32
Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2002-2003)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-2007
Thirty-Second Report
Fourteenth Lok Sabha
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

THIRTY-SECOND REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
EXCESSES  OVER  VOTED  GRANTS  AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2002-2003)
[Action Taken on 10th Report of Public Accounts
Committee (14th  Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23-08-06
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23-08-06
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
August, 2006/Bhadrapada 1928 (Saka)

PAC No. 1817
©2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by the Manager, Govt. of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.
Price: Rs. 95.00

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007) ..................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted
by Government .................................................................... 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
 not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government .......................................................................... 74
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration .......................... 75
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies ........ 79
PART II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee  (2006-07)
held on 17.08.2006................................................................ 80
APPENDIX
Statement of Observations and Recommendations ............ 82
(i)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  (2006-2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Assistant Director
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this 32nd Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations of
the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 10th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on
“Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2002-2003)”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 17th August,  2006. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have
also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
18 August, 2006 Chairman,
27 Sravana, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER-I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Tenth Report (14 Lok Sabha) on “Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2002-2003)”.
1.2 The Tenth Report (14th Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha on
28th April, 2005 contained 15 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes
have been received in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations from the
concerned Ministries/Departments and these have been broadly categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by Government.
Paragraph Nos.  65, 66, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 76, 77, 78, 79
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from Government:
-NIL-
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos.  68, 75
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
Excess expenditure over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2002-2003)—
a gist of the Committee’s Observations/Recommendations in the Original Report
1.3 The Committee’s examination of the Appropriation Accounts of Union
Government for 2002-2003 had revealed that during the year under review, the excess
expenditure of an unprecedented magnitude amounting to Rs. 2188.12 crore was incurred
under 20 cases of 18 excess registering Grants/Appropriations as against Rs. 1089.54
crore during the last year i.e. 2001-2002. The Committee had noted that the bulk of the
excess expenditure i.e. Rs. 1864.47 crore was on the Civil side which was mainly
contributed by one Appropriation alone viz., Appropriation No. 29-Interest Payments
showing an excess of Rs. 1792.90 crore, registering 83 per cent of the total excess
expenditure incurred by the various Ministries/Departments of the Union Government
during 2002-2003. Further 10 Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of
Railways contributed to an excess expenditure of Rs. 323.65 crore. The Committee had,
therefore, observed that defective estimation of requirement of funds, lack of a
continuous watch over the flow of expenditure as well as timely review of financial
requirements and failure to assess the additional fund requirement etc. largely

2
contributed to the excess expenditure. While noting that similar reasons persisted year
after year, the Committee believed that the matter had not been viewed by the Ministries/
Departments with due seriousness. The Committee had therefore, urged the Ministries/
Departments of Government of India to chalk out a definite policy in order to observe
greater fi nancial discipline and ensure that expenditure does not overshoot its
prescribed limits.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some
of the Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee in their Original Report,
which need reiteration or merit comments.
Need to reduce the excess expenditure to the barest minimum Recommendation
(Para 66)
1.5 In paragraph 66 of the Original Report, the Committee had observed that despite
the oft-repeated concerns expressed by the Committee on the lack of financial discipline
by the Ministries/Departments and issue of necessary instructions from time to time
by the Ministry of Finance to strengthen their procedure, the excess expenditure
incurred by various Ministries/Departments as well as the number of excess registering
Grants/Appropriations was constantly on the rise since the year 2000-2001. The
Committee had, therefore, desired the Government to take this issue with utmost
seriousness so that excess expenditure as well as the excess registering Grants/
Appropriations were reduced to the barest minimum, if not altogether eliminated.
1.6 In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs-Budget Division) have stated as follows:
“As a part of the cash and expenditure management exercise, and with a view
inter-alia, to ensure an even pace of expenditure vis-a-vis the allocations,
instructions have been issued to all Ministries/Departments to restrict the
expenditure during the last quarter of the financial year to 33 per cent of the
budgeted amount. Further, periodical review of expenditure trend is being
undertaken by the Ministry of Finance through meetings with the Financial
Adviser of Ministries/Departments. A system of cash management was
introduced on a pilot basis in 2003-04 in 9 Demands viz. (i) Agriculture and
Cooperation, (ii) Fertilizers, (iii) Food and Public Distribution, (iv) Health,
(v) Family Welfare, (vi) Elementary Education and Literacy, (vii) Secondary
Education and Higher Education, (viii) Women and Child Development and (ix)
Rural Development. This pilot scheme has been reviewed and is being extended
with suitable modifications to select other Ministries/Departments during the
current financial year. It is expected  that the above initiatives will result in
improvement in the fiscal discipline on the part of the Ministries/Departments.”
1.7 The Committee have been given to understand that the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) introduced a system of cash management on a pilot
basis in 2003-2004 in respect of Demands pertaining to nine Ministries/Departments
which is being extended with suitable modifications to select other Ministries/
Departments. Instructions in this regard are stated to have been issued to all the
Ministries/Departments to restrict the expenditure during the last quarter of the

3
financial year to 33 per cent of the budgeted amount. The Committee hope that the
new system of cash management would bring about improvements in fiscal discipline
by all the Ministries/Departments. The Committee would like the Ministry of Finance
to ensure that the instructions issued by them in this regard are scrupulously followed
by all the Ministries/Departments. The Committee would like to be apprised about
the improvements brought about in the wake of introduction of the system of cash
management.
Excess expenditure despite having Supplementary Grants Recommendation
 (Paragraph 67)
1.8 The scrutiny of the relevant Appropriation Accounts for the year 2002-2003 had
revealed that excess expenditure of Rs. 2188.12 crore was incurred during the year
2002-2003 despite having supplementary Grant of Rs. 1764.19 crore in 12 out of 20
cases of excess expenditure. In case of Appropriation Accounts (Civil), the excess
expenditure of Rs. 1864.47 crore had occurred even after obtaining Supplementary
Grant of Rs. 1613.17 crore in five out of nine excess registering Grants/Appropriations.
The Committee had noted that under Grant No. 8—Department of Culture, the excess
expenditure incurred was higher than the Supplementary Grant obtained. In case of
Indian Railways Appropriation Accounts, the excess expenditure of Rs. 323.65 crore
was incurred despite having Supplementary Grant of Rs. 151.02 crore in seven out of
11 such cases. The Commitee has thus concluded that Supplementary Grants in most
of these cases were obtained without proper assessment with the result that even the
additional provisions proved inadequate to meet the actual requirements of funds of
the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Committee had, therefore, desired the
concerned Ministries/Departments to impress upon their budget controlling authorities
to thoroughly examine their proposals for additional funds with due farsightedness
and ensure proper review and scrutiny of the requests for Supplementary demands
before presenting the same to Parliament for approval.
1.9 In their Action Taken Notes the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
have stated that instructions have been issued to all Ministries/Departments of
Government of India.
1.10 The Ministry of Culture have also stated in their Action Taken Note that the
general instructions to all attached/subordinate offices and autonomous organizations
and Divisional Heads have been  issued to observe due farsightedness while submitting
proposals for the additional funds and also ensure proper planning and estimation and
scrutiny of the proposals for budgets as well as for supplementary demands.
1.11 Similarly, the Ministry of Home Affairs have stated in their Action Taken Note
that the instructions were issued to all the Budget controlling Authorities to frame
realistic Budget Estimates and requirements for Supplementary Grants so that cases of
excess expenditure are eliminated. In these instructions, emphasis was laid on thoroughly
examining the proposals for additional funds and ensuring proper  review and scrutiny
of the requests for Supplementary Demands to avoid shortage of funds and excess of
expenditure as a result thereof.
1.12 Further, the Ministry of Railways have replied that a letter to the Railways, on
the need to assess the requirement of charged expenditure accurately, has been issued
recently on 17.02.2005. The need for greater accuracy in budgeting has also been

4
emphasized in the FA & CAOs conferences held in March’05 and May’05 for taking
corrective action by the Railways.
1.13 While scrutinizing the cases of excess expenditure despite having
Supplementary Grants in the Grants/Appropriations operated by the concerned
Ministries/Deptts. and the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), the Committee had
asked the concerned Ministries/Departments to impress upon their budget controlling
authorities to thoroughly examine their proposals for additional funds with due
farsightedness and ensure proper review and scrutiny of the requests for
Supplementary Demands before presenting the same to Parliament for approval. It
has been observed from the Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure), Ministry of Culture, Home Affairs and Railways that
they all had issued instructions to their budget controlling authorities to frame
realistic Budget Estimates and requirements for Supplementary Grants so as to
eliminate excess expenditure. Such instructions are issued by various Ministries/
Departments from time to time but it has often been observed that these are not being
followed in letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore, would like to emphasise that
issuance of instructions would not serve the purpose unless these instructions are
strictly enforced and complied with. They therefore, desire that the Minsitries/
Departments should take effective follow-up steps to ensure strict observance of the
existing instructions apart from improving their accounting information system and
tightening their expenditure control.
Delay in submission of explanatory notes
Recommendation (Paragraph 68)
1.14 While taking serious view of the delay in furnishing of explanatory notes on
excess expenditure incurred, by the concerned Ministries/Departments, the Committee
in paragraph 68 of their original Report had observed as follows:
“The Ministries/Department are required to submit to the Committee explanatory
notes in respect of the excess registering Grants/Appropriations immediately
after the presentation of relevant Appropriation Accounts to the House. The
Committee observe that while the explanatory note on Grant No. 13—Department
of Telecommunications, Grant No. 99—Chandigarh and Grants/Appropriations
operated by the Ministry of Railways were received within time, the delay in
furnishing the explanatory notes in respect of remaining six Grants/
Appropriations ranged from nine days to more than four months. The explanatory
note on Appropriation No. 29—Interest Payments has not been received till the
finalisation of the Report. The Committee owe an explanation from the Ministry
regarding this inordinate delay. The Committee take a serious view of such
delays on the part of the Ministries cocnerned in furnishing the explanatory
notes and desire that responsibility be fixed for the laxity shwon in this regard.
The Committee, however, would like the Ministry of Finance, who is the
coordinating Ministry in this regard, to look into the matter and take suitable
measures to ensure timely submission of explanatory notes in future.
The Committee would further like to point out that whenever the excess
expenditure is noticed under any Grant/Appropriation, no time should be lost by
the concerned Minsitry/Department in preparing and forwarding the explanatory

5
notes to Audit for vetting. The objections, if any, raised by Audit should be
resolved on top priority basis. The Committee desire that a time schedule should
be laid down for taking action at various stages involving finalisation/vetting of
these explanatory notes, which would result in eliminating delay on this account.
The Committee trust that necessary steps would be taken in this direction.”
1.15 Explaining the reasons for the delay in submission of explanatory notes on
excess expenditure incurred under Appropriation No. 29—Interest Payments, the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—Budget Division) have stated
in  their Action taken Notes that:
“The explanatory note on excess expenditure occurred in the Appropriation was
prepared on finalisation of Head-wise Appropriation Accounts and its receipt
thereof from the Accounting Office. The said Appropriation Accounts was
received in this Ministry on 1.1.2004. As this Ministry was preoccupied with the
preparation and presentation of  interim Budget for the year 2004-05 on 3.2.2004,
the initial explanatory note was prepared and sent to Audit for vetting on 6.2.2004.
Audit has sought detailed explanations for the excess expenditure. As the
Appropriation—Interest Payments is a centralized one and the estimates thereof
are furnished by various estimating authorities, the detailed reasons for excess
expenditure were called for from them. The Ministry became, meanwhile, occupied
with the preparation and presentation of Regular Budget for the year 2004-05 on
8.7.2004. After obtaining necessary information from the various estimating
authorities, revised explanatory note was sent to Audit for vetting on 14.9.2004.
Audit had called for further information on the revised explanatory note on
28.10.2004. After making good the information sought for by Audit, the revised
explanatory note was sent to Audit on 18.1.2005. The vetted explanatory note
was received form Audit on 23/25.2.2005. In the meantime, Budget Divisions,
Ministry of Finance went into the preparation and presentation of Budget for
the year 2005-06 on 28.02.2005 and processing of final batch of Supplementary
Demands for Grants for the year 2004-05. Final explanatory note was sent to the
Public Accounts Committee on 23.3.2005.
As may be seen from the above, the Ministry remained occupied with the
preparation and presentation of two Regular Budgets and one  interim Budget
during the year 2004 and 2005, whice processing the explanatory note through
its various stages till the final note was sent on 23.3.2005. Thus, there was no
laxity on the part of this Ministry in submission of explanatory notes to the
Committee. However, efforts will continue to be made to submit the explanatory
note to the Audit and finally to the Committee within the time schedule prescribed
for the purpose in future.
As regards laying down the time schedule for taking action at various stages
involving finalisation/vetting of explanatory notes, Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure has, vide O.M. No. 1/10/2005-MC dated 17.6.2005,
reiterated the instructions to all Ministries/Departments for strict adherence to
the time schedule in submitting the vetted explanatory note to the Committee.”

6
1.16 The Committee in their Original Report had desired that a time schedule
should be laid down for taking action at various stages involving finalisation/vetting of
explanatory notes on excess expenditure, which would result in eliminating delay in
their submission to the Committee. However, from the explanation given by the Ministry
of Finace in their Action Taken Notes, the Committee find that there was avoidable delay
at every stage on the part of Ministry of Finance in the finalisation of the explanatory
notes. While other Ministries/Departments have acknowledged the delay on their part
in the finalisation and submission of the explanatory notes, the Ministry of Finance
have sought to justify the delay on their part by simply enumerating as to how they
remained pre-occupied with the preparation and presentation of two regular and one
interim Budget during the years 2004 and 2005. The Committee, find this reply of the
Ministry of Finance evasive and unconvincing, particularly so, because additional
responsibility rested in the Ministry of Finance as the nodal agency not only to expedite
finalisation of their own explanatory notes but in respect of other Ministries/Departments
also. The Committee feel that it should have been possible for the Ministry of Finance to
furnish the requisite notes within the stipulated time. That the Minsitry failed to do so
is nothing but regrettable. The Committee would now expect the Ministry of Finance to
show more responsibility in the timely finalisation and submission of explanatory notes
to the Committee. They desire that the Ministry of Finance should evolve an effective
procedure for taking action at various stages in finalisation/vetting of these explanatory
notes for their timely submission to the Committee.
Excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways
Recommendation (Para 75)
1.17 The Committee in paragraph 75 of their Original Report had observed that there
was an overall excess expenditure of Rs. 323.65 crore incurred under three Grants and
eight Appropriations operated by the Ministry of Railways. Out of this excess
expenditure, Grant No. 14—Appropriation to Funds—DRF, DF, Pension and CF was
the main contributor having an excess of Rs. 211.15 crore, which is 65% of the total
excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways. This was followed by Grant
No. 16— Assets— Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—Special Railway
Safety Fund having excess of Rs. 89.97 crore. An analysis of the reasons causing the
excess expenditure indicates that the excess under Grant No.14 was mainly due to
strengthening the fund balances in view of overall better financial performance of
Indian Railways. Under Grant No. 16, it was mainly due to slow progress of works and
lesser activities than anticipated. Furthermore, under Appropriation Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9,
11 and 16— Capital, the excess expenditure was due to unanticipated decretal payments
at the fag end of the year. They had, therefore, emphasized that through proper control
over expenditure and with more accurate estimation of liabilities, much of the excess
expenditure can be avoided. They had desired that, if at all the requirement of more
funds is felt after the budget estimates, additional provisions at the revised estimates
should be made with more precision.
1.18 In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) have
stated that a letter to the Railways on the need to assess the requirement of charged
expenditure accurately has been issued recently on 17.02.2005. This matter has also
been raised in the FA & CAO’s Conferences held in March, 05 and May, 05.

7
1.19 In the above mentioned letter issued to FA & CAOs of all Zonal Railways, the
Ministry of Railways have inter-alia stated that:
“The Public Accounts Committee, over the last few years has commented
adversely on misclassification and excess over expenditure on Railways and has
desired a corrective mechanism to be put in place. In particular, the Committee
has advised the Railways to review the exchequer control and monitoring system
and ensure that expenditure does not exceed budget allocation. In this context,
it has expressed concern over the slow implementation of computerized financial
management information system, which was expected to correct the existing
lacunae in the manual system.
In the light of these observations of the Public Accounts Committee it is
reiterated that Railways must continuously monitor expenditure in every demand
in relation to budget provision to ensure that allocation is not exceeded. The
Finance and Accounts Codes provide detailed instructions on the subject and it
is expected of every Accounts officer to follow them diligently and ensure that
instances of misclassification and excess/savings over budget are avoided. The
existing system may be streamlined through detailed analysis of various inputs
like Audit reports, internal check and Accounts inspection. Besides, a realistic
assessment of charged expenditure may be carried out to plug any loophole to
avoid unexpected excess over budget towards the closing months of the financial
year. The entire process of budgeting also required a careful reivew right from
the PU stage to avoid differences between expenditure and estimate. A copy of
the monthly PU-wise review may be enclosed with MCDO to FC.
The Board has been emphasizing the need to implement the FMIS scheme at
the earliest. The necessary sanctions and directions have also been issued from
time to time. But the progress of implementation so far leaves much to be desired.
Despite formation of monitoring Committees, targets have not been met. The
importance of computerized FMIS requires no emphasis and it is expected that
Railways will adhere to the completion targets given by them. FA&CAOs should
personally monitor the progress to ensure its timely completion by 31.3.2005.”
1.20 In this connection, it may be stated that in response to the recommendations
made by the Committee in their earlier Reports i.e. 6th Report (13th Lok Sabha),
30th Report (13th Lok Sabha) and 4th Report (14th Lok Sabha) regarding implementation
of Financial Management Information System, the Ministry of Railways in their Action
Taken Notes have stated as follows:
(i) The implementation of a new computer-based Financial Management
Information System (FMIS) on different Zonal Railways was expected to
enable them to improve the assessment of fund requirements more realistically.
(ii) FMIS is still under the evolving stages and its fruitfulness in assessment,
monitoring and expenditure control can be evaluated only after it is fully
implemented.

8
(iii) The implementation of FMIS has been planned in a phased manner in view of
fund constraints and other related issues. In Phase-I, Headquarters and one/
two divisions of 7 major Zonal Railways were taken up during 2002-03. In
Phase-II, sanctioned in 2004-05, the remaining divisions/ remaining Railways
have been covered. The implementation process is under progress. The
remaining units have also been advised to submit their implementation plans
and proposals. The need to expedite implementation process has already
been emphasized to all the Zonal Railways as per enclosed letter. The entire
implementation process is likely to be over by 2006-07.’’
1.21 The Ministry of Railways have conceded that they have not been able to
achieve the targets with regard to the implementation of the new computer-based
Financial Management Information System (FMIS) on different Zonal Railways, which
according to them, is necessary to improve the assessment of fund requirements
more realistically. The Committee, therefore, regret to observe that in spite of repeated
exhortation by them in their earlier Reports, the implementation of the Financial
Management Information System in the Railways has taken place at a snail’s pace,
with the result that excess expenditure over authorized provisions in the Ministry of
Railways has continued to occur year after year. Needless to say that the proper and
timely implementation of the FMIS would result in regulating the flow of expenditure
in the Railways. It is, therefore, imperative for streamlining the accounting procedures
in a large and key Ministry like Railways with several field formations spread over
the country, that the Ministry of Railways should closely monitor the implementation
of the FMIS and its completion at least by the end of the current financial year, i.e.,
2006-07 and apprise the Committee of the progress made in this regard.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT  HA VE  BEEN  ACCEPTED  BY
GOVERNMENT
  Recommendation
The Committee’s examination of the Appropriation Accounts of Union Government
for 2002-03 has revealed that during the year under review, the excess expenditure of
an unprecedented magnitude amounting Rs. 2188.12 crore was incurred under
20 cases of 18 excess registering Grants/Appropriations as against Rs. 1089.54 crore
during the last year i.e. 2001-02. The excess during the year is prominently noticeable
in the Grants administered by the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Home Affairs,
Department of Culture, Department of Telecommunications and Ministry of Railways.
The Committee note that the bulk of the excess expenditure i.e. Rs. 1864.47 crore in
on the Civil side as was the case last year also. This is mainly contributed by one
Appropriation alone viz., Appropriation No. 29—Interest Payments showing an
excess of Rs. 1792.90 crore, which is 83 percent of the total excess expenditure
incurred by the various Ministries/Departments of the Union Government during
2002-03. Further, 10 Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of Railways
contributed to an excess expenditure of Rs. 323.65 crore. The explanations tendered
by the concerned Ministries/Departments has revealed that defective estimation of
requirement of funds, lack of a continuous watch over the flow of expenditure as well
as timely review of financial requirements and failure to assess the additional fund
requirement etc. have largely contributed to the excess expenditure. The fact that
similar reasons persist year after year leads the Committee to believe that the matter
has not been viewed by the Ministries/Departments with ample seriousness. The
Committee have been repeatedly pointing out in their reports that the system of
estimation of and control over expenditure is faulty and year after year, Parliament is
being presented with a fait accompli of unremitting excess phenomenon. From the
foregoing, it is clear that the Committee’s oft-repeated recommendations had little
impact on the concerned Ministries. The Committee, therefore, once again urge the
Ministries/Department of Government of India to chalk out a definite policy in order
to observe greater financial discipline and ensure that expenditure does not exceed
its prescribed limits.
[Sl. No. 1, Para No. 65 of Appendix-IV of 10th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
In view of the recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee,
instructions have been issued to all Ministries/Departments of the Government of
9

10
India vide O.M. No. 12 (2)/E. Coord/2005 dated 17.11.2005.
This has been vetted by Audit vide  their U.O. No. RR/1-42/2005-06/315
dated 7th November, 2005.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure P&C Wing U.O. No. 12(2)/E.
Coord/2005 dated 17.11.2005]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
The Ministry have serious concern over the excess expenditure that has occurred
under some Grants of the Ministry during the past few years. It is unfortunate that this
has happened in spite of the repeated instructions issued by the Ministry to all concerned
in this regard.
2. It is submitted here that Ministry of Home Affairs is a very vast Ministry and
operate 10 ‘Demands for Grants’. There are a number of Budget Controlling Authorities
in the Ministry, which frame the Budget Estimates under these Grants. The booking of
expenditure is also carried out by a large number of Pay and Accounts Offices under
the administrative control of Principal Accounts Office (MHA). Although every care is
taken to avoid lapses on the part of the Ministry that lead to deficient budgeting, some
cases of excess expenditure have occurred under some Sections of the Grants during
the financial year 2002-03. The actual reasons for excess expenditure under these
Grants have already been explained in the ‘Explanatory Notes for Excesses’, submitted
by the Ministry to the PAC.
3. It is also submitted here that excess expenditure has occurred during the past
few years due to some lapses/cases of oversight at one place or the other.
Notwithstanding the reasons responsible for excess expenditure, the Ministry fully
agree with the Committee that this should not have happened.
4. Every time, the Committee’s observations and recommendations are given
prompt attention in the Ministry. The present observations/recommendations have
also been noted with all seriousness in the Ministry and the same have been brought
to the notice of all concerned for strict compliance in future. The concerned officers
have also been advised to take necessary steps against the erring officials to avoid
such lapses in future. (No. 28/2/2005-Bgt.I dated 6th June, 2005—copy enclosed)
(This ‘Action Taken Note’ has been vetted by O/O DGACR vide their U.O. No. RR/
6-2/2005-06/175 dated 4th July, 2005).
(Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 28/2/2005-Bgt. I dated 13-7-05)

IMPORTANT  PAC  MATTER
No. 28/2/2005-Bgt. I
Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs
New Delhi, the 6th June, 2005
Subject: Excesses Over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations—
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee.
The Public Accounts Committee (2004-05) (14th Lok Sabha), in its 10th Report on
‘Excesses Over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2002-03)’, presented to the
Lok Sabha on 28th April, 2005, have commented adversely on the persistent excess
expenditure being incurred by the Ministries/Departments over the authorized budget
allocations.
2. In the above stated Report, PAC have pointed out that excess expenditure is
being incurred by the Ministries/Departments year after year in spite of the repeated
observations and recommendations made by the Committee in its previous Reports. It
shows that the Committee’s off-repeated recommendations had little impact on the
concerned Ministries/Departments. The Committee’s dissatisfaction is more so in the
cases where excess expenditure has been incurred despite taking Supplementary Grants.
The Committee have also pointed out that mere issue of instructions by the Ministries/
Departments in this regard is not sufficient unless these instructions are strictly complied
with the desired results are achieved. A copy of the observations/recommendations
made by the PAC in the aforesaid Report, on the Grants being operated by Ministry of
Home Affairs, is enclosed (Paragraphs Nos. 65, 67, 71 and 79 of the Report refer.)
3. Instructions have been issued repeatedly by the Budget Wing of the Ministry
in the recent past to avoid excess expenditure at all costs. But it seems that these
instructions are not being followed in right earnest resulting in incurring of excess
expenditure year after year. During the financial year 2002-03, the excess expenditure
has been incurred in four Sections of three Grants.
4. It is needless to say that repeated observations/recommendations of PAC on the
excess expenditure have created embarrassing situation for the Ministry. The excess
expenditure could have been avoided with a little more care taken in this regard. It has
been repeatedly stated that expenditure should be restricted to the authorized budget
allocations and if more funds are required during the financial year, Supplementary
Grants can be obtained. The expenditure incurred in excess of the Budget Provision
and Supplementary Grants, is an unauthorized expenditure and is viewed very seriously
by the PAC.
5. All the Divisional Heads/Budget Controlling Authorities in the Ministry of Home
Affairs are once against requested to take utmost care in framing Budget Estimates
and Supplementary Grants so that they do not run short of funds for their schemes/
projects. However, excess expenditure is to be avoided under any circumstances.
11
Server2 \2680ls\2680ls(1-44) 11

12
6. It is also requested to bring the above instructions alongwith the observations/
recommendations of the PAC to the notice of all concerned under your charge.
Necessary action may please be taken aginst the officials not complying with these
instructions.
Sd/-
(N.A. Viswanathan)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
Enclosures: As above.
To
1. All Joint Secretaries in Ministry of Home Affairs/Department of Official
Language/Department of Justice/Registrar General of India/Department of
Development of  North-Eastern Region.
2. Others (As per attached Standard List).
Copy also forwarded to:—
Principal Accounts Office (Accounts), Ministry of Home Affairs, C-I, Hutments,
Dalhousie Road, New Delhi-110 011—with the directions to bring it to the notice of all
Pay and Accounts Officers that they will be personally held responsible for any excess
booking of expenditure and punished accordingly.
Sd/-
(Jawahar Thakur)
Chief Controller of Accounts (Home)
Standard List of Addresses
1. Shri Daya Shankar Pandey, Asstt. Director (Budget), Central Translation
Bureau, Department of Official Language, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi.
2. Shri Om Prakash, Fire Advisor, D.G.C.D., East Block VIII, Level VII, R.K. Puram
(Main), New Delhi-66.
3. Shri V.K. Sharma, Deputy Director (Budget), O/O the Registrar General of
India, Man Singh Road, New Delhi.
4. Shri S. Hariharan, Asstt. Director, Intelligence Bureau, New Delhi.
5. Shri K.M. Nandyal, Director, National Civil Defence College, Ministry of  Home
Affairs, Nagpur-440 001.
6. Shri P.B. Rajappan, Under Secretary, Inter-State Council Sectt., Vigyan Bhavan
Annexe, New Delhi.
7. Shri Brij Mohan Negi, Director (Policy), Deptt. of Official Language,
Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi.
8. Shri R.A. Singh, Senior Accounts Officer, National Human Rights Commission,
Sardar Patel Bhavan, New Delhi.

13
9. Shri Sudersan Kumar, Deputy Secretary, Zonal Council Sectt., Jam Nagar
House, New Delhi.
10. Shri A. Mohanan, Under Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhavan,
New Delhi.
11. Shri A. Manoharan, Under Secretary, O/O Principal Scientific Adviser to the
Govt. of  India, 310-A, Vigyan Bhavan Annexe, New Delhi.
12. Shri N.R. Das, Section Officer, National Security Council Sectt., East Block
No. 10, Level-4, R.K. Puram, New Delhi.
13. Shri P.K. Roy, Under Secretary, Prime Minister’s Oifice, South Block, New Delhi.
14. Shri Likhi Ram, Section Officer, President’s Sectt., New Delhi.
15. Shri K.K. Bajaj, Under Secretary, M&G Section, MHA, North Block,
New Delhi.
16. Shri J.L. Sharma, AIG (Accounts), Special Protection Group, SPG Complex,
Dwarka, Sector-9, New Delhi.
17. Dr. K.C. Wadhwa, Director, National Fire Service College, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Nagpur.
18. Shri Rajiv Walia, Dy. Director-General, Narcotics Control Bureau, West Block
No. 1, Wing No. 5, R.K. Puram, New Delhi.
19. Shri P. Venugopal, Administrative Officer, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National
Police Academy, Ministry of Home Affairs, Hyderabad-500 053.
20. Shri Pinaki Sengupta, Administrative Officer, LNJP National Institute of
Criminology & Forensic Science, Ministry of Home Affairs, Sector-3, Outer
Ring Road, Rohini, Delhi-110 085.
21. Shri Sarabjit Singh, Director-General, Central Forensic Science Laboratory
(BPR&D), Block No . 4, 4th Floor, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
22. Shri R.P. Sharma, Suppdt., Central Forensic Science Laboratory (CBI), Block
No. 4, 4th Floor, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
23. Shri A.K. Sood, Asstt. Director (Admn.), Central Detective Training School,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
24. Shri A.K. Sood, Joint Asstt. Director, BPR&D, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi.
25. Shri Praveen Kumar, Deputy Financial Adviser, CRPF, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Raod, New Delhi.
26. Shri U.N. Majhi, Financial Adviser (AR), Directorate of Assam Rifles, Shillong.
27. Shri R.P. Joshi, Asstt. Commandant (Finance), Border Security Force, Block
No. 1, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.

14
28. Shri P.D. Sharma, Deputy Chief Accounts Officer, Indo-Tibetan Border Police,
Block No. II, CGO Complex, Lodhi Raod, New Delhi.
29. Shri O.P. Nimesh, Senior Accounts Officer, National Security Guard, CGO
Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
30. Shri R.D. Sharma, Asstt. Director (Accounts), Central Industrial Security Force,
13, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
31. Shri B.S. Dhupia, Assistant Director, National Crime Records Bureau, East
Block No. 7, R.K. Puram, New Delhi—110066.
32. Shri Rajan Kumar, FA to Commissioner of Police, Delhi Police, I.P. Estate,
New Delhi.
33. Shri Hans Raj, Accounts Officer, Directorate of Co-ordination, Block No. 9,
CGO Complex, New Delhi.
34. Shri J.S. Chambial, D.I.G ., Special Service Bureau, Block No. V (East),
R.K. Puram, New Delhi—110066.
35. Dr. M.S. Rao, Chief Forensic Scientist, Directorate of Forensic Science, Block
No. 4, 4th floor, CGO Complex, New Delhi.
36. Shri Manmohan, Administrative Officer (FS), Directorate of Forensic Science,
Block No. 4, 4th floor, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
37. Shri Rakesh Bhatnagar, Asstt. Financial Adviser (B-I), Ministry of Defence
(Finance), South Block, New Delhi.
38. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of  Daman & Diu, Moti Daman, DAMAN.
39. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of  Dadra & Nagar Haveli, SILV ASSA.
40. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of  Lakshadweep, KAVARATTI.
41. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of  Chandigarh, CHANDIGARH.
42. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of  A & N Islands, PORTBLAIR.
43. Shri S.B. Doval, Under Secretary (Planning Cell), Ministry of Home Affairs,
North Block, New Delhi.
44. Shri Pooran Chand, Under Secretary (Bgt.II), Ministry of Home Affairs,
North Block, New Delhi.
45. Shri Anil Kumar, Sr. Accountant, O/O CCA (Home), MHA, North Block,
New Delhi.
46. S.Shri P.S. Dravaria, Section Officer/Y. Srinivasulu, Assistant/Smt. Anitha.
K.P., UDC, Budget-I Section, MHA.
47. Sr. Accounts Officer, Pay & Accounts Office (P & M), Jam Nagar House,
New Delhi.
48. Sh. B.B. Sarkar, Deputy Controller of Accounts, Principal Accounts Office,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, 3rd Floor, ‘B’ wing,
Lok Nayak Bhavan, Khan Market, New Delhi-110 003.
49. Shri Rajeev Singh, Director (Finance), National Technical Research
Organisation, J-16, Hauz Khas, New Delhi-110 016.

15
Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture
With respect to Para 65 (page 34) in respect of Ministry of Culture, the general
instructions to all attached/subordinate offices and autonomous organizations and
Divisional Heads to observe greater financial discipline and also to strictly keep watch
over flow of expenditure have been issued by the Ministry. Besides, the Ministry has
been monitoring progress of expenditure, additional requirement of funds etc. regularly
at the highest level.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/3-20/2205-06/507 dated
15th February, 2006.
[Ministry of Culture O.M. No. 20-1/2005-P&B, dated 22nd February 2006]
Action Taken by the Deptt. of Telecommunications
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. Every effort is being
made to contain the expenditure within the allotment.
This issues with the approval of Member (Finance).
[Deptt. of Telecommunications File No. 1-4/2005-B, dated 05.08.2005]
This has been vetted by DG Audit (P&T) vide their U.O. No. Rept VI/4001(b) Appr.
Accts./2002-03 984 dt. 30.4.05
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The above recommendation is general in nature and takes into account the excess
expenditure incurred by various Central Ministries as a whole. The observation of the
Committee is, nonetheless, noted. The specific comments on excess incurred by
Railways are being given on the other recommendations dealing particularly with the
excess incurred under the Grants/Appropriations operated by the Railways.
Audit vide their U.O.No. 230 RA-III/2-1/2004 dated 21st December, 2005 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
[Ministry of Railways’ O.M. No. 2005-BC-PAC-XIV/10 dated—24-01-2006.]
Recommendation
What is further disquieting to observe is that despite the oft-repeated concerns
expressed by the Committee on the lack of financial displine by the Ministries/
Departments and issue of necessary instructions from time to time by the Ministry of
Finance to strengthen their procedure, the excess expenditure incurred by various
Ministries/Departments as well as the number of excess registering Grants/
Appropriations is constantly on the rise since the year 2000-01. Expressing their concern
over this state of affairs, the Committee in Paragraph 17.1 of their 58th Report
(13th Lok Sabha) had desired that a detailed review of the existing system be undertaken,
particularly by the Ministry of Finance and Railways, to devise suitable and effective
measures targeting inherent defects in the existing system. The Committee would like
the Government to take this issue with utmost seriousness so that excess expenditure
as well as the excess registering Grants/Appropriations are reduced to the barest
minimum, if not altogether eliminated.
[Sl. No. 2, Paragraph 66 of Appendix IV of Tenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha)].

16
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
As a result of rigorous monitoring, the incidence of excess expenditure on Railways
has been reducing over the years. It was Rs. 57 cr. in 1999-2000 and Rs. 0.14, cr. in
2000-01. Though an exces of about Rs. 211 cr. was incurred in 2001-02, it was explained
to the Committee that this was due to repayment of loan, which became possible within
the year because the year-end operating surplus was better than budgeted. Early
repayment of the loan also saved the Railways from payment of crores of rupees as
interest. Barring this factor, the excess in 2001-02 worked out to just Rs. 1 cr.
In 2002-03 also, out of the overall excess of Rs. 323.65 cr., almost 65% i.e., Rs. 211.15 cr.
was incurred under Demand No. 14 alone, i.e., under ‘Appropriation to Railway Funds’,
which as submitted in ATN to Para-67 (of the Report under consideration) is technical
in nature. Excluding this, the remaining excess was Rs. 112 cr. only. The Committee’s
concern on the rising trend of excess has however been noted, for bringing about
improvement in the position.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 230 RA/III/2-1/2004 dated 21st December, 2005 have
vetted the Action Taken Note.
[Ministry of Railways’ O.M. No. 2005-BC-PAC-XIV/10 dated 24-01-2006]
Recommendation
The Committee regret to observe that excess expenditure of Rs. 2188.12 crore was
incurred during the year 2002-2003 despite having Supplementary Grant of Rs. 1764.19
crore in 12 out of 20 cases of excess expenditure. In case of Appropriation Accounts
(Civil), the excess expenditure of Rs. 1864.47 crore has occurred even after obtaining
Supplementary Grant of Rs. 1613.17 crore in five out of nine excess registering Grants/
Appropriations.
[Sl. No. 3, para 67, of Appendix IV of 10th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(14th Lok Sabha) voted grants and charged appropriations (2002-2003)]
Action taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
In view of the recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee,
instructions have been issued to all Ministries/Departments of the Government of
India vide O.M. No.  12(2)/E. Coord./2005 dated 17.11.2005.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No: RR/1-42/2005-06/315 date 7th
November 2005.
[Ministry of Finance Department of Expenditure P&C Wing U.O. No. 12(2)/
E.Coord/2005 dated 17.11.2005]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
It is submitted here that during the financial year 2002-2003, out of the four excess
registering Secions of three Grants of this Ministry, there was only one Section in
which excess expenditure was incurred in spite of obtaining Supplementary Grant.
This Supplementary Grant, amounting to Rs. 1.47 crore, was obtained under Revenue
Section (Charged) of Grant No. 99—Chandigarh. However, actual expenditure under
this Section exceeded the Total Grant (Original  Grant + Supplementary Grant) by

17
 Rs. 38.83 lakh. An ‘Excess Note’, explaining the reasons for this excess expenditure,
has already been submitted by the Ministry to the PAC, duly vetted by audit (copy
enclosed).
2. Notwithstanding the reasons stated for excess expenditure under the Grants and
especially in the cases where excess expenditure was incurred in spite of obtaining
Supplementary Grants, instructions were issued by the Ministry to all the Budget
Controlling Authorities to frame realistic Budget Estimates and requirements for
Supplementary Grants so that cases of excess expenditure are eliminate
 (No. 10/34/2004-Bgt. I dated 14.9.2004— copy enclosed). In these instruction, imphasis
was laid on thoroughly examining the proposals for additional funds and ensuring
proper review and scrutiny of the requests for Supplementary Demands to avoid
shortage of funds and excess of expediture as a result thereof.
3. In view of the serious concern expressed by the PAC, in its present Report on
‘Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2002-2003), all the Budget
Controlling Authorities in the Ministry have been directed to take all necessary steps
to avoid cases of excess expenditure at any cost. These directions also stipulate
suitable action against the erring oficials (No. 28/2/2005-Bgt.I dated 6th June 2005—
copy enclosed).
(This ‘Action Taken Note’ has been vetted by O/O DGACR  vide their U.O. No. RR/
6-2/2005-06/175 dated 4th July, 2005).
Sd/-
(N.A. Viswanathan)
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor (Home)
[Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 28/2/2005-Big. I dated 13.7.05]

File No. 15013/6 /004-Bgt.
Government of India,
Ministry of Home Affairs
New Delhi, 1 June, 2004
Explanatory Note for Excess
Revenue Section (Charged)
Note for Public Accounts in respect of excess occurrs under Revenue Section
(Charged) of Grant No. 99-Chandigarh as disclosed in the Union Government
Appropriation Accounts (Civil for the year 2002-03).
Revenue Section (Charged) (Rupees in thousand)
Original Grant 21,84,00
Supplementary Grants 1,47,00
Total Grant 23,31,00
Actual Expenditure 23,69,83
Excess 38,83
2. Under Revenue Section (Charged of Grant No. 99-Chandigarh for the year 2002-03,
the total provision was Rs. 2,400 thousand. This was augmented to Rs. 233100
thousand by obtained Supplementary Grant Rs. 14700 thousand. Against this, the
Expenditure fo Rs. 236983 thousand was incurred, resulting in excess of Rs. 3883
thousand.
3. The excess of Rs. 3883 thousand as the net effect of total excesses of Rs. 4084
thousand and total saving of Rs. 201 thousand.
The sub-head under which the excess expenditure of Rs. 5.00 lakh and above
occurred and reasons therefore are explained below:—
Sub-head (Rupees in Lakh)
2014 00 102 02 - Establishment
Original Grant 2082.00
Supplementary Grants 27.00
Total Grant 2109.00
Actual Expenditure 2149.84
Excess 40.84
Reasons:—Under Revenue Section (Charged) the excess expenditure of Rs. 40.84
lakh was incurred for payment of salary to the High Court Staff. Though the savings
were available under Revenue Section (V oted) but it was beyond the competence of
the Administration to Re-appropriate it to ‘Charged’ side. Hence the excess expenditure
of Rs. 40.84 lakh requires regularization.
18

19
Remedial action taken to avoid saving in future:—
i. Instructions have been issued from time to time to restrict the expenditure
upto budget provision. The latest instructions have been issued in the month
of August 2002 by the then Home Secretary. A copy of these instructions is
enclosed.
ii. Instructions have also been issued by the then Home Secretary to CCA(Home)
that the provision of GFRs enabling PAOs to relase payment in excess of
budgetary provision, based on the undertaking from Head of Department, be
used very  Sparingly and that both CCA and the PAO  will be personally
responsible for excess expenditure beyond budgetary provision. CCA(Home)
has also directed the  PAOs, not to make any payment without receipt of
formal re-appropriation orders (copies enclosed). Director
(Fin-Home) has also invited the attention of all Joint Secretaries in the Ministry
of Home Affairs to the provisions contained in Rule 53, 54 & 55 of GFR
emphasizing on the need for making realistic assessment of funds and proper
scrutiny of exsimates not only at the BE stage, but also at Supplementary
Grants so that the occurrence of excess could be fully avoided (copy
enclosed).
The Explanatory Note for Excess Expenditure has been vetted by Office of the
D.G .ACR vide their UO No. RR/6-36/2003-04/159 dated 4th June, 2004.
Sd/-
(N.A. Viswanathan)
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor (Home)

No. 10/27/2002-Bgt.I
Ministry of Home Affairs
20 Aug., 2002
Subject: Management of Budgetary provisions in MHA
Unspent Provisions
1. Year after year, audit have been adversely commenting on the large savings
occurring in different Grants of MHA. Even the recent reports of Audit have observed
that there had been persistent unspent provision in various Grants of MHA. According
to audit, unspent provisions in a Grant are indicative of poor budgeting or shortfall in
performance depending upon the circumstances and the purpose for which the Grant
was provided. There have also been instances where savings in a Grant were more
than Rs. 100 Crore and PAC had taken a very serious view of such large savings. The
question of large saving also came up during the evidence of the then Home Secretary
before PAC in 1998.
2. Ideally speaking, Budgetary estimates should be made in such a manner that the
provision is sufficient for all essential expenditure and that there are no savings at the
end of the year. While minor savings/excess expenditure may be justified, large savings
of Rs. 100 crore or above in a Grant is a highly unacceptable situation.
3. It is necessary that the administrative and financial authorities in MHA and
PMFs take appropriate steps to ensure that budget estimates are prepared as accurately
as possible, expenditure is contained within the authorized provision and the savings
under various heads are intimated for surrender or re-appropriated as on as they are
foreseen.
Peparation of Budget Estimates
4. Large savings against the budgetary provisions raise doubts on the system of
making Budget Estimates. Rule 54 of the General Financial Rules provides that the
estimates of expenditure proposed by the estimating authorities should be scrutinized
by the Heads of the Department concerned. While an elaborate system of preparing
budget estimates exists in MHA and the CPMFs, occurrence of large savings indicates
that there is a definite need and scope for improving the situation.
Provisions for New Schemes/Projects
5. There have been many instances of seeking funds for activities in anticipation of
required approvals for the scheme and, year after year, provisions for such schemes
remain unutilized. General Financial Rules provide that no expenditure shall be incurred
during a financial year on a ‘new service’ not contemplated in the annual budget for
the year except after obtaining a supplementary grant or appropriation or an advance
from the Contingency Fund during that year.
20

21
6. As the system of seeking supplementary Grant for a new service exists, it is safer
not to provide funds in the Budget for a new project and to seek supplementary grant
only after the scheme/ project has been approved. It is, therefore, necessary to ensure
that no provision is made for new projects/schemes, while submitting Budget Estimates
to the Ministry and suitable Supplementary Grant is obtained for new scheme/projects
only after its due approval by the competent authority.
Surrender of Savings
7. Rule 69 of the General Financial Rules provides that Departments of the
Central Government shall surrender to the Finance Ministry, before the close of the
financial year, all anticipated savings noticed in the grants or appropriation controlled by
them. Note 1 to this Rule also provides that the savings should be surrendered immediately
when they are foreseen without waiting till the end of the year, unless they are required
to meet excesses under some other unit or units which are definitely foreseen at that time
and no savings should be held in reserve for possible future excesses.
8. However, it has been observed in the past that the savings are reported only at
the fag end of the year, that too after reminders are sent by the IFD. Such action on the
part of the Competent Financial Authorities (administrative authorities) go against the
provisions of General Financial Rules. If savings are reported, as and when they are
observed, IFD can utilize such savings for other pressing/additional requirements by
way of reappropriation.
9. Audit have also observed that the surrenders in certain Grants at the end of the
year were much less than the savings in the Grants. It was due to non-reporting of
savings by the concerned administrative authorities in time.Audit have also observed
a very disturbing trend where surrenders in a particular Grant at the end of the year
were more than savings finally occurring in that Grant.
10. It is, therefore, desirable that after periodical review of the budgetary provisions,
requirement of funds and the progress of expenditure, if savings or excess under any
head are likely to occur, the same should be immediately reported to IFD without
waiting until the close of the year so that the available savings could be adjusted
against the excess expenditure elsewhere through suitable re-appropriation.
Supplementary Grants
11. There have also been instances where additional funds were sought by the
administrative units but the actual expenditure was less than even the original provision.
Thus, seeking of supplementary grant not only did not serve the desired purpose for
such units, it also deprived other units who could not be provided more funds even for
their more pressing requirements. Instances have also been brought to notice where
supplementary grants sought for a particular object head were utilized in full but
savings occurred in other object heads of the same sub-head resulting in net savings
in the sub-head. Such instances also point to the bad financial management and attract
adverse audit observations.
12. Therefore, before seeking additional funds by way of supplementary grants, the
available funds in different object heads should be fully reviewed and if any savings

22
are possible in any of the object heads, such savings should be utilized to meet
additional requirement through re-appropriating the funds and supplementary grants
should be sought only for balance requirement. Further, to avoid situations where
additional funds sought in the last batch of supplementaries result in savings, such
additional funds , if required, should as far as possible be sought in the second batch
of supplementaries (Winter Session of Parliament). In the final batch of supplementaries,
funds should be sought only for those activities for which additional funds can be
fully utilized before the close of the financial year.
Rush of Expenditure
13. Rule 69 of the General Financial Rules also provide that the Rush of expenditure
particularly in the closing month of the financial year shall be regarded as a breach of
financial regularity and should be avoided. Audit have also adversely commented
upon the trend of disproportionately large expenditure in the month of March and the
last quarter of the year.
14. Through circulars No. OM(12)2/Ecord/2001 dated 11th June, 2001 and No.
4(36)B(SD)/2000 dated 13th July, 2001, Department of Expenditure informed the
Ministries/Departments about the adverse observations of  Public Accounts Committee
on the rush of expenditure in the month of March. Instructions have already been
issued in this Ministry also,from time to time, to ensure that the rush of expenditure in
the month of March and last quarter of the year should be avoided by close monitoring
of the expenditure.
15. An analysis of monthly data of three main grants of MHA and also of various
units in these grants reveals that there were only a  few instances of disproportionately
large expenditure in March or in the last quarter of the year. However, there is no need
to be complacent on this aspect as audit again brought out in their latest report, a few
instances where expenditure in the month of March was disproportionately large.
Instances quoted by the audit primarily relate to expenditure/release of funds for loans
and Advances to State Governments, transfers to UTs, other administrative services
capital outlay on housing, schemes of North Eastern Council etc. Analysis of monthly
data of CPMFs also reveal that major expenditure in ‘provision’ heads like Clothing
and Tentage, Machinery and Equipment and motor vehicles have taken place in the
last two quarters of the year.
16. There is, therefore, an urgent need to focus attention on items where expenditure
trends to take place only in the later part of the year and to take administrative steps or
procedural changes, wherever, required, so as to correct the imbalance. Appropriate
steps may, therefore, be taken to evenly phase out the expenditure by suitably adjusting
the indenting/procurement cycle, periodicity in releasing grants etc.
17. All Divisional Heads in MHA and Heads of CPMFs/CPOs should immediately
take steps to improve the financial and expenditure management by suitably adhering
to various provisions of General Financial Rules through periodical monitoring. All
Divisional Heads in MHA should hold monthly meetings to review expenditure on
each sub-head under their administrative control and a report of each should be
submitted to the respective Special Secretary in the Ministry. A quarterly report of
such reviews should be submitted to me, after the expiry of each quarter, by the 20th of
the following month.

23
18. Heads of CPMFs/CPOs may decide their own periodicity for such meetings but
a quarterly report of such reviews should positively be sent to the Ministry. Review of
budgetary provisions and expenditure should also be included as one of the items of
Agenda in the periodical IGs Conference held in the respective CPMFs.
Sd/-
(Kamal Pande)
Home Secretary
Dated: 19.08.2002
All Joint Secretaries in MHA(P)DOL/RGI
Copy to: SS(NE)SS(JKA)SS(FFR) AS(H)
DGs/Directors of all CPMFs/ CPOs

No. 10/27/2002-Bgt.I
Ministry of Home Affairs
Subject: Management of budgetary provisions in MHA
In continuation to the instructions of even number dated 20th August, 2002,
following directions are issued for strict compliance by FA(H)/CCA(H):
1. FA(H) will monitor implementation of the guidelines mentioned in the above
instructions by CPMFs/CPOs and will bring to the notice of the respective Special
Secretaries If any of the CPMFs/CPOs is found to be not implementing the guidelines
and failing in submission of quarterly reports of the reviews conducted by them in
respect of financial and expenditure management as provided in General Financial
Rules (GFR).
2. FA(H) will correspond with the Divisional Heads for receipt of budgetary
requirements at both BE and RE stages and will process these proposals further for
obtaining approval of Ministry of Finance after obtaining the views of the Divisional
Heads on such funds requirements.
3. While finalizing the requirements for RE for the current year and BE for the next
year. IF Division will take special care to firm up such estimates so that the possibility
of savings is avoided as far as possible. Concerned Divisional Heads should also be
intimated, well in advance, on the requirements for seeking second batch of
supplementaries as in the Ministry we have already taken a view that seeking of funds
in the third batch of supplementaries will have to be avoided unless has it is absolutely
necessary.
4. Before seeking any supplementary funds, FA(H) will ensure that the saving by
way of re-appropriations in the same grants are not available.
5.  All proposals for re-appropriations shall invariably be received through Divisional
Heads along with their views and only thereafter will the proposal or re-appropriation
be sent to Ministry of Finance.
6. Monthly review of progress of the expenditure with the officials of CPMFs/POs
and Divisional Heads in MHA should be carried out by I.F. Division. At least quarterly
review will also be carried out by FA(H) with the concerned officers of the Union
Territories to ensure adherence to the provisions of GFR.
7. In the last quarter of the year, considering the substantial budget outlay of the
Ministry, regular monitoring will be carried out by FA(H) to ensure that savings which
are not likely to be utilized for any approved activity are surrendered in time and as far
as possible savings at the end of the year are surrendered in full to avoid any adverse
observations by audit in future. In the last quarter of the year, FA(H) will also have
fortnightly meetings with the IFAs/concerned IGs of the CPMFs/CPOs and Divisional
Heads in MHA to ensure adherence to various facets of financial discipline.
24

8. Budget Branch under FA(H) will have a close interaction with the accounts
officials of various CPMFs/CPOs and other spending organizations to see that all the
required provisions of budgetary control provided in GFRs are strictly adhered to.
While GFRs provide that the PAOs can release funds on the undertaking from Head
of Department controlling the Grant that necessary funds to accommodate the
disbursements will be provided by issue of re-appropriation orders etc, it has been
observed that this particular provisions has resulted in excess expenditure in various
grants of MHA and restraint has to be exercised on this power of PAOs for ensuring
better financial discipline. It will, therefore, be the responsibility of CCA(H) that such
provision of GFR is used very sparingly. CCA(H) and concerned PAO will be personally
responsible for excess expenditure beyond budgteary provisions in any object head,
sub-head etc.
Sd/-
(Kamal Pande)
Home Secretary
Dt. 7.09.2002
(H)/CCA(H)
25

iz/kku ys[kk dk;kZy; ¼ys[kk½
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTS OFFICE (ACCOUNTS)
x`g ea=ky;
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
lh&1] gVesUVl] MygkSth jksM
C-1, HUTMENTS, DALHOUSIE ROAD
ubZ fnYyh&110 001
NEW DELHI-110 001
Ph. 3016148
la-@No.11-23/Pr.AO/A cs/MHA/ATN/2001-02/675 fnukad@Dated 5/11/2002
Subject: Excess expenditure being incurred by various divisons/authorities without
     re-apropriation of fund.
As per Article 114(3) of the Constitution, no money can be withdrawn from the
Consolidate Fund of India except under appropriation made by law. As per provisions
of Annexure ‘A’ to note 8 under Rule 66 of GFR, no payment should be made in excess
to budget allotment under any sub-head or primary unit of appropriation. All the PAOs
are hereby directed not to make payment without receipt of formal necessary re-
appropriation orders from Head of the Department which is agreed to by Budget
Division in writing. The excess of expenditure occurs due to the following reasons:—
(i) downward revision of grant from the original budget provision at RE stage
and late/non-communication of Revised Estimates.
(ii) non-fulfilment of assurances by the budget section.
(iii) surrender of amount without taking into consideration actual expenditure at
the time of surrendering the amount.
(iv) incorrect re-appropriation orders at the close of the financial year.
(v) irregular transfer/appropriation of funds from Capital to Revenue and vice-
versa.
(vi) non-maintenance/improper maintenance of Expenditure Control Register and
non-reconciliation of expenditure with the departmental officers.
2. In order to eliminate the chance of incurring any excess expenditure under any sub-
head , it is directed that aforesaid provision of  the GFR and other instructions of the
Govt. issued from time to time are strictly observed, so that PAOs are also able to make
payment only in such cases where budget provisions are made in advance and there is
no excess in any of the unit of appropriation to avoid any adverse comment of the CAG
in future.
FA (Home) has futher directed that no Pay & Accounts Officer will allow payment
beyond budgetary provision even against the undertaking from Head of the Department
that the funds would be made available in Reserved Estimates.
(Jawahar Thakur)
Chief Controller of Accounts
All Dy. CAs/PAOs/RPAOs
26

No 28/25/2003/Bgt. I
Ministry of Home Affairs
(I.F. Division)
5 JUN., 2003
Subject: Realistic and effective assessment of funds/Budget Estimates—recommen-
dations of the Public Accounts Committee—40th Report (13th Lok Sabha)—
Excess over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2000-01)
A copy of the OM No. 12(1)/E.Coord/2003 dated 19th May, 2003 received from
Ministry of Finance on the above subject is enclosed. Through this OM, Ministry of
Finance have drawn attention of all the Ministries/Departments to the observations of
Public Accounts Committee taking adverse note of the occurance of excess expenditure
over V oted Grant/Charged Appropriation and that the Committee has viewed such
excesses as clear instances of lack of foresight and monitoring on the part of budget
controlling authorities.
2. Ministry of Finance have also drawn attention to the provisions contained in
Rules 53, 54 and 55 of GFR emphasizing on the need for making realistic assessment of
funds and proper scrutiny of estimates by respective administrative authorities. Extracts
of Rules 53, 54 and 55 of GFR are given below:
Rule 53. Expenditure Estimates— The detailed estimates of expenditure will
be prepared by the estimating authorities by each unit of appropriation (sub/detailed
head) under the prescribed Major and Minor Heads of Accounts separately for Plan
and Non-Plan expenditure.
Rule 54. Scrutiny by Heads of Departments —The estimates of expenditure
proposed by the estimating authorities shall, after due scrutiny by the Heads of
Departments concerned, be forwarded to the Departments of the Central Government
administratively concerned.
Rule. 55 The estimates, on receipt from the Estimating Authorities, shall be
scrutinized according to the procedure prescribed in this behalf and modified as
necessary, in the Ministries/Departments administratively concerned and processed
further as under—
(i) The estimates of Plan expenditure for the ensuing year will be processed in
consultation with the Planning Commission in accordance with the
instructions issued by him.
(ii) In other cases (i.e. Revised Estimates of both Plan and Non-Plan expenditure
and Budget Estimates for Non-Plan expenditure) the estimates will be
submitted to the Financial Advisor. The latter will, after such scrutiny and
modifications as may be called for in his judgement in the context of economy
and other considerations, get the estimates consolidated for each
programme/organization to present a complete picture of their financial
costs and obtain approval of Secretary (Expenditure) in the Ministry of
Finance, wherever necessary.
27

The estimates as finally approved will then be forwarded to the Budget Division
in the Department of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance in such manner and
forms as may be prescribed by them from time to time.
3. Addressees are requested to take note of contents of the OM of Ministry of
Finance and also relevant provisions made in the General Financial Rules for
compliance.
Sd/-
(P.C. Rastogi)
Director (Fin-Home)
 dated  04.03.2003
All Joint Secretaries in MHA (P) DOJ/RGI/DOL/DONER & DOP &T
Copy to: F A(H)
Dy. FA(Pers.)
28

No. 12(1) E. Coord./2003
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
New Delhi, the 19th May, 2003
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Realistic and effective assessment of funds/Budget Estimates—recommen-
dations of the Public Accounts Committee—40th Report (13th Lok Sabha)—
Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2000-2001)
The undersigned is directed to invite the attention to the observations made by the
Public Accounts Committee in Para 20.2 of their 40th Report (13th Lok Sabha). While
taking adverse note of the occurrence of excess expenditure over voted grants/charged
appropriations, even after Supplementary Grants, the Committee has viewed such
cases as clear instances of inefficacious planning, lack of foresight and monitoring on
the part of budget controlling authorities.
2. Realistic assessment of funds with proper planning of Plans and Programmes to
which these funds are to be appropriated is at the very core of budget making to
ensure effective utilization of scarce resources.The General Financial Rules in Rules
53, 54 & 55 emphasize this cardinal principle in as much as these Rules provide for
detailed procedure for making realistic assessment of funds and also for proper scrutiny
of estimates made by the concerned authorities. If these procedures are followed
properly and proper scrutiny made by the concerned authorities, estimations made
may neither fall short nor run into excess. However, as highlighted by the Public
Accounts Committee occurrence of excesses in expenditure despite Supplementary
Grants in certain cases, clearly establishes that proper care and attention was not paid
by the authorities concerned for making realistic asessment of funds.
3. Accordingly, in view of the recommendations made by the Public Accounts
Committee, all the Ministries/Departments are advised that due care and attention be
paid to the existing instructions contained in the General Financial Rules to make
realistic assessment of funds not only at the BE state, but also at the stage of
Supplementary Grants so that the occurrence of excess could be fully avoided.
Sd/-
(Usha Mathur)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
1. All the Ministries/Departments as per the standard mailing list
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India
3. All Financial Advisers
29

IMPORTANT/URGENT
F.No. 10/34/2004-Bgt.I
Government of India/Bharat Sarkar
Ministry of Home Affairs/Grih Mantralaya
New Delhi, the 14th September, 2004
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Control of expenditure against the sanctioned grants/appropriations and
proper Assessment of requirements for Supplementary Demands for Grants/
Appropriations—Observations of the Public Accounts Committee.
Budget Division of Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Financial vide
O.M. No. 4(12)-B (SD)/2004, dated 17th August, 2004 have conveyed that the Public
Accounts Committee (PAC) in their 58th Report (13th Lok Sabha) has taken a very
serious view of the instance of persistent excess expenditure over the voted grants
and charged expenditure, particularly in those cases where the excess expenditure has
been incurred in spite of taking Supplementary Grants.
2. The PAC in its report, inter alia, has observed:
“The Committee are distressed to find that the excess expenditure during
2001-02 has occurred even after obtaining supplementary grant of Rs. 6429.59
crore in 12 out of 17 cases of excess registering grants/appropriations.
Strangely, the Ministry of Railways obtained supplementary grants in eight
cases of excess registering grants/appropriations. There were also three
instances in Civil Appropriation Accounts where excess expenditure had
occurred despite having obtained supplmentary grants. The scrutiny of the
cases of excess expenditure incurred despite obtaining of supplementary grants
reveals that in five cases, the amount of supplementary grants obtained had
proved inadequate as the excess expenditure incurred in five cases was more
than the supplementary grant obtained. The Committee are of the opinion that
the instrument of obtaining supplementary grants was not operated judiciously
by certain Ministries/Departments during the year under review. The Committee
view this situation with grave concern and express thir displeasure over the
irresponsible attitude displayed by various Ministries/Departments while
obtaining supplementary grants during the year under review. They, therefore,
desire the concerned Ministries/Departments to thoroughly review and
scrutinize the budget estimates at the supplementary grant stage itself so as to
obtained the supplementary demands not so casually but in rare and emergent
cases only.”
3. The Buget Division of the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance,
while calling for the proposals for Supplementary Demands for Grants has regularly
been reiterating the need for reviewing of estimates at the Supplementary Grant Stage
and making a realistic assessment of the requirements.
30

31
4. In this connection, the Budget Division of Department of Economic Affairs while
inviting proposals for the Supplementary Demands for Grants have specifically drawn
attention to their earlier communication wherein it has been stated:
“Recurrence of excess expenditure over sanctioned provision in certain grants
has also been viewed very seriously by the Public Accounts Committee. Needless
so say, such expenditure is unauthorized expenditure and must be avoided at
any cost. Therefore, not only the Supplementary Demands should be sought for
the minimum necessary amount after a thorough review of savings (both under
Plan and Non-Plan) within the grant but it should be sufficient to cover any
foreseeable excess. In order to ensure that this balance is met, (there is a need)
to keep the expenditure under close watch on a daily basis after sending the
proposals for Supplementary Grants and promptly inform us if there is a
significant variation requiring correction in the proposals...”
5. Keeping in view the observations made by the PAC in their 30th Report
(13th Lok Sabha), further instructions have already been issued by the Budget Division
of the Ministry of Finance vide memorandum No. 4 (10)-B (SD)/2002 dated 26th August,
2002 for keeping in view the provisions of Article 114(3) of the Constitution of India
and meticulously following the instructions contained in the General Finance rules for
control of expenditure against the sanctioned grant/appropriation so that instances of
expenditure in excess of sanctioned grant/appropriation are eliminated.
6. In view of the serious concern expressed by the PAC, the Ministry of Finance
have once again reiterated that the Financial Advisor of the Ministries/Departments
should thoroughly scrutinise the Budget Estimates at the Supplementary Grant Stage
in order to avoid instances of excess expenditure. It is, therefore, necessary on the part
of all Divisions to thoroughly scrutinise the Budget Estimates at the Supplementary
Grant Stage to avoid instances of excess expenditure.
7. In this regard your attention is also invited to this Ministry’s earlier OM No. 28/
62/2002-Bgt.I dated 26th September, 2002 wherein the recommendations of PAC for
keeping a strict control over expenditure was conveyed to you. (Copy enclosed for
ready reference).
8.  All Divisional Heads are therefore requested to give personal attention to this
matter and ensure strict observance of the directions of Ministry of Finance in regard
to thorough scrutiny of Budget Estimates at Supplementary Grant Stage and submit
proposals for Supplementary Demands not casually but only in rare and emergent
cases and also ensure avoidance of excess expenditure. Action taken in this regard
may please be intimated to the Budget Division of MHA immediately.
Sd/-
(N.A. Viswanathan)
Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor (Home)
To
1. All Joint Secretaries of MHA.
2. Others as per Standard List.
3. Copy for kind information to AS  (BM), AS (CS) and PPS to HS/PPS to Secretary  (BM)
Sd/-
(Jawahar Thakur)
Chief Controller of Accounts (Home)

32
Copy Forwarded Together with Enclosure:—
1. Shri Daya Shankar Pandey, Asstt. Director (Budget), Central Translation
Bureau, Deptt. of Official Language, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
2. Shri Om Prakash, Fire Advisor, D.G.C.D., East Block VIII, Level VII, R.K. Puram
(Main), New Delhi-66.
3. Shri V.K. Sharma, Deputy Director (Budget), O/O the Registrar General of
India, Man Singh Road, New Delhi.
4. Shri S. Hariharan, Asstt. Director, Intelligence Bureau, New Delhi.
5. Shri K.M. Nandyal, Director, National Civil Defence College, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Nagpur-440001.
6. Shri P .B. Rajappan, Under Secretary, Inter-State Council Sectt., Vigyan Bhavan,
Annexe, New Delhi.
7. Shri Brij Mohan Negi, Director (Policy), Deptt. of Official Language,
Lok Nayak Bhavan, New Delhi.
8. Shri R.A. Singh, Senior Accounts Officer, National Human Rights Commission,
Sardar Patel Bhavan, New Delhi.
9. Shri Sudersan Kumar, Deputy Secretary, Zonal Council Sectt., Jam Nagar
House, New Delhi.
10. Shri A. Mohanan, Under Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhavan,
New Delhi.
11. Shri M. Rai, Under Secretary, O/O Principal Scientific Adivser to the Govt. of
India, 310-A, Vigyan Bhavan Annexe, New Delhi.
12. Shri C.A. Subrahmanian, Deputy Secretary, National Security Council Sectt.,
East Block No. 10, Level-4, R.K. Puram, New Delhi.
13. Shri P.K. Roy, Under Secretary, Prime Minister’s Office, South Block,
New Delhi.
14. Shri Likhi Ram, Section Officer, President’s Sectt., New Delhi.
15. Shri K.K. Bajaj, Under Secretary, M&G Section, MHA, North Block,
New Delhi.
16. Shri J.L. Sharma, AIG (Accounts), Special Protection Group, SPG Complex,
Dwarka, Sector-9, New Delhi.
17. Dr. K.C. Wadhwa, Director, National Fire Service College, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Nagpur-440001.
18. Shri Rajiv Walia, Dy. Director-General Narcotics Control Bureau, West Block
No. I, Wing No. 5, R,K. Puram New Delhi.
19. Shri P. Venugopal, Administrative Officer, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National
Police Academy, Ministry of Home Affairs, Hyderabad-500053.

33
20. Shri Pinaki Sengupta, Administrative Officer, LNJP National Institute of
Criminology of Forensic Science, Ministry of Home Affairs, Sector-3, Outer
Ring Road, Rohini, Delhi-110085.
21. Shri A.K. Sood, Joint Asstt. Director, Bureau of Police Research &
Development, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
22. Shri Sarabjit Singh, Director-General Central Forensice Science Laboratory
(BPR&D), Block No. 4, 4th Floor, C.G.O. Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
23. Shri R.P. Sharma Suppdt. Central Forensic Science Laboratory (CBI), Block
No. 4, 4th Floor, C.G.O. Complex Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
24. Shri Manmohan, Administrative Officer (FS) Directorate of Forensic Science,
CGO Complex, New Delhi.
25. Shri A.K. Sood, Asstt. Director (Admn.), Central Detective Training School,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
26. Shri Praveen Kumar, Deputy Financial Adviser, Central Reserve Police Force,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
27. Shri P.K. Guta, Sr. Accounts Officer, Directorate of Assam Rifles, Shillong.
28. Shri R.P. Joshi Asstt. Commandant (Finance) Border Security Force, Block
No. I, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
29. Shri P.D. Sharma, Deputy Chief Accounts Officer, Indo-Tibetan Border Police,
Block No. II, CGO Complex. Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
30. Shri O.P. Nimesh Senior Accounts Officer, National Security Guard, CGO
Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
31. Shri R.D. Sharma Asstt. Director (Accounts) Central Industrial Security Force,
13, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
32. Shri B.S. Dhupia, Assistant Director, National Crime Records Bureau, East
Block No. 7, R.K. Puram, New Delhi- 110066.
33. Shri Rajan Kumar FA to Commissioner of Police Delhi Police, I.P., Estate,
New Delhi.
34. Shri Hans Raj, Accounts Officer, DIrectorate of Coordination Block No. 9,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
35. Shri J.S. Chambial D.I.G. Special Service Bureau, Block No. V (East) R.K.
Puram, New Delhi-110066.
36. Dr. M.S. Rao Chief Forensic Scientist, Directorate of Forensic Science, Block
No. 4, 4th floor, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
37. Shri Rakesh Bhatnagar Asstt. Financial Adviser (B-1) Ministry of Defence
(Finance), South Block, New Delhi.

34
38. The Sr. Account Officer, Pay & Account Office (P&M) Jam Nagar House,
New Delhi.
39. Shri J.K. Dadu, Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of Daman & Diu. Moti Daman,
Daman.
40. Shri J.K. Dadu, Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of Dadra & Nagar Haveli,
Silvassa.
41. Shri Sandeep Kumar, Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of Lakshadweep,
Kavaratti.
42. Shri K. Avtar Singh, Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of Chandigarh Chandigarh.
43. Shri P.K. Goel, Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of A&N Island Portblair.
44. Shri S.B. Doval, Under Secretary (Planning Cell), Ministry of Home Affairs,
North Block, New Delhi.
45. Shri Pooran Chand, Under Secretary (Bgt. II), Ministry of Home Affairs, North
Block, New Delhi.
46. Shri Anil Kumar, Sr. Accountant, O/O CCA (Home), MHA, North Block,
New Delhi.
47. S/Shri P.S. Dravaria, S.O./Srinivasulu, Asstt./Smt. Anitha K.P., UDC,
Budget-I Section Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi.
48. Sr. Accounts Officer, PAO (A/cs), C-I Hutments, Dalhousie Road, New Delhi.
Copy also forwarded for information to:
P.S. to FA (Home)/P.S. to CCA (Home).
Sd/-
(M.P. Rao)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India
Tel. No. 2309-2784

No. 28/62/2002-Bgt.-I
Ministry of Home Affairs
(Budget—I)
New Delhi.
Dated: 26 September, 2002
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Control of expenditure against the sanctioned grant/appropriation —
 Observations of the Public Accounts Committee
The Public Accounts Committee in their 30th Report (13th Lok Sabha) relating to
Excess Expenditure over the V oted Grants and Charged Appropriation (1999-2000)
have taken a serious view of expenditure incurred in excess of the provisions authorized
by the Parliament. The Committee have particularly observed, with much more serious
concern, the case of excess expenditure in those grants/appropriations where
supplementary provisions have been obtained. The Committee have observed that
such instances constituted a telling reflection on the approach of the Ministries/
departments concerned and on their inability to assess actual requirement of funds
even at the fag end of the financial year
2. In this connection, attention is invited to clause (3) of Article 114 of the Constitution
of India according to which no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund
of India except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the
provisions of the said Article. Thus, expenditure incurred in excess of the grant/
appropriation approved by the Parliament is unauthorized. Further, instructions for
control of expenditure already exist in part VII of Chapter 5 of the General Financial
Rules.
3. Keeping in view the observations of the Public Accounts Committee and the
rules/instructions quoted above, it is once again exphasized that strict watch should
be kept over the flow of expenditure against the sanctioned grant by regular monitoring
as provided in Rule 71, Chapter 5 of GFRs so that the expenditure does not exceed the
amounts authorized by the Parliament. In case the amount of a Grant falls short of the
requirement, a Supplementary Grant may be obtained before the expenditure is incurred.
While obtaining supplementary demands for grants, the amount of supplementary
demand may be assessed realistically so that the amount of Supplementary Grant
neither falls short of the actual requirement necessitating excess expenditure as pointed
out by the Public Accounts Committee, nor the amount is drawn in excess of the
requirement resulting finally in surrender of the amount of grant. While obtaining the
supplementary grant, savings available within the grant may also be assessed so that
additional funds could be provided through the “Token” or Technical Supplementary
Demands for Grants without involving additional cash outgo from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
35

4. All Budget Controlling Authorities are directed to scrupulously follow the
above guidelines.
Sd/-
(N.A. Viswanathan)
Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
To
As per list attached.
36

OM NO. F.4 (10)-B (SD) 2002
Ministry Of Finance & Company Affairs
Department Of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
New Delhi- 110001
Dated: 26th August, 2002
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Control of expenditure against the sanctioned grant/appropriation—
Observations of the Public Accounts Committee.
The Public Accounts Committee in their 30th Report (13th Lok Sabha) relating to
Excess Expenditure over the V oted Grants and Charged Appropriation (1999-2000)
have taken a serious view of expenditure incurred in excess of the provisions authorised
by the Parliament. The Committee have particularly observed, with much more serious
concern, the case of excess expenditute in those grants/appropriations where
supplementary provisions have been obtained. The Committee have observed that
such instances constituted a telling reflection on the approach of the Ministries/
departments concerned and on their inability to assess actual requirement of funds
even at the fag end of the financial year.
2. In this connection, attention is invited to cluase (3) of Article 114 of the Constitution
of India according to which no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of
India except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions
of the said Article. Thus, expenditure incurred in execss of the grant/appropriation approved
by the Parliament is unauthorised. Further, instructions for control of expenditure already
exist in Part VII of Chapter 5 of the General Financial Rules.
3. Keeping in view the observations of the Public Accounts Committee and the rules/
instructions quoted  above, it is once again emphasised that strict watch should be kept
over the flow of expenditure against the sanctioned grant by regular monitoring as
provided in Rule 71, Chapter 5 of GFRs so that the expenditure does not exceed the
amounts authorised by the Parliament. In case the amount of a Grant falls short of the
requirement, a Supplementary Grant may be obtained before the expenditure is incurred.
While obtaining supplementary demands for grants, the amount of supplementary
demand may be assessed realistically so that the amount of Supplementary Grant
neither falls short of the actual requirement necessitating excess expenditure as pointed
out by the Public Accounts Committee, nor the amount is drawn in excess of the requirement
resulting finally in surrender of the amount of grant. While obtaining the supplementary
grant, savings available within the grant may also be assessed so that additional funds
could be provided through the ‘Token’ of ‘Technical’ Supplementary Demands for Grants
without involving additional cash outgo from the Consolidated Fund of India.
Sd/-
(D. Swarup)
Additional Secretary
To
Shri N.A. Vishwanathan,
F.A., Min. of Home Affairs, New Delhi.
37

IMPORTANT  PAC MATTER
No. 28/2/2005-Bgt.I
Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs
New Delhi , the 6th June, 2005
Subject: Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations—Observations/
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee.
The Public Accounts Committee (2004-2005) (14th Lok Sabha), in its 10th Report on
‘Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2002-2003)' presented to
the Lok Sabha on 28th April, 2005, have commented adversely on the persistent excess
expenditure being incurred by the Ministries/Departments over the authorized budget
allocations.
2. In the above stated Report, PAC have pointed out that excess expenditure is
being incurred by the Ministries/Departments year after year in spite of the repeated
observations and recommendations made by the Committee in its previous Reports. It
shows that the Committee’s off-repeated recommendations had little impact on the
concerned Ministries/Departments. The Committee’s dissatisfaction is more so in the
cases where excess expenditure has been incurred despite taking Supplementary Grants.
The Committee have also pointed out that mere issue of instructions by the Ministries/
Departments in this regard is not sufficient unless these instructions are strictly complied
with and desired results are achieved. A copy of the observations/recommendations
made by the PAC in the aforesaid Report, on the Grants being operated by Ministry of
Home Affairs, is enclosed (Paragraph Nos. 65, 67, 71 and 79 of the Report refer).
3. Instructions have been issued repeatedly by the Budget Wing of the Ministry in
the recent past to avoid excess expenditure at all costs. But it seems that these
instructions are not being followed in right earnest resulting in incurring of excess
expenditure year after year. During the financial year 2002-2003, the excess expenditure
has been incurred in four Sections of three Grants.
4. It is needless to say that repeated observations/recommendations of PAC on the
excess expenditure have created embarrassing situation for the Ministry. The excess
expenditure could have been avoided with a little more care taken in this regard. It has
been repeatedly stated that expenditure should be restricted to the authorized budget
allocations and if more funds are required during the financial year, Supplementary
Grants can be obtained. The expenditure incurred in excess of the Budget Provision
and Supplementary Grants, is an unauthorized expenditure and is viewed very seriously
by the PAC.
5. All the Divisional Heads/Budget Controlling Authorities in the Ministry of Home
Affairs are once again requested to take utmost care in framing Budget Estimates and
Supplementary Grants so that they do not run short of funds for their schemes/projects.
However, excess expenditure is to be avoided under any circumstances.
38

39
6. It is also requested to bring the above instructions alongwith the observations/
recommendations of the PAC to the notice of all concerned under your charge.
Necessary action may please be taken against the officials not complying with these
instructions.
Sd/-
(N.A. Viswanathan)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
Enclosures: As above.
To
1. All Joint Secretaries in Ministry of Home Affairs/Department of Official Language/
Department of Justice/Registrar General of India/Department of Development of North-
Eastern Region.
2. Others (As per attached Standard List).
Copy also forwarded to:—
Principal Accounts Office (Accounts), Ministry of Home Affairs, C-I Hutments,
Dalhousie Road, New Delhi-110 0 11 with the directions to bring it to the notice of all
Pay and Accounts Officers that they will be personally held responsible for any excess
booking of expenditure and punished accordingly.
Sd/-
(Jawahar Thakur)
Chief Controller of Accounts (Home)
Standard List of Addresses
1. Shri Daya Shankar Pandey, Asstt. Director (Budget), Central Translation
Bureau, Department of Official Language, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi.
2. Shri Om Prakash, Fire Advisor, D.G.C.D., East Block VIII, Level VII, R.K. Puram
(Main), New Delhi-66.
3. Shri V .K. Sharma, Deputy Director (Budget), O/o the Registrar General of
India, Man Singh Road, New Delhi.
4. Shri S. Hariharan, Asstt. Director, Intelligence Bureau, New Delhi.
5. Shri K.M. Nandyal, Director, National Civil Defence College, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Nagpur- 440 001.
6. Shri P.B. Rajappan, Under Secretary, Inter-State Council Sectt., Vigyan Bhavan
Annexe, New Delhi.
7. Shri Brij Mohan Negi, Director (Policy), Deptt. of Official Language,
Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi.
8. Shri R.A. Singh, Senior Accounts Officer, National Human Rights Commission.
Sardar Patel Bhavan, New Delhi.

40
9. Shri Sudersan Kumar, Deputy Secretary, Zonal Council Sectt., Jam Nagar
House, New Delhi.
10. Shri A. Mohanan, Under Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhavan,
New Delhi.
11. Shri A. Manoharan, Under Secretary, O/o Principal Scientific Adviser to the
Govt. of India, 310-A, Vigyan Bhavan Annexe, New Delhi.
12. Shri N.R. Das, Section Officer, National Security Council Sectt., East Block
No. 10, Level-4, R.K. Puram, New Delhi.
13. Shri P.K. Roy, Under Secretary, Prime Minister’s Office, South Block,
New Delhi.
14. Shri Likhi Ram, Section Officer, President’s Sectt., New Delhi.
15. Shri K.K. Bajaj, Under Secretary, M&G Section, MHA, North Block,
New Delhi.
16. Shri J.L. Sharma, AIG (Accounts), Special Protection Group, SPG Complex,
Dwarka, Sector-9, New Delhi.
17. Dr. K.C. Wadhwa, Director, National Fire Service College, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Nagpur.
18. Shri Rajiv Walia, Dy. Director-General, Narcotics Control Bureau, West Block
No. 1, Wing No. 5, R.K. Puram, New Delhi.
19. Shri P. Venugopal, Administrative Officer, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National
Police Academy, Ministry of Home Affairs, Hyderabad-500053.
20. Shri Pinaki Sengupta, Administrative Officer, LNJP National Institute of
Criminology & Forensic Science, Ministry of Home Affairs, Sector-3, Outer
Ring Road, Rohini, Delhi-110085.
21. Shri Sarabjit Singh, Director-General, Central Forensic Science Laboratory
(BPR&D), Block No.4, 4th Floor, C.G.O. Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
22. Shri R.P. Sharma, Suppdt., Central Forensic Science Laboratory (CBI),
Block No. 4, 4th Floor, C.G.O. Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
23. Shri A.K. Sood, Asstt. Director (Admn.), Central Detective Training School,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
24. Shri A.K. Sood, Joint Asstt. Director, BPR&D, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi.
25. Shri Praveen Kumar, Deputy Financial Adviser, CRPF, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
26. Shri U.N. Majhi, Financial Adviser (AR), Directorate of Assam Rifles, Shillong.
27. Shri R.P. Joshi, Asstt. Commandant (Finance), Border Security Force,
Block No. 1, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
28. Shri P.D. Sharma, Deputy Chief Accounts Officer, Indo-Tibetan Border Police,
Block No.II, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.

41
29. Shri O.P. Nimesh, Senior Accounts Officer, National Security Guard, CGO
Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
30. Shri R.D. Sharma, Asstt. Director (Accounts), Central Industrial Security Force,
13, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
31. Shri B.S. Dhupia, Assistant Director, National Crime Records Bureau, East
Block No.7, R.K. Puram, New Delhi-110066.
32. Shri Rajan Kumar, FA to Commissioner of Police, Delhi Police, I.P. Estate,
New Delhi.
33. Shri Hans Raj, Accounts Officer, Directorate of Co-ordination, Block No. 9,
CGO Complex, New Delhi.
34. Shri J.S. Chambial, D.I.G ., Special Service Bureau, Block No. V (East),
R.K. Puram, New Delhi.
35. Dr. M.S. Rao, Chief Forensic Scientist, Directorate of Forensic Science,
Block No. 4, 4th Floor, CGO Complex, New Delhi.
36. Shri Manmohan, Administrative Officer (FS), Directorate of Forensic Science,
Block No. 4, 4th Floor, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
37. Shri Rakesh Bhatnagar, Asstt. Financial Adviser (B-I), Ministry of Defence
(Finance), South Block, New Delhi.
38. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of Daman & Diu, Moti Daman, DAMAN.
39. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of Dadra & Nagar Haveli, SILV ASSA.
40. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of Lakshadweep, KAV ARATTI.
41. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of Chandigarh, CHANDIGARH.
42. Secretary (Finance), U.T. Admn. of A & N Islands, PORTBLAIR.
43. Shri S.B. Doval, Under Secretary (Planning Cell), Ministry of Home Affairs,
North Block, New Delhi.
44. Shri Pooran Chand, Under Secretary (Bgt.II), Ministry of Home Affairs,
North Block, New Delhi.
45. Shri Anil Kumar, Sr. Accountant, O/o CCA (Home ), MHA, North Block,
New Delhi.
46. S/Shri P.S. Dravaria, Section Officer/Y. Srinivasulu, Assistant/Smt. Anitha.
K.P., UDC, Budget-I Section, MHA.
47. Sr. Accounts Officer, Pay & Accounts Office (P&M), Jam Nagar House,
New Delhi.
48. Shri B.B. Sarkar, Deputy Controller of Accounts, Principal Accounts Office,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, 3rd Floor, ‘B’ Wing,
Lok Nayak Bhavan, Khan Market, New Delhi - 110 003.
49. Shri Rajeev Singh, Director (Finance), National Technical Research
Organisation, J-16, Hauz Khas, New Delhi -110 016.

42
Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture
With respect to Para 67 (Page 36) in respect of Ministry of Culture, the general
instructions to all attached/subordinate offices and autonomous organizations and
Divisional Heads have been issued to observe due farsightedness while submitting
proposals for the additional funds and also ensure proper planning and estimation and
scrutiny of the proposals for budgets as well as for supplementary demands.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/3-22/2005-06/507 dated
15th February, 2006.
[Ministry of Culture O.M. No. 20-1/2005-P&B, dated 22nd February, 2006]
Action Taken by the Deptt. of Telecommunications
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. Proposals for additional
demands are reviewed and scrutinized before the same are proposed for inclusion in
the Supplementary Demands for Grants.
The issues with the approval of Member (Finance).
This has been vetted by DG Audit (P&T) vide their U.O. No. Rep. VI/4001 (b) Apprn
A/Cs/2002-03/984 dt.30.11.05.
[Deptt. of  Telecommunications File No. 1-4/2005-B Dated 5.08.2005]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
Out of the overall excess of Rs. 323.65 cr, almost 65% i.e., Rs. 211.15 cr was incurred
under Demand No. 14 alonge, i.e., to ‘Appropriation to Funds’. In 2002-03, the financial
results showed better performance due to higher earnings and saving in overall revenue
expenditure, resulting in higher generation of internal resources which were ultimately
to be appropriated to the Railway Reserve Funds,  viz, DF, DRF or SRSF. As the
appropriation of surplus resources is technically considered as a part of expenditure
and forms part of Demand No. 14, the excess incurred hereunder can be deemed to be
technical in nature, as no real expenditure is involved in this case.

43
Apart from above, an excess of Rs. 18.30 cr has been incurred under Demand
No. 15, i.e., ‘Dividend to General Revenues etc.’, mainly due to payment of deferred
dividend on new Lines under moratorium not contemplated earlier. Normally, the
clearance of deferred dividend on New Lines under moratorium has been very less.
Whether a particular line will do well enough in a given year to move from a ‘moratorium’
status to a dividend paying line, is clear only after the accounts are finalized, hence it
is difficult to budget for the same.
As regards the excess under Demand No. 16 in SRSF, despite an increased provision
made through Supplementary Demands, the excess has resulted because of the thrust
being given to complete these safety related targeted works under Track Renewal and
Rolling Stock.
As far as charged appropriations are concerned, it is submitted that the amounts of
excess incurred in all appropriations, except Demand No. 16, are very minor totaling to
merely Rs. 84. lakhs in 7 cases.
As regards excess appropriation under Demand No. 16, there had been higher
demand of funds under Capital at the fag end of the year which could not be anticipated
by Central Railway, Eastern Railway, South Central Railway, South Eastern Railway,
Western Railway, Integral Coach Factory and Central Organization for Railway
Electrification. A letter to the Railways, on the need to assess the requirement of
charged expenditure accurately, though the amounts involved are mostly nominal, has
been issued recently on 17.02.2005. The need for greater accuracy in budgeting has
also been emphasized in the FA&CAOs’ conferences held in March’05 & May’05 for
taking corrective action by the Railways.
Audit vide their U.O.No. 230 RA-III/2-1/2004 dated 21st December, 2005 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005-BC-PAC-XIV/10 dated 24-01-2006]
Recommendation
From the scrutiny of Appropriation Accounts (Civil) the Committee note that there
was an excess disbursement of Rs. 1864.47 crore in 9 segments of 8 Grants/
Appropriations in civil Ministries. The excess expenditure over Rs. One crore had
occurred in four out of nine cases. The Committee find that Appropriation No. 29 —
Interest Payments has shown the maximum excess expenditure aggregating Rs. 1792.90
crore followed by excess expenditure of Rs. 52.70 crore under Grant No. 80 —
Department of Culture and Rs. 15.89 crore under Grant No. 13 — Department of
Telecommunications. The excess expenditure under the Grants/Appropriations operated
by Civil Ministries/Departments was mainly on account of provision of Grant- in-aid to
States for Railway Safety Works, Special drive to restore, conserve and improve
conditions of monuments, conversion of special securities, wrong booking of

44
expenditure, payments ordered by Court, clearance of unadjusted transactions etc. In
the opinion of the Committee, these reasons could have been anticipated well in
advance and provided at the budgetary or supplementary Grants stage. The fact that
this was not done is regrettable. The Committee desire that in future adequate care may
be taken by the concerned Ministries/Departments in this regard.
[Sl.No. 5, para 69, of the Appendix IV of 10th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
In view of the recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee,
instructions have been issued to all Ministries/Departments of the Government of
India vide O.M. No. 12(2)/E. Coord/2005 dated 17.11.2005.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-42/2005-06/315 dated
7th November, 2005.
Ministry of Finance Department of Expenditure P&C Wing U.O.No. 12(2)/E.
Coord/2005 dated 17.11.2005]
Action taken by the Ministry of Culture
With respect to Para 69 (page 38) in respect of Ministry of Culture, the general
instructions to all attached/subordinate offices and autonomous organizations and
Divisional Heads to clearly anticipate the excess expenditure under the Grants/
Appropriation well in advance with their reasons/justifications for excess/savings of
budgetary proposals so that these could be included at Supplementary Grant stage for
the approval of the Parliament.
This has been vetted by audit vide their U.O. No. RR/3-22/2005-06/507 dated 15th
February, 2006.
[Ministry of Culture O.M. No. 20-1/2005-P&B, dated 22nd February, 2006]
Action Taken by the Deptt. of Telecommunications
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted.
This issues with the approval of Member (Finance).
This has been vetted by the DG Audit (P&T) their U.O. No. Ref. VI/4001 (b) Apprn.
A/ACs/2002-03/ 984 dt. 30-11-05.
[Deptt. of Telecommunications File No. 1-4/2005-B Dated 05-08-2005]
Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to point out that excess expenditure under Grants/
Appropriations operated by the Civil Ministries/Departments has become a somewhat
recurring phenomenon. The comparative figures of the past five years, i.e from 1998-99

45
to 2002-03 (year under review) indicates that the excess expenditure under Civil
Ministries/Departments had gone up to Rs. 1864.47 crore in sharp contrast to the years
1999-2000 and 2000-01 when the excess expenditure showed a nominal decline from
Rs. 0.57 to Rs.0.44 crore respectively. The Grants showing excess expenditure have
also increased from 5 in 2001-02 to 8 in 2002-03. Detailed analysis of the Appropriation
Accounts (Civil) for the preceding two years i.e. 2001-02 and 2002-03 by the Committee
has revealed that Grant No. 13—Department of  Telecommunications and Appropriation
No. 29 — Interest Payments recurringly registered excess expenditure during these
years. It has further been observed that while the excess expenditure under Grant
No. 13 — Department of  Telecommunications is reduced during the year 2002-03 (from
Rs.114.36 crore in 2001-02 to Rs. 15.89 crore in 2002-03), it has shown a steep rise in
case of Appropriation No. 29 — Interest Payments (Rs. 28.39 crore in 2001-02 to
Rs. 1792.90 crore in 2002-03).  Apparently no efforts have been made by the concerned
Ministries/Departments to examine the factors contributing to such a dismal state of
affairs and take corrective action. The Committee desire that every Ministry/
Department, particularly those concerned with grants mentioned above, should carefully
review their mechanism for framing of budget estimates and take corrective measures
wherever required to make it more balanced and realistic.
[Sl. No. 6, para 70, of the Appendix IV of 10th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
In view of the recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee,
instructions have been issued to all Ministries/Departments of the Government of
India vide O.M. No. 12(2)/E.Coord/2005 dated 17-11-2005.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No.: RR/1-42/2005-06/315 dated
7th November, 2005.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure P&C wing U.O. No. 12(2)/
E.Coord/2005 dated 17.11.2005]

MOST  IMMEDIATE
PAC  MATTER
No. 12(2)/E.Coord./2005
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
New Delhi, the 17th November, 2005
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Action taken on the recommendations contained in the 10th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged Appropria-
tions (2002-2003)”
The undersigned is directed to invite the attention to the recommendation made by
the Public Accounts Committee in paras 65, 67, 69 and 70 of their 10th Report (14th Lok
Sabha) where the Committee has viewed with serious concern the cases of excess
expenditure even in those grants of appropriations where supplementary provisions
had been obtained. The observations made by the Public Accounts Committee in the
relevant paras are summarized as under:
Para 65
In the year 2002-03 an excess expenditure of Rs. 2188.12 crore was incurred. The
excess expenditure was mainly on account of Appropriation No. 29 relating to interest
payments which were exceeded by Rs. 1792.90 crore. The excess expenditure was on
account of defective estimation of requirement of funds, lack of continuous watch
over expenditure flow, timely review of financial requirements, failure to assess the
additional fund requirements etc. The reasons are similar to the earlier years and it is
apparent that Ministries/Departments are not viewing this matter with ample seriousness
and the often repeated recommendations of Public Accounts Committees in the past
have had little impact. All the Ministries/Departments are therefore urged to chalk out
a definite policy in order to observe greater financial discipline and ensure that
expenditure does not exceed its prescribed limit.
Para 67
Supplementary grants in most of the cases were obtained without proper assessment
with the result that even the additional provisions proved inadequate the actual
requirement of funds. Concerned Ministries/Departments should impress upon their
budget controlling authorities to thoroughly examine their proposals for additional
funds with due foresightedness and ensure proper review and scrutiny of the requests
for Supplementary demands before the same are presented to the Parliament for
approval.
Para 69
In a large number of cases, there was an excess expenditure of over Rs. 1 crore even
after the Supplementary Grants stage. This was regrettable as a factors leading excess
46

47
expenditure should have been anticipated well in advance and provided for at
budgetary or Supplementary Grants stage. Adequate care should be taken by the
concerned Ministry/Department in this regard.
Para 70
Excess expenditure under Grants/Appropriations in Civil Ministries/Departments
has become a recurring phenomenon. All the Ministries/Departments should therefore
carefully review their mechanism for framing of Budget Estimates and take corrective
measures to make it more balanced and realistic.
2. The instances brought out in the aforesaid Report of the Public Accounts
Committee that Ministries/Departments have not been making the Budget Estimates
after proper scrutiny leading to excess expenditure having to be incurred year after
year  with the Parliament being presented with a fate-acommpli.  It is therefore
necessary for all the Ministries/Departments of Government of India to observe
greater financial discipline with a view to ensure that expenditure does not exceed its
prescribed limits.
3. One of the basic requirements of Budget formulation and estimation is realistic
assessment of funds required for various expenditure at different stages in a financial
year be made. In this connection, attention is invited to this Department’s Office
Memorandum No. 12(1)/E.Coord./2002 dated September 27, 2002.  As per the provisions
of this Office Memorandum, careful monitoring of expenditure in accordance with the
provisions contained in the General Financial Rules and Ministry of Finance O.M. No.
12(3)/E.Coord./2000 dated August 13, 2001 was mandatory to avoid any excesses over
V oted/Charged Appropriations. The provisions of new GFRs also referred to this issue.
Specific attention is drawn to Rule 52(3) of the GFRs, 2005 as per which no expenditure
shall be incurred which may have the effect of exceeding the total grant or appropriation
authorized by Parliament by law for a financial year, except after obtaining a
supplementary grant or an appropriation or an advance from the contingency fund.
Rules 54, 58, 59, 60 and 61 of GFRs, 2005 are also to be noted in this connection.
4. In view of the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee as mentioned
in para 1 above, Ministries/Departments are requested to ensure strict compliance
with the relevant provisions of the GFRs, 2005 and the instructions issued vide this
Department’s Office Memorandums dated September 27, 2002; August 13, 2001 and
O.M. No. G-25018/CGA-AA/Excess./2000-01/629 dated September 5, 2001.
Sd/-
(Dr. S.C. Pandey)
Officer on Special Duty (P&C)
1. All the Ministries/Departments as per the standard mailing list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers.

48
Action Taken by the Deptt. of  Telecommunications
All corrective measures are taken to ensure framing of a balanced and realistic
Budget Estimate, and as a result the excess expenditure was reduced to a considerable
extent in the year 2002-03 in comparison to the previous year. The excess expenditure
was due to adjustment of amounts lying under Suspense and Remittance heads which
was necessitated for transferring the reconciled balances to Bharat Sanchar Limited.
This excess expenditure was merely a book adjustment without involving any cash
outgo.
This issues with the approval of Member (Finance).
This has been vetted by DG Audit (P&T) vide their U.O. No. Rep. VI/4001(b) Appr.
A/Cs 2002-03/984 dated 30-11-05.
[Deptt. of Telecommunications File No. 1-4/2005-B Dated 05.08.2005]
Recommendation
“The Committee are distressed to find that during the year under review the
Ministry of Home Affairs incurred the excess expenditure of Rs. 91.00 lakh under four
sections of three Grants, i.e., (i) Grant No. 45 - Ministry of Home Affairs (Revenue -
Charged), 47 - Police (Revenue - Charged) and 99 - Chandigarh (Revenue - Charged
and Capital - Charged). According to the Ministry of Home Affairs, this was mainly due
to wrong booking of expenditure, payment of compensation as per court decrees,
payment of MACT cases, salary and arrears of ‘Assured Career Progressive Scheme’
to High Court staff and payment deposited in Court on enhancement of various awards
in land acquisition cases. The Committee are of the view that many of these could have
been foreseen and provided for at least at the Supplementary Grant stage before the
close of the year. This has happened despite the issuance of the instructions by the
Ministry from time to time to restrict the expenditure as per the budgetary provisions.
Director (Finance - Home) has also stated to invite the attention of all Joint Secretaries
to the provisions contained in Rule 53, 54 and 55 of GFR emphasizing upon the need
for making realistic assessment of funds and proper scrutiny of estimates not only at
the Budget Estimate stage, but also at Supplementary Grants so that the occurrence of
excess could be fully avoided. The Committee need hardly emphasis that mere issue of
instructions is not sufficient unless these instructions are strictly complied with. They,
however, desire the Ministry of Home Affairs to take suitable effective steps to ensure
compliance of those instructions in their right earnest apart from tightening their
control over expenditure.
Further scrutiny of the Grants operated by the Ministry of Home Affairs has
revealed that there was wrong booking of expenditure of Rs. 2.13 lakh under Major Head
“2052” - Secretariat - General Services of Grant No. 45 - Ministry of Home Affairs. The
Committee would like to have the details of the said wrong booking of expenditure,
which vitiated the estimated of final requirements of funds. The Committee would urge
the Ministry to examine the matter for appropriate action in case any serious negligence
on the part of supervisory officials is noticed.”
[Sl. No. 7, Para No. 71 of Appendix-IV of 10th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

49
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
The Ministry agree with the Public Accounts Committee that during the financial
year 2002-03, the excess expenditure in four Sections of three Grants of the Ministry
was unfortunate and more so as it had happened despite the issuance of the instructions
by the Ministry from time to time to restrict the expenditure as per the budgetary
provisions. The Ministry agrees that mere issue of instructions is not sufficient unless
these are strictly complied with and the desired goals are achieved.
2. It is submitted here that excess expenditure under various Grants of the Ministry
during the financial year 2002-03 had occurred due to various reasons, as furnished in
the ‘Detailed Explanatory Notes for Excess Expenditures’, already submitted by the
Ministry to the PAC, duly vetted by audit.
3. The present observations and recommendations of the Committee have been
noted with all seriousness in the Ministry and the same have been brought to the
notice of all Budget Controlling Authorities in the Ministry for strict compliance in
future. All the Divisional Heads have also been advised to take necessary action
against the defaulting officials under their charge responsible for any excess expenditure
in future (No. 28/2/2005-Bgt.I dated 6th June 2005 - copy enclosed).
4. As regards wrong booking of expenditure of Rs. 2.13 lakh under Major Head
“2052'—Secretariat—General Services of Grant No. 45 - Ministry of Home Affairs, it is
submitted here that there were three bills in which wrong accounting codes were
mentioned. Out of these, two bills pertain to Cash Section of the Ministry and one to
‘Committee of Parliament on Official Language’. In the first case, although the
expenditure was booked by the Cash Section under the head ‘Other Charges (V oted)’,
inadvertently code of ‘Charged’ expenditure was indicated in the ‘Data Input Sheets’
(covering letters of the bills). In the second case also, the error was somewhat similar.
Office of the ‘Committee of Parliament on Official Language’ had inadvertently indicated
in the ‘Data Input Sheet’, an expenditure of Rs. 12106/- to be booked under the head
‘Other Charges (Charged) while it was to be booked under the head Office Expenses
(Voted). This Mis-classification of expenditure could not be detected by PAO and the
expenditure was booked by them under the ‘Charged’ portion of the Grant. This led to
booking of an excess expenditure of Rs. 2.13 lakh under this portion. Copies of all the
three ‘Data Input Sheets’ are enclosed. The ‘Table’ given below has the details of the
aforesaid three bills:
Sl. Bill No. and Date Bill Amount Expenditure Details
No.
1. CB-57/1145/OC/02- Rs. 1,50,000/- For meeting expenses on boarding,
03 dated 25.3.2003 lodging and other miscellaneous
expenditure of the Chairman and
Members of the ‘Criminal Justice
Systems Reforms Committee under the
Chairmanship of Justice V . S. Malimath’
for their meeting held in Bangalore from
23rd March, 2003 to 28th March, 2003.

50
Sl. Bill No. and Date Bill Amount Expenditure Details
No.
2. Adjustment Bill No. Rs. 51,749/- For making payment to Indira Gandhi
CB-44/1091/Adj./02 Institute of Development Research,
03 dated 12.3.2003 Mumbai for arranging the Seminar from
22nd March, 2002 to 24th March, 2002
for the ‘Criminal Justice Systems
Reforms Committee’, constituted by the
Government of India.
3. 226/CB-2002-03 Rs. 12,106/- For making payment to Secretary,
dated 21.3.2003 New  Delhi Municipal Council for ‘Electricity/
Water Charges’ in respect of office
of the ‘Committee of Parliament on
Official Language’.
5. In this context, it is submitted here that these errors were totally unintentional
and perhaps occurred due to rush of work at the close of the financial year. No serious
negligence, whatsoever, has been noticed on the part of the supervisory officials. As
remedial measures, the concerned officials have been cautioned and instructed by the
Joint Secretary concerned to take utmost care while preparing the bills and booking
the expenditure under various heads to avoid recurrence of mis-classification in future.
Besides this, one official has specifically been assigned the job of checking the bills in
Cash Section, before they are sent to PAO for booking. Instructions have also been
issued to all concerned in the Ministry for proper use of according code and
classification of expenditure. It has been brought to their notice that recurrence of
such instances will be viewed seriously (No. 12/1/2003-Bgt. I dated 24th May 2004—
copy enclosed).
(This ‘Action Taken Note’ has been vetted by O/O DGACR vide their U.O.
No. RR/6-2/2005-06/215 dated 2nd August, 2005).
[Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 28/2/2005-Bgt.I dated 12.08.2005]

IMPORTANT PAC  MATTER
No. 28/2/2005-Bgt. I
Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs
New Delhi, the 6th June, 2005
Subject: Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations—Observations/
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee.
The Public Accounts Committee (2004-2005) (14th Lok Sabha), in its 10th Report on
‘Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2002-2003)’, presented to
the Lok Sabha on 28th April, 2005, have commented adversely on the persistent excess
expenditure being incurred by the Ministries/Departments over the authorized budget
allocations.
2. In the above stated Report, PAC have pointed out that excess expenditure is
being incurred by the Ministries/Departments year after year in spite of the repeated
observations and recommendations made by the Committee in its previous Reports. It
shows that the Committee’s off-repeated recommendations had little impact on the
concerned Ministries/Departments. The Committee’s dissatisfaction is more so in the
cases where excess expenditure has been incurred despite taking Supplementary Grants.
The Committee have also pointed out that mere issue of instructions by the Ministries/
Departments in this regard is not sufficient unless these instructions are strictly complied
with the desired results are achieved. A copy of the observations/recommendations
made by the PAC in the aforesaid Report, on the Grants being operated by Ministry of
Home Affairs, is enclosed (Paragraph Nos. 65, 67, 71 and 79 of the Report refer).
3. Instructions have been issued repeatedly by the Budget Wing of the Ministry in
the recent past to avoid excess expenditure at all costs. But it seems that these
instructions are not being followed in right earnest resulting in incurring of excess
expenditure year after year. During the financial year 2002-2003, the excess expenditure
has been incurred in four Sections of three Grants.
4. It is needless to say that repeated observations/recommendations of PAC on the
excess expenditure have created embarrassing situation for the Ministry. The excess
expenditure could have been avoided with a little more care taken in this regard. It has
been repeatedly stated that expenditure should be restricted to the authorized budget
allocations and if more funds are required during the financial year, Supplementary
Grants can be obtained. The expenditure incurred in excess of the Budget Provision
and Supplementary Grants, is an unauthorized expenditure and is viewed very seriously
by the PAC.
5. All the Divisional Heads/Budget Controlling Authorities in the Ministry of Home
Affairs are once again requested to take utmost care in framing Budget Estimates and
Supplementary Grants so that they do not run short of funds for their schemes/projects.
However, excess expenditure is to be avoided under any circumstances.
6. It is also requested to bring the above instructions alongwith the observations/
51

52
recommendations of the PAC to the notice of all concerned under your charge.
Necessary action may please be taken against the officials not complying with these
instructions.
Sd/-
(N.A. Viswanathan)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
Enclosures: As above.
To
1.  All Joint Secretaries in Ministry of Home Affairs/Department of Official Language/
Department of Justice/Registrar General of India/Department of Development of North-
Eastern Region.
2. Others (As per attached Standard List).
Copy also forwarded to:—
Principal Accounts Office (Accounts), Ministry of Home Affairs, C-I, Hutments,
Dalhousie Road, New Delhi-110 011—with the directions to bring it to the notice of all
Pay and Accounts Officers that they will be personally held responsible for any excess
booking of expenditure and punished accordingly.
Sd/-
(Jawahar Thakur)
Chief Controller of Accounts (Home)
Standard List of Addresses
1. Shri Daya Shankar Pandey, Asstt. Director (Budget), Central Translation
Bureau, Department of Official Language, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi.
2. Shri Om Prakash, Fire Advisor, D.G.C.D., East Block Block VIII, Level VII, R.K.
Puram (Main), New Delhi-66.
3. Shri V.K. Sharma, Deputy Director (Budget), O/O the Registrar General of
India, Man Singh Road, New Delhi.
4. Shri S. Hariharan, Asstt. Director, Intelligence Bureau, New Delhi.
5. Shri K.M. Nandyal, Director, National Civil Defence College, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Nagpur-440001.
6. Shri P .B. Rajappan, Under Secretary, Inter-State Council Sectt., Vigyan Bhavan,
Annexe, New Delhi.
7. Shri Brij Mohan Negi, Director (Policy), Deptt. of Official Language,
Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi.
8. Shri R.A. Singh, Senior Accounts Officer, National Human Rights Commission,
Sardar Patel Bhavan, New Delhi.
9. Shri Sudersan Kumar, Deputy Secretary, Zonal Council Sectt, Jam Nagar
House, New Delhi.

53
10. Shri A. Mohanan, Under Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhavan,
New Delhi.
11. Shri A. Manoharan, Under Secretary, O/O Principal Scientific Adviser to the
Govt. of  India, 310-A, Vigyan Bhavan Annexe, New Delhi.
12. Shri N.R. Das, Section Officer, National Security Council Sectt, East Block
No. 10, Level-4, R.K. Puram, New Delhi.
13. Shri P.K. Roy, Under Secretary, Prime Minister’s Office, South Block,
New Delhi.
14. Shri Likhi Ram, Section Officer, President’s Sectt., New Delhi.
15. Shri K.K. Bajaj, Under Secretary, M&G Section, MHA, North Block,
New Delhi.
16. Shri J.L. Sharma, AIG (Accounts), Special Protection Group, SPG Complex,
Dwarka, Sector-9, New Delhi.
17. Dr. K.C. Wadhwa, Director, National Fire Service College, Ministry of Home
Affairs, Nagpur.
18. Shri Rajiv Walia, Dy. Director-General, Narcotics Control Bureau, West Block
No. 1, Wing No. 5, R.K. Puram, New Delhi.
19. Shri P. Venugopal, Administrative Officer, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National
Police Academy, Ministry of Home Affairs, Hyderabad-500 053.
20. Shri Pinaki Sengupta, Administrative Officer, LNJP National Institute of
Criminology & Forensic Science, Ministry of Home Affairs, Sector-3, Outer
Ring Road, Rohini, Delhi-110085.
21. Shri Sarabjit Singh, Director-General, Central Forensic Science Laboratory
(BPR&D), Block No. 4, 4th Floor, C.G.O. Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
22. Shri R.P. Sharma, Suppdt., Central Forensic Science Laboratory (CBI), Block
No. 4, 4th Floor, C.G.O. Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
23. Shri A.K. Sood, Asstt. Director (Admn.) Central Detective Training School,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
24. Shri A.K. Sood, Joint Asstt. Driector, BPR&D, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi.
25. Shri Praveen Kumar, Deputy Financial Adviser, CRPF, CGO Complex, Lodhi
Road, New Delhi.
26. Shri U.N. Majhi, Financial Adviser (AR), Directorate of Assam Rifles,
Shillong.
27. Shri R.P. Joshi, Asstt. Commandant (Finance), Border Security Force, Block
No. 1, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
28. Shri P.D. Sharma, Deputy Chief Accounts Officer, Indo-Tibetan Border Police,
Block No. II, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.

54
29. Shri O.P. Nimesh, Senior Accounts Officer, National Security Guard, CGO
Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
30. Shri R.D. Sharma, Asstt. Director (Accounts), Central Industrial Security Force,
13, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
31. Shri B.S. Dhupia, Assistant Director, National Crime Records Bureau, East
Block No, 7, R.K. Puram, New Delhi-110066.
32. Shri Rajan Kumar, FA to Commissioner of Police, Delhi Police, I.P. Estate,
New Delhi.
33. Shri Hans Raj, Accounts Officer, Directorate of Co-ordination, Block No. 9,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
34. Shri J.S. Chambial, D.I.G., Special Service Bureau, Block No. V (East), R.K.
Puram, New Delhi-110066.
35. Dr. M.S. Rao, Chief  Forensic Scientist, Directorate of Forensic Science, Block
No. 4, 4th Floor, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
36. Shri Manmohan, Administrative Officer (FS), Directorate of Forensic Science,
Block No. 4, 4th Floor, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi.
37. Shri Rakesh Bhatnagar, Asstt. Financial Adviser (B-I), Ministry of Defence
(Finance) South Block, New Delhi.
38. Secretary (Finance) U.T. Admn. of  Daman & Diu, Moti Daman, Daman.
39. Secretary (Finance) U.T. Admn. of  Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Silvassa.
40. Secretary (Finance) U.T. Admn. of  Lakshadweep, Kavaratti.
41. Secretary (Finance) U.T. Admn. of  Chandigarh, Chandigarh.
42. Secretary (Finance) U.T. Admn. of A & N Islands, Portblair.
43. Shri S.B. Doval, Under Secretary (Planning Cell), Ministry of Home Affairs,
North Block, New Delhi.
44. Shri Pooran Chand, Under Secretary (Bgt. II), Ministry of Home Affairs, North
Block, New Delhi.
45. Shri Anil Kumar, Sr. Accountant, O/O CCA (Home), MHA, North Block,
New Delhi.
46. S/Shri P.S. Dravaria, Section Officer/Y. Srinivasulu, Assistant/Smt. Anitha,
K.P., UDC, Budget-I Section, MHA.
47. Sr. Accounts Officer, Pay & Accounts Office (P&M), Jam Nagar House,
New Delhi.
48. Sh. B.B. Sarkar, Deputy Controller of Accounts, Principal Accounts Office,
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, 3rd Floor, ‘B’ Wing,
Lok Nayak Bhavan, Khan Market, New Delhi-110003.
49. Shri Rajeev Singh, Director (Finance), National Technical Research
Organisation, J-16, Hauz Khas, New Delhi-110016.

55
Recommendation
The Committee note that an excess expenditure of Rs. 15.89 crore occurred under
Capital Section (V oted) of Grant No. 13—Department of Telecommunications. This
was despite an augmentation of the Original provision of Rs. 1.00 crore by Rs. 754.16
crore through a Supplementary Grant of Rs. 753.16 crore for this purpose. The Committee
feel that obtaining of Supplementary provisions of Rs. 753.16 crore as compared to
original provision of Rs. 1 crore shows gross under-estimation of funds at the
Supplementary Grant stage. Further they find that the Ministry have not explained in
their note the precise reasons for their failure to make provisions at the time of preparing
the original budget or at the time of seeking Supplementary Grants. Regarding excess,
the Committee opine that the Ministry have furnished an oft-repeated explanation that
this was on account of clearance of unadjusted transaction that had occurred over
several previous years. The Committee have been informed that the excess did not
involve any cash outgo but was merely a book adjustment whereby transactions/
expenditure from past year was passed on to Capital. Nevertheless, the Committee are
inclined to conclude that the Ministry have woefully failed to take appropriate measures
as they present the same fait accompli year after year. The Committee recall that only
last year, they had desired in Paragraph 17.5 of their 58th Report (13th Lok Sabha), to
watch the impact of the steps taken by the Department of Telecommunications in this
regard, in future Appropriation Accounts. The Committee have now been informed
that after corporation of the DTS/DTO, the budgeting system of Department of
Telecommunications has been completely revamped and efforts are being made to
contain the expenditure within the Budget Allocation. The Committee hope that the
Department of Telecommunications will be consistent in their efforts so that no
expenditure is incurred in excess of the authorized limits under this Grant in future.
Para No. 72 of Appendix IV of the 10th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by the Deptt. of Telecommunications
All possible measures are taken to contain the expenditure within the sanctioned
budget. The impact of the steps taken was that there was no excess expenditure under
Capital Section of the Grant during 2003-04.
This issues with the approval of Member (Finance).
This has been vetted by DG Audit (P&T vide their U.O. No. Rep. VI/4001 (b) Appro
Accts. 20-02-03/984 dt. 30.11.05.
(Deptt. of Telecommunications File No. 1-4/2005-B Dated 5.8.2005)
Sd/-
(Anuradha Mitra
DDG (FEB)

56
Recommendation
The Committee find that there was an overall excess expenditure of Rs.1792.90 crore
under the Revenue Section (Charged) of Appropriation No. 29—Interest Payments. The
excess was mainly due to conversion of Special Securities worth Rs. 400 crore, higher
collections and investments of net small savings. The Committee would like to know the
reasons as to why these factors could not be considered at the time of Supplementary
Budget as no Supplementary provisions were obtained in this case. The Committee feel
that the requirements for these factors could have been realistically assessed and
forecast and timely additional provisions should have been made in the Revised
Estimates. In the Committee’s view this is not the first occasion when excess under this
Appropriation has come to their notice. The Committee have further noted that an excess
of Rs. 2882.39 crore and Rs. 28.39 crore was also reflected during the years
1998-99 and 2001-02 respectively. The Committee have been informed that pursuant to
their earlier recommendations [1998-99 23rd Report (13th Lok Sabha)], the Department of
Economic Affairs had issued instructions to the various estimating authorities to put in
place effective coordination between estimating and disbursing authorities with the help
of a sound data base to avoid excess expenditure. While dealing with the excess
expenditure of Rs. 28.39 crore under this Appropriation during the year 2001-2002, the
Committee had also expected the Ministry of Finance to display better sense of financial
discipline in future. Recurrence of excess expenditure to the tune of Rs. 1792.90 crore
during the year 2002-2003 under this appropriation clearly indicate that instructions
issued in the past had hardly any effect in improving the budgetary procedures and
controls in the Ministry. The Committee would like to express their displeasure over the
fact that instructions pursuant to their recommendations remain effective for a very short
span of time and the deficiencies surface again thereafter. The Committee emphasise that
repeated issuance of instructions would not serve the purpose unless these instructions
are strictly enforced and monitored timely and properly. They would, therefore, urge the
Ministry to examine critically the specific steps taken towards implementation of the
instructions issued by them in order to identify any further steps required to contain the
recurring phenomenon of excess expenditure under this Appropriation.
 [Paragraph 73 of Appendix IV of 10th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(2004-2005) (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs)
The Appropriation—Interest Payments is centralized appropriation which provides
for interest charges on Central Government’s debt obligation, both internal and
external. It also includes provisions for interest payable on provident funds, special
deposits with the Government besides depreciation and other reserve funds of
commercial departments, like Railways. Provision for management of debt and other
liabilities of the Central Government are also included in this Appropriation. The entire
expenditure included in this Appropriation is classified as ‘charged’ on the
Consolidated Fund of India under article 112(3)(c) of the Constitution of India.
2. The excess expenditure of Rs.1792.90 crore occurred in Appropriation—
Interest Payments during the year 2002-03 was mainly on account of payment of
prepayment premium on high cost external loans, interest on conversion of marketable

57
securities issued in conversion of special securities, interest on special Government
securities issued against net collections of small savings from 1999-2000, provident
funds, special deposits and special bonds issued to oil companies. Prepayment of
high cost external loans from Asian Development Bank, Government of France and
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development was a post-budget develop-
ment and was carried out in the month of February, 2003 resulting in unanticipated
payment of prepayment premium. Upward movement of foreign exchange rates also
contributed to unanticipated excess expenditure. Marketable securities worth Rs. 20,000
crore were converted into special securities in the month of January, 2003, payment of
interest on which was not anticipated at the time to framing budget estimates. Collec-
tions under various small savings schemes, including the deposit scheme for retiring
Government/Public Sector employees, largely depended on the investor behaviour/
market situation. As a sequence, the resultant investment of such collections/desposits
in Government securities and the interest payment thereon such securities/desposits
also could not be estimated accurately. Similarly, estimates of interest payments on
special desposits and provident funds are always susceptible to variation depending
upon the accretions in the funds/deposits. Estimates of interest payment on special
bonds issued to oil companies could not be included in the original estimates as the
bonds were issued much after finalization of BE 2002-03.
3. Supplementary appropriations for the additional expenditure were also not
sought with the anticipation that savings expected in certain subheads such as ‘interest
on securities issued to RBI in conversion of Treasury Bills’, ‘Compensation and other
Bonds’, ‘interest on Special Deposits of Provident Superannuation Gratuity Fund’ etc.
could be utilized to meet the excess requirement through reappropriation of funds.
However, as the anticipated savings did not materialize, the final expenditure resulted
into excess expenditure over authorized appropriation.
4. The estimating authorities of interest payments of larger magnitude have
been instructed to monitor the interest expenditure with reference to budget estimates
on a timely basis. Several measures have been taken to avoid recurrence of excess
expenditure in future. Reserve Bank of India has been asked, specifically, to have
concurrent internal checks over discharge/interest payments and reconciliation of
accounts with Government to minimize/avoid under/over provisioning. The estimating
authority for payment of interest on external debt has assured for estimation of interest
payments, close to the actual expenditure, with inclusion of element of variation while
calculating rupee equivalent of foreign currency payment. The authority for payment
of interest on ‘small savings’ has been asked to be precise in estimates of interests
payments in future.
5. As regards estimating authorities for payment of interest on deposits/funds,
it is proposed to reiterate the instructions issued earlier, through annual Budget Circular
issued by this Ministry, for realistic and accurate estimates, as far as possible.
6. This has been vetted by Audit  vide their U.O.No.RR/1-37/2005-06/289
dt. 5.10.2005.
[Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs) F. No.F.6(6)-B(AC)/2005
dated 18.10.2005.]

58
Recommendation
Under Revenue Section (voted) of grant No.80—Department of Culture, the
Department incurred an overall excess expenditure of Rs. 52.70 crore against the total
sanctioned provision of  Rs. 487.46 crore during 2002-2003. The excess expenditure
had mainly occurred under the sub-heads ‘Grants to other Cultural Institutions’
(Rs. 5.95), “Other Schemes” (Rs. 29.16 crore), “Grants to other Libraries"
(Rs. 2.45 crore) “Conversation of Ancient Monuments’’ (Rs. 37.38 crore) and National
Council of Science Museums, Kolkata (Rs. 3.20 crore) etc. According to the Department
of Culture, this excess was due to the fact that an additionality of Rs. 63 crore which
was obtained from Ministry of Finance, at the time of Revised Estimate 2002-2003 was
not reflected in the 3rd Supplementary Demand for Grants during that year to get the
approval as an additionality by the Parliament. The Committee view this as a case of
avoidable excess expenditure showing lethargy on the part of dealing officers. Had the
Departmental officers initiated timely action in this case, the additionalities could have
been reflected in the 3rd Supplementary Demands for Grants. The Committee have
been informed that instructions have been issued to all Attached / Subordinate Offices/
Autonomous Organizations and all the Divisional Heads of the Department of Culture
to maintain strict financial discipline. The Committee trust that the extant instructions
would be strictly observed.
[Sl. No.10 Para 74 of Appendix IV of Tenth Report of PAC, 14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture
With respect to para 74, (p.44), in respect of Ministry of Culture, the general
instructions to all Attached / Subordinate Offices / Autonomous Organizations and
Divisional Heads to observe strict financial discipline have been issued by the
Ministry.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/3-22/2005-06/507 dated
15th February, 2006.
[Ministry of Culture O.M. No.20-1/2005-P&B dated 22nd February, 2006.]
Recommendation
Yet another area where inherent shortcomings were observed by the Committee
related to the manner in which Supplementary Grants had been obtained by the Ministry
of Railways. The Committee’s examination of the relevant Appropriation Accounts has
revealed that supplementary provisions of Rs.151.02 crore were obtained in seven out
of eleven cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations as against the original
provision of Rs. 2606.05 crore obtained in two out of seven such cases. The Committee’s
scrutiny has also revealed that under Appropriation Nos. 3, 4, 7, 8 and 11, the original
provisions were not available and only Supplementary Grants were obtained for this
purpose. Under Appropriation No. 7, the Supplementary provisions of Rs. 1.32 lakh, as
obtained, proved to be inadequate as the actual expenditure under this Appropriation
exceeded the provision by Rs. 4.23 lakh, which is 320.51 percent of the Supplementary

59
provisions obtained. Further, under Grant No. 14, no Supplementary Grant was obtained
although there was excess expenditure subsequently to the tune of  Rs. 211.15 crore. In
fact that Supplementary provision in all these cases were too meager as compared to
excesses noticed subsequently which goes to prove that Supplementary Grants were
ill conceived without conducting a proper and close scrutiny of the expenditure incurred
or likely to be incurred by them during the financial year. The Committee are concerned
over such a state of affairs and would like to express their unhappiness in this regard.
They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Railways should evolve a mechanism
to access and project realistic requirement of funds both at Budgetary and
Supplementary stages so that timely action is taken to ensure that the excess expenditure
could be avoided as far as possible.
[Sl. No. 12 Appendix IV Para No. 76 of 10th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
In 2002-03, the financial results showed better performance due to higher earnings
and saving in overall revenue expenditure resulting in higher generation of internal
resources which were ultimately to be appropriated to one or the other Railway
Reserve Funds under Demand No.14,  i.e., ‘Appropriation to Funds’, which in the
present case were DRF & SRSF, resulting in an excess of Rs. 211.15 cr. under this
Demand. But, as the appropriation of surplus resources is technically considered as
a part of expenditure and forms part of Demand No.14, the excess incurred here
under can be deemed only as technical in nature as no real expenditure is involved in
this case.
As regards charged appropriations, it is submitted that the amounts of excess
incurred in all appropriations, except Demand No. 16 where reasons have been explained
in ATN on Para No. 67, are very minor totaling merely Rs. 84 lakhs in 7 cases.
Notwithstanding this, the concern of the Committee is noted. It may also be stated
that the Railways have been addressed on the need to assess the requirement of
charged expenditure accurately despite the amounts involved being nominal. A letter
has been written to all Railway zones on 17.02.2005. This matter has also been raised in
the FA&CAOs’ conferences held in March  05 & May 05.
Audit vide their U.O.No.230 RA-III/2-1/2004 dated 21st December, 2005 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
[Ministry  of  Railways  O.M.  No. 2005-BC-PAC-XIV/10 dated  24-01-2006]
Recommendation
Whereas the excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways had shown
decreasing trend during the year 1999-2000 (Rs. 56.79 crore) and 2000-01
(Rs. 0.14 crore), it has again started showing increasing trend subsequently, which is
evident from the fact that during the years 2001-02 and 2002-03, the excess expenditure

60
was Rs. 210.71 crore and Rs. 323.65 crore respectively. The Committee are concerned to
note that excess expenditure has become a recurring phenomenon in respect of
Appropriation Nos. 3, 7 and 16. The Committee’s detailed analysis of these Grants/
Appropriations revealed that under Appropriation No. 3 — Working Expenses —
General Superintendance and Services the excess expenditure has occurred recurringly
for the past seven years i.e. from 1996-97 to 2002-03, under Appropriation No. 7 —
Repairs and Maintenance of Plant and Equipments for the past four years  i.e., from
1999-2000 to 2002-03 and under Appropriation No. 16 — Assets — Acquisition,
Construction and Replacement — Capital for the past three years i.e., from 2000-01 to
2002-03. The excess expenditure under Appropriation No. 16 is also showing an
increasing trend i.e. Rs. 0.13 crore in 2000-01 to Rs. 3.39 crore in 2002-03. While
commenting on the recurrent excesses under Appropriation No. 3, the Committee, in
their 58th Report, had desired the Ministry of Railways to critically re-examine and
suitably revise the existing procedures. According to the Action Taken Note, the
Ministry of Railways are stated to have issued instructions to the concerned Railways
to arrest the trend of excess expenditure particularly in Appropriation No. 3 which
however, has shown the excess expenditure this year also. Obviously these instructions
have failed to yield desired results. The Committee would urge the Ministry to look
into the matter and take suitable steps apart from monitoring the instructions issued
with a view to tightening their budgetary control so as to leave little scope for excess
expenditure being incurred under various Grants/Appropriations operated by them.
[Sl. No 13 Appendix IV Para No. 77 of 10th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The amounts of excess incurred under charged appropriations 3 & 7 over the years
have been minor. However, noting the concern expressed by the Committee regarding
recurring excess under Demand No. 3 in its 58th Report of 2003-04, this Ministry has
issued instructions to the Railways concerned, to arrest the trend of excess expenditure,
particularly under Appropriation No. 3 on 12.03.2004. The above observations however
are on excess incurred in 2002-03, that is, the year previous to the issue of the
instructions.
The issue of discrepancies in the budgeting of charged expenditure has also been
discussed in the FA&CAOs’ conference held in March’05 & May’05, for taking
corrective action by the Railways.
Further Audit Observations
The PAC has observed that the instructions issued by the Ministry of Railways to
the concerned Railways to arrest the trend of excess expenditure have failed to yield
desired results. As recommended by the PAC the Ministry of Railways should take
suitable steps, apart from monitoring the instructions issued, to tighten their budgetary
control so as to leave little scope of excess expenditure being incurred under various
Grants/Appropriations operated by them.

61
Comments of Ministry of Railways
As has already been submitted above, the instructions were issued on 12.03.2004
to the Railways to arrest the trend of excess expenditure. This issue was also taken up
in the FA&CAOs’ conferences held in March, 2005 and May, 2005. Further, consequent
to similar observations in other recommendations, a letter has been written to the
Railways on 17-02-2005 also. It may please be appreciated that the present
recdommendations deals with the excess expenditure for 2002-03, whereas the action
on it has been taken in 2004 and later, thereby not being able to correct the position
retrospectively. Instructions have further been issued to the Railways on 30-12-2005
for curbing the trend of excess expenditure particularly under charged appropriations,
in light of the PAC’s latest report on excess expenditure for 2003-04.
Audit vide their U.O.No. 66 RA-III/2-1/2004 dated 10th January, 2006 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
[Ministry of  Railways O.M. No.2005-BC-PAC-XIV/10 dated  24.01.2006]

Government of India (Bharat Sarkar)
Ministry of Railways (Rail Mantralaya)
(Railway Board)
No.  2005-B-342 New Delhi, dated 30.12.2005
The General Managers,
All Indian Railways.
Subject: Excess over V oted Grants/Charged Appropriations.
As you are aware, no expenditure over and above the sanctioned allotment can be
incurred without proper authorization from Parliament. The Board has been emphasizing
the need to contain the expenditure within the sanctioned allotment over and again.
But, there have been recurrent incidences of excess expenditure over the years
particularly under charged appropriations.
Public Accounts Committee has been commenting adversely on the incidences of
excess expenditure, especially under charged appropriations, over the years. There
have been instances where excess has occurred even after taking supplementary and
instances where expenditure has occurred without any original or supplementary
appropriation. While criticizing these excesses, that are mostly the decretal payments
under charged appropriations and have occurred with the same contributory reasons,
PAC, in its latest report, has desired ‘that the recurrent lapses on this account may be
carefully looked into, with a view to fixing responsibility at the appropriate level so that
there is no recurrence of such excesses’.
Hence, the Railways are hereby urged to correctly assess the additional requirement
under the charged appropriations for 2005-06 RE and 2006-07 BE. Those Railways,
which have already submitted their estimates for RE0506/BE0607, may after carefully
reassessinng their requirement under charged appropriations, resubmit immediately if
there is any change. The Railways are also urged to take all necessary steps to tighten
the existing monitoring mechanism to avoid excess expenditure.
Kindly acknowledge receipt.
Sd/-
(S. Balachandran)
Additional Member (Budget)
Railway Board
62

63
Recommendation
The Committee are distressed to find that misclassification of expenditure in Railways
has become almost a regular feature. During the year under review, there have been
misclassification of expenditure in as many as three Grants/Appropriations which
have recorded excess expenditure. the Ministry of Railways have attributed these
cased of misclassifications to lack of adequate attention being given at the time of
preparation of vouchers. The Committee feel that these reasons are not enough to
justify the regular failure of misclassifications on the part of Ministry of Railways.
Obviously the committee are led to the inescapable conclusion that the Ministry of
Railways have not taken effective steps to tackle the problem of misclassification of
expenditure between various Grants/Appropriations and to devise fool-proof measures
to obviate recurrence of misclassification that vitiates sound budgetary control. The
Committee would also like the Ministry to identify and fix responsibility for such
patent errors, as soon as they occur.
[Sl. No. 14 Appendix IV Para No. 78 of 10th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee regarding misclassification
of expenditure have been noted. Detailed instructions are repeatedly being issued to
the Railways to effect improvement in working systems and restrict the factor that lead
to misclassifications. Instructions issued to the Railways also provide for regular
reporting on punitive action taken for errors detected on this account. As a result, a
number of staff have been taken up by the Railways by fixing responsibility for the
lapses.
The total elimination of instances of misclassification will be difficult to achieve in
practice, mainly due to sheer volume of transactions and their varying nature. However,
it shall always remain the endeavor of Ministry of  Railways to avoid ‘Misclassifications/
Mistakes’ altogether.
Audit vide their U.O.No. 56 RA-III/2-1/2004 dated 9th September, 2005 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
[Ministry of Railways, O.M. No.2005-BC-PAC-XIV/10 dated  24-01-2006]
Recommendation
Subject to the Observations made in the preceding Paragraphs, the Committee
recommend that the expenditure referred to in Para 10 of this report be regularised in
the manner prescribed in Article 115(1) (b) of the Constitution of India.
[(Sl. No. 15, Paragraph 79 of Appendix-IV of Tenth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs)
As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Demands for Excess
Grants for Expenditure of the Central Government (excluding Railways) relating to
2002-2003 were submitted to Parliament in the Monsoon Session, 2005. The Parliament

64
has passed the Excess Demands for Grants. Necessary Appropriation Bill for regularising
the money drawn in excess of the amounts authorised by the Parliament for the year
2002-2003, has also been passed and the corresponding Act published in the Gazette
of India (Extra-Ordinary) Part II, Section I dated 25.08.2005, as Act No. 35 of 2005, after
obtaining assent of the President. in view of this, the excess amount drawn
in 2002-2003 stands regularised. Action taken in this regard is, therefore, completed.
This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No.DGACR/RR/1-25/2005-06/
292 dated 13th October, 2005.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division), O.M.
No. F.4.(16)-B (SD)/2005 dated 17th October, 2005.]
Action Taken by the Deptt. of Telecommunications
Action has already been taken for regularization of excess expenditure through
Ministry of Finance in the Monsoon Session 2005-06 of Parliament.
This issue with the approval of Member (Finance).
Sd/-
(Anuradha Mitra)
 DDG(FEB)
This has been vetted by DG Audit (P&T) vide their U.O. No. Rept VI/4001(b)
Appr. A/c/2002-03) 984 dt. 30.4.05)
Department of Telecommunications File No. 1-4/2005-B Dated 5.8.2005.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Culture
With respect to Para 79 (Page 50) the excess expenditure referred to in para 10 of the
report has been regularised by the Parliament, vide Ministry of Finance order No.F.4(16)-
B(SD)/2005, dated 26-08-2005 (Copy annexed).
This has been vetted by Audit vide  their U.O. No. RR/3-22/2005-06/507
dated 15th February 2006
[Ministry of Culture O.M. No. 20-1/2005-P&B, dated 22nd February 2006]

F.4(16)-B(SD)/2005
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
New Delhi, the 26th August, 2005
Subject : Demands for Excess Grants relating to 2002-2003.
The undersigned is directed to state that the Demands for Excess Grants relating
to 2002-2003 have been passed by the Lok Sabha. The connected Appropriation
Bill (No. 4), 2005 has also been passed by Parliament and assented to by the
President of India on 24th August, 2005 and the Act has been published in the
Gazette of India (Extra-ordinary) Part II, Section I dated 25th August, 2005 as
Act No. 35 of 2005.
Sd/-
(Anuradha Prasad)
Director (Budget)
1. Shri A.K. Sawhney, Member (Finance), Ministry of Communications &
Information Technology, Department of Telecommunications, Sanchar
Bhawan, New Delhi.
2. Shri N. A. Vishwanathan, Financial Adviser, Ministry (then Department) of
Development of North Eastern Region, New Delhi.
3. Shri M. Deena Dayalan, Financial Adviser, Ministry of Finance, Department
of Economic Affairs (Interest Payments), New Delhi.
4. Shri M. Deena Dayalan, Financial Adviser, Ministry of Finance (Transfers to
State & Union territory Governments), New Delhi.
5. Shri N.A. Vishwanathan, Financial Adviser, Ministry of Home Affairs,
New Delhi.
6. Shri N.A. Vishwanathan, Financial Adviser, Ministry of Home Affairs (Police),
New Delhi.
7 . Smt. Deepa Jain Singh, Financial Adviser, Department of Culture,
New Delhi.
65

66
8. Shri N.A. Vishwanathan, Financial Adviser, Ministry of Home Affairs
(Chandigarh), New Delhi.
9. The Finance Library (Publication Section) with the request that copies of the
Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part II, Section I dated 25th August, 2005 as
Act No. 35 of 2005 be obtained from the Manager of Publication and supplied
to Comptroller & Auditor General of India, 10 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
10. The Parliament Library, Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi (5 copies).
11. The Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch), Parliament Annexe, New Delhi-
110 001 (5 Copies).
12. Director General of Audit, Central Revenues, AGCR Building, New Delhi-
110 002 (10 Copies).
13. Director General of Audit, Posts & Telecommunications, Sham Nath Marg,
Civil Lines, Delhi-110 054 (10 Copies).
14. The Director General of Audit, Central Revenues, AGCR Building, New Delhi-
110 002 (5 Copies).
15. Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 10, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
16. Finance Library, North Block, New Delhi (5 Copies).
17. Joint Secretary (PF-I), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance,
North Block, New Delhi.
18. Joint Secretary (PF-II), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance,
North Block, New Delhi.
19. The Controller General of Accounts, Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi (5 Copies).
20. Secretary (Economic Affairs)
21. Secretary (Expenditure)
22. Joint Secretary (Budget)
23. Joint Secretary (FRBM)
24. Director (AP) (2 Copies)
25. Director (DD) (2 Copies)
26. ABG (2 Copies)
27. DS VSC (2 Copies)
28. DD (Hindi) (5 Copies)

67
29. All US/Deputy Directors in Budget Division
30. All Sections (including PF Sections I & II) in Budget Division.
2002-2003 DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
DEMAND NO. 80
DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2003, in
respect of DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE under the MINISTRY OF TOURISM AND
CULTURE.
V oted : Fifty two crore sixty nine lakh seventy seven thousand six hundred and
twenty six rupees.
Section  Final Grant  Actual Expenditure Excess
 Rs.  Rs.  Rs.
Revenue
V oted: 487,46,00,000 5 40,15,77,626 52,69,77,626
Against the financial grant of Rs. 487,46,00,000 the actual expenditure was
Rs. 540,15,77,626 resulting in an excess expenditure of Rs. 52,69,77,626 which requires
regularization. The excess expenditure was on account of the fact that Parliamentary
approval through the Third Supplementary Demands for Grants for the year could not
be obtained for an additionality of Rs. 63 crore provided in the Revised Estimates
2002-2003.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
To get the excess expenditure regularized that occurred under four Sections of three
Grants of this Ministry during the financial year 2002-2003, ‘Excess Demand Statements’,
duly filled in, as requisitioned by Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
vide their D.O. Letter No. 4 (16)-B(SD)/2005 dated 10th June 2005 (copy enclosed),
have been furnished to them on 15th/16th June 2005 (copies enclosed).
(This ‘Action Taken Note’ has been vetted by O/O DGACR vide their U.O. No. RR/
6-2/2005-06/207 dated 27.7.2005).
[MHA O.M. No. 28/2/2005-Bgt. I dated 8/8/2005]

Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
North Block
New Delhi-110 001
June 10, 2005
L.M. VAS
Joint Secretary (Budget)
D.O.F.  No. 4(16)-B(SD)/2005
Dear Sir,
Excess expenditure had occurred in the Demands for Grants for 2002-2003 in Demand
Nos. 13, 23, 29, 30, 45, 47, 80 and 99, which is proposed to be regularized in the
Monsoon session of Lok Sabha, on the basis of the recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee in their Tenth report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha).
2. For seeking Parliamentary approval, necessary excess demand statements have
been prepared from the Action Taken Notes earlier furnished by the Ministries/
Departments concerned to the PAC, in consideration of which the Committee
recommended regularization of the excesses.
3. The excess demand statement with which you are concerned is forwarded herewith.
This may please be returned, stating reasons for the excess therein, duly vetted by
Audit not later than July 1, 2005.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(L.M. Vas)
Shri N.A. Vishwanathan,
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser,
Ministry of Home Affairs,
New Delhi.
2002-2003  DEMANDS  FOR  EXCESS  GRANTS
DEMAND NO. 45
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2003, in
respect of the MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS under the MINISTRY OF HOME
AFFAIRS.
68

Charged: Two lakh ninety one thousand nine hundred and seventy one rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Rs. Rs. Rs.
Revenue
Charged: 10,00,000 12,91,971 2,91,971
Against the final grant of Rs. 10,00,000 the actual expenditure was Rs. 12,91,971
resulting in an excess expenditure of Rs. 2,91,971 which requires regularisation. The
excess expenditure was on account of ............................................................
...............................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................
2002-2003  DEMANDS  FOR  EXCESS  GRANTS
DEMAND NO. 47
POLICE
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2003, in
respect of the POLICE under the MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS.
Charged: Thirty one lakh thirty seven thousand five hundred and four rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Rs. Rs. Rs.
Revenue
Charged: 2,01,00,000 2,32,37,504 31,37,504
Against the final grant of Rs. 2,01,00,000 the actual expenditure was Rs. 2,32,37,504
resulting in an excess expenditure of Rs. 31,37,504 which requires regularisation. The
excess expenditure was on account of ............................................................
...............................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................
2002-2003 DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
DEMAND NO. 99
CHANDIGARH
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March 2003, in
respect of the CHANDIGARH under the MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS, UNION
TERRITORIES (WITHOUT LEGISLATURE).
Charged: Fifty six lakh seventy one thousand one hundred and thirty nine rupees.
69

70
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Rs. Rs. Rs.
Revenue
Charged: 23,31,00,000 23,69,82,732 38,82,732(a)
Capital
Charged: 10,00,00,000 10,17,88,407 17,88,407(b)
Total 33,31,00,000 33,87,71,139 56,71,139
(a) In the Revenue Section, against the final grant of Rs. 23,31,00,000 the actual
expenditure was Rs. 23,69,82,732 resulting in an excess expenditure of Rs. 38,82,732
which requires regularisation. The excess expenditure was on account of .....................
...............................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................
(a) In the Capital Section, against the final grant of Rs. 10,00,00,000 the actual
expenditure was Rs. 10,17,88,407 resulting in an excess expenditure of Rs. 17,88,407
which requires regularisation. The excess expenditure was on account of .....................
...............................................................................................................
.......................................................................................................................................
.................................................................................................................

MOST  IMMEDIATE
No. 14/01/2003-Bgt.I
Government of India/Bharat Sarkar
Ministry of Home Affairs/Grih Mantralaya
New Delhi, the 16th June, 2005.
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Regularisation of excess expenditure in Demands for Grant for the year
2002-2003 under Grant No.45—MHA and Grant No.47—Police.
The undersigned is directed to refer to Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Economic
Affairs D.O. 4(16)-B(SD)/2005 dated 10th June, 2005on the above mentioned subject
and to send herewith the excess demand statements indicating the reasons for the
excess expenditure in respect of above mentioned Grants for further necessary action.
2. The reasons for excess expenditures indicated in the enclosed statements have
already been got vetted by the office of the DGACR vide their U.O. No. 11-9/Pr.A.O.
(A/cs)MHA/AA/Gr.51/2003-2004/410 dated 03.08.2004 (RR/6-31/2003-2004/446 dated
23.07.2004) and No. RR/6-32/2003-04/1281 dated 29th October, 2004 in respect of Grant
No.45—MHA and Grant No. 47—Police respectively.
Sd/-
(S.C. Saksena)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India
Tel. No.  2309-2784
To
The Ministry of Finance,
(Deptt. of Economic Affairs)
(Shri R.C. Sharma, Under Secretary (SD),
North Block, New Delhi.
Copy to File No. 12/1/2003-Bgt.I
2002-2003 DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
DEMAND NO. 45
MINISTRY  OF  HOME  AFFAIRS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March 2003, in
respect of the MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS under the MINISTRY OF HOME
AFFAIRS.
Charged: Two lakh ninety one thousand nine hundred and seventy one rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Rs. Rs. Rs.
Revenue
Charged 10,00,000 12,91,971 2,91,971
71

72
Against the Final Grant of Rs. 10,00,000 the actual expenditure was Rs. 12,91,971
resulting in an excess expenditure of Rs. 2,91,971 which requires regularization. The
excess expenditure was on account of wrong booking of the expenditure under ‘Charged’
portion instead of ‘Voted’ portion due to indication of wrong Accounting code
inadvertently by Cash Section and payment of compensation by Intelligence Bureau
as directed by the High Court of Jodhpur.
2002-2003 DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
DEMAND NO. 47
POLICE
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March 2003, in
respect of the POLICE GRANT under the MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS.
Charged: Thirty one lakh thirty seven thousand five hundred and four rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Rs. Rs. Rs.
Revenue
Charged 2,01,00,000 2,32,37,504 31,37,504
Against the Final Grant of Rs. 2,01,00,000 the actual expenditure was Rs. 2,32,37 504
resulting in an excess expenditure of Rs. 31,37,504 which requires regularization. The
excess expenditure was on account of payment of compensations ordered by Courts
in Motor Accident Compensation Tribunal cases pertaining to Central Reserve Police
Force and Delhi Police.
F.No. U-15013/6/2004-Bgt.II
Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs
New Delhi, Dated the 15th June, 2005
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Regularization of excess expenditure occurred in Demands for Grant for
the year 2002-03 under Grant No.99—Chandigarh.
The undersigned is directed to refer to Ministry of Finance’s DO letter No.4(16)-
B(SD)/2005 dated the 10th June, 2005 on the subject cited above and to send herewith
the excess demand statement indicating the reasons for the excess expenditure for
further action.
2. The reasons for excess expenditure indicated in the enclosed statement have
already been got vetted by the office of the DG (Audit) vide their UO No. RR/6-36/
2003-04/159 dated 4th June, 2004.
Sd/-
(Pooran Chand)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India
Tel. No.  2309 4237
Shri R.C. Sharma,
Under Secretary (SD).
Budget Division,
Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs),
North Block, New Delhi.

73
DEMAND NO. 99
CHANDIGARH
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2003, in
respect of the CHANDIGARH under the MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS, UNION
TERRITORIES (WITHOUT LEGISLATURE).
Charged: Fifty six lakh seventy one thousand one hundred and thirty nine rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Rs. Rs. Rs.
Revenue
Charged: 23,31,00,000 23,69,82,732 38,82,732 (a)
Capital
Charged: 10,00,00,000 10,17,88,407 17,88,407(b)
Total 33,31,00,000 33,87,71,139 56,71,139
(a) In the Revenue Section, against the final grant of Rs. 23,31,00,000 the actual
expenditure was Rs. 23,69,82,732 resulting in an excess expenditure of Rs. 38,82,732
which requires regularisation. The excess expenditure was on account of payment
of salary to the High-court Staff. Though the savings were available under Revenue
Section (Voted) but it was beyond the competence of the U.T. Administration to
Re-appropriate it to ‘Charged' side. Hence the excess expenditure requires
regularization.
(b) In the Capital Section, against the final grant of Rs. 10,00,00,000 the actual
expenditure was Rs. 10,17,88,407 resulting in an excess expenditure of Rs. 17,88,407
which requires regularisation. The excess expenditure was on account of payments
deposited in the Court on enhancement of awards in various land acquisition cases as
per attachment order of the Court which was obligatory and time bound. Though the
savings were available under Capital Section (V oted) but it was beyond the competence
of the U.T. Administration to Re-appropriate it to ‘Charged’ side. Hence, the excess
expenditure requires regularization.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The excess expenditure incurred during 2002-03 has been got regularized by
Parliament in its monsoon session (2005).
Audit vide their U.O. No. 230 RA-III/2-1/2004 dated 21st December, 2005 have
vetted the Action Taken Note.
[Ministry of Railways’ O.M. No. 2005-BC-PAC-XIV/10 dated 24.01.2006]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM GOVERNMENT.
-NIL-
74

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVT. HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION.
Recommendation
The Ministries/Departments are required to submit to the Committee explanatory
notes in respect of the excess registering Grants/Appropriations immediately after the
presentation of relevant Appropriation Accounts to the House. The Committee observe
that while the explanatory note on Grant No. 13—Department of Telecommunications,
Grant No. 99—Chandigarh and Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of
Railways were received within time, the delay in furnishing the explanatory notes in
respect of remaining six Grants/Appropriations ranged from nine days to more than
four months. The explanatory note on Appropriation No. 29—Interest Payments has
not been received till the finalization of the Report. The Committee owe an explanation
from the Ministry regarding this inordinate delay. The Committee take a serious view
of such delays on the part of the Ministries concerned in furnishing the explanatory
notes and desire that responsibility be fixed for the laxity shown in this regard. The
Committee, however, would like the Ministry of Finance, who is the coordinating
Ministry in this regard, to look into the matter and take suitable measures to ensure
timely submission of explanatory notes in future.
The Committee would further like to point out that whenever the excess expenditure
is noticed under any Grant/Appropriation, no time should be lost by the concerned
Ministry/Department in preparing and forwarding the explanatory notes to Audit for
vetting. The objections, if any, raised by Audit should be resolved on top priority
basis. The Committee desire that a time scheduled should be laid down for taking
action at various stages involving finalization/vetting of these explanatory notes,
which would result in eliminating delay on this account. The Committee trust that
necessary steps would be taken in this direction.
[Paragraph 68 of Appendix-IV of 10th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(2004-2005) (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs)
The Appropriation—Interest Payments is centralized appropriation which provides
for interest charges on Central Government’s debt obligation, both internal and external.
It also includes provisions for interest payable on provident funds, special deposits
with the Government besides depreciation and other reserve funds of commercial
departments, like Railways. Provision for management of debt and other liabilities of
the Central Government are also included in this Appropriation. The entire expenditure
included in this Appropriation is classified as ‘charged’ on the Consolidated Fund of
India under article 112(3)(c) of the Constitution of India.
75

76
2. The explanatory note on excess expenditure occurred in the Appropriation was
prepared on finalization of Head-wise Appropriation Accounts and its receipt thereof
from the Accounting Office. The said Appropriation Accounts was received in this
Ministry on 1.1.2004. As this Ministry was preoccupied with the preparation and
presentation of interim Budget for the year 2004-05 on 3.3.2004, the initial explanatory
note was prepared and sent to Audit for vetting on 6.2.2004. Audit had sought detailed
explanations for the excess expenditure. As the Appropriation-Interest Payments is a
centralized one and the estimates thereof are furnished by various estimating authorities,
the detailed reasons for excess expenditure were called for from them. The Ministry
became, meanwhile, occupied with the preparation and presentation of Regular Budget
for the year 2004-05 on 8.7.2004. After obtaining necessary information from the various
estimating authorities, revised explanatory note was sent to Audit for vetting on
14.9.2004. Audit had called for further information on the revised explanatory note on
28.10.2004. After making good the information sought for by Audit, the revised
explanatory note was sent to Audit on 18.1.2005. The vetted explanatory note was
received from Audit on 23/25.2.2005. In the meantime, Budget Division, Ministry of
Finance went into the preparation and presentation of Budget for the year 2005-06 on
28.2.2005 and processing of final batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for the
year 2004-05. Final explanatory note was sent to the Public Accounts Committee on
23.3.2005.
3. As may be seen from the above, the Ministry remained occupied with the
preparation and presentation of two Regular Budgets and one interim Budget during
the years 2004 and 2005, while processing the explanatory note through its various
stages till the final note was sent on 23.3.2005. Thus, there was no laxity on the part
of this Ministry in submission of explanatory notes to the Committee. However,
efforts will continue to be made to submit the explanatory note to the Audit and
finally to the Committee within the time schedule prescribed for the purpose in
future.
4. As regards laying down the time schedule for taking action at various stages
involving finalization/vetting of explanatory notes, Ministry of Finance, Department
of Expenditure has, vide O.M. No.1/10/2005-MC dated 17.6.2005, reiterated the
instructions to all Ministries/Departments for strict adherence to the time schedule in
submitting the vetted explanatory note to the Committee.
5. This has been vetted by Audit vide its U.O. No. RR/1-45/2005-06/313 dated
28.10.2005.
[Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs, F.No. 6(6)-B(AC)/2005 dated
7.11.2005]
Recommendation
The Committee’s examination of Indian Railways Appropriation Accounts for the
year 2002-03 revealed that there was an overall excess expenditure of Rs. 323.65 crore

incurred under three Grants and eight Appropriations. Out of this excess expenditure,
Grant No. 14—Appropriation to Funds—DRF, DF, Pension and CF was the main
contributor having an excess of Rs. 211.15 crore, which is 65% of the total excess
expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways. This was followed by
Grant No. 16—Assets—Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—Special Railway
Sefety Fund having excesses of Rs. 89.97 crore. An analysis of the reasons causing the
excess expenditure indicates that the excess under Grant No. 14 was mainly due to
strengthening the fund balances in view of overall better financial performance of
Indian Railways. Under Grant No. 16, it was mainly due to slow progress of works and
lesser activities than anticipated. Furthermore, under Appropriation Nos. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9
11 and 16—Capital, the excess expenditure was due to unanticipated decretal payments
at the fag end of the year. Deploring this tendency, the Committee had, in Paragraph
17.9 of their 58th Report (13th Lok Sabha) expected the Ministry of Railways to ensure
that in future, prompt action is taken to make the decretal payments and provide for it
in the Original/Supplementary Budget. The fact that the Ministry has not taken due
care despite the Committee’s directive is regrettable. The Committee would, therefore,
again like to emphasize that through proper control over expenditure and with more
accurate estimation of liabilities, much of the excess expenditure can be avoided. If at
all the requirement of more funds is felt after the budget estimates, additional provisions
at the revised estimated should be made with more precision.
[S.No. 11 Appendix IV Para No. 75 of 10th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The concern of the Committee is noted. It may also be mentioned that a letter to the
Railways, on the need to assess the requirement of charged expenditure accurately,
though the amounts involved are mostly nominal, has been issued recently on
17.02.2005 (copy enclosed). This matter has also been raised in the FA&CAO’s
conferences held in March ’ 05 & May ’ 05.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 230 RA-III/2-1/2004 dated 21st December, 2005 have
vetted the Action Taken Note.
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2005-BC-PAC-XIV/10 dated 24.01.2006]
77

Government of India
Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board)
RBA 8/2005
No. 2005/ACII(CC)/37/2 Dated 17th February, 2005
FA&CAOs,
All Zonal Railways
Sub: PAC’s observations for streamlining of the system of classification/control
over expenditure on railways.
The Publc Accounts Committee, over the last few years has commented adversely
on misclassification and excess over expenditure on Railways and has desired a
corrective mechanism to be put in place. In particular, the Committee has advised the
Railways to review the exchequer control and monitoring system and ensure that
expenditure does not exceed budget allocation. In this context, it has expressed concern
over the slow implementation of computerized financial management information system,
which was expected to correct the existing lacunae in the manual system.
In the light of these observations of the Public Accounts Committee, it is reiterated
that Railways must continuously monitor expenditure in every demand in relation to
budget provision to ensure that allocation is not exceeded. The Finance and Accounts
Codes provide detailed instructions on the subject and it is expected of every Accounts
officer to follow them diligently and ensure that instances of misclassification and
excess/savings over budget are avoided. The existing system may be streamlined
through detailed analysis of various inputs like Audit reports, internal check and
Accounts inspection. Besides, a realistic assessment of charged expenditure may be
carried out to plug any loophole to avoid unexpected excess over budget towards the
closing months of the financial year. The entire process of budgeting also required a
careful review right from the PU stage to avoid differences between expenditure and
estimate. A copy of the monthly PU wise review may be enclosed with MCDO to FC.
The Board has been emphasizing the need to implement the FMIS scheme at the
earliest. The necessary sanctions and directions have also been issued from time to
time. But the progress of implementation so far leaves much to be desired. Despite
formation of monitoring committees, targets have not been met. The importance of
computerized FMIS requires no emphasis and it is expected that Railways will adhere
to the completion targets given by them. FA&CAOs should personally monitor the
progress to ensure its timely completion by 31.3.2005.
Kindly acknowledge receipt and confirm appropriate action being taken.
Sd/-
(R. Ashok)
Adviser (AR)
Railway Board
78

CHAPTER  V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES.
-NIL-
NEW DELHI: PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
18 August, 2006 Chairman,
27 Sravana, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
79

PART  II
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON 17th AUGUST, 2006
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 17th August, 2006 in
Room No. “51” (Chairman’s Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
7. Prof. M. Ramdass
8. Shri Mohan Singh
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
10. Shri Kharabela Swain
11. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri V . Narayanasamy
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Dr. K. Malaisamy
15. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri M. K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
80

81
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri R.K. Ghose — Accountant General (Audit)
2. Shri A. N. Chatterjee — Director  General (Reports Central)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.
The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports and adopted
the same with minor modifications:
(i) Draft Original Report on “Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2004-2005)”; and
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
10th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to “Excesses over Voted
Grants and Charged Appropriations (2002-2003)”.
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the light of
verbal and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by Audit or otherwise
and to present the same to Parliament.
4. The Committee decided to hold their next sitting on 5th and 6th  September, 2006.
They also decided to undertake an on-the-spot study visit to Jaipur, Udaipur and
Mumbai from 16 to 22 September, 2006.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para  Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department
12 3 4
1. 1.7 Finance The Committee have been given to understand
(Department that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
of Economic Affairs) introduced a system of cash management
Affairs) on a pilot basis in 2003-04 in respect of Demands
pertaining to nine Ministries/Departments which is
being extended with suitable modifications to select
other Ministries/Departments. Instructions in this
regard are stated to have been issued to all the
Ministries/Departments to restrict the expenditure
during the last quarter of the financial year to 33
percent of the budgeted amount. The Committee hope
that the new system of cash management would bring
about improvements in fiscal discipline by all the
Ministries/Departments. The Committee would like
the Ministry of Finance to ensure that the
instructions issued by them in this regard are
scrupulously followed by all the Ministries/
Departments. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the improvements brought about in
the wake of introduction of the system of cash
management.
2. 1.13 Finance While scrutinizing the cases of excess expenditure
(Department of despite having Supplementary Grants in the Grants/
Expenditure), Appropriations operated by the concerned
Culture, Ministries/Departments and Ministry of Railways
Home Affairs, (Railway Board), the Committee had asked the
Railways concerned Ministries/Departments to impress upon
their budget controlling authorities to thoroughly
examine their proposals for additional funds with due
farsightedness and ensure proper review and
scrutiny of the requests for Supplementary Demands
before presenting the same to Parliament for approval.
It has been observed from the Action Taken Notes
furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure), Ministry of Culture, Home Affairs and
82

83
Railways that they all had issued instructions to their
budget controlling authorities to frame realistic
Budget Estimates and requirements for
Supplementary Grants so as to eliminate excess
expenditure. Such instructions are issued by various
Ministries/Departments from time to time but it has
often been observed that these are not being followed
in letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore, would
like to emphasise that issuance of instructions would
not serve the purpose unless these instructions are
strictly enforced and complied with. They therefore,
desire that the Ministries/Departments should take
effective follow-up steps to ensure strict observance
of the existing instructions apart from improving their
accounting information system and tightening their
expenditure control.
3. 1.16 Finance The Committee in their Original Report had desired
(Department that a time schedule should be laid down for taking
of Economic action at various stages involving finalisation/vetting
Affairs) of explanatory notes on excess expenditure, which
would result in eliminating delay in their submission
to the Committee. However, from the explanation
given by the Ministry of Finance in their Action Taken
Notes, the Committee find that there was avoidable
delay at every stage on the part of Ministry of Finance
in the finalisation of the explanatory notes. While
other Ministries/Departments have acknowledged
the delay on their part in the finalisation and
submission of the explanatory notes, the Ministry of
Finance have sought to justify the delay on their
part by simply enumerating as to how they remained
pre-occupied with the preparation and presentation
of two regular and one interim Budget during the
year 2004 and 2005. The Committee, find this reply of
the Ministry of Finance evasive and unconvincing,
particularly so, because additional responsibility
rested in the Ministry of Finance as the nodal agency
not only to expedite finalisation of their own
explanatory notes but in respect of other Ministries/
Departments also. The Committee feel that it should
have been possible for the Ministry of finance to
furnish the requisite notes within the stipulated time.
That the Ministry failed to do so is nothing but
regrettable. The Committee would now expect the
12 3 4

84
Ministry of Finance to show more responsibility in
the timely finalisation and submission of explanatory
notes to the Committee. They desire that the Ministry
of finance should evolve an effective procedure for
taking action at various stages in finalisation/vetting
of these explanatory notes for their timely submission
to the Committee.
4. 55 Railways The Ministry of Railways have conceded that they
have not been able to achieve the targets with regard
to the implementation of the new computer-based
Financial Management Information System (FMIS)
on different Zonal Railways, which according to them,
is necessary to improve the assessment of fund
requirements more realistically. The Committee,
therefore, regret to observe that inspite of repeated
exhortation by them in their earlier Reports, the
implementation of the Financial Management
Information System in the Railways has taken place
at a snail’s pace, with the result that excess
expenditure over authorized provisions in the
Ministry of Railways has continued to occur year
after year. Needless to say that the proper and timely
implementation of the FMIS would result in regulating
the flow of expenditure in the Railways. It is,
therefore, imperative for streamlining the accounting
procedure in a large and key Ministry like Railways
with several field formations spread over the country,
that the Ministry of Railways should closely monitor
the implementation of the FMIS and its completion
at least by the end of the current financial year i.e.,
2006-2007 and apprise the Committee of the progress
made in this regard.
12 3 4
MGIPMRND—2680LS(S-2)—13-09-2006.