CONTROL SYSTEMS IN INDIA
SECURITY PRESS, NASHIK
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPTT. OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-2007
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
Fourteenth Lok Sabha
Lok Sabha Secretariat
New Delhi
28

TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
CONTROL SYSTEMS IN INDIA SECURITY
PRESS, NASHIK
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE)
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 7.8.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 7.8.2006
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
August, 2006/Sravana, 1928 (Saka)

PAC No. 1813
Price: Rs. 96.00
© 2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE .................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
REPORT......................................................................................................... 1
APPENDIX I. Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of  India
for the year ended 31 March, 2004, (No. 14  of 2005)
Union Government (Civil—Performance Audit) ........... 53
A
PPENDIX II. Statement of Observations/Recommendations ........... 67
PART II
Minutes of the sittings of Public Accounts Committee
(2005-2006) and (2006-2007) held on 14th  and  15th
September, 2005 and   on 20th July, 2006 respectively... 87, 88, 91
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2006-2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  —  Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
5. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this 28th Report relating to “Control Systems in India Security Press, Nashik”
on the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March 2004 (No. 14 of 2005),
Union Government (Civil – Performance Audit).
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No.14 of
2005), Union Government (Civil – Performance Audit) was laid on the Table of the
House on 6th May, 2005.
3. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on the subject at their   sittings   held on
14th  and 15th  September, 2005.  The Committee considered and finalised this Report
at their sitting held on 20th July, 2006.   Minutes of the sittings form Part II of the
Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in the Appendix to the
Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) for the cooperation extended by them in
furnishing information and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI;    PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
24  July, 2006               Chairman,
2 Sravana, 1928 (Saka)    Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

PART I
 REPORT
Introductory
India Security Press (ISP) was set up by the British in 1924 at Nashik in the State of
Maharashtra.  At present, ISP is the only organisation in India and one of the few in the
world where a wide variety of security papers are printed and supplied. The security
papers comprise of Postal Stamps, Judicial and Non-Judicial Stamps, Cheque Books
for Reserve Bank of India and State Bank of India, Saving Certificates, Postal Orders,
Passports, Promissory Notes and other security documents required by the Central/
State and Union Territory Governments, Public Sector Undertakings and Local Bodies.
In addition to postal stamps of various denominations, ISP produces 25 categories of
stamps and stamp papers in 212 denominations.  The non-security documents consist
of Welfare Stamps, Non-MICR Cheques, and Railway Warrants etc.  In so far as ISP is
concerned, the value of these security and non-security documents is limited to their
cost of production, which are realised from the indenters.
2. For the indenting entities, more particularly for the Union Government and the
State Governments, the security and non-security documents are the financial
instruments of revenue used for registration of documents, issue of securities and
realisation of the cost of postal and other services. Thus, for the indenting entities, the
security papers are the money worth their face value.
II.  Organisational Set up
3. The India Security Press (ISP) is an Industrial establishment of the Government
of India under the Ministry of Finance, Currency and Coinage Division of the
Department of Economic Affairs.  It is a commercial department under the direct
administrative control of the General Manager (GM), who is the Head of the Department
and also the Ex-Officio Controller of stamps of India.    The Financial Advisor and Chief
Accountant Officer (FA & CAO) assist the GM in matters relating to accounts and in
other operational matters he is assisted by the Deputy General Manager (DGM).  For
overseeing the physical security of the Press, a Commandant of Central Industrial
Security Force  (CISF) is posted in the unit.  Besides, a Vigilance Unit has also been set
up to see the matter relating to security and vigilance which is headed by an officer of
the Intelligence Bureau. As regards distribution of the stamps and stamp papers, the
Central Stamp Depot (CSD), a part of India Security Press, stocks the products and
disposes them to various organisations in accordance with the indents received from
the various indenters.  It also raises the bills on the indents and maintains the revenue
receipts.
1

2
III.  Audit Objectives
4.  Audit reviewed the Control Systems obtaining in India Security Press, Nashik
with regard to indents, production planning and printing, supply, surveillance on the
entire operations, sensitivity to error signals and lessons-learnt system in respect of
non-postal stamps and security papers.  The review was carried out consequent to
the discovery of large-scale counterfeit stamps in the country and with a view to
assess whether :
• the system of indent and supply was robust to ensure fulfilment of the
requirement of various types of judicial and non-judicial stamps by the state
governments and other entities;
• the production plan and actual production of stamps in ISP was consistent
with the indents;
• ISP put in place adequate system of control to address the risks associated
with the production, supply procedures and security besides short supply
against the indents;
• appropriate coordination between ISP  on one hand and the indenting entities
on the other, existed for review of the forecasts of requirement, indents, and
actual supply;
• the disposal procedures of the machinery and equipment used for production
of security papers consisted of safeguards to prevent their misuse;
• ISP was sensitive to error signals and undertook measures to address the
possible risks associated with the reported aberrations and learnt appropriate
lessons from the results of the investigations; and
• ISP undertook effective remedial measures consequent upon large-scale
counterfeit operations.
5. For this purpose, Audit examined the documents in ISP , Nashik and Security
Printing Press, Hyderabad  for the period from 1996-2004 and also scrutinised secondary
data in Private Paper Manufacturing Mills and Dandy Roll
1  manufacturing units. The
thrust areas of Audit were high value Non-Judicial Stamps/Stamp Papers, India
Insurance Stamps, India Impressed Court Fee Stamps, Revenue Stamps, Share Transfer
Stamps and Notarial Stamps.
6. Audit review
2  brought to light the following lacunae in the system of working of
India Security Press :
• Deficient controls in the procedures for indents, printing and supply;
• Non-existence of risk perception in the areas associated with different stages
of Production and Supply of stamps;
1 Dandy roll is a device for solidifying and impressing water mark in the paper during manufacture.
2 CAG's Report No. 14 of 2005—Union Government (Civil-Performance Audit) relating to "Control
Systems in India Security Press, Nashik."

3
• Non-investigation of sharp swings in the indents received from State
Governments, Union Territories etc.;
• Absence of relationship between annual printing programmes and indents;
• Failure of ISP to gauge the risk of the severe short supply of stamp on the
functions dependent on the stamps and stamp papers and the possibility of
counterfeits;
• Absence of effective control over the actual quantity of security paper
manufactured by the Private Paper Mills, nor on the manufacture, custody
and use of Dandy Rolls and the equipments that introduce the security
feature in the papers during its production;
• Existence of cases of theft on the shop floor and also many in transit, which
entailed the risk of siphoning of the genuine stamps outside the prescribed
channel;
• Impact of the decision of ISP to permit the presence of the representatives of
the successful bidder for disposal of printing machine during its dismantling
which entailed the risk of its reassembly for counterfeit printing;
• Non-establishment of a surveillance and intelligence system by ISP to provide
assurance that genuine stamps were used and fake stamps were not in
circulation;
• Confinement of ISP’s role to that of a printer and limiting its work only to
verification of genuineness of the stamps which are referred to it by
investigative agencies; and
• Failure of ISP to prepare comprehensive response to the high risk of
counterfeit stamps despite large number of stamps referred to it for
examination being found fake.
7. The Committee have examined in detail the various issues raised by the Audit in
their Report.  The same have been discussed in detail in the succeeding paragraphs.
IV.  Unmet Indents
8 . The India Security Press receives quarterly indents from the State
Governments, Union Territories etc. for supply of stamp papers of various categories
and denominations.  Within ISP , the consolidation of the indents and supply of stamp
papers is managed by its Central Stamp Depot (CSD).  Based on the print requisition
by the CSD, the warrant section issues print warrants to the production section.  The
CSD is also entrusted with the responsibility for the dispatch of stamp papers to the
indenters.
A. INDENTS,  PRINTING  AND SUPPLY
9. Audit scrutiny of the production, indent and supply of stamps and stamp papers
for ISP from 1996-97 to 2003-04 revealed that the cumulative indent during the said
period was 27722.52 lakh of sheets.  Against this, the production and supply were

4
only 12783 and 11833 lakh of sheets respectively.  The shortfall in supply with reference
to indent was 15889.65 lakh of sheets and the percentage of shortfall in production
and supply to the indent were 53.89 and 57.32 respectively.
10. When asked about the constraints due to which ISP could not achieve the
targetted demand, the Ministry in a written note submitted as under :
“Indents placed by indenters were very erratic, fluctuating between 52 to
18 Crore.  It was difficult to plan production according to such abnormal
fluctuations in the indents. However, efforts were made by ISP to ensure supplies
more than its installed capacity in general. In addition to the above, there are
other constraints such as old machinery, lack of availability of raw materials in
time, lengthy purchase procedure leading to delay in timely receipt of raw
materials, etc.”
11.  The Committee desired to know the measures taken by the Ministry to remove
the bottlenecks so as to achieve optimum level of production and supply of stamps
and stamp papers.  In response, the Ministry of Finance in a written note stated as
under :
“There has been no shortfall in production against the installed capacity except
in the year 1999-2000.  However, shortfall in supply is on account of the fact that
indents were inflated and not realistic in most of the cases.  Therefore,  in order
to ensure that indents are more realistic, it has been decided that the indenters
should deposit 30 per cent cost of the indented material as advance.  During the
current financial year 2005-06, only 12 States/UTs have remitted 30 per cent the
advance payment. The new system has contributed considerably to the decline
in size of the indents.”
12.  Enquired about the steps taken by the Ministry to make the remaining
16 States comply with the decision stipulating deposit of 30 per cent of cost of
indented material as advance,  the Ministry, in a written note as under:
“The 16 states which have not complied with the decision are Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and
Uttar Pradesh. The States are being requested regularly to comply with the
decision of the Ministry.  We have received intimation from some of the States
about non-availability of budget at their end for release of advance payments.
There are other cases also where States have asked for performa invoice for the
advance payment, whereas several other States have not responded to the
requests made by ISP so far. ISP has further communicated to all such States
that indents received without advance payment will be treated as, ‘unconfirmed
indents’ and ISP will not be in a position to accord any priority to such indents
from the current Financial Year.”

5
13. Asked to  furnish the details of States that have made balance payment of
70 per cent at the time of taking delivery of stamp papers, the Ministry in a written
note stated as under:
“Except Union Territory of Pondicherry, none of the states or Union Territories
have made balance payment of 70 per cent at the time of taking delivery of
stamps / stamp papers. After dispatch of consignment, bills are raised and
payment received from concerned paying authorities of State Governments in
due course. Payment of balance 70 per cent amount is generally settled by the
State Governments after a lapse of not less than three months from the date of
dispatch of stamps.”
14. The Committee desired to know the latest position regarding production, indent
and supply of stamps and stamp papers by ISP.  The Ministry in their  written reply
stated the position as under:
“The figures depicted by Audit are more or less identical to the figures of ISP so far
as indents and supplies are concerned.  However, the figure differ under the head
production. The production, indent and supply of stamps and stamp papers for ISP
from 1996-97 to 2004-05 are  as follows :
(Sheets in lakh)
Y ear Indent Production Supply Shortfall Percentage Percentage
in supply of shortfall of  shortfall
with in in supply
reference production to indent
to indent to indent
a b c d e = b-d f = % of g = % of
 (b-c)/b  (b-d)/b
1996-97 5281.85 1498.44 1424.44 3857.41 71.63% 73.03%
1997-98 5128.67 2000.42 1895.85 3232.82 61.00% 63.03%
1998-99 2962.02 1338.63 1305.42 1656.6 54.81% 55.93
1999-2000 1810.13 748.45 946.56 863.57 58.65% 47.71%
2000-01 2296.57 1363.15 1306.36 990.21 40.64% 43.12%
2001-02 2738.07 1386.17 1389.2 1348.87 49.37% 49.26
2002-03 4117.45 1780.28 1616.5 2500.95 56.76% 60.74
2003-04 3279.85 1789.76 1948.84 1331.01 45.43% 40.58%
Cumulative
total up to 31st
 March 2004 27614.6 11905.3 11833.2 15781.4 56.89% 57.15%
2004-05 2204.72 1263.62 1344.63 860.09 42.69% 39.01%
Cumulative
total up to
31st  March
2005 29819.3 13168.9 13177.8 16641.5 55.84% 55.81%”

6
A.1 Fluctuations in the Indents
15. Audit scrutiny of indents has revealed that the total of indents in terms of
number of sheets varied over a wide range of 1810-5282 lakh during the eight years
(i.e. from the period 1996-1997 to 2003-2004) for which data was collected. Further,
the ISP did not maintain account of indents and supply in terms of value and there
was no evidence to suggest that ISP analysed the wide fluctuations in the annual
indents in consultation with the indenters to find out the reasons for such wide
variations.
16. When asked whether the Ministry had at any point of time undertaken a study
to find out the reasons for wide fluctuations/variations in indents, the Ministry of
Finance in written note submitted as under:
“ISP is a printing agency which undertakes security printing on orders from
various State Govts. /UTs and Central Govt. Ministries /offices. It is difficult for
the ISP to undertake studies on an all India basis to find out reasons for abnormal
fluctuations in indents. However, the States/UTs were apprised of the
fluctuations in the indents placed by them and requested to place realistic
indents."
17. On being asked to explain the possible reasons due to which the State
Governments submit  inflated and unrealistic indents and whether  ISP had
established any mechanism to coordinate with States/Union Territories to monitor
the indents, the Ministry of Finance in a written note delineated their view point as
under :
“Indents raised by various indenters have been analysed. The indents
received during the last nine years have been tabulated and it is observed
that there is no pattern and they appear to have been raised in an ‘ad-hoc’
manner. From the analysis, it clearly emerges that even when the full supplies
were not met against the indents of a particular year, in the subsequent year
the indents did not increase in the same proportion. Instead, in most of the
cases it had gone down that too without any consistent pattern. Since States
were sending indents to ISP without any commitment of release of payments,
the indents have been raised without analysing the requirements in a realistic
manner. Even the payments after supplies of stamps and stamp papers have
not been released to ISP in many cases, which clearly indicate the absence of
linkages between the indenter, consignee and paying authority. This fact is
further bolstered by the outcome of the introduction of procedure of calling
for 30 per cent advance amount against the indents, whereby the indents
have come down very drastically from around 50 crore to 14 crore in a year. It
clearly indicates that State Governments have submitted inflated and unrealistic
indents.  ISP has attempted to educate the states / UTs to monitor the indents
by conducting interactive programmes as well as by writing regularly in this
regard.”

7
18. When asked by the Committee to specify the reasons due to which ISP could
not maintain accounts of indents and supply in terms of value, the Ministry of Finance
in a written reply stated as under:
“The reasons for not maintaining records as per face value are:
ISP, as a printer, is responsible for printing of different kinds of stamps / stamp
papers on the basis of indents received from the indenters. Indents are received
in the form of number of sheets. The record is maintained in ISP for production
and supply of documents of various denominations in the form of issue sheets
and hence, maintaining face value – wise record was not felt necessary from the
inception;
the accounts of ISP in terms of procurement of raw material, its use, wastage,
etc. are also done on the same basis;
and in terms of wastage on account of faulty printing, the value cannot be taken
to be the face value and it would only be the value of production (raw material,
process costs, labour, etc.).
However, in case of thefts, ISP reports the loss in terms of both volume and the
face value. Further, while making delivery, face value of the stamps is written
along with other details in the invoice sent to consignees”
A.2 Indents and Production
19. Audit review of the actual production of stamp papers in terms of sheets in ISP
disclosed that it had no relationship with the indent.  The annual production varied in
the wide range of 877 and 2066 lakh sheets.  Cumulatively, over the eight years i.e.
from 1996 to 2004, ISP produced only 12783 lakh sheets against the total indent of
27723 lakh sheets, which is only 46 per cent of the indent.  Audit revealed that ISP did
not review the reasons for very low production with reference to the indents and its
attendant risks.  Category and denomination-wise analysis of production of stamps
over 1995 to 2003 confirmed that there was no co-relation between indent, production
and supply. Moreover, the production was consistently lower than the indent.
20. Audit also pointed out that ISP did not increase production; despite under-
utilisation of the production capacity and large unmet indents.  The machinery was
used on an average for only five hours and 15 minutes against the effective working
hours per shift of nine hours.  In the absence of log books of machines, which ISP was
expected to maintain, unutilised machine-hour remained unexplained.
21. The committee sought the  reasons for such a low production level, which was
only 46 per cent of the indents placed by States/other agencies.  The Ministry in a
written reply stated as under :
“There have been wide fluctuations in the indents of Non-Judicial Stamp Papers
(NJSPs) placed by the State Govts./UTs. However, the production and supply
have been more or less consistent over years. Because of the wide fluctuations
it was impracticable to enhance the installed capacity all of a sudden and that
too when there was no certainty whether the demand would continue to remain
in the coming years.”

8
22. Replying to a query about the measures taken to increase the installed capacity
of ISP so as  to achieve the optimum level of production, the Ministry of Finance
informed the Committee in a written note as under:
“Production capacity of ISP has been analysed and it is observed that current
requirement of indents can be met with the existing capacity. For the current
Financial Year i.e.2005-06 the total indent of Non-Judicial Stamp (NJSP) and
allied stamps is approximately 14 crore issue sheets and the installed capacity is
13.3 crore issue sheets. Therefore, at present, there is no proposal to enhance
the installed capacity. Further, it is pertinent to mention that dematting is under
active consideration, whereby requirement of stamp papers is likely to reduce
significantly. Some states like Karnataka, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh
have already taken steps in this direction.”
23. The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry of Finance had initiated
any steps or conducted any survey to analyse the reasons for the shortfall / deficit of
54 per cent of the indent during the period 1996 to 2004 and how the deficit had been
made good by the indenters. In response, the Ministry of Finance in a written note
stated as under:
“No survey was conducted by ISP to analyse as to where the indenters were
meeting their requirements in the event of short-supplies with reference to the
indented quantity. This was not done because under  Section 10 (b) of Indian
Stamps Act, State Governments have been empowered to take recourse to
alternate mode of Stamp Duty Collections in the event of shortage of stamps/
stamp papers. However, the Ministry have conducted meetings with State
Governments and requested them to raise realistic indents and the measures
taken by the Ministry have led to very significant reduction in the indented
quantity from as high as 52.8 crore in the year 1996-97 to approximately 14 crore
in 2005-06.”
24. When asked as to how the Ministry could justify that they had produced
Stamp Papers more than the installed capacity when the printing machines was reported
to have worked only 5 hrs and 15 minutes per day against the effective working hours
per shift of nine hours, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:
“The printing capacity of 13.3 crore issue sheets as indicated for stamps /
stamp papers is the printing & processing capacity to actually produce Stamps
and stamp papers in a shift of nine hours. The printing capacity as depicted,
takes into account the time lost due to change-over, cleaning and counting of
materials, etc. Processing of stamps / stamp papers is done manually and it is
also one of the important steps in the processing of stamps / stamp papers.
Prior to November 2001, ISP was working 11 hours per shift. Hence, prior to this
period, the related printing capacity were more than 16 crore, which is more than
the actual production taken place during this period. Higher production could
be achieved due to more concerted efforts in the processing where capacity is
limited, but, can vary. It may be appropriate to note that in the security printing,
the documents are printed at one or more stages. There are documents of which

9
base printing is done on one machine, body printing  is done on the other and
perforation, cutting & sheeting is done on some other machines. Further,
installed capacity of printing machines is used for printing of different papers.”
25. When asked by the Committee about the steps taken by ISP to streamline the
production process so as to increase the effective working hours of the machines, the
Ministry of Finance in a written note stated as under:
“In a Security set-up akin to I.S.P., it is quite reasonable if the average effective
working hours of more than 5 hours is achieved in a shift of 9 hours considering
the various factors associated with security printing and processing.  Being a
security printing organization, as a security requirement, it is necessary to stop
the production as well as inspection operations and seal off the production and
inspection areas before the lunch and at the end of the shifts.   In this process,
the entire shop floor is evacuated. This process takes not less than one hour
each in 2 changeovers. In addition to this, the personnel are ‘body searched’
before allowing them to go out. As a process requirement, the machines are to
be cleaned before the end of shift to prevent drying of ink to save damage to ink
ducts.”
26. To a query regarding the rationale behind non-maintenance of logbooks for
machines by ISP , the Ministry replied as under:
“At India Security Press, the details of working and production output of
machines is recorded daily for both the shifts separately. The monthly compilation
of the same is called  “Monthly Machine Utilisation Statement”.  Similar record
is perhaps called “Log-Book” in other establishments.”
27. When asked by the Committee about the measures which have been taken/
proposed to be taken by ISP to avoid the inherent risk of production of fake stamps /
counterfeits due to consistent lower level of production than the indent, the Ministry
of Finance informed the Committee in a written note as under:
“Indents raised were ad-hoc and inflated. Production and supply of stamps/
stamp papers have been consistent and it is felt that realistic indents can be met
by ISP . It is observed that the level of production, which may be achieved by
ISP, is adequate to take care of the requirements of States. Further, in the light of
dematting, the demand of stamps / stamp papers is likely to go down.”
28. As regards  the machinery / mechanism for ensuring effective monitoring and
control of indent, production and supply by ISP, the Ministry in a written note informed
the Committee as under:
“Ministry conducts ‘Annual Production Planning’ meetings to analyse and
decide the production plan of all Mills and Presses, including ISP. Indents for
stamps and stamp papers are received from State Governments and Union
Territories, which are compiled at Central Stamp Depot (CSD). CSD calls for the
indents and compiles them in accordance with procedure laid down in the
‘Rules for Supply and Distribution of Stamps’ issued by Department of Revenue,

10
Ministry of Finance. In order to streamline the process of monitoring and control
of indents, Ministry of Finance have conducted two meetings with the Revenue
Secretaries and Inspector General (Registration & Stamps) of the States and
Union Territories.
Following decisions were taken in the aforesaid two meetings, which are being
regularly pursued for compliance by the State Governments / Union Territories–
(i) To curtail the erratic and unrealistic indents, from 2004 onwards, 30 per
cent amount of the indented value is being asked for as advance along
with the indents. As of now, 12 out of 28 states have already started
making advance payments at the time of sending their indents. Other
States are being requested to adopt this new procedure.
(ii) States have been asked to centralize their indents. Several States have
already centralized their indents before sending it to CSD.
(iii) From the year 2003 onwards, there has been close interaction with the
State Governments, whereby representatives of Treasuries are invited
and they are provided with some elementary input about the security
features of the stamp papers along with educating them to raise realistic
indents. This training has become a regular feature and officials from
State Governments are attending this training.”
A.3 Indents and Supply
29. The Audit scrutiny revealed that just as production of stamp/stamp papers did
not have any relationship with indent, the supply also did not follow any pattern.
The supply varied between as low as 27 per cent and a maximum of 59 per cent of the
indents.  Over the eight-year period i.e. from 1996 to 2004, the supply was only 11833
lakh sheets against the indent of 27723 lakh sheets; a shortfall of about 57 per cent.
State-wise and denomination-wise analysis of supply against the indents disclosed
an arbitrary pattern.  While the supplies were largely much lower than the indent, it
did not follow any pattern.
30. Audit review also highlighted that in a few cases, the supplies were more than
the indents while in many these were very low. There were also cases, where supplies
were made without any indents.  While the production was consistently low compared
to the indent, ISP retained significant balance in stock at the close of the financial
year.  Though the rules on the subject provide for retention of the stamps/stamp
papers by ISP equivalent to a minimum of three months’ stock, the application of this
rule has rationale only when ISP has fulfilled the indents completely.
31. On being asked by the Committee whether the Ministry have been able to find
out the major reasons for shortfall of supply of indents as high as 57 per cent during
the years 1996-2004, the Ministry of Finance informed the Committee that the apparent
shortfall have not resulted in crisis in any of the States since the indents were highly
inflated.

11
32. When enquired about the present position of indent and supply and whether
optimal equilibrium between indent & supply has been maintained.  The Ministry in a
written note submitted as under :
“Because of the efforts made by ISP to curb inflated indents, the indented
quantities have come down substantially.  There are instances where the NJSPs
duly packed and ready for dispatch packets are not being lifted by the Indentors
in some cases such as the governments of U.P., Punjab, Jharkhand, Bihar etc.,
in spite of reminders to them for collections of the products indented.  From the
above, it is clear that there is hardly any problem in respect of supply of Stamps/
Stamp papers. With the adherence to the procedure of depositing 30 per cent
cost of the indented quantity in advance uniformly by all the States/UTs, the
position will become more clear in the near future.”
33. When enquired by the Committee how ISP could supply the stamps more than
the indented quantity in some cases and less in certain other cases, the Ministry   of
Finance in a written reply stated as under:
“In normal course, supplies are made as per indents only.  However, in some
stray cases, supplies are affected for the backlog indent also, on the request of
indenters, thereby, giving an impression as if the supplies have been made
more than the current indented quantity.  There are other situations also wherein
indenters who come to collect stamps/stamp papers request for more stamps of
lower denominations in place of higher denominations, if the full quantity of
higher face value denominations are not ready.  Such situations also give an
impression that supplies made are more than the indented quantity.”
34.  When asked by the Committee as to why ISP had retained a significant balance
in their stock, when they were unable to supply even 43 percent of the indented
quantity, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:
“The balance in stock reflected in the books is the balance available on the last
day of the financial year i.e. 31st March. Since production and supply is a
continuous process, closing stock will always be available.  Moreover, it may
be reiterated here that there was no real shortage of production/supply since
the indents placed were highly inflated and unrealistic…….. a reserve stock for
all kinds of stamp is required to be maintained at the CSD, Nashik to meet
emergent requirements.”
35.  Replying to a query as to what was the rationale for retention of the stamps/
stamp papers by ISP equivalent to a minimum of three months’ stock, when ISP has
not fulfilled the indents completely, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
“Supply  of stamps was not held to create stock at CSD available stock on any
particular day of the year were the rolling stock plus the stamps and stamp
papers which could not be collected by the consignee as the representatives of
the States have  not reported to take possession of the consignment.  As per
the Rule No. 6 of the Supply & Distribution of stamps, ISP/CSD shall ordinarily
maintain a reserve stock based on the probable monthly consumption in addition
to the stocks required for a quarter/six months/one year depending upon the
type of stamps/stamp papers.”

12
36.  When asked by the Committee whether ISP had made any enquiry to find as to
how the customers were meeting their requirement of stamp papers inspite of the
shortfall of supply by about 57 per cent, the Ministry in a written reply stated as
under:
“……….the supply was generally maintained above the installed capacity.  It is
pertinent to mention here that ISP responded to all communications from the
Indenters, whenever any inadequate supply was intimated and the problem
was resolved by making supplies. Even assuming that the ISP was not in a
position to make supply of a given denomination of NJSPs, the State Govts.
under Section 10(b) of the INDIAN STAMP  ACT, 1899 could take recourse to
alternate mode of stamp duty collections to overcome such temporary
shortages.”
37.  When the Committee desired to know whether any review had been done with
reference to indent and supply in consultation with the users, the Ministry of Finance
in a note have replied as under:
“When the indents were going beyond the printing capacity of India Security
Press, this fact was communicated to all  the Treasuries/Sub Treasuries and
Postal Stores Depots all over the country vide Central Stamp Depot, Nashik
Road Circular No. 2304 dated 13th November, 1991 and subsequent reminder
Circular bearing No. 2606 dated 13th April, 1996.  It was clearly brought out in
the Circular that the indenters should raise realistic indents and the unmet
indents for a quarter would not be carried forward.  Apart from these steps, to
meet the enhanced requirement, part of the load is diverted to Security Printing
Press, Hyderabad to print and supply Non-Judicial Stamps.  With this
arrangement it is expected that it would take care of the enhanced requirements.
The Ministry of Finance, Government of India also conducted two meetings
with the Revenue Secretaries and Inspectors General (Registration & Stamps)
of the States & UTs, in 2004, and highlighted the importance of raising of
realistic indents by them. This, it was decided in the meeting, could be done by
making advance payments to the Presses at the time of placing Indents.
In addition to the above, the awareness-cum-training programme has been
organized at I.S.P. for the representatives of the Indenters, in which they are
made aware about the India Security Press and its capacity and the various
security features incorporated in our security products mainly in the stamps
and stamp papers.  Through this, they have also been persuaded to raise
realistic indents only. ”
38. The Committee were given to understand that some indenters request for
change in the denomination of stamp papers other than what they have indented
while taking delivery of stamp papers. When asked how did ISP agree to such a
change, the Ministry in a written note replied as under:
“While taking personal delivery of stamps/stamp papers, the authorized
representatives of the State Governments come up with a request to supply
stamp papers of the denomination other than the originally indented

13
denominations. There are cases where the emergency indent is raised due to
one or the other crisis reported by the States. ISP generally accepts such
requests and accords higher priority to them. There are cases where the
representatives of State Governments make a request for more low denomination
stamp papers in lieu of high denomination stamps/stamp papers. Such cases
are also entertained subject to availability.
There are cases when representative of the State could not come to collect the
supplies and same were collected during subsequent year thereby giving an
impression as if supplies are more than the indent of the year when supplies
were effected. Following sample cases as pointed out by audit illustrates these
types of incidents.
HARYANA
Denomination Year: 2000-01 Y ear: 2001-02 Rem arks
Indent Supply Indent Supply Excess supply than
Rs. 5/- 9.13 lacs 1.00 10.80 19.30 indented qty. in 2001-02
lac lacs lacs due to supply against
backlog of  2000-01
MAHARASHTRA
Y ear Denomination Rem arks
2001-02 Rs. 50/- Rs. 100 Excess supply of
Indent Supply Indent Supply Rs. 50/-  made for use in
24.95 lacs 26.85 lacs 54.15 lacs50.80 lacs combination of Rs. 100/-
PUNJAB
Denomination Y ear Rem arks
2001-02 2002-03 Excess supply than indented
Rs. 10/- Indent Supply Indent Supply qty. in 2002-03 due to
48.49 lacs 18.70 lacs 4.00 lacs 10.00 lacs supply against the
backlog of  2001-02
39. The Committee asked the Ministry of Finance as to whether they concur  agree
with the view that the India Security Press had not taken measures to rectify the
various deficiencies in the control procedures of ISP relating to indent, printing and
supply etc.,  till the Audit pointed out the same. The Ministry in a written note
furnished their comments as  under:
“Several drawbacks in the System were identified prior to the receipt of the
observations made in the C&AG’s Report on 15.6.2005. Some of the measures
which have been taken earlier by India Security Press in this regard are as
under:
• When the indents were going beyond the printing capacity of ISP , the

14
fact was communicated to all the Treasuries/Sub Treasuries and Postal
Stores Depots all over the country vide Central Stamp Depot, Nashik
Road, Circular No.2304 dated 13th November, 1991 and subsequent
reminder of the Circular bearing No.2606 dated 13th April, 1996.  It was
clearly brought out in the Circular that the indenters should raise realistic
indents and the unmet indents for a quarter would not be carried forward
and would be treated as cancelled.  The indenters were made aware of the
annual capacity limitations of IPS.
• Apart from the steps taken in the year 1997-98, the total indent for Non-
Judicial Stamps itself shot up to 47.35 Crore. To meet this enhanced
requirement, workload was diverted to Security Printing Press, Hyderabad
to print and supply 11.04 Crore of Non-Judicial Stamps of Rs.1, Rs.2 and
Rs.5 for the whole country and Rs.10 and  Rs.20 for eight southern States.
It was expected that this arrangement would take care of the enhanced
requirements.
• The Ministry of Finance in two meetings with the Revenue Secretaries
and Inspectors General (Registration and Stamps) of the States and UTs,
held during 2004, took the following decisions:
• to curtail erratic and unrealistic indents, from 2004 onwards, 30 per
cent  amount of the indented value is being asked as an advance
along with the indents.  The balance 70 per cent of the quantity is to
be paid at the time of taking delivery of the stock;
• the States have been asked to centralise their indents;
• the States should give a three years’ rolling indent which would
enable the presses to plan their production; and
• States were asked to give six monthly supply schedules to enable
the Presses to make suitable production targets.
• Despite fluctuations in indents, the ISP ensured that it supplied stamps
more than its installed capacity of around 1330 crore sheets per year
during the period 1996-97 to 2003-04, except in one year i.e. 1999-2000.
• Action as stated below has already been taken:
• From October 1998 delivery of Non-judicial and allied stamps are
through personal collection under armed escort by the indenters and
hence there is no question of theft en-route.  The cases reported in
the Report of the C&AG mostly relate to the period upto 1999-2000
when the revised procedure had not become fully operational.
• Even in the present set-up, whatever cases of discrepancies are
reported to ISP , they are recorded and investigated and reports sent
to the agency that reported the discrepancy.

15
• As an additional measure, the consignments which are ready for dispatch
are also being subjected to random audit checks  for correctness of
quantity delivered.
• Provisions for obtaining a legally binding oath/undertaking from the private
suppliers for ensuring security and secrecy in the process of production
of paper and equipments for printing of stamps/stamp papers, is already
being made in the contracts.
• A procedure for resolving of discrepancies on account of short/excess
supply of stamps reported by the indenters is already in existence as
explained in this Departments’ reply to Para 3.1 of the C&AG’s Report No.
14 of 2005.
• India Security Press has already created a  ‘surveillance and vigilance
unit, which has become functional with effect from 01-03-2005.
• Regarding installation of electronic access control system and creation
of apex level security committee, it may be mentioned that procurement
process was already initiated for installation of CCTV .
• Physical security has also been handed over to C.I.S.F. in a phased manner
and complete deployment of C.I.S.F has already taken place.
• Disposal of obsolete machinery and equipments used for printing of
stamps and stamp papers, is being done only after converting them into
scrap, since 2003.”
B.  RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH PRODUCTION
40. Audit review indicated that many intermediate steps related to production of
the stamp/stamp papers viz., manufacture of security papers, Dandy Roll for security
watermark on the paper, gumming and super-calendaring etc. are outsourced.
According to Audit, these activities carry very high risk of replication for counterfeit
and, therefore, warrant appropriate security and surveillance procedure to minimize
the risks.  Examination of the procedure followed by ISP in relation to these vital
activities disclosed that it was not alive to the possible risks and managed the
outsourcing of such security related papers in an indifferent manner.
B.1 PRODUCTION OF PAPER
41. As per the agreement with the paper mills which produced paper for printing
the mills should not produce and supply security paper to other agencies. However,
Audit scrutiny revealed that ISP did not exercise any control regarding actual
quantities produced by the paper mills against its supply orders, including the
wastages.  Absence of control by ISP on the production of paper entailed risk of
diversion for counterfeit operations.  Similarly, ISP did not exercise control over pulping
of the rejected stock of security paper manufactured by paper mills, which entailed a
risk of its misuse.

16
42.  When asked whether ISP exercises any control over Paper Mills regarding
actual quantity produced vis-a-vis its supply order, the Ministry of Finance in a
written note stated as under:
“The only source of supply of paper for Non-judicial Stamps for ISP is Security
Paper Mill, Hoshangabad, under the Ministry of Finance, Government of India
with adequate security set up. Besides, no procurement of this type of paper
has been made from any Private Mills.  For other variety of stamp papers viz.
Revenue Stamps, Fiscal Stamps etc., the Unit has to inevitably purchase paper
from Private Mills. As per the contractual obligations, these Mills cannot produce
more than the quantity ordered without the permission of the ISP.  Out of the
forgery cases, which have been detected in the Fake Stamps Scam, no case has
been reported where genuine papers have been found in any of the fake stamps.
This amply proves that there is no leakage of papers from the Mills. However, to
verify the antecedents and reliability of the Private Firms/Mills before placing
supply orders on them, a system of obtaining security clearance from Intelligence
Bureau in respect of such firms has been introduced from 2003 onwards.”
43. When asked about the methodology adopted by ISP for the security clearance
of private firms / mills prior to 2003, the Ministry in a written note replied as under:
“Prior to the year 2003, there was no system in place to obtain security clearance
of private firms / mills supplying paper to ISP. However, it is pertinent to mention
that the full requirement of paper for Non-Judicial Stamps have been met from
the supplies made by Security Paper Mills, Hoshangabad, which is an
organization of Government of India and only the paper required for other
stamps was procured from Private Mills.”
44. The Committee liked the Ministry to furnish a detailed note on the procedure
involved in invitation of tenders for production of stamp papers by Private Paper
Mills, short-listing of paper mills and their vetting by Intelligence Bureau.  In response,
the Ministry  in a written note submitted as under:
“The decision to take security clearance of the firms from I.B. was taken in
November 2003 by Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs. As
per this decision, for procurement of security sensitive items, the units were
advised to obtain security clearance of the firms from I.B. before finalising
tenders.  Accordingly thereafter, the following procedure is followed in
procurement of security sensitive items:
• The Global/Open Tenders are issued for Pre-Qualification Bid bringing
out the criteria as per which the firms can qualify for issue of Techno-
Commercial Tenders.
• The tenders are published through D.A.V .P. in leading newspapers as
well as in Indian Trade Journal and they are also put on the Website.
• A Committee of officers evaluates pre-qualification offers.
• After evaluation, firms are short-listed to whom Techno-Commercial
Tenders are to be issued.

17
• While short-listing the firms, such firms are excluded which are black
listed or who have adverse report from I.B. Firms located in countries
with weak and not up to the mark security systems, as per the assessment
of I.B., are also excluded.
• The tenders are issued to the short-listed firms and ISP through Ministry
of Finance forwards the list of short-listed firms to I.B. for security
clearance.
• By the time the Techno-Commercial Tenders are received, I.B. clearance
is also received.
• The two actions namely issue of Techno-Commercial Tenders to short-
listed firms (in two bid system i.e. Techno-Commercial bid and price bid
separately) and intimation to I.B. for clearance of short-listed firms are
taken together to reduce the time for finalization of orders.
• Even if a firm has been issued tender after short-listing and if the report
from I.B. is adverse about the firm, tenders from such firms are not
considered and ignored on national security grounds. In other words it is
ensured that the Supply order is placed only on the firm, which has been
cleared by I.B.
• On receipt of Techno-Commercial Tenders, a Committee of officers
evaluates them.
• Thereafter price bids of only those firms are opened whose offers are
found to be conforming to the Techno-Commercial specifications of the
tender.
•The Supply Order is placed on the lowest bidder.”
45.  Enquired whether there were any instances where a firm has been short-listed
by ISP but its name was not forwarded to I.B. for vetting/clearance, the Ministry in a
written note replied  in negative.
46. On being asked whether non-exercise of control by ISP over the Paper Mills
with respect to actual quantity of paper produced by them does not entail the risk
of Paper Mills producing more than the orders placed by ISP and diverting the
excess production for counterfeit operations,  the Ministry in a written note stated
as  under:
“India Security Press is not in a position to have full control over private paper
manufacturers with respect to the quantity of paper produced since they supply
different kinds of papers not only to ISP but also to many other users. Through
the contractual arrangements between ISP and paper manufacturers, they are
bound to supply paper to ISP with its watermark and design specific to ISP and
it cannot be supplied to any other agency. Generally, paper manufacturers
produce paper for supply to ISP as per the quantity stipulated in the supply
order. Excess paper produced, if any, is re-pulped by the paper mills. This
system has worked well till now. In the cases which have been sent by State
Police, CBI and other Investigating Agencies to Forgery Detection Cell of ISP

18
for examination, it has been revealed from the examination reports that there are
no forged stamps/stamp papers wherein genuine paper supplied to ISP has
been used.”
47. The Committee desired to know whether ISP exercise any control in respect of
management of wastage of security paper by the Paper Mills in order to avoid their
probable misuse, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:
“As a standard practice, the Paper Mills re-pulp waste paper. A condition has
now been incorporated in the Supply Orders of ISP that the Paper Mills will
have to provide figures of total production, the quantity supplied and the
waste quantity.  They have to give a certificate also that they have re-pulped
the waste/excess quantity.  It is also stipulated in the Supply Order that they
will not supply this paper to any other person/organization and written guarantee
to this effect is to be given by the mill/supplier.”
B.2  Dandy Roll
48. Dandy Roll is a device used for introduction of security watermark on to the
paper during the course of its manufacture is designed by ISP but manufactured by
private producers.  The paper mills other than ISP is responsible for manufacture of
Dandy Rolls through private sources.  The manufacturers of Dandy Rolls are small-
scale industrial units and do not have a separate license for their manufacture from
ISP.  Duplicate production or theft/diversion of the Dandy Rolls is fraught with serious
risk of these being misused to produce paper for counterfeit production.
49. Audit scrutiny of the system of control over Dandy Rolls disclosed disregard
for security procedures of this high risk device in as much as ISP did not maintain
control of the Dandy Rolls and their use through the means of their custody, verification
and legal backing of agreement/oath by the private users.  The inspections by ISP
officials were infrequent and follow up actions were non-existent. At no time, ISP
assured itself that Dandy Rolls were not misused.
50. To a query regarding measures taken by ISP to streamline the security procedures
in relation to prevention of misuse of Dandy Rolls, the Ministry in a written note
replied as under :
“The physical custody of Dandy Rolls remains with the Mills as it is their
property but they cannot use them without ISP’s permission as per the
contractual provisions.  Physical verification of Dandy Rolls at Mills which was
in practice earlier have been discontinued in view of the contractual obligations
of the suppliers and also due to the number and the geographical spread of
suppliers as well as the manpower constraints, it is very difficult to conduct
physical verification of Dandy Rolls of all the Mills regularly.”
51. Explaining the role of Dandy Roll in the production of stamps and stamp
papers, the Secretary, Ministry of Finance during evidence deposed as under:
“Dandy Roll is basically a cylindrical drum of metallic mesh which has a certain
watermark designed on it. While paper is being manufactured, this watermark is

19
created on that semi-finished paper. That is basically the purpose of Dandy
Rolls. At the moment, there are only two private companies that are making this.
Dandy Rolls made by these two private companies go to a number of private
paper mills which, in turn, manufacture paper utilising Dandy Rolls for water-
marking that paper. In the past there have been eleven such private paper mills,
which have been using Dandy Rolls made by these two manufacturers for
making paper. Here I would like to make a clear distinction between the types of
paper that come out of the Dandy Roll process. This is only for low security
paper that is allowed to be manufactured by the private paper mills using Dandy
Rolls.”…….For high value security paper, the ISP  procures paper…………..
from the security Paper Mill, at Hosangabad.”
52. The Secretary  added:
“There is no doubt that there is a danger in the sense that the two mills that
are making the Dandy Rolls are giving it to eleven other private mills who are,
in turn, making these low security paper and clandestinely they can make
more paper than what is supplied to the ISP. Besides, the security features
even on the low security paper are not just only the watermarking created by
the Dandy Rolls. There are some other security features as well, like the
security printing ink and such other things. Now, we have put in place a
system where the private paper mills, those who are authorised to make these
low security papers, are cleared first by the I.B. before they are put on panel
for making this paper. However, there is a danger of the paper mills
manufacturing more paper than what is supplied by the ISP. To that extent
there is a threat of leak. Although  it must be clear that the threat is not as
much as it is made out to be because the water marking created by the Dandy
Rolls is just not the only security feature. There are other security features as
well. In fact, during the process of investigations by the CBI of the papers
that had been seized, there has been no case of a paper made through this
process which has figured in the seizures which basically means that this has
not been the main cause of the failure.”
53. When asked to give suggestions with regard to checking the possibility of
fabrication of Dandy Rolls by the Private Mills and also to make the system fool-
proof, the Secretary, Ministry of Finance during evidence deposed as under:
“……….In this regard there are two suggestions. One is, of course, that we
have to put in place a system for defacement as well as destruction of Dandy
Rolls, which should be done in the presence of the officials of the ISP each time
the contracted supply of paper, is completed.  But even this is not foolproof
because the mills can make more than that before they call for it.  So, the only
foolproof way of doing this is to have all the papers required by the ISP made in
the Government control press.  At the moment, we are doing for high security
papers coming from Government control press, Hoshangabad.  So, the only
foolproof solution is that all the papers should come from Government control
press and therefore, either set up another press or in one of the existing press
add a new manufacturing line which will take care of this.”

20
B.3  Physical custody and verification of  Dandy Rolls
54. According to Audit, as per the documents maintained by ISP, 53 Dandy Rolls
were in the custody of nine paper mills, many of which are not manufacturing paper
for ISP for years.  ISP had not carried out physical verification of 21 Dandy Rolls after
1988-89 lying with seven Paper Mills. The last physical inspection  was carried out by
ISP in Titagarh Paper Mills, Kolkata in 1996, in which only 12 Dandy Rolls out of 26
were available.  Neither the 14 missing Dandy Rolls were traced nor the 12 that were
available, had been taken over by ISP despite no business with this mill for about
20 years.
55. The Committee desired to know the reasons for involving small scale industrial
units which did not have a separate license in the manufacture of Dandy Rolls and
whether any clause had been incorporated in the agreement with SSI Units that
misuse of Dandy Rolls by them will have criminal implications.  In a written reply the
Ministry have stated as under:
“From the available records of ISP , it is seen that only two Indian manufacturers
of Dandy Rolls have been supplying the Dandy Rolls with ISP watermark to
paper mills supplying paper to ISP.  They are, M/s. SWILL Limited, 27-A, Camac
Street, Calcutta [they were earlier known as M/s. Shalimar Wires India Ltd.,] and
M/s. Dandy Rolls India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore.  Obtaining Dandy Rolls for
manufacture of paper is the responsibility of paper manufacturer. ISP does not
enter into any agreement with the unit manufacturing Dandy Rolls. In the
agreement entered with the Supplier of paper, there are precluding clauses
whereby the Paper Supplier is restrained to use Dandy Rolls for any other
purpose other than stated in the agreement. As a further measure to improve
the control on Dandy Rolls, paper manufacturers are being asked to obtain an
undertaking from the Dandy Roll manufacturers that they would not produce
Dandy Roll of the watermark used by ISP for any other organization without the
express approval of ISP .”
 56. When asked as to why physical verification of Dandy Rolls had been
discontinued by ISP and whether steps have been taken to ensure that they are not
misused to produce counterfeits, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:
“Physical verification of Dandy Rolls by ISP has not been conducted on regular
basis. The verification was carried out in the years 1987-88, 1991, 1996, 2003 and
2005.  Now the mechanism has been put in place whereby inspection would be
carried out on half-yearly basis. It has been decided that henceforth Dandy
rolls will be defaced/destroyed after the completion of the ordered quantity of
the paper is fully supplied by the mills. Effective verification of Dandy Rolls
would be done thereby eliminating possibility of their misuse.”
57.  Enquired about the reasons for keeping  53 Dandy Rolls  in the custody of nine
Paper Mills,  when they were not manufacturing  papers for  ISP , for several years, the
Ministry in a note replied as under:
“The physical custody of Dandy Rolls remained with the Paper Mills as they
belonged to the mills. Mills retain Dandy Rolls for the supply of paper to ISP. All

21
the available Dandy Rolls would be inspected and defaced/destroyed in a
phased manner in the presence of the ISP representative/s. The names of the
Paper Mills as pointed out in the Audit Report were M/s. Titaghur Paper Mills,
Calcutta; M/s.Tribeni issues Ltd., Calcutta; M/s. Ballarpur Industries, Yamuna
Nagar; M/s. Supreme Paper Mills Calcutta; M/s. Circar Paper Mills Ltd., Nellor;
M/s. J.B. Paper Mills, New Delhi; M/s. Sidharth Paper Ltd., New Delhi;
M/s. Ansal Papers Ltd., New Delhi and M/s. Pudumjee Paper Mills, Pune.  Out
of these Mills, M/s. Pudumjee Paper Mills, Pune is still supplying paper to ISP .”
58. To a specific query of the Committee as to why ISP did not carry out physical
verification of 21 Dandy Rolls which were lying with seven paper mills after 1987-88,
the Ministry in a written note submitted as under:
“Physical verification of Dandy Rolls by ISP has not been conducted on regular
basis. The verification was carried out in the years 1987-88, 1991, 1996, 2003 and
2005.  A mechanism has now been put in place whereby inspection would be
carried out on half-yearly basis. It has been decided that henceforth Dandy
Rolls will be defaced/destroyed after the completion of the ordered quantity of
the paper is fully supplied by the mill. Effective verification of Dandy Rolls
would be done thereby eliminating possibility of its misuse. List of these mills
as pointed out in audit report were M/s. Ballarpur Industries, Yamuna Nagar;
M/s. Supreme Paper Mills Calcutta; M/s. Circar Paper Mills Ltd., Nellor; M/s.
J.B. Paper Mills, New Delhi; M/s. Sidharth Paper Ltd., New Delhi; M/s. Ansal
Papers Ltd., New Delhi and  M/s. Pudumjee Paper Mills, Pune.”
59. Enumerating the reasons for not taking over the possession of remaining
12 Dandy Rolls that were available in the Titagarh Paper Mills,  the Ministry stated as
under:
“The Titagarh Paper Mill was closed in 1983.  As per available records, the mill
was supposed to have 21 Dandy Rolls and not 26. Out of these 21 Dandy Rolls,
12 were verified in the year 1996 and only 9 Dandy Rolls were not verified.
Subsequently, the last verification, which was done on 18-08-2005, 16 Dandy
Rolls have been verified. Therefore, 5 Rolls could not be verified as they are not
properly stored and there were no personnel of the mill available to identify
Dandy Rolls of ISP, as the mill is closed.”
60. When asked about the changes that were envisaged to make the system fool-
proof  from  possible misuse and tampering of Dandy Rolls as they play a critical role
in the printing of stamps and stamp papers, the Ministry in a written reply submitted
as under:
“To prevent even the remotest chance of any misuse of Dandy Rolls
henceforth, the Dandy Rolls will be defaced after the ordered quantity is
completed by the paper supplier in each contract. This will be done in the
presence of ISP officials and suitable clause would be inserted in the terms and
conditions of the Future Supply Orders.”

22
61. Replying to another question as to how ISP would ensure that the suppliers of
Ink/Dye, etc. produce only the required quantities of ordered material and did not
supply the same to third parties, the Ministry of Finance in a written note stated as
under:
“The entire requirements of security ink/dye for printing of security features on
documents at ISP was met from supplies made by BNP Dewas, which is a
Central Government Organisation under Ministry of Finance.  Hence, keeping
the track of quantity produced and its accounting are taken care of by BNP,
Dewas.”
62. As regards prescribed norms fixed for  the consumption of Ink/Dye and paper,
the Ministry in a written note explained as under:
“Considering the very nature of security printing, it may not be possible to
lay rigid norms for consumption of paper, ink/dye, etc. Printing being done in
batches, non-uniformity in the shade of printing or other related security
features results in a considerable portion of product getting rejected. However,
the consumption of security papers are recorded systematically and the
wastages are worked out every month. The rejections are accounted for and
the rejected printed stuff is shredded and duly reconciled accounts are
maintained which clearly show the consumption and wastage.  Therefore, the
procedure of accounting of paper is considered to be appropriate and
adequate.”
V .  Supply and Dispatch Procedures
63. Audit review revealed that the procedure for dispatch of the stamp papers
suffered from shortcomings, which are pointers towards lower level of sensitisation
within ISP to the risks associated with the discrepant dispatch. While deficient control
over paper production, Dandy Rolls and disposal of machines entail risk of counterfeit,
loopholes in the printing, supply, dispatch and receipt procedures entail a risk of the
genuine security papers printed in ISP finding their way outside the Government
channel, which could be used for defrauding the Government treasuries.
A. Excess/Short Supply
64. According to Audit short supply and supply of stamps and stamp papers of
denominations other than indented or declared in the packing list is high-risk
deficiency that could point towards pilferage of the printed stamps and stamp
papers. ISP did not take remedial measures despite a number of instances and
complaints about the packets dispatched by it containing stamps of incorrect
denominations, excess and short supply. Sample check of documents relating to
different consignments in various states disclosed short supplies with aggregate
value of Rs. 1453.75 corer  i.e. Delhi (239.75 crore), Gujarat (332.71 crore), Haryana
(Rs. 1.00 crore), Kerala (Rs. 72.26 crore), Punjab (Rs. 0.13 crore) and Uttar Pradesh
(Rs. 807.90 crore) and excess supplies of stamps of value of Rs. 687.89 crore in six
States during 1996-2003 i.e.—Delhi (Rs.15.73 crore), Gujarat (Rs.132.41 crore),

23
Kerala (Rs.142.75 crore), Orissa (Rs.6.75 crore), Punjab (Rs.0.25 crore) and Uttar
Pradesh (Rs.390.00 crore).
65. When asked to explain the excess/short supply of stamps and stamp papers
to various indenting  parties, the Ministry of Finance in a written reply stated as
under:
“The cases of short/excess supply reported are very less in number compared
to the volume of supplies made by ISP.  Despite having proper counting
mechanism in place, such human errors in counting do occur. However, every
such discrepancy reported by the indentors is investigated by Central Stamps
Depot (CSD), Nashik. As per procedure followed by CSD, discrepancy reported
is communicated to Control Section of ISP for detailed investigation.  Control
Section, in turn, investigates the cases and submits an investigation Report.
On the basis of investigation Report furnished, the authorities reporting
discrepancy are informed by CSD. The specific cases highlighted by Audit
pertain to Treasuries/State Treasuries of different States/Union Territories for
the year 1996 to 2003. The responsibility in regard to shortages etc. lies with
them.”
 66. During evidence, the Committee, enquired about the reason for excess supply
of stamp papers, even though the indenting parties, namely States did not ask for it.
In response, Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs deposed as under:
“Basically, what happens is that at the time of dispatch, different State
Governments, at different points of time, make a request for additional supplies
because, maybe, from the time that they have placed the indent to the time that
the delivery is being made, they have reassessed the requirement and they
want stamps more of a particular denomination, etc. So, that is one of the
reasons why there is excess supply.  Sometimes, there is a crisis in some States
for different kinds of reasons.  There could be flood or any kind of special
situation.  Then, at the time of delivery, they ask for additional thing.  So, the
excess supply comes in.”
67. On being asked whether the demand has been made by the States/indenting
agencies, the Secretary (Economic Affairs) depose as under:
“These are all written requests given  at that time.  The indent comes in at a
particular point of time, which is written one.”
68. The Committee desired to know about the findings of the Central Stamps Depot
in respect of human errors that occurred while counting stamps and stamp papers for
their supply to various indenters.  In response , the Ministry  in a written note stated
as under:
“Wherever cases of short/excess supply of stamps/stamp papers are reported
by consignees, CSD initiates an inquiry through Control Section of ISP. The
findings of inquiry are conveyed to complainant. There are cases where
disciplinary action has been taken against the officials responsible for counting,
packing and dispatch for any laxity on their part. However, it may be pertinent

24
to mention that cases where short/excess supplies have been reported are
insignificant (less than 0.05 per cent during the period of special audit covering
the period from 1996-97 to 2003-04) with respect to the number of stamp papers
supplied by ISP.”
B. Discrepancy and Theft of Stamps Within India Security Press (ISP)
69. Audit review revealed that ISP did not investigate large number of cases of
discrepancies in figures of the quantity of stamps between the Control Section, which
was responsible for quality check on the shop floor and packing and the Central
Stamp Depot, which was responsible for custody and dispatch.  The result of sample
check  as pointed out by the Audit is indicated in the Table below:
Y ear Name of Stamp Issue Receipt Excess Face
Figure as per Receipt V alue
as per CSD  in CSD
Control
Section
1997-98 India Adhesive court 3,84,425 3,85,215 790 Rs. 3.16
fee stamp of Rs. 5/- of lakh
set 80
India Adhesive court
fee stamp of Rs. 20/-
of set 80 2,88,500 2,89,290 790 Rs. 12.64
lakh
2001-02 India Imprest Court 1,17,000 2,17,000 1,00,000 Rs. 50
fee stamp of Rs. 5,000/- crore
2003-04 India Adhesive court 18,68,200 18,72,200 4,000 Rs. 6.40
fee stamp of Rs. 2/- of  lakh
set 80
70. It has also been revealed by Audit that there were three cases of theft of stamps
from ISP shop floor with aggregate value of Rs. 1.17 crore. While two cases are
pending in the courts of law, in the third case involving theft of stamps valued at
Rs. 84.60 lakh, which took place in April 2002, the culprit was yet to be traced but the
case was closed.
71. When asked  as to why ISP had failed to investigate a large number of cases of
discrepancies in figures of the stamps supplied and received by two sections of ISP,
the Ministry in a written note stated as under:
“Dispatch of ISP and receipt at CSD is reconciled on a regular basis. Physical
verification of stocks is also conducted to ascertain the correctness of stock
and related accounts. The cases of discrepancy between dispatch figure of ISP
and receipt of stamps at CSD has been looked into and it has been observed
that in all such cases, the difference is due to “Sales Return” received in CSD

25
from consignees. “Sales Return” are the stamps, which are returned by the
consignees due to delivery of stamps of other denomination or refusal of
consignee to accept the consignment as it was found broken at the end of
consignee and are taken into account in the books of CSD. Therefore, the
figures at CSD are likely to be more than the figures of dispatch from ISP. As
mentioned, there are systems in place to ensure that regular reconciliation is
done between CSD and ISP as well as verification of stocks of CSD.”
72. When the Committee desired to know whether ISP had introduced electronic
counting machines to eliminate discrepancies while dispatching stamps and stamp
papers to indenters, the Ministry of Finance in a written note stated as under:
“To check the excess and short supply, at present, 100 per cent manual counting
is being done just before packing. The electronic counting machines have been
introduced for some higher denominations of Non-Judicial Stamps for sample
checking basis with effect from June 2005. No decision has been taken regarding
the use of electronic counting machines for all denominations of stamps/stamp
papers.”
73. When asked by the Committee to explain the reasons for the closure of the theft
case that took place in April 2002 which had led to a loss of Rs. 84.60 lakh, the
Ministry in a note replied as under:
“Case of theft of India Foreign Bill Stamps amounting to Rs.84.60 lakh is not
closed and the matter is being pursued with the police authorities. FIR No. 159/
2002 dated 29th April 2002 has already been lodged with the State Police.”
74. When asked  whether  only 3 cases of theft were reported  from  the shop floor
or were there any possibilities of unreported/undetected cases, the Ministry of Finance
informed the Committee in a written note as under:
“No, there were 4 cases of thefts at the shop-floor level. Apart from regular
conciliation of receipt and issue of stamps from C.S.D. by such Officers, the
“Verification and Vigilance Cell” of the Ministry of Finance also carry out physical
verification of stock of stamps and stamp papers etc. during the month of April
every year.  A team of Officers from Currency Note Press, Nashik Road (which
is an independent unit) also conducts physical verification of stock every year
in the month of October.”
75. During the evidence, the Committee enquired about the action taken by ISP
against the officials involved in the theft cases. In response, the Secretary, Ministry
of Finance deposed  as under:
“In all the four cases of theft, apart from whatever action has been taken by the
CBI, the departmental action was that the General Manager was suspended
first and arrested and also dismissed from service later. A few more employees
have been suspended/arrested.  In one or two cases, of course, the CBI has,
after due verification, have subsequently given a clean chit.  But the point is
that there has also been departmental action against whoever has been found
to be responsible for aiding and abetting the culprits.”

26
76. On being asked about  the steps taken by ISP to avoid  recurrence of such
thefts, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:
“The security set up in the ISP has been revamped. C.I.S.F. has been deployed in
place of the Departmental Security Organization (DSO) and the Maharashtra State
Police .”
C. Loss/Theft in Transit
77. Audit examination revealed that a large number of cases of loss/theft of the
stamp papers in transit through Railways came to the notice of ISP during 1995-2000.
The aggregate of the reported cases of loss/theft in terms of the value of stamps were
over Rs. 25 crore, with steady increase as under:
Year in which theft No. of Reported Cases Face V alue of
was Reported Stamps (Rs.)
1995-96 10 7,16,769
1996-97 16 1,97,81,934
1997-98 18 3,83,50,107
1998-99 25 6,10,27,250
1999-00 10 13,04,92,700
Total 79 25,03,68,760
However, sample check of documents in the treasuries of the respective States by
Audit showed loss of stamps worth of Rs. 181.52 crore, in transit, during 1992-93 to
2002-2003 in respect of  five States as under:
Sl. No. Name of the State Period Amount
(Rs. in crore)
1. Andhra Pradesh 1992-93 to 1998-99 6.81
2. Assam 1993-94 to 2002-03 146.66
3. Rajasthan 199 4-95 2.03
4. Uttar Pradesh 1993-94 to 2002-03 20.74
5. Tamilnadu 1992-93 to 1998-99 5.28
78. According to Audit, this suggests that either all cases of theft/loss in transit
were not reported to ISP, or the system of reconciliation of dispatch or actual receipt
of stamps was unreliable. Rather than being alive to the risk of fraud and counterfeit,
ISP generally assumed a legalistic posture in cases of short/incorrect supply and
loss/theft in transit reported to it by the States, taking a stand that under the rules, ISP
was not responsible for the discrepancies reported after the prescribed period or that

27
the consignments became property of the consignee, once these were dispatched,
etc. ISP introduced a system of collection of stamps by the representatives of the
indenters at Nashik with effect from October 1998.
79. When asked about the reasons for the  wide difference in the figures  relating
to  theft/loss of stamps as per the records of ISP and respective State Treasuries, the
Ministry in a written note stated as under:
“The cases of theft/loss of stamps, if any, are reported by State Treasuries to
I.S.P .  All such reported cases are recorded in the books of I.S.P.  The possible
reason for the difference in figures could be on account of non- reporting of
cases to ISP.”
80. On being asked about the action  taken by ISP in respect of the cases of loss/
theft reported by State Treasuries, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:
“As per the prevailing law of the country, loss/theft is investigated by State
Govt. agencies and necessary action is taken by them.  ISP’s cooperation is
sought with respect to providing technical assistance and giving evidence
etc.”
81. The Committee desired to know  whether there was any mechanism to know
about  the cases of theft/loss of stamps  that were not reported to ISP by State
treasuries and in the event of such cases of non-reporting  detected later what action
would ISP take against the defaulters. In response, the Ministry in a written note
stated as under:
“As a security printing organisation, it is not in the mandate of ISP to take any
action in the cases of loss/theft of stamps not taking place within the premises
of ISP. Unless reported by the consignee, ISP will not be in a position to come
to know of it.  Cases of theft/loss at treasuries as well as in transit are dealt with
by the state authorities concerned.  With the introduction of the new procedure
of dispatch of stamps/stamp papers through state representative along with
armed escort, no case of theft in transit has been reported so far.”
82. To a query as to  whether the Ministry of Finance had evolved a system of
transportation of Security documents from ISP to various nodal centres under
appropriate Security cover, namely CISF etc.,  the Ministry in a written note stated as
under:
“To prevent the increasing incidence of thefts and  pilferage  enroute after the
dispatch of consignments by rail/posts,  from India Security Press, the Ministry
of Finance decided during 1998 to change the procedure for dispatch of materials
to indentors. From October, 1998 onwards the collection of materials is done by
the indentors from the CSD, Nashik through their representatives with armed
escort. After this procedure became fully operational from 1999-2000 onwards,
there is no reported case of theft in transit. The question or reverting back to
the old system where the Ministry of Finance takes the responsibility of
transporting materials to indentors, does not, therefore, arise.”

28
VI. Surveillance/Vigilance System
83. Audit scrutiny had revealed that ISP did not have an institutionalised system
of surveillance/vigilance for this high risk and vulnerable operation, except for a
Forgery Detection Cell, whose task was limited to verification of the genuineness of
the stamps, whenever a complaint was received from the indenters or investigating
agencies. Even this operation was approached in a routine manner, limiting its role to
mere reporting of the findings. ISP delayed the verification of the genuineness of the
stamps on the referred cases and did not extend the scope of investigation to the
possibility of counterfeit on a large scale. Many cases remained un-investigated for
years, sometimes on the ground of non-receipt of the examination fee of a mere
Rs. 100 per document.   The following Table highlights the number of cases received
for examination by ISP and the number of reports issued as well as the number of
outstanding cases from 1995 to 2003.
Y ear No. of Cases No. of Reports No. of
Received for Examination Issued Outstanding Cases
1995 75 69 6
1996 73 68 5
1997 92 85 7
1998 90 88 2
1999 133 124 9
2000 138 134 4
2001 139 125 14
2002 200 185 15
2003 249 170 79
Total 1189 1048 141
84. Audit also revealed that a large number of the cases referred for examination
of genuineness of the stamps pertained to Uttar Pradesh (241), Maharashtra (294),
Andhra Pradesh (156), New Delhi (140) and Tamil Nadu (57). Out of the total 69,648
documents of suspected counterfeit stamps consisting of non-postal stamps and
stamp papers, the examination by the fraud detection unit disclosed fake stamps in
50313 documents.
85. According to Audit ISP ought to have approached the subject of suspected
authenticity of the stamps with the attendant risk perception rather than approaching
it from the mechanical point of view of reporting the findings and examination fee
alone.  In almost all cases the references were received from Government Agencies
and, therefore, refusal to undertake examination of suspected security documents for
non-receipt of the examination fees betrayed total lack of awareness of the risk.
Besides, ISP did not set up its own surveillance and vigilance system in coordination

29
with the State Governments and other users by way of drawing of random samples
from the users or the used stamps and appropriate intelligence system in the light of
the vulnerability of the system to abuse by counterfeiting.
86.  According to audit, the status of setting up of vigilance-cum-surveillance unit
in ISP consequent upon Ministry’s decision after the discovery of the counterfeit
stamps could not be verified by them in the absence of a response from ISP.
87. On being asked about the status of setting up a vigilance cum surveillance
unit in ISP , the Ministry in a written reply  stated that the Vigilance-cum-Surveillance
Cell had already been set up which had started functioning with effect from
1-03-2005.  However, this cell is concerned only with the activities within the ISP,
Nashik Road and has nothing to do with intelligence gathering and surveillance all
over the country as that function is the concern of Central/State Intelligence-cum-
surveillance agencies.
88.  When the Committee desired to know whether ISP is exploring the possibility
of setting up of its own surveillance and vigilance system in coordination with the
State Governments and other users in the light of vulnerability of the system to abuse
by counterfeiting, the Ministry in a written note replied as under:
“No.  Since, the investigative role of handling counterfeiting matters rests with
the State and Central Surveillance/Vigilance Agencies, and  since ISP is
concerned only with the task of printing various security documents, the
question of setting up ISP’s own surveillance and vigilance system did not
arise.”
89. When enquired about the reasons for several cases remaining un-investigated
for years by the Detective Cell of ISP, the Ministry in a written note stated as
follows:
“Investigation is not the responsibility of ISP.  Cases are only sent to ISP for
expert opinion and are dealt by the Detection Cell. To ensure that only the
genuine cases are sent to Forgery Detection Cell of ISP, a procedure has been
laid down that the request for investigation should accompany along with
the inspection fee. The cases that were received along with the fee were
investigated and reported upon. Other cases got delayed due to non-
compliance of the procedure. Further, speedy investigations also depend on
the priority accorded to the case. For example, CBI cases are given priority
over other routine cases.”
90. During evidence, the Committee enquired whether the genuiness of the
complaints regarding suspected security documents/instruments were looked into
by ISP, even though they are not accompanied by requisite examination fees.  In
response, Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs deposed as under:
“They have not been examined because no fee has come.”
91. The Committee enquired about the steps taken by the Ministry to prevent
circulation of fraudulent and counterfeits stamps and stamp papers in the market as

30
detected by the Forgery Detection Unit of ISP, the Ministry in a written note replied
as under:
“The documents seized by Police, Judicial Authorities, Banks, Income Tax etc.
are sent to ISP to confirm their genuineness or otherwise.  As per Section 292
CrPC the General Manager, ISP or his representative, is the Central Government
Authority to certify whether the said paper is genuine or not. The Forgery
Detection Cell of ISP performs this role. Thus, it plays a limited role of ascertaining
the genuineness of the documents presented to it by various investigating
agencies like State Police, CBI. Reports of the cases received from States and
other agencies where forgery in the documents are detected have been also
been sent to CBI.  Investigation of cases of forged stamps is done by State
Governments and agencies of State Government take necessary action on
circulation and use of Stamps at different levels. To prevent circulation of
fraudulent stamps/stamp papers, Treasury and Revenue officials of State
Government have been trained by ISP about the security features and to identify
forged documents.”
92. When enquired about the findings of the investigation conducted by the
Detection Cell of ISP, the Ministry of Finance in a written reply submitted as under:
“The findings concluded on the basis of examination of documents received
from various agencies from all over India were as follows:
(i) In  cases of Non-Judicial Stamps, all samples   were found 100 per cent
forged; (ii) in the case of Revenue Stamps, Court fee Stamps and Fiscal Stamps,
it was found that 99 per cent were forged.”
93. The following are some of the prominent cases received from different
investigating agencies of Government of India, and investigated by Forgery Detection
Cell, ISP:
ISP Number of T ype of Received Findings of
Stamp Case/ Documents Documents from  Examination of
Received on Received for Received the  Documents
Examination Received
12 3 4 5
No. 8392(08) 1003 Non-Judicial CBI, SIU, XVII, 100% forged
/4-6-2001 Stamp Paper  Lodhi Road, [Non-genuine
of Rs. 100/- & New Delhi. paper non
Rs. 500/- genuine printing.]
Denominations
with printing
material and
film positive etc.
No. 8393(9)/ 11 Nos. 17” Demand CBI, SPL. 100% Tampered
16-6-2001 Draft INVESTIGA- [Originally ISP
TION CELL, Supplied genuine

31
LUCKNOW. paper  and genuine
Printing  was Altered by
way of forged
Printing.]
No. 8574 1689 + 140 Non-Judicial SIT, Pune 100% Forged.
(190)/ Nos. Printing Stamps, Revenue [Non-genuine
7-8-2002 Plates + 254 Stamps,  Court positives and
Nos. Negative   Fee Stamps  negatives].
and Positives  and Fiscal Stamps
No. 9071(98)/ 1506 Insurance CBI, Anveshan 99% Forged
26-5-2004 Stamps  Special Parisar, [Non genuine paper
Adhesive Stamps Charlmli, non genuine printing]
Revenue Stamps Bhopal. 1% Genuine.
No. 9083(110)/ 1661 Broker’s Note CBI, EOU-VII, 92% Forged [Non
9-6-2004 Stamp of New Delhi. genuine paper non
Rs. 100/- & genuine printing]
Rs. 500/-  8% Genuine.
VII. Physical Security and Disposal of Machinery
94. Audit observed that the physical security within ISP, which ought to have
multi-level reinforced security system, had been lax. While Maharashtra police
managed the security at the gates, the departmental security personnel were
responsible for security at the shop floor.  Central Industrial Security Force replaced
the Maharashtra police at the gate from October 2002 and the department security
personnel at the shop floor from September 2004.  However, even after introduction of
Central Industrial Security Force, many security related recommendations by the
Intelligence Bureau were yet to be implemented as of March 2004. Some of these
included upgradation of the access control and installation of electronic access control
system, creation of apex level security committee, frisking of all employees and visitors,
etc.
95. The Committee having observed that there was much delay in handing over the
security of ISP to CISF, enquired about the current status of action taken by the ISP
on the security related recommendations made by  Intelligence Bureau. In response,
Ministry of Finance in a written reply submitted as under:
“The total security (inside and peripheral) of India Security Press, Nashik Road
has been entrusted to Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) with effect
from September 2004. The Intelligence Bureau (I.B.) had made total
38 recommendations, during their visit. Out of these recommendations, 35 have
already been implemented.  The positions in respect of 3 pending
recommendations are:
• Watch Tower: C.P.W.D.  is   likely  to   complete the   work  before
December 2005.
123 4 5

32
• Installation of C.C.T.V . System: The Supply order has already been issued
and the system is likely to be installed by   the   end of year 2005.
• Shifting of Trade Union Offices: Shifting is likely   to take some time
because new building is to be constructed. Expected time of completion
is Dec. 2006.”
A. Negligence in Disposal of  the Machinery
96. Audit review revealed that ISP was negligent in disposal of the equipment
and machinery used for printing and other operations in printing of stamp paper.  It
did not dismantle them on ‘as is where is basis’ with a view to eliminating any risk
of their re-assembly for counterfeit operation, precluding the same person/firm from
buying the condemned machinery of different types used in printing and other
associated operations etc. Far from this, ISP actually facilitated knowledge of
assembly of the machines by permitting up to 10 representatives of the successful
bidder, M/s Unique Enterprises to witness the dismantling of the machines before
their disposal, for two months, in two spells during June-September, 1998. ISP was
also negligent in the sale of the condemned printing machine and perforating machine
to the same firm, M/S Unique Enterprises at different points of time between June
1998 and September 1998.
97.  When the Committee enquired as to why the machines of ISP were disposed
off without dismantling, the Ministry of Finance in a note stated as under:
“Disposal of Machines was done on “as is where is” basis. Only bigger
machines were dismantled so that it can be taken out from the doors of the
shop. Other machines have been sold as it is. The machines such as
Perforating Machines  were already available with private security printers in
India, who were supplying commemorative postage stamps to Department of
Posts, Government of India. For the disposal of machinery, procedure
prescribed in General Financial Rules has been followed. However, this case
is already being investigated by CBI.”
98. On being asked whether any procedure was laid down by ISP for disposal of
such machines, the Ministry in a written note replied as under:
“Keeping in view the sensitivity and security involved, a new procedure for
disposal of obsolete machinery has been introduced according to which  its
disposal is done after converting it into scrap.”
99. The Committee during the course of examination of Audit findings were inclined
to conclude that by permitting 10 representatives of the successful bidder, M/s Unique
Enterprises to witness the dismantling of machines before their disposal, ISP had
facilitated production of counterfeit   stamp paper by the successful bidder.  When
asked about the reasons for permitting the  bidder to witness dismantling of the
machines, the Ministry in a written note replied as under:
“As per the terms and conditions of the Tender Notice No. 5/97 at S. Nos. 11, 12
and 13, the firms’ representatives were permitted to witness the dismantling of

33
the machines to ensure that firm satisfies itself that all the parts of machine are
made available to them.  Accordingly, the representatives from M/s Unique
Enterprises were permitted to witness the dismantling. As regards action to be
taken against officials, matter is being investigated by CBI.  Relevant clauses of
tender as mentioned above are reproduced as under:
  x x x x x x
11. The successful tendered/purchaser will have to arrange for shifting and
lifting tackles and labours during the working hours (days) of the Press in the
presence of India Security Press accredited representative from the place where
they are stored.
12. Machines in the running conditions will be dismantled if necessary and
made available for shifting and lifting from Ex-GCD area by the Workshop
personnel. Transport shall be arranged by the successful tenderers.
13. Representatives of the purchaser will be allowed to witness the dismantling,
if desired. No claim of any kind about dismantled parts or their genuineness will
be entertained after dismantling.”
VIII. Issues relating to Stamp Papers Scam
100.  During  evidence  the Committee enquired about the status of investigation
by CBI into the Stamp Papers Scam as also the number of cases that were filed by CBI
relating to the scam. In response the representative of CBI deposed as under:
“We started reacting to this whole information and also received certain cases
from the State Governments way back in 2003 itself. Even before 48 cases were
given to us by the hon. Supreme Court in March, 2004, we already had 13 cases
and 3 cases were added later. These cases included two very prestigious cases
and one of them was related to ISP and in that, while conducting searches and
after conducting preliminary investigation, we even arrested the then GM, Mr.
Ganga Prasad. He was later dismissed from service also. Apart from that, we
also registered a case against certain employees of RPF for having connived
with Telgi and his gang members for pilfering genuine stamps in transit, which
were supposed to have reached the States. They were stolen in transit. It went
on for certain years and the value was running in crores of rupees. There, we
arrested seven RPF personnel, including the then Commandant (a senior officer).
In that, while investigating the RPF case, we found that the entire assessment,
whether it is done on the part of the indenting units or on the part of the ISP, is
being done just on the paper value of the stamps. The loss is counted only in
terms of paper value whereas whosoever is stealing or pilfering it, is actually
using it as real financial instrument………This one RPF case is only a test case.
There were several such instances happening around that time and not only
the stamp paper case. You must be aware that Kisan Vikas Patra and other
valuable documents have also been stolen from Railway wagons, but we took
this as a test case because this involved Abdul Karim Telgi himself. The RPF
case is about to be charge-sheeted. We were awaiting sanction for prosecution.

34
The Ministry of Railways has been kind enough to give the sanction recently
and during the course of this month, the case will be charge-sheeted.”
The witness added:
“Though the allegations in the case of ISP were very vast, for the sake of
probe, we focussed on three allegations. This did not exclude other
allegations, but just to have a systematic probe, we focussed on three
allegations. One of them included the dandy rolls. W e found that there was
no physical verification carried, but unfortunately, no mala fide  could be
attributed to a particular person because the system was simply not in
practice. So, in one of our cases, we have this problem because we will need
evidence beyond just supervisory or administrative lapses, to prosecute
the person. So, for dandy roll, we have found that though it was the property
of ISP, it was in the custody of private firms. Obviously, such an arrangement
is fraught with inherent  dangers.…It is very difficult to pinpoint whether it
was misused by any set of criminals. The second allegation we found was
the callous way in which the machinery was disposed of through auction.
This allegation is substantiated. We will be filing a charge-sheet soon. The
third allegation which we took was basically on the basis of our interaction
with the Karnataka Stamp IT. They, in their Report, also mentioned about
the artificial  suppression of supply so as to help the criminals. Now this
was a very very serious allegation. This allegation has taken a lot of time
and on the face of it, it is very difficult to say whether there was any
connivance. But since the matter is still under probe, I would not be in a
position to comment. One thing which has taken so long was that the day
we got those 48 cases, we wanted to conduct a kind of a holistic probe.
Even, we have linked the ISP probe with the investigation of other cases.
Out of 48 cases, we also took some cases which were non-Telgi in nature.
This shows that certain other gangs were also there who were operating
and selling counterfeit stamps. What set Telgi apart from them was the scale
of sophistication and the massive geographical spread. That is where the
CBI scored over other investigating  agencies and detected Telgi’s criminal
network, spread over 71 firms/175 officers and 124 bank accounts. If you
look at the value of the seizure, I am confining my statistics to 48 cases and
it is a little premature to say whether the entire scam was of Rs.30,000 or
Rs.50,000 crore. But the fact remains that what was seized was of Rs.3,300
crore. Out of these 48 cases, one case of Karnataka has already ended in
conviction and out of the remaining cases, nearly 29 cases have been fully
disposed of. Telgi’s trial is being conducted through video conferencing
because he is sick and there are also security implications involved. The
trial has commenced in most of the cases. He is being produced digitally
before the Courts located at Mumbai, Delhi, at Bangalore and Indore. We
have requested the Government of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu to also
start  the video-conferencing system because 48 cases which I am referring
to are related not only to one or two States but to 11 States.”

35
 101. While stating that the system of inspection and check at the State level  had
simply failed , the CBI representative  during evidence deposed as under:
“We found in one of the States that the LIC which is one of the bulk buyers
(these bulk buyers were identified by Telgi through market surveys)  did not
buy any stamps from the treasury for nearly a decade. It bought stamps from
the stamp vendors outside the States.”
102. When asked whether more cases have come to their knowledge, the
representative of CBI clarified that in all there are 64 cases relating to the Stamp
Papers Scam.
103. The Committee desired to know whether the stamp papers scam that broke out
in the country a few years ago was in anyway  a result of the  loopholes that existed
in the system of production, supply and dispatch of stamp papers by ISP. In response,
the Ministry of Finance in a written reply stated as under:
“It has been seen from the cases investigated so far, that there has been no
direct nexus between the ISP, Nashik and the scamsters. Furthermore, the papers
and inks used by scamsters for printing of counterfeit stamps and stamp papers
are distinctly different from the actual security paper and inks used by ISP . ISP
disposed off discarded machines through normal disposal procedure, which
have been subsequently found to be used by the scamsters for printing of
some of the counterfeit stamps/stamp papers. The possibility of access to such
discarded equipments has now been eliminated by amending the machinery
disposal procedure.”
104.  During the course of evidence, the Committee learnt that the then Chief
Minister of Karnataka had written letters to the Union Government alerting them
about the circulation of fake stamp papers and to take remedial steps thereon.  When
asked as to whether Ministry of Finance was aware of the said letters and if so, what
were the steps taken by the Government to curb the circulation of fake /counterfeit
stamps, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:
“On receipt of the letter dated 11.7.2002 from the Chief Minister, Karnataka,
the Director, Intelligence Bureau and Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs
were requested to initiate intelligence surveillance over ISP and CNP , Nashik
and detect the nexus with ISP officials vide the Department’s letter dated
19th July, 02 and 13
th
 August, 2002 respectively.  This was required in view of
the fact that the letter from Karnataka CM did not mention any names of the
concerned officials and only hinted at the suspect liaison of some of the
officials.  Information was also sought from IB vide this department’s letter
dated 9
th
 April, 2003 for reports regarding the nexus of ISP officials with the
counterfeiters. The Head of SIT, Karnataka had also been requested to send
a report regarding involvement of ISP officials. The Finance Minister vide
D.O. letter dated 5.3.03 also informed the Chief Minister, Karnataka of the
action being taken by the Ministry and drew his attention to the fact that the
report from SIT, Karnataka had not yet been received. Ultimately, the report
was received in May, 2003.

36
The Government of India has taken various steps to curb the circulation of
fake/ counterfeit stamp papers which include:
• Indenters (States/UTs) were asked to raise realistic indents. Ministry
conducted meetings with State Secretaries.
• To curb unrealistic indents, States have been asked to deposit 30 per cent
of the value of indent as advance.
• Indenters have been requested to give rolling indent of three years and
half yearly supply schedule for better production planning.
• To prevent theft in transit, States are asked with effect from 1998 to detail
their representatives along with armed escorts to take personal delivery
of stamps/stamp papers.
• Enhanced Security features in Non-Judicial Stamp Papers and Adhesive
stamps to eliminate counterfeiting were finalized in 2003.
• In principle decision to encourage dematting of stamp papers taken on
18.12.2003.
• The definition of “stamps” has been revised through an amendment in
section 2, after clause (25) of the Indian Stamps Act, 1899 so as to include
any mark, seal or endorsement by any agency or person duly authorised
by the State Government, which includes an adhesive or impressed stamp,
for the purposes of duty chargeable under the said Act. By this amendment
State Government may adopt dematting, franking and any other method
decided by them for collection of stamp duty.
• Security clearance of the suppliers from IB has been introduced with
effect from. November 2003.
• Security set up, both internal and external has been strengthened. CISF
has been inducted with effect from 16
th October 2002.
• Decision to set up Vigilance-cum-Surveillance Cell at ISP had already
taken on 17.9.2003.
• Decision to dispose of obsolete security printing machinery and
equipment as scrap taken on 24.7.2003.
105. In a written note the Committee were informed about  the following systemic
and procedural improvements that were brought about by Ministry of Finance / ISP in
the aftermath of stamp paper scam :
“The steps which have been taken to reduce the possibility of forged stamps
being circulated in the market are:
• New Non- Judicial Stamps and Stamp Papers bear a unique Serial Number
and name of the State: The stamp paper printed for one particular State
can be used only in that State. By the introduction of unique Serial
Numbers on the stamp paper, Treasuries can keep track of the stamps
issued from their chest.

37
• Several enhanced security features in the paper and printing introduced:
These security features will not only make it very difficult for the forgers
to printing stamps/stamp papers of identical integrity, but will also render
them ineffective in the absence of technical know-how to do this
specialised job.
• Personal delivery of stamps from ISP under armed escort:  To avoid
theft in transit and circulation of such stamps by antisocial elements, it
was decided to ask the State Governments’ representatives to come
personally along with their own-armed escort and collect the consignments
from ISP . After the introduction of this system, no case of theft in transit
has been reported at ISP.
• Curbing of inflated indents due to 30 per cent advance payment along
with indent: Indenters have been asked to deposit 30 per cent advance
along with indents. Due to this, indents have come down drastically.
• Close interactions with representatives of the State Governments/UTs:
From the year 2003 onwards, there has been close interaction with
representatives of the State Governments/UTs whereby representatives
of Treasuries are invited and they are provided with some elementary
input about the security features of the stamp papers along with educating
them to raise realistic indents. This training has become a regular feature
and officials from State Governments are attending this training.
• Dematting of stamp papers: The proposal of collection of stamps duty
by switching over from paper to dematting has already been considered
in the meetings convened by the Ministry of Finance with the State
Revenue Secretaries. After the introduction of this method, the
requirement of stamp papers will come down drastically, so are the chances
of forgers attempting to supply counterfeit stamp and stamp papers.”
106. The Committee asked the Ministry to give their views/suggestions and the
steps that are required to be taken up immediately for preventing possible leakage of
sensitive information with regard to indent, printing and dispatch of stamps and
stamp papers etc. The Ministry of Finance in a written note stated that they have
already undertaken major steps which are as under:
• functioning of Vigilance Cell at India Security Press, (manned by I.B.
personnel);
• security entrusted to a professionally trained organization in industrial
security i.e. C.I.S.F.;
• random rigorous search introduced before the personnel leave the Press;
• introduction of Visitor’s pass with their photo issued through computerised
system;

38
• the access to the Computer Cell is also limited to the concerned persons
only and their record of entry and exit are also maintained; and C.C.T.V . is
also being installed for round-the-clock surveillance and  monitoring.
• Hence, adequate steps have been taken to prevent any leakage of sensitive
information. In view of the measures taken it is felt that as per the present
threat perception, these measures will take care to prevent any possible
leakage of information.”
IX. Dematerialisation  (Demat) of Stamps and Stamp Papers
107.  During evidence, the Committee enquired about the role played by
Dematerialisation  and whether it was the only way to stop problem of fake/ counterfeit
stamps/ stamp papers.  In response the Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs
deposed as under:
“…….at the outset, I would like to clarify that de-matting does not connate the
same kind of system that is in vogue for de-matting of shares.  De-matting
basically means moving away physically from the material form.  So if you have
a system of cash instead of stamps, that could also be considered as de-matting.
In fact, de-matting could be, as I said, collection of cash or it could be a
combination of both.  In fact, Andhra Pradesh as well as Karnataka have tried to
put in place a combination of the two.  Basically what we are doing is that for
certain small value, stamps are made mandatory and above that it is a system of
cash.   So, both the features are there as far as moving away from stamp duty is
concerned.  To sum up, basically we are in favour of moving away from the
reliance on stamps.  We are trying to persuade the State Governments to do so.
Some State Governments have already taken steps to move away and the others
are being persuaded to do so.”
The Witness added:
“De-matting basically does not imply that we need to go through the procedure
as we do so for buying and selling of shares.  De-matting is a thing where
stamps are not insisted on in physical form.  Take for instance, franking.  Now
for any document to be registered, one needs to go to the Sub-Registrar’s
Office.  So instead of the document being on stamp paper, at the Sub-Registrar’s
Office some franking could be done.  So that itself would be de-matting.  It is
not in the sense that normally it is understood in terms of transfer of shares.
So, I think there are various ways which one can do.  As I said, a couple of
States have already tried it and they have got a system of part stamps and
part cash.”
108. The Ministry of Finance had furnished the following note on the current
status of the proposed system for dematerialisation of stamps and stamp papers:
“Dematting is a process whereby stamp duty may be collected by modes other
than stamps/stamp papers. There are several ways in which dematting can be
introduced. These include deposit of cash through challans of banks/treasuries.

39
State Governments have to adopt the system most suited to their ground realities.
In this regard the State of Andhra Pradesh uses stamp papers only up to the
denomination of Rs.100/- and the rest is in cash whereas Karnataka has
completely done away with the use of Stamp papers.  Other State Governments
are examining the proposed system.”
109. The Ministry  added :
“The proposal to go for dematerialized form of stamp duty collection was
approved by the Government on 28.02.2004. Meetings with the State Revenue
Secretaries and Inspector-General (Registration & Stamps) held on 22.12.2003,
4.3.2004 and 2.9.2004 also stresses on doing away with physical use of stamps/
stamp papers and subsequently switching over to dematerialised form of
stamp duty collection. One of the ways of dematting is through electronic
form of stamps. As a pilot project, Ministry of Finance has appointed, IFCI
Limited (IFCI) as Consultant for rendering the specific advisory services in
this mode. The proposed system of dematting envisages implementation of
Stamp Duty Administration in selected cities. The selected Central Record-
keeping Agency (CRA) would incur Capital and Operational Expenditure to
ensure adequate and appropriate logistics in the specific cities for its successful
implementation.  In lieu of the services which, CRA is expected to provide to
the State, the designated CRA will be paid pre-approved charges. It will be
decided through competitive bid process, and same will be payable on per
transaction basis. The C-SDAS (Computerized- Stamp Duty Administration
System) would initially be introduced on a pilot basis in 12 to 13 cities within
a short period. The entire capital cost would be borne initially by the
Government of India. States are free to join the system or introduce similar
systems in their jurisdiction.  The IFCI has already initiated the bid process
management for selection of Central Record -keeping Agency (CRA) to provide
for Advisory Services for alternative options and solutions for Stamp Paper
Registration.  The process is nearing completion and the Government would
take a decision regarding selection of CRA shortly.”
110. As regards  the feedback received from the States in connection with the
implementation of dematting of stamps/stamp papers, the Ministry  in a written note
submitted as under:
“The responses of some of the States are as under:
• The Government of Bihar is considering computerisation of its Registration
Offices on Karnataka pattern with the assistance of Electronics
Development Corporation of India Limited on BOT basis. However the
Government of Bihar does not plan to associate itself with the pilot project
proposed by the IFCI.
• The Government of West Bengal has sought further details for
understanding the proposal. Their requests have been forwarded to the
IFCI for providing the necessary information.

40
• The Deputy Inspector General of Registration and Superintendent of
Stamps, Chhattisgarh, Raipur have requested for furnishing further details
on the Scheme as well as the proposed action plan. The IFCI were advised
to get in touch with the Government of Chhattisgarh in this regard and
furnish the necessary clarifications as desired by them.
• The Financial Commissioner & Principal Secretary to Government of
Haryana, Revenue Department has informed that the State of Haryana is
not willing to adopt the proposed Stamp Duty Administration System for
the time being.  They have further stated that this Ministry will be apprised
if the State Government decides to adopt it at later stage.”

OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
111. The India Security Press (ISP), Nashik, was set up in 1924 as an industrial
establishment of the Government of India under the Ministry of Finance (Currency
and Coinage Division). It is considered to be the only organisation in India and one of
the few in the world where a wide variety of security and non-security papers are
printed and supplied. The security papers consist of postal stamps, judicial and non-
judicial stamps, cheque books for Reserve Bank and State Bank of India, saving
certificates, postal orders, passports, promissory notes and other security documents
required by the Central/State and Union Territory Governments, Public Sector
Undertakings and Local Bodies. In addition to postal stamps of various denominations,
India Security Press produces 25 categories of stamps and stamp papers in
212 denominations.  The non-security documents comprise of welfare stamps, non-
MICR Cheques, and railway warrants etc.  In so far as India Security Press is
concerned, the value of these security and non-security documents is limited to their
cost of production, which are realised from the indenters.  For the indenting entities
i.e. for the Union and State Governments, the security and non-security documents
are the financial instruments of Revenue. Thus, for the indenting entities, the
security papers are the money worth their face value.
112. The India Security Press receives quarterly indents from the State
Governments, Union Territories etc., for supply of stamp papers of various categories
and denominations.  As per the extant arrangement in ISP, the consolidation of the
indents and supply of stamp papers is managed by its Central Stamp Depot (CSD).
Based on the print requisition by the CSD, the Warrant Section issues print warrants
to the Production Section.  However, during 1996-97 to 2003-04 against the
cumulative indent of 277.22 crore of stamp paper sheets, the production and supply
were 127.83 and 118.32 crore sheets respectively.  The shortfall in supply with
reference to indent was 158.89 crore sheets and the percentage of shortfall in
production and supply to the indents were 53.89 and 57.32 per cent respectively.
Explaining the reason for ISP’s inability to meet the demand raised in the indents,
the Ministry informed the Committee that indents placed by indenters were very
erratic, fluctuating between 52 crore to 18 crore per year and it was difficult to plan
production according to such abnormal fluctuations in the indents. In addition to the
above, there are other constraints such as old machinery, lack of availability of raw
materials in time, lengthy purchase procedure leading to delay in timely receipt of
raw materials, etc.
113. The Committee find that the total indents in terms of number of sheets varied
over a wide range of 18.10 crore to 52.82 crore sheets per year during the period
1996-1997 to 2003-2004 and there was no evidence to suggest that ISP had analysed
the reasons for such wide fluctuations in the indents in consultation with the
indenters.  The Ministry have informed the Committee that ISP undertakes printing
41

42
on orders from various State Governments/Union Territories and Central
Government Ministries/Offices and it is difficult for it to undertake studies on all
India basis to find out the reasons for abnormal fluctuations in the indents.  The
Committee were further informed that analysis of  the indents received during the
last nine years indicate that there was no pattern and they appear to have been raised
in an ‘ad-hoc’ manner. Even when the full supplies were not met against the indents
of a particular year, in the subsequent year the indents did not increase in the same
proportion. Instead, in most of the cases, it had gone down that too without any
consistent pattern.
114. With a view to ensure that the States raise realistic indents, the Ministry of
Finance have decided that  from 2004 onwards, 30 per cent cost of the indented
material should be deposited as an advance by the indenters. Indents received without
advance money would be treated as unconfirmed indents and ISP will not accord any
priority to such indents from 2005-06.  However, the Committee find the new system
to be a non- starter which can be gauged from the fact that  only 12 States/Union
Territories have remitted the advance payment during the Financial Year
2005-2006 and the   remaining 16 States viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnatka,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh
have not yet complied with the new system.  According to the Ministry of Finance, the
major reason for non-compliance of States to the new arrangement is the reported
non-availability of budget in some States for release of advance payment.  While
some States have asked for performa invoice for the advance payment other States
have not responded to their request so far.
115. According to the Ministry, with the introduction of procedure of calling for
30 per cent advance amount against the indents, the indents have come down very
drastically from around 50 crore to 14 crore sheets in a year which seems to indicate
that State Governments used  to submit inflated and unrealistic indents.  Though the
Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry to curb erratic indents by
way of introduction of a system of payment of advance of the material to be indented,
the fact remains that it is only after Audit have taken up the review of ISP, the
Ministry have become alive to the problem  and decided as late as in 2004 to introduce
the system. With a view to curtail and curb erratic indents by various indenting
agencies, the Committee recommend that India Security Press should set up an
institutional mechanism to rationalise the indents received from various entities
and also introduce a system of coordination with indenters to address the issue of
erratic and inflated indents by setting up a printing and supply plan consistent with
the indents. However, at the same time it should also be ensured that for want of
payment of 30 per cent advance, States do not place low indents so that it could lead to
a situation of scarcity in the market which could be exploited by the unscrupulous
elements.  The Committee also urge upon the Ministry to examine the feasibility of
introducing a comprehensive and transparent information system in coordination
with the State Governments and other indenting entities on one hand and the Finance
Ministry on the other for exchanging/sharing the information relating to indents so
that the possibility of shortages of stamp papers could be eliminated.

43
116. The Committee are constrained to point out that the actual production of
stamp papers in terms of sheets disclosed that it did not have any relationship with
the indent.  There was  a wide variation in the annual production varying between
8.77 crore to 20.66 crore sheets.  During the eight years period, i.e. from 1996 to
2004, India Security Press cumulatively produced  127.83 crore sheets against
the total indents of 277.23 crore sheets, which is only 46 per cent of the indents.
Analysis of Category and denomination-wise production of stamps over the period
from 1995 to 2003 confirmed that there was no co-relation between indent and
production as well as indent and supply. Moreover, the production was consistently
lower than the indent and the ISP did not bother to increase production despite
large unmet indents.  The Ministry of Finance have however contended that
production and supply were more or less consistent over years.  Because of wide
fluctuation in indents it was impracticable to enhance installed capacity all of a
sudden and that too when there was no certainty that demand would continue to
remain in the coming years.  The Ministry have further informed the Committee
that on analysis of production capacity of ISP it had been observed that current
requirement of indents can be met with the existing capacity and therefore, at
present, there is no proposal to enhance the installed capacity. Since dematting is
under active consideration, the requirement of stamp papers is likely to reduce
significantly.  Though the Committee appreciate the Ministry’s view point that it
would be difficult for ISP to increase the installed capacity all of a sudden and that
too in the light of erratic indents which vary from year to year, nevertheless the
fact remains that ISP did not bother to review the reasons for consistently low
production with reference to the indents and the attendant risks such as the
possibility of counterfeit stamp papers entering the market to make good of the
wide variation in the supply and demand.  The Committee feel that this betrays total
lack of risk perception in ISP towards their highly sensitive and risk function of
production and supply of stamps and stamp papers.  The Committee are quite
sceptical about the Ministry’s optimism that the existing production capacity of
ISP would take care of the current requirements of indents, since there is no
evidence to suggest that ISP had carried out an assessment in this regard.  Further,
the Committee cannot subscribe to the Ministry’s view that demat of stamp papers
would significantly reduce the demand for stamps and stamp papers when it is still
at a very nascent stage and is yet to be  implemented.  With a view to maintain
equilibrium between indent and production, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry of Finance may consider  the feasibility of enhancing the installed capacity
of ISP. Various bottlenecks such as old machinery, lack of availability of raw
materials in time etc. that come in the way of achieving optimum production level
should have been removed by taking timely remedial action. The Ministry ought to
ensure that there is no shortages in supply of stamps and stamp papers vis-à-vis
demand raised in the indents which could lead to a crisis situation that can be
exploited by the scamsters. Requiste quantity of stamp papers should be made
available by fulfilling all the indents raised by the indenting agencies.
117. The Committee are dismayed to note that no survey was conducted by the
Ministry  to analyse as to how the indenters were able to meet their requirements of

44
stamps and stamp papers when ISP was unable to fulfill the entire demand raised in
the indents so much so that 54 per cent of the total demand raised in the indents had
remained unfulfilled.  Explaining the reasons for not conducting the survey  by ISP,
the Ministry have stated that under Section 10(b) of Indian Stamps Act, State
Governments are empowered to take recourse to alternate mode of Stamp duty
collection in the event of shortage of stamps/stamp papers.  The Committee do not
accept the Ministry’s arguement which appears to be  hypothetical and presumptuous
and is not backed by any evidence suggesting that States/UTs have been invoking the
provisions under the Indian Stamp Act to meet their requirements.  The Committee
cannot but deplore the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry to such an important
and sensitive issue which have grave implication for the economy.  Far from being
alive to the inherent dangers implicit in the shortage of stamps and stamp papers
that could be exploited by the unscrupulous elements to their advantage, the Ministry
have sought to take refuge in the provision of Indian Stamp Paper Act, which betrays
a total lack of seriousness and insensitivity on the part of the Ministry to their
sovereign function of printing and supply of stamps and stamp papers in adequate
quantities.
118. The Committee note that just as production of stamp/stamp papers did not
have any relationship with indent, the supply also did not follow any pattern.  The
supply varied between as low as 27 per cent and a maximum of 59 per cent of the
indents.  Over the eight-year period i.e. from 1996 to 2004, the supply was only
118.33 crore sheets against the indent of 277.23 crore sheets i.e., a shortfall of
about 57 per cent. State-wise and denomination-wise analysis of supply against the
indents disclosed that while the supplies were largely much lower than the indent,
it did not follow any pattern. The Ministry have taken a stand that the apparent
shortfall of indents by 57 per cent had not resulted in crisis in any of the States
since the indents were highly inflated and because of the efforts initiated by ISP to
curb inflated indents, the indented quantities have come down substantially. It has
also been stated that some of the indenters did not lift the non-judicial-stamp-
papers which were duly packed and ready for dispatch, inspite of reminders which
shows that there was hardly any problem in respect of supply of stamps and stamp
papers.  The Committee have been further informed that when the indents were
going beyond the printing capacity of ISP, the fact was communicated to all the
Treasuries/Sub Treasuries and Postal Stores Depots all over the country vide
Central Stamp Depot, Nashik Road, Circular No. 2304 dated 13
th November, 1991
and subsequent reminder Circular bearing No. 2606 dated 13th April, 1996.  It was
clearly brought out in these Circulars that the indenters should raise realistic
indents and the unmet indents for a quarter would not be carried forward and
would be treated as cancelled.  The Committee regret to note that post 1996 the
Ministry have not made any efforts to review the indents in consultation with the
users. Though the Ministry had issued a Circular way back in 1991 followed by a
reminder in 1996 asking the indenters to make realistic indents, it appears that
thereafter it had not bothered to review the situation and slept over the matter till
Audit had pointed out the mismatches in the Indent, Production and Supply. It is
only after Audit had taken up review of ISP, the Ministry had woken up to the issue

45
and conducted meetings with the respective State Governments and Union
Territories in 2004.   The Committee are of the opinion that had the Ministry been
alive to the problem in the intervening period from 1996-97 to 2003-04, and taken
remedial measures to correct the imbalances between Indent and supply things
would not have come to such a pass.  Further, the possibility of scamsters exploiting
the situation arising out of consistent low supply of stamp papers for counterfeit
operations would have been greatly minimised.
119. Generally, paper manufacturers produce paper for supply to ISP as per
the quantity stipulated in the supply order. Excess paper produced, if any, is re-
pulped by the paper mills.   As per the agreement entered into by ISP with the paper
mills which produce paper for printing, the mills should not produce and supply
security papers to other agencies. However, Audit review revealed that ISP did not
exercise any control regarding actual quantities produced by these mills against
its supply orders, including the wastages.  The Committee apprehend that absence
of control on the production of paper entails risk of diversion for counterfeit
operations.  In support of their contention that the extant system of private paper
mills producing paper as per the quantity stipulated in the supply order of ISP has
been working well, the Ministry have stated that the examination  reports  in
respect of the fake stamp paper cases that were sent by State Police, CBI and other
Investigating Agencies to Forgery Detection Cell of ISP, for examination, had
revealed that there are no forged stamps/stamp papers wherein genuine paper
supplied to ISP by private mills has been used. On the other hand, the Ministry
have conceded that ISP is not in a position to have full control over private paper
manufacturers with respect to the quantity of paper produced since they supply
different kinds of papers not only to ISP but also to many other users. The Committee
are of the view that despite the contractual obligation whereunder the paper mills
cannot produce more than the quantity ordered by ISP without their permission
there is no guarantee that paper Mills will not violate this condition.  Further ISP
do not have any mechanism to find out whether the mills have been strictly adhering
to this condition.  Under these circumstances it is naïve on the part of ISP to repose
confidence  in the private paper mills.  Though the Ministry can find solace from
the fact that in none of the cases where forgery has been detected by the
investigating agencies, genuine paper manufactured by private mills are used, the
Committee however, caution the ISP not to become complacent.  The Ministry
should take extra caution and have a strict vigil and constant monitoring on the
functioning of the private paper mills so that they do not divert the stamp paper to
unscrupulous persons for counterfeit operations.  The Committee further
recommend that ISP should ensure that the paper mills do not produce papers
more than the quantity ordered and also to evolve a mechanism by which ISP can
detect production of excess paper by the paper mills.
120. The Committee are informed that dandy roll, a device used for introduction
of security watermark on to the paper during the course of its manufacture is
designed by ISP but manufactured by private producers.  The paper mills rather
than ISP is responsible for manufacture of dandy rolls through private sources.
The manufacturers of dandy rolls are small scale industrial units and do not have

46
a separate licence for their manufacture from ISP. In his deposition before the
Committee, the Secretary (Economic Affairs), Ministry of Finance had clarified
that only low value security paper is allowed to be manufactured by the Private
Paper mills using dandy rolls.  For High Value security paper, ISP procures paper
from the security paper mill, Hoshangabad.  However, the review of Control Systems
in ISP over dandy rolls disclosed disregard for security procedures of this high
risk device in as much as ISP did not maintain control of the dandy rolls and their
use through the means of their custody, verification and legal backing of agreement/
oath by the private users.  The inspections by ISP officials were infrequent and
follow up actions were non-existent. At no time, ISP assured itself that dandy rolls
were not misused. The Ministry have informed the Committee, that the physical
custody of dandy rolls remain with the mills as it is their property. Obtaining
dandy rolls for manufacture of paper is the responsibility of paper manufacturer
and ISP does not enter into any agreement with the unit manufacturing dandy
rolls. In the agreement entered with the Supplier of paper, there are precluding
clauses whereby the Paper Supplier is restrained to use dandy rolls for any other
purpose other than stated in the agreement. As a further measure to improve the
control on dandy rolls, paper manufacturers are being asked to obtain an
undertaking from the dandy roll manufacturers that they would not produce dandy
roll of the water mark used by ISP for any other organization without the express
approval of ISP.
121. The Committee apprehend that duplicate production or theft/diversion of
the dandy rolls is fraught with serious risk of these being misused to produce
paper for counterfeit production.  The Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Finance  while deposing before the Committee shared the apprehension
of the Committee that the private mills can make more paper than what is required
by virtue of their possession of the dandy rolls.  The Secretary mooted a suggestion
that the only fool proof mechanism for prevention of misuse of dandy rolls is that
all the papers should come from  Government controlled presses.  For this either
another Press should be set up or a new manufacturing line be added to the existing
Government press.  The Committee cannot but over emphasise the critical role
played by dandy rolls and any misuse of this critical input would have a serious
repercussions on the economy in as much as it could not only lead to production of
counterfeit stamp paper but also loss of revenue to the Central and  State Government
exchequers. The Committee regret to note that there was a total lack of threat
perception on the part of ISP towards the high risk involved in the  use of dandy
rolls in the production of Stamp Papers Far from carrying out a risk assessment
on the probable misuse of dandy rolls by the Private Paper Mills for excess
production of papers than the indented quantity for counterfeit production of stamp
papers, ISP had chosen to rely upon the contractual obligation entered with them.
It is only after discovery of large scale counterfeit stamp papers in the recent past
followed by Audit review on their functioning that ISP had become alive to the
problem and has since decided that hence forth dandy rolls will be defaced/destroyed
after the ordered quantity of the paper is fully supplied by the mills. The Committee
recommend that with a view to prevent misuse of dandy rolls, the custody and use of

47
dandy rolls should be controlled by ISP by way of retaining the same with them and
released only for the duration of production of security paper.  Possibility of
automatic embedding of  the number of sheets of use with each dandy roll may also
be explored.  The Committee further recommend that the feasibility of completely
doing away with the system of engagement of Private Paper Mills for production of
paper and entrusting the job of producing all the papers required for security
paper production — both high and low value security paper to the Government
Security Press should be explored. This can be done either by augmenting the
production capacity of the Government Press or setting up a second line of
production.
122. The Committee note that as per the documents maintained by India Security
Press, 53 dandy rolls were in the custody of nine paper mills, many of which are
not manufacturing paper for ISP for years.  ISP had not carried out physical
verification of 21 dandy rolls  that were lying with seven paper mills after 1988-89.
The last physical inspection was conducted  by ISP in Titagarh Paper Mills, Kolkata
in 1996, in which only 12 dandy rolls out of 26 were available.  Neither the
14 missing dandy rolls were traced nor the 12 that were available, had been taken
over by ISP despite no business with this mill for about 20 years.  According to the
Ministry the physical custody of dandy rolls remained with paper mills as they
belonged to them.  While conceeding that the physical verification of dandy rolls
had not been conducted on a  regular basis, the Ministry , however, stated that the
same was carried out in the year 1987-88, 1991, 1996, 2003 and 2005.  The
Ministry have now informed that a mechanism has since been put in place whereby
inspection would be carried out on half-yearly basis and effective verification of
dandy rolls would be done eliminating the possibility of their misuse.  Henceforth,
dandy rolls will be defaced/destroyed after ordered quantity is supplied by the
mills. The Committee are distressed to note  that ISP could not give any plausible
explanation for the irregular/infrequent physical verifications of dandy rolls.  No
periodicity or interval appears to have been fixed for the physical verification
which is borne by the fact that verification was sometimes carried out after a
yawning gap of more than 7 years, which betrays lack of seriousness and most
importantly sensitivity to this important function which is fraught with the risk of
counterfeit production.  It is only after the Committee were seized of the matter
that ISP had now decided to conduct physical verification of dandy rolls at half-
yearly intervals.  What has surprised the Committee is the fact that some paper
mills which are no longer producing paper for ISP are still in possession of dandy
rolls rather  than destroying them.  ISP had justified the possession of dandy rolls
by these paper mills on the ground that they lie with the paper mills since they
belonged to them, which is anything but inexplicable.  The Committee expect that
atleast in future ISP would carry the physical inspection at regular intervals.
They also expect ISP would strictly ensure that as soon as the mills produce the
ordered quantity, the dandy rolls are defaced/destroyed.  The Committee recommend
that ISP should set up a monitoring mechanism both in headquarters as well at
each private paper mill which produce papers for ISP to oversee that dandy rolls
are completely destroyed.

48
123. Instances of short  and excess supply and supply of stamps and stamp papers
of denominations other than indented or declared in the packing list have come to the
notice of the Committee which is a high-risk deficiency that could point towards
pilferage of the printed stamps and stamp papers. Sample check of documents relating
to different consignments in various States disclosed short supplies with aggregate
value of Rs. 1453.75 crore i.e. Delhi (239.75 crore), Gujarat (332.71 crore), Haryana
(Rs 1.00 crore), Kerala (Rs. 72.26 crore), Punjab (Rs 0.13 crore) and Uttar Pradesh
(Rs 807.90 crore) and excess supplies of stamps of value of Rs. 687.89 crore in Six
States during 1996-2003 i.e —Delhi (Rs.15.73 crore), Gujarat (Rs.132.41 crore),
Kerala (Rs.142.75 crore), Orissa (Rs.6.75 crore), Punjab (Rs.0.25 crore) and Uttar
Pradesh (Rs.390.00 crore). The Committee are constrained to point out that India
Security Press did not take suitable remedial measures despite a number of instances
and complaints about the packets dispatched by them containing stamps of incorrect
denominations, excess and short supply.  The Committee hope that suitable steps
would be taken by ISP in future to avoid such instances.
124. Audit Review has revealed that there were three cases of theft of stamps
from ISP shop floor with an aggregate value Rs. 1.17 crore.  Out of these, two cases
were reported to be pending in the courts of law. In the third case involving theft of
stamps valued at Rs. 0.85 crore, which took place in April 2002, the culprit was yet
to be traced but the case was reported to have been closed.  The Ministry have
clarified that the theft case relating to India Foreign Bill Stamps amounting to
Rs.0.85 crores has not been closed and the same is being pursued with the concerned
State police authorities. An FIR had already been lodged with State police.  Explaining
the action taken against the culprits involved in the theft cases, the Secretary,
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance during evidence deposed that
General Manager of ISP was suspended  and arrested and later on dismissed from
the service.   Besides, a few more employees have been suspended/arrested and in
one or two cases,  the CBI after due verification, had subsequently given  clean chit.
The Committee while expressing their serious concern over the theft that occurred
in ISP shop floor, recommend that suitable penal action should be taken against all
the persons found guilty in the theft cases. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the steps taken to strengthen the security and vigilance systems in the shop floor
of ISP so as to prevent recurrence of theft.
125. The Committee find that India Security Press did not have an
institutionalised system of surveillance/vigilance in discharge of its high risk
and vulnerable operation, except for a Forgery Detection Cell, whose task was
limited to verification of the genuineness of the stamps, whenever a complaint was
received from the indenters or investigating agencies. Even this operation was
approached in a routine manner, limiting its role to mere reporting of the findings.
The Committee note that there was an inordinate  delay in the verification of the
genuineness of the stamps on the referred cases and ISP  did not extend the scope
of investigation to the possibility of counterfeit on a large scale which again points
to the lack of threat perception by ISP towards this high risk function.  The
Ministry of Finance have contended that ISP is not an investigative agency and its
role is limited to ascertaining genuiness of the documents presented to it by

49
various investigating agencies like State Police, CBI etc.  According to the
Ministry, investigation of cases of forged stamps is done by respective State
Governments.  The Committee note that many cases  relating to forgery of stamps/
stamp papers had remained un-investigated for years, sometimes on the ground of
non-receipt of the examination fee of a mere Rs. 100 per document.   They further
note that a large number of the cases referred for examination of genuineness of
the stamps pertained to Uttar Pradesh (241), Maharashtra (294), Andhra Pradesh
(156), New Delhi (140) and Tamil Nadu (57), where incidentally a number of cases
relating to counterfeit stamp papers were reported/found in the wake of Forged
Stamp Paper Scam. Out of the total 69,648 documents of suspected counterfeit
stamps consisting of non-postal stamps and stamp papers, the examination by the
fraud detection unit disclosed fake stamps in 50313 documents.   The Committee
regret to note that though the Ministry had subsequently set up a Vigilance-cum
Surveillance Cell which had started functioning with effect from 1.3.2005, the
Cell is concerned only with activities within ISP and it has nothing to do with
intelligence gathering and surveillance  all over the country.  Though it is
appreciated that intelligence gathering and surveillance relating to circulation of
counterfeit stamps in the economy pertains to State and Central Intelligence
Agencies, nevertheless the Committee are of the opinion that with a view to curb
and prevent circulation of large scale counterfeit stamp paper in the system, the
Ministry of Finance should explore the possibility of setting a Centralised
Surveillance and Vigilance System comprising of representative of ISP and State
and Central Investigative Agencies.  The modalities of functioning of the system
should be worked out by Ministry of Finance in coordination with Ministry of
Home Affairs and in consultation with  respective State Governments. The system
so set up  should be alert to the error signals that may manifest in various form viz.
theft within ISP and in transit, missing dandy rolls etc.   The Committee further
recommend that in view of the ramifications of counterfeit stamps on the economy
as a whole ISP should therefore, examine the  genuineness of stamps in respect of
all the complaints received irrespective of whether the examination fee had been
paid or not.
126. The Committee were concerned to note that the physical security within
India Security Press, which ought to have multi-level reinforced security system,
had been lax. While Maharashtra police managed the security at the gates, the
departmental security personnel were responsible for security at the shop floor.
Though Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) replaced the Maharashtra police
at the gate as late as  October, 2002 and the department security personnel at the
shop floor with effect from September, 2004, the Committee regret to note that still
some of the security related recommendations made  by the Intelligence Bureau
were yet to be implemented as of March 2004.  The Committee have been subsequently
informed that out of total 38 recommendation, 35 have already been implemented.
The remaining 3 recommendations that are pending implementation relate to
installation of Watch Tower, CC.TV system and the shifting of Trade Union Offices.
The Ministry have informed that Watch Tower and CCTV system  would be installed
by December, 2005.  The Committee would like to be apprised as to how far the

50
implementation of recommendations made by Intelligence Bureau  has helped in
beefing/strengthening the security set up in ISP.  They also expect that the Ministry
of Finance would ensure that the remaining recommendations are implemented at
the earliest.
127. The Committee were concerned to  note that far from dismantling the
equipment and machinery used for printing and other operations in printing of
stamp paper, on ‘as is where is basis’, with a view to eliminating any risk of their
re-assembly for counterfeit operation, and precluding the same person/firm from
buying the condemned machinery of different types used in printing and other
associated operations etc., ISP had actually facilitated knowledge of assembly of
the machines by permitting up to 10 representatives of the successful bidder,
M/s Unique Enterprises to witness the dismantling of the machines before their
disposal for two months, in two spells, during June-September, 1998. ISP was also
negligent in the sale of the condemned printing machine and perforating machine
to the same firm at different points of time between June 1998 and September
1998.  The Committee were informed that only bigger machines were dismantled
so that it can be taken out from the doors of the shop and other machines have been
sold as it is. The machines such as Perforating Machines  were already available
with private security printers in India, who were supplying commemorative postage
stamps to Department of Posts, Government of India. In this connection the Ministry
have tried to explain that as per the terms and conditions of the Tender Notice
No. 5/97 (S. Nos. 11, 12 and 13)  the firms’ representatives were permitted to
witness the dismantling of the machines to ensure that firm satisfies itself that all
the parts of machine are made available to them.  The Ministry have contended that
procedure prescribed in General Financial Rules had been followed for the disposal
of machinery.  However, they have added that keeping in view the sensitivity and
security involved a new procedure had since been introduced whereunder disposal
of machines is done after converting them into scrap. The Committee are perplexed
at the casual and negligent approach adopted by ISP towards the high risk function
of dismantling of printing machines, which is totally devoid of any threat/risk
perception.  Far from being alive to the possible risk associated with such operation
such as chances of misuse of machinery, the tender documents were designed in
such a manner that the knowledge of assembly of machines was unwittingly passed
on to the bidder.  The issue had become all the more serious and alarming and the
motive of ISP behind incorporation of certain clauses in the tender notice
questionable after the Fake Stamp Paper Scam came into light.  It is only after the
Scam broke out that ISP had become wiser and decided to adopt a new procedure
whereunder the obsolete machinery is disposed after converting into scrap.  The
Committee are of the firm view that had this new procedure been put in place
earlier, the possibility of alleged misuse of the machinery by the bidders would
have been completely eliminated.  Suitable deterrent action should be taken against
all those who are found guilty.

51
128. The Committee understand that several cases relating to fake stamp
papers scam are currently under investigation by CBI.  The Committee were
informed that as on 12 th September, 2005 CBI had registered and filed charge
sheets in 64 cases in the fakes stamp paper scam.  Out of these 39 were related
to Abdul Karim Telgi, the kingpin of the scam and the remaining 25 cases were
stated to be not directly linked to Telgi.  As regards ISP’s role in the fake stamp
papers scam, the representative of CBI during evidence had deposed that CBI
had focussed on three allegations relating to ISP namely—(i) physical
verification of Dandy Rolls, (ii) negligent disposal of machinery, and (iii) artificial
suppression of supply of stamps.  The Committee recommend that the Ministry
of Finance should periodically review the progress made in the cases relating to
ISP and urge upon the CBI to expedite the investigation/examination of the cases.
The Committee would like to be apprised of  the findings of CBI in the matter of
ISP related cases together with suitable remedial Action Taken by the
Government to obviate recurrence of such instances.
129. The Committee are of the considered view that there is an urgent need to
revamp/overhaul the functioning of ISP.  This has attained paramount importance
particularly in the wake of recent fake stamp paper scam that has rocked the country.
For this, an expert Committee comprising of eminent personalities/professionals
drawn from different fields with experience relevant to the functioning of ISP should
be set up to examine the entire gamut of activities relating to ISP.  The Expert
Committee should examine all the existing procedures/rules in relation to indent,
production, supply and dispatch from the standpoint of threat/risk perception.  Risk
analysis with respect to all activities pertaining to production  of  stamps and stamp
papers viz. procurement, short-listing of private paper mills, dandy rolls, ink, security
etc. should be conducted so that the scope for error and lapses in these processes are
minimised to a large extent.
130. The Committee note that though the Ministry of Finance had taken a decision
in principle to encourage dematting of Stamp Papers way back in December, 2003
i.e. 18/12/2003, the proposal was  approved by the Government after more than a
year i.e. on 28/2/2005. Despite holding 3 meetings so far with State Revenue
Secretaries and Inspector   General (Registration and Stamps) on 22/12/2003,
4/3/2004 and 2/9/2004, respectively, the Committee regret to note that dematting of
Stamp Papers is yet to take a final shape.  The Committee were given to understand
that some States are still in the process of understanding the proposal.  The Committee
while expressing their unhappiness over the tardy progress made in the
implementation of demat process recommend that Ministry should make concerted
efforts to convince all the States/UTs  so that the demat of  Stamp Papers is implemented
at the earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position in this
regard.

52
131. Apart from dematerialisation of stamp papers, the Committee are of the
considered view that in the present age of information technology other alternative
methods should be explored so as to completely do away with the physical form of the
Stamp Papers.  The Ministry of Finance may examine the feasibility of implementing
various ways and means to achieve these objectives.
N
EW DELHI;    PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
24  July, 2006               Chairman,
2, Sravana, 1928 (Saka)   Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
REPORT OF THE  COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA FOR
THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2004, (NO. 14 OF 2005) UNION GOVERNMENT
(CIVIL-PERFORMANCE  AUDIT)
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
Control Systems in India Security Press, Nashik
Highlights
ISP Nashik approached the management of the printing  and supply of the security
papers and stamps to the Union/State Governments, public sector undertakings and
local bodies with an attitude of a vendor rather than as an entity entrusted with a
high-risk sovereign function of the Government. It did not carry out appropriate risk
assement of the entire process of indent, printing and supply of stamp and stamp
papers to the State and Union Governments and bodies and authorities int he public
sector.
There was a serious disconnect between the objectives of the indenters and ISP in
relation to stamp papers, a contributory factor to ISP's insensitivity to the risks.
ISP consistently printed and supplied the stamps and stamps papers far below
the quantities indented by the State Governments and other indenting agencies
without a concern as to how the indenters coped with supplies of stamps and
stamp papers less than half their indents. The documents in the ISP did not display
a sound system of production planning, which was far removed from the indents
placed by the users.
The perception of risk within ISP associated with different stages of production
and supply of stamps was non-existent in as much as it had little control over
production of security papers by the paper mills, most of which were in the private
sector, over dandy rolls, which is a device to introduce watermark security features in
the papers during the course of its production and on supply procedures including
discrepancy and theft of stamps.
Far from eliminating all chances of misuse of machinery and equipment due for
disposal by complete dismantling with a view to rendering them beyond reassembly,
ISP management, in effect, facilitted possible misuse of the machinery by permitting
for about two months up to 10 representatives of successful bidder to watch the
dismantling operations of the printing machine to be disposed of. It also sold the
53

54
printing machinery and perforating machine to the same firm, M/S Unique Enterprises
without assessing the risks associated with their sale to the same agency.
The sensitivity of ISP management to error signals was very low and effective
lessons-learnt system did not exist. ISP failed to take appropriate measures, despite
error signals manifesting in various forms viz. thefts within ISP and in transit, missing
dandy rolls and large number of counterfeit stamps detected upon examination of
suspected documents received from investigating agencies for verification.
Adequacy and effectiveness of remedial measures in relation to indent, printing
and supply of stamps and stsmp papers in the wake of large scale counterfeit could
not be verified in the absence of comprehensive information from ISP .
Gist of Recommendations
• ISP may institute a system to rationalise the indents received from various
entities and introduce a system of coordination with them to address erratic
indents. It should establish printing plan consistent with the indents along
with embedded comprehensive performance information system.
• ISP should carry out a detailed risk assessment associated with each stage
of the production of paper, manufacture and use of dandy rolls and other
equipment used in the process of printing and set up a system of effective
control over their custody and utilisation to eliminate the risks of misuse/
abuse.
• ISP should sensitise the supply procedures to be alive to the risks of short
supply, discrepancies, theft etc. an institute  a system of time-bound
reconciliation, investigation remedial actions along with suitable performance
information and lessons-learnt system.
• ISP should institute a surveillance and vigilance system to gather intelligence
and may consider random drawal of sample of stamps and stamp papers
suo-moto in systematic manner for examination to assure their genuineness.
• ISP shoul strengthen the physical security within its premises by
consolidating the measures already taken.
• There is a need to establish a formal procedure for disposal of machinery
and equipment used for printing of stamps and stamp papers to eliminate all
chances of their misuse.
1. Introduction
India Security Press (ISP), Nashik under the administrative control of Department
of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance is responsible for printing and supply of
security papers viz. postal stamps, judicial and non-judicial stamps, cheque books
for Reserve bank of India and State Bank of  India, saving certificates postal orders,
passports, promissory note and other secruity documents required by the Central/

55
State and UT Governments, Public Sector Undertakings and Local Bodies. In addition
to postal stamps of various denominations, ISP produces 25 categories of stamps
and stamp papers in 212 denominations. In so far as ISP is concerend, the value of
these security papers is limited to their cost of production, which is realised from
the indenters. For the indenting entities, more particularly for the State Governments
and the Union Government, these security papers are the financial instruments of
revenue used for registration of documents, issue of securities and realisation of
documents, issue of securities and realisation of the cost of postal and other services.
Thus, for the indenting entities, the security papers are the money worth their face
value.
1.1 Audit Objectives
Audit of the control environment obtaining in ISP in regard to indents, production
planning and printing, supply, surveillance onthe entire operations, sensitivity to
error signals and lessons-learnt system in respect of non postal stamps and security
papers was carried out consequent to the discovery of large scale counterfeit stamps
with a view to assessing whether:
• the system of indent and supply was robust to ensure fulfilement of the
requirement of various types of judicial and non-judicial stamps by the State
Governments and other entities;
• the production plan and actual production of stamps in ISP was consistent
with the indents;
• ISP put in place adequate system of control to address the risks associated
with the production, supply procedures and security besides short supply
against the indents;
• appropriate coordination between ISP on one hand and the indenting entities
on the other, existed for review of the forecasts of requirement, indents, and
actual supply;
• the disposal procedures of the machinery and equipment used for production
of security papers consisted of safegards to prevent their misuse;
• ISP was sensitive to error signals and undertook measures to address the
possible risks associated with the reported aberrations and learnt appropriate
lessons from the results of the investigations; and
• ISP undertook effective remedial measures consequent upon large-scale
counterfeit operations.
1.2 Scope of Audit
The audit was carried out through examination of documents in ISP , Nasik and
Security Printing Press, Hyderabad relating to printing and supply of non-postal
stamps and security papers over 1996-2004 and through examination of secondary
data in private paper maunfacturing mills and dandy roll
1  manufacturing units.
1Dandy roll is a device for solidifying and impressing water mark in the paper during manufacture.

56
1.3 Audit Methodology
The thrust areas of audit were high value non-judicial stamps/stamp papers,
India Insurance Stamps, India Impressed Court Fee Stamps, Revenue Stamps, Share
Transfer Stamps and Notarial Stamps. Detailed testing of documents was made in
ISP through examination, analysis and questionnaires. Limited secondary tests
were carried out of the documents relating to the production and suppliers of
security paper, dandy rolls etc. besides examination of documents at Security Printing
Press, Hyderabad.
1.4 Acknowledgement
The audit plan including the audit objectives was discussed in the entry and exit
conference and in several meetings with the General Manager, ISP as also with the
respective heads of various wings in ISP during the course of audit. Memoranda
containing audit observations were issued to ISP management. While the cooperation
of the ISP Management during the meetings and in course of audit is acknowledged
with thanks, inadequate response by way of written communication was received.
Out of 54 audit observation memos relating to this performance audit, General Manager
ISP provided reply to only 37. The draft audit report was issued to the Ministry and
the General Manager, ISP in July 2004 with a request to furnish response within the
prescribed period of six weeks. The Ministry as well as the General Manager, ISP did
not furnish reply to the draft audit report. The audit findings and conclusions in this
report are, therefore, constrained with the limitation of not having the response from
the Ministry and ISP.
2. Unmet Indents
ISP received quarterly indents from the State Governments, Union territories etc.
for supply of stamp papers of various categories and denominations. Within ISP, the
consolidation of the indents and supply of stamp papers is managed by its central
stamp depot. Based on the print requisition by the central stamp depot of ISP, the
warrant section issues print warrants to the production section. The central stamp
depot is also entrusted with the responsibility of the despatch of the stamp papers to
the indenters.
2.1 Indents, Printing and Supply
The production, indent and supply of stamps and stamp papers for ISP from
1996-97 to 2003-04 is given below:
(sheets in Lakh)
Shortfall in Percentage Percentage
supply with of shorfall in of shortfall
Y ear Indent Production Supply reference production in supply
to indent to Indent to indent
12 3 4 5 6 7
1996-97 5281.89 1711.96 1424.32 3857.57 67.59 73.03
1997-98 5128.18 2012.23 1895.81 3232.37 60.76 63.03
1998-99 3085.69 1311.74 1305.30 1780.39 57.49 57.70

57
1999-00 1810.14 876.93 946.58 863.56 51.55 47.71
2000-01 2281.13 1406.18 1306.36 974.77 38.36 42.73
2001-02 2738.08 1497.17 1389.22 1348.86 45.32 49.26
2002-03 4117.57 2066.04 1616.51 2501.06 49.82 60.74
2003-04 3279.84 1900.73 1948.77 1331.07 42.04 40.58
Total 27722.52 12782.98 11832.87 15889.65 53.89 57.32
2.1.1 Fluctuations in the Indents
The total of indents in terms of number  of sheets varied over a wide range of 1810
and 5282 lakh sheets during the eight years for which data was collected. ISP did not
maintain account of indents and supply in terms of value. The unexplained wide
fluctuation in the indents should have raised a doubt about their accuracy and
completeness. However, there was no evidence to suggest that ISP analysed the wide
fluctuations in the annual indents in consultation with the indenters to find out the
reasons for such wide variations.
2.1.2 Indents and Production
The actual production of stamp papers in terms of sheets disclosed that it had no
relationship with the indent. The annual production varied in the wide range of 877
and 2066 lakh sheets. Cumulatively, over the eight years 1996 to 2004, ISP produced
only 12783 lakh sheets against the total indent of 27723 lakh sheets, which is only
46 per cent of the indent. ISP did not review the reasons for very low production with
reference to the indents and its attendant risks. Category and denomination-wise
analysis of production of stamps over 1995-2003 confirmed that there was no
co-relation between indent, production and supply.
The production was consistently lower than the indent. ISP did not increase
production; despite under-utilisation of the production capacity and large unmet
indents. The machinery was used on an average for only five hours and 15 minutes
against the effective working hours per shift of nine hours. In the absence of log
books of machines, which ISP was expected to maintain, unutilised machine-hour
remained enexplained.
2.1.3 Indents and Supply
Just as production of stamp/stamp papers did not have any relationship with
indent, the supply also did not follow any pattern. The supply varied between as low
as 27 per cent and a maximum of 59 per cent of the indents. Over the eight-year period
1996-2004, the supply was only 11833 lakh sheets against the indent of 27723 lakh
sheets; a shortfall of about 57 per cent.
12 3 4 5 6 7

58
State-wise and denomination-wise analysis of supply against the indents disclosed
an arbitrary pattern. While the supplies were largely much lower than the indent, it did
not follow any pattern. In a few cases, the supplies were more than the indents while
in many these were very low. There were also cases, where supplies were made
without any indents. A few illustrative examples are given in Annex-A.
While the production was consistently low compared to the indent, ISP retained
significant balance in stock at the close of the financial year. Though the rules on the
subject provide for retention of the stamp/stamp papers by ISP equivalent to a
minimum of three month's stock, the application of this rule has rationale only when
ISP has fulfilled the indents completely.
The management of ISP stated that comparison of supply with indents might not
be appropriate in view of unrealistic indents placed by various state governments.
But, ISP could produce only one evidence wherein a State government had requested
ISP not to despatch indented stamps in view of sufficient stock with them. The
contention of ISP in support of lower production and supply with reference to the
indent is not backed by any review of the indents in consultation with the users.
ISP ought to have reviewed the risk associated with consistent low supply and as
to how the indenters were meeting their requirement of stamp papers.
Recommendations
• ISP may institute a system to rationalise the indents from various entities
and introduce a system of dialogue with them to address erratic indents and
• ISP should set up a printing and supply plan consistent with the indents and
introduce a transparent system of comprehensive performance information
system to the State governments and other indenting entities on one hand
and Finance Ministry on the other.
2.2 Risks Associated with Production
Many intermediate steps related to production of the stamp/stamp papers viz.,
manufacture of security papers, dandy roll for security watermark on the paper,
gumming
2 and super-calendaring 3 etc. are out sourced. These activities carry very
high risk of replication for counterfeit and, therefore, warrant appropriate security
and surveillance procedure to minimize the risks. Examination of the procedure
followed by ISP in relation to these vital activities disclosed that it was not alive to the
possible risks and manged the outsourcing of such security related papers in an
indifferent manner, as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
2.2.1 Production of Paper
The agreement with the paper mills which produced paper for printing provided
that the paper mills should not produce and supply security paper to other agencies.
However, ISP did not exercise any control regarding actual quantities produced by
2 Process of application of gum/adhensives in adhesive stamps.
3 Process of smoothening.

59
the paper mills against its supply orders, including the wastages. Absence of control
by ISP on the production of paper entailed risk of diversion for counterfeit operations.
Smilarly, ISP did not exercise control over pulping of the rejected stock of security
paper manufactured by paper mills, which entailed a risk of its misuse.
2.2.2 Dandy Roll
Dandy roll, a device used for introduction of security watermark on to the paper
during the course of its manufacture is designed by ISP but manufactured by private
producers. The paper mills rather than ISP is responsible for manufacture of dandy
rolls through private sources. The manufacturers of dandy rolls are small scale industrial
units and do not have a separate licence for their manufacture from ISP. Duplicate
poduction or theft/diversion of the dandy rolls is fraught with serious risk of these
being misused to produce paper for counterfeit production.
Examination of the system of control over dandy rolls disclosed disregard for
security procedures of this high risk device in as much as ISP did not maintain control
of the dandy rolls and their use through the means of their custody, verfication and
legal backing of agreement/oath by the private users. The inspections by ISP officials
were infrequent and follow up actions were non-existent. At no time, ISP assured
itself that dandy rolls were not misused.
2.2.3 Physical Custody and Verification of Dandy Rolls
As per the documents maintained by ISP , 53 dandy rolls were in the custody of
nine paper mills, many of which are not manufacturing paper for ISP for years. ISP had
not carried out physical verfication of 21 dandy rolls after 1988-89 lying with seven
paper mills. ISP had carried out last physical inspection in Titagarh Paper Mills,
Kolkata in 1996, in which only 12 dandy rolls out of 26 were available. Neither the
14 missing dandy rolls were traced nor the 12 that were available, had been taken over
by ISP despite no business with this mill for about 20 years.
Recommendations
• ISP should carry out a detailed risk assessment associated with each stage of
the production of paper, manufacture and use of dandy rolls and other equipment
used in the process of printing and address them effectively to eliminate the
risks of misuse/abuse.
• It should also attempt to obtain a legally binding oath/undertaking from the
private players involved in the process of production of paper and equipment
and printing of stamps/stamp papers.
• The custody and use of dandy rolls should be controlled by retaining them
with ISP and released only for the duration of production of security paper.
Possibility of automatic embedding the number of sheets of use with each
dandy roll may be explored.

60
3. Supply and Dispatch Procedures
The procedure for dispatch of the stamp papers suffered from shortcomings, which
are pointers towards lower level of sensitisation within ISP to the risks associated
with the discrepant dispatch. While deficient control over paper production, dandy
rolls and disposal of machines entail risk of counterfeit, loopholes in the printing,
supply, dispatch and receipt procedures entail a risk of the genuine security papers
printed in ISP finding their way outside the government channel, which could be used
for defrauding the government treasuries.
3.1 Excess/Short Supply
Short supply and supply of stamps and stamp papers of denominations other than
indented or declared in the packing list is high-risk deficiency that could point towards
pilferage of the printed stamps and stamp papers. ISP did not take remedial measures
despite a number of instances and complaints about the packets dispatched by it
containing stamps of incorrect denominations, excess and short supply.
Sample check of documents relating to different consignments in various States
disclosed short supplies
4 with aggregate value of Rs. 1453.75 crore and excess5 supplies
of stamps of value of Rs. 687.89 crore in six states during 1996—2003.
3.2 Discrepancy and Theft of Stamps within ISP
ISP did not investigate large number of cases of discrepancies in figures of the
quantity of stamps between the Control section, which was responsible for quality
check on the shop floor and packing and the Central Stamp Depot, which was
responsible for custody and despatch. The result of sample check is indicated in the
table below:
Issue figure
Y ear Name of stamp as per Receipt as Excess
control per CSD receipt in Face value
section CSD
1997-98 India Adhesive court fee 3,84,425 3,85,215 790 Rs. 3.16 lakh
stamp of Rs. 5/- of set 80
India Adhesive court fee 2,88,500 2,89,290 790 Rs. 12.64 lakh
stamp of Rs. 20/- of set 80
2001-02 India Imprest Court fee 1,17,000 2,17,000 1,00,000 Rs. 50 crore
stamps of Rs. 5,000/-
2003-04 India Adhesive court fee 18,68,200 18,72,200 4,000 Rs. 6.40 lakh
stamp of Rs. 2/- of set 80
4 Short supply—Delhi (Rs. 239.75 crore), Gujarat (Rs. 332.71 crore), Haryana (Rs. 1.00 crore),
 Kerala (Rs. 72.26 crore), Punjab (Rs. 0.13 crore) and Uttar Pradesh (Rs. 807.90 crore).
5 Excess supply—Delhi (Rs. 15.73 crore), Gujarat (Rs. 132.41 crore), Kerala (Rs. 142.75 crore),
 Orissa (Rs. 6.75 crore), Punjab (Rs. 0.25 crore) and Uttar Pradesh (Rs. 390.00 crore).

61
There were three cases of theft of stamps from ISP shop floor with aggregate value
of Rs. 1.17 crore. While two cases are pending in the courts of law, in the third case
involving theft of stamps valued at Rs. 84.60 lakh, which took place in April 2002, the
culprit was yet to be traced but the case was closed.
Such instances of discrepancy and thefts entail risk of printed stamps being diverted
through unauthorised channels and warrant a fool-proof system of reconciliation and
security.
3.3 Loss/Theft in Transit
Large number of cases of loss/theft of the stamp papers in transit through railways
came to the notice of ISP during 1995-2000. The aggregate of the reported cases of
loss/theft in terms of the value of stamps were over Rs. 25 crore, with steady increase
as under:
Year in which theft No. of reported Face value of
was reported cases stamps (Rs.)
1995-96 10 7,16,769
1996-97 16 1,97,81,934
1997-98 18 3,83,50,107
1998-99 25 6,10,27,250
1999-00 10 13,04,92,700
Total 79 25,03,68,760
However, sample check of documents in the treasuries of the respective States
showed loss of stamps in transit of Rs. 181.52 crore during 1992-93 to 2002-2003 in
five States as under:
Sl. Name of the Period Amount
No. State (Rs. in crore)
1. Andhra Pradesh 1992-93 to 1998-99 6.81
2. Assam 1993-94 to 2002-03 146.66
3. Rajasthan 1994-95 2.03
4. Uttar Pradesh 1993-94 to 2002-03 20.74
5. Tamil Nadu 1992-93 to 1998-99 5.28
This suggests that either all cases of theft/loss in transit were not reported to
ISP or the system of reconciliation of dispatch and actual receipt of stamps was
unreliable.
Rather than being alive to the risk of fraud and counterfeit, ISP generally assumed
a legalistic posture in cases of short/incorrect supply and loss/theft in transit reported
to it by the states, taking a stand that under the rules, ISP was not responsible for the
discrepancies reported after the prescribed period or that the consignments became
property of the consignee, once these were dispatched, etc.

62
ISP introduced a system of collection of stamps by the representatives of the
indenters at Nashik with effect from October 1998.
Recommendations
• ISP should  sensitise the supply procedures to be alive to the risks of short
supply, discrepancies and thefts etc. and institute a system of reconciliation,
investigation and remedial actions in a time-bound manner.
• ISP should institute an information system to document all discrepancies/theft
etc. with periodic reports to the Ministry and indenting agencies along with the
stage of reconciliation/investigations.
• ISP may institute a system of accountability for discrepancies in the accounts
of stamps and stamp papers within its complex.
4. Surveillance/Vigilance System
ISP did not have an institutionalised system of surveillance/vigilance for this high
risk and vulnerable operation, except for a Forgery Detection Cell, whose task was
limited to verification of the genuineness of the stamps, whenever a complaint was
received from the indenters or investigating agencies. Even this operation was
approached in a routine manner, limiting its role to mere reporting of the findings. ISP
delayed the verification of the genuineness of the stamps of the referred cases and
did not extend the scope of investigation to the possibility of counterfeit on a large
scale. Many cases remained un-investigated for years, sometimes on the ground of
non-receipt of the examination fee of a mere Rs. 100 per document.
Y ear No. of cases No. of reports No. of outstanding
received for issued cases
examination
1995 75 69 6
1996 73 68 5
1997 92 85 7
1998 90 88 2
1999 133 124 9
2000 138 134 4
2001 139 125 14
2002 200 185 15
2003 249 170 79
Total 1189 1048 141
Large number of the cases referred for examination of genuineness of the stamps
pertained to Uttar Pradesh (241), Maharashtra (294), Andhra Pradesh (156), New Delhi
(140) and Tamil Nadu (57).

63
Out of the total 69,648 documents of suspected counterfeit stamps consisting of
non-postal stamps and stamp papers, the examination by the fraud detection unit
disclosed fake stamps in 50313 documents.
ISP ought to have approached the subject of suspected authenticity of the stamps
with the attendant risk perception rather than approaching it from the mechanical
point of view of reporting the findings and examination fee alone. In almost all cases
the references were received from Government agencies and, therefore, refusal to
undertake examination of suspected security documents for non-receipt of the
examination fees betrayed total lack of awareness of the risk.
Besides, ISP did not set up its own surveillance and vigilance system in coordination
with the state governments and other users by way of drawing of random samples
from the users or the used stamps and appropriate intelligence system in the light of
the vulnerability of the system to abuse by counterfeiting.
The status of setting up of vigilance-cum-surveillance unit in ISP consequent
upon Ministry's decision after the discovery of the counterfeit stamps could not be
verified in the absence of a response from ISP.
Recommendations
• ISP should give effect to the decision of the Ministry to set up surveillance and
vigilance system to gather intelligence and samples of stamps and stamp papers
suo-moto in a systematic manner for examination to assure their genuineness
and exclusion of counterfeit. It should also complete examination of genuineness
of stamps received for check from the investigating agencies delinking it from
the actual receipt of examination fee in view of high risks involved.
5. Physical Security and Disposal of Machinery
The physical security within ISP, which ought to have multi-level reinforced security
system, had been lax. While Maharashtra police managed the security at the gates,
the departmental security personnel were responsible for security at the shop floor.
Central Industrial Security Force replaced the Maharashtra police at the gate from
October 2002 and the department security personnel at the shop floor from September
2004. However, even after introduction of Central Industrial Security Force, many
security related recommendations by the Intelligence Bureau were yet to be
implemented as of March 2004. Some of these included upgradation of the access
control and installation of electronic access control system, creation of apex level
security committee, frisking of all employees and visitors, etc.
5.1 Negligence in Disposal of the Machinery
ISP was negligent in disposal of the equipment and machinery used for printing
and other operations in printing of stamp paper. It did not dismantle them for 'as is
where is basis' with a view to eliminating any risk of their reassembly for counterfeit
operation, precluding the same person/firm from buying the condemned machinery of
different types used in printing and other associated operations etc. Far from this, ISP

64
actually facilitated knowledge of assembly of the machines by permitting up to 10
representatives of the successful bidder, M/s Unique Enterprises to witness the
dismantling of the machines before their disposal for two months in two spells during
June-September 1998. ISP was also negligent in the sale of the condemned printing
machine and perforating machine to the same firm, M/s Unique Enterprises at different
points of time between June 1998 and September 1998.
6. Insensitivity to Error Signals and Absence of Lessons-Learnt System
ISP did not sanitise its systems and procedures in the light of error signals it
received by way of discrepancy in the quantity of stamps in the packing within the
Press, between the quantities dispatched and actual receipt by the indenters, theft
in transit and within ISP etc. It also failed to take remedial measures after dandy rolls
were not found in physical inspections. Even the large scale discovery of counterfeit
stamps upon examination of the suspected stamps received from various
investigating agencies did not prompt ISP to set up a surveillance and intelligence
system in order to minimise or eliminate the risk of production and circulation of
counterfeit stamps.
Recommendations
• ISP should consolidate the physical security within its premises by consolidating
the measures already taken;
• ISP should establish a formal procedure for disposal of machinery and equipment
used for printing of stamps and stamp papers to eliminate all chances of their
misuse, in the light of remedial measures decided by the Ministry; and
• Institute proper system to be alive to signals of errors/aberrations and establish
a lessons-learn system.
7. Conclusion
It would, thus, be seen from the above that ISP approached the responsibility of
printing of the stamps and stamp papers in a mechanical way, more or less like a
vendor rather than as an important partner and stakeholder. It was because of this
approach that the level of sensitivity to the correctness of indents, supply against
indents, risks with production, despatch, security and disposal etc. was rather low.
As brough out in the introduction, the detached approach was borne out of the
perceived value ISP attached to the stamp papers.
There is inherent disconnect between the value of the security papers for the
producers and the indenters and the objectives of the two are detached. In view of
this, it is imperative that the procedures for indent, printing, supply and utilisation are
interlinked and controlled in an integrated manner. For the same reason, it is also
necessary that appropriate risk assessment is carried out and structured procedures
are put in place to address the risks to the entities.
However, as disclosed from the audit findings the procedures were not integrated
and transparent. Risk assessments of the various operations were not made.

65
8. Remedial Measures
In response to an audit memo about remedial measures taken in the light of discovery
of large scale counterfeit stamp papers, the Ministry of Finance stated in March 2004
that the following remedial measures had been taken:
• Introduction of new security features in non-judicial adhesive stamps;
• Disposal of machinery after dismantling and crushing them for sale as scrap;
• Change in the system of indenting procedure from quarterly to half-yearly, with
three-year rolling indent;
• Regular surveillance by Intelligence Bureau and setting up of vigilance-cum-
surveillance cell at ISP; and
• Replacement of the existing security with CISF.
Verification of actual implementation of remedial measure in ISP could not be made.
General Manager, ISP did not furnish information on the status of the above remedial
measures except confirming that CISF security and the system of forecasting the
indent for three years had been introduced.
However, the remedial measures approved by the Ministry do not address some of
the other critical issues relating to risks associated with inaccurate indents, insufficient
printing and supply, absence of coordination between indenters and ISP, production
of paper, manufacture, custody and use of dandy rolls etc., discrepancy in the
packaging and absence of lessons-learnt system.

66
Annex-A
(Refers to paragraph 2.1.3)
India Non-judicial Stamps
(Figure in lakh sheets)
Denomination 2001-02 2002-03
Indent Production Supply Indent Production Supply
Rs. 100 232.580 155.240 129.620 445.950 290.480 225.810
Rs. 500 85.950 60.240 55.990 134.90 52.80 67.420
Rs. 1000 330.425 156.600 186.540 443.317 243.960 177.770
Rs. 5000 76.258 65.000 47.870 133.618 47.200 62.680
State-wise analysis (Illustrative examples)
Name of the 2001-02 2002-03
State Rs. 100 Rs. 500 Rs. 1000 Rs. 5000 Rs. 100 Rs. 500 Rs. 1000 Rs. 5000
Indent Supply Indent Supply Indent Supply Indent Supply Indent Supply Indent Supply Indent Supply Indent Supply
Assam 5.760 0.000 2.460 0.000 1.930 0.000 1.120 0.000 9.550 2.310 3.225 0.900 2.367 1.070 0.944 0.530
Haryana 3.550 1 .600 2.100 2.000 3.620 2.980 3.130 1.900 8.640 2.970 2.570 0.000 6.780 4.000 2.880 1.000
Punjab 20.000 8.000 6.000 3.000 12.000 6.500 2.000 1.400 48.50 4.410 21.820 6.320 33.350 6.500 11.350 2.900
Uttar Pradesh 99.150 37.400 57.150 27.500 132.800 51.620 14.000 4.900 148.80 90.830 70.300 43.800 133.400 53.850 52.400 28.800

APPENDIX II
STATEMENT OF OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. No. Para Ministry Observations/Recommendations
12 3 4
1. 111 M/o Finance The India Security Press (ISP), Nasik, was set
(D/o Economic up in 1924 as an industrial establishment of the
Affairs) Government of India under the Ministry of
Finance (Currency and Coinage Division). It is
considered to be the only organisation in India
and one of the few in the world where a wide
variety of security and non-security papers are
printed and supplied. The security papers consist
of postal stamps, judicial and non-judicial stamps,
cheque books for Reserve Bank and State Bank
of India, saving certificates, postal orders,
passports, promissory notes and other security
documents required by the Central/State and
Union Territory Governments, Public Sector
Undertakings and Local Bodies. In addition to
postal stamps of various denominations, India
Security Press produces 25 categories of stamps
and stamp papers in 212 denominations.  The
non-security documents comprise of welfare
stamps, non-MICR Cheques and railway warrants
etc.  In so far as India Security Press is concerned,
the value of these security and non-security
documents is limited to their cost of production,
which are realised from the indenters.  For the
indenting entities i.e. for the Union and State
Governments, the security and non-security
documents are the financial instruments of
Revenue. Thus, for the indenting entities, the
security papers are the money worth their face
value.
2. 112 -do- The India Security Press receives quarterly
indents from the State Governments, Union
Territories etc., for supply of stamp papers of
various categories and denominations.  As per
67

68
the extant arrangement in ISP, the consolidation
of the indents and supply of stamp papers is
managed by its Central Stamp Depot (CSD).
Based on the print requisition by the CSD, the
Warrant Section issues print warrants to the
Production Section.  However, during 1996-97 to
2003-04 against the cumulative indent of 277.22
crore of stamp paper sheets, the production and
supply were 127.83 and 118.32 crore sheets
respectively.  The shortfall in supply with
reference to indent was 158.89 crore sheets and
the percentage of shortfall in production and
supply to the indents were 53.89 and 57.32 per
cent respectively.   Explaining the reason for ISP’s
inability to meet the demand raised in the indents,
the Ministry informed the Committee that indents
placed by indenters were very erratic, fluctuating
between 52 crore to 18 crore per year and it was
difficult to plan production according to such
abnormal fluctuations in the indents. In addition
to the above, there are other constraints such as
old machinery, lack of availability of raw materials
in time, lengthy purchase procedure leading to
delay in timely receipt of raw materials, etc.
3. 113 M/o Finance The Committee find that the total indents in terms
(D/o Economic of number of sheets varied over a wide range of
Affairs) 18.10 crore to 52.82 crore sheets per year during
the period 1996-1997 to 2003-2004 and there was
no evidence to suggest that ISP had analysed
the reasons for such wide fluctuations in the
indents in consultation with the indenters. The
Ministry have informed the Committee that ISP
undertakes printing on orders from various State
Governments/Union Territories and Central
Government Ministries/Offices and it is difficult
for it to undertake studies on all India basis to
find out the reasons for abnormal fluctuations in
the indents. The Committee were further informed
that analysis of the indents received during the
last nine years indicate that there was no pattern
and they appear to have been raised in an 'ad-
hoc' manner. Even when the full supplied were
12 3 4

69
not met against the indents of a particular year, in
the subsequent year the indents did not increase
in the same proportion. Instead, in most of the
cases, it had gone down that too without any
consistent pattern.
4. 114 M/o Finance With a view to ensure that the States raise realistic
(D/o Economic indents, the Ministry of Finance have decided
Affairs) that  from 2004 onwards, 30 per cent cost of the
indented material should be deposited as an
advance by the indenters. Indents received
without advance money would be treated as
unconfirmed indents and ISP will not accord any
priority to such indents from 2005-06.  However,
the Committee find the new system to be a non-
starter which can be gauged from the fact that
only 12 States/Union Territories have remitted
the advance payment during the Financial Year
2005-2006 and the   remaining 16 States viz.,
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Uttar
Pradesh have not yet complied with the new
system.  According to the Ministry of Finance,
the major reason for non-compliance of States to
the new arrangement is the reported non-
availability of budget in some States for release
of advance payment.  While some States have
asked for proforma invoice for the advance
payment other States have not responded to their
request so far.
5. 115 -do- According to the Ministry, with the introduction
of procedure of calling for 30 per cent advance
amount against the indents, the indents have
come down very drastically from around 50 crore
to 14 crore sheets in a year which seems to
indicate that State Governments used  to submit
inflated and unrealistic indents.  Though the
Committee appreciate the efforts made by the
Ministry to curb erratic indents by way of
introduction of a system of payment of advance
of the material to be indented, the fact remains
that it is only after Audit have taken up the review
12 3 4

70
of ISP, the Ministry have become alive to the
problem  and decided as late as in 2004 to
introduce the system. With a view to curtail and
curb erratic indents by various indenting
agencies, the Committee recommend that India
Security Press should set up an institutional
mechanism to rationalise the indents received
from various entities and also introduce a system
of coordination with indenters to address the
issue of erratic and inflated indents by setting up
a printing and supply plan consistent with the
indents. However, at the same time it should also
be ensured that for want of payment of 30 per
cent advance, States do not place low indents so
that it could lead to a situation of scarcity in the
market which could be exploited by the
unscrupulous elements.  The Committee also urge
upon the Ministry to examine the feasibility of
introducing a comprehensive and transparent
information system in coordination with the State
Governments and other indenting entities on one
hand and the Finance Ministry on the other for
exchanging/sharing the information relating to
indents so that the possibility of shortages of
stamp papers could be eliminated.
6. 116 M/o Finance The Committee are constrained to point out that
(D/o Economic the actual production of stamp papers
Affairs) in terms of sheets disclosed that it did not have
any relationship with the indent.  There was  a
wide variation in the annual production varying
between 8.77 crore to 20.66 crore sheets.  During
the eight years period, i.e. from 1996 to 2004, India
Security Press cumulatively produced  127.83
crore sheets against the total indents of 277.23
crore sheets, which is only 46 per cent of the
indents.  Analysis of category and denomination-
wise production of stamps over the period from
1995 to 2003 confirmed that there was no co-
relation between indent and production as well
as indent and supply. Moreover, the production
was consistently lower than the indent and the
ISP did not bother to increase production despite
12 3 4

71
large unmet indents.  The Ministry of Finance
have however contended that production and
supply were more a less consistent over years.
Because of wide fluctuation in indents it was
impracticable to enhance installed capacity all of
a sudden and that too when there was no
certainty that demand would continue to remain
in the coming years.  The Ministry have further
informed the Committee that on analysis of
production capacity of ISP it had been observed
that current requirement of indents can be met
with the existing capacity and therefore, at present,
there is no proposal to enhance the installed
capacity. Since dematting is under active
consideration, the requirement of stamp papers
is likely to reduce significantly.  Though the
Committee appreciate the Ministry’s view point
that it would be difficult for ISP to increase the
installed capacity all of a sudden and that too in
the light of erratic indents which vary from year
to year, nevertheless the fact remains that ISP
did not bother to review the reasons for
consistently low production with reference to the
indents and the attendant risks such as the
possibility of counterfeit stamp papers entering
the market to make good of the wide variation in
the supply and demand.  The Committee feel that
this betrays total lack of risk perception in ISP
towards their highly sensitive and risk function
of production and supply of stamps and stamp
papers.  The Committee are quite sceptical about
the Ministry’s optimism that the existing
production capacity of ISP would take care of
the current requirements of indents, since there
is no evidence to suggest that ISP had carried
out an assessment in this regard.  Further, the
Committee cannot subscribe to the Ministry’s
view that demat of stamp papers would
significantly reduce the demand for stamps and
stamp papers when it is still at a very nascent
stage and is yet to be  implemented.  With a view
to maintain equilibrium between indent and
production, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry of Finance may consider  the feasibility
12 3 4

72
of enhancing the installed capacity of ISP. Various
bottlenecks such as old machinery, lack of
availability of raw materials in time etc. that come
in the way of achieving optimum production level
should have been removed by taking timely
remedial action. The Ministry ought to ensure
that there is no shortages in supply of stamps
and stamp papers vis-a-vis demand raised in the
indents which could lead to a crisis situation that
can be exploited by the scamsters. Requisite
quantity of stamp papers should be made
available by fulfilling all the indents raised by the
indenting agencies.
7. 117 M/o Finance The Committee are dismayed to note that no
(D/o Economic survey was conducted by the Ministry  to
Affairs) analyse as to how the indenters were able to
meet their requirements of stamps and stamp
papers when ISP was unable to fulfill the entire
demand raised in the indents so much so that 54
per cent of the total demand raised in the indents
had remained unfulfilled.  Explaining the reasons
for not conducting the survey  by ISP, the
Ministry have stated that under Section 10(b) of
Indian Stamps Act, State Governments are
empowered to take recourse to alternate mode of
Stamp duty collection in the event of shortage of
stamps/stamp papers.  The Committee do not
accept the Ministry’s arguement which appears
to be  hypothetical and presumptuous and is not
backed by any evidence suggesting that States/
UTs have been invoking the provisions under
the Indian Stamp Act to meet their requirements.
The Committee cannot but deplore the
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry to such
an important and sensitive issue which have
grave implication for the economy.  Far from being
alive to the inherent dangers implicit in the
shortage of stamps and stamp papers that could
be exploited by the unscrupulous elements to
their advantage, the Ministry have sought to take
refuge in the provision of Indian Stamp Paper
Act, which betrays a total lack of seriousness
and insensitivity on the part of the Ministry to
12 3 4

73
their sovereign function of printing and supply
of stamps and stamp papers in adequate
quantities.
8. 118 M/o Finance The Committee note that just as production of
(D/o Economic stamp/stamp papers did not have any
Affairs) relationship with indent, the supply also did not
follow any pattern.  The supply varied between
as low as 27 per cent and a maximum of 59 per
cent of the indents.  Over the eight-year period
i.e. from 1996 to 2004, the supply was only 118.33
crore sheets against the indent of 277.23 crore
sheets i.e., a shortfall of about 57 per cent. State-
wise and denomination-wise analysis of supply
against the indents disclosed that while the
supplies were largely much lower than the indent,
it did not follow any pattern. The Ministry have
taken a stand that the apparent shortfall of indents
by 57 per cent had not resulted in crisis in any of
the States since the indents were highly inflated
and because of the efforts initiated by ISP to
curb inflated indents, the indented quantities have
come down substantially. It has also been stated
that some of the indenters did not lift the non-
judicial-stamp-papers which were duly packed
and ready for dispatch, inspite of reminders which
shows that there was hardly any problem in
respect of supply of stamps and stamp papers.
The Committee have been further informed that
when the indents were going beyond the printing
capacity of ISP, the fact was communicated to all
the Treasuries/Sub Treasuries and Postal Stores
Depots all over the country vide Central Stamp
Depot, Nashik Road, Circular No.2304 dated 13
th
November, 1991 and subsequent reminder
Circular bearing No.2606 dated 13
th April, 1996.  It
was clearly brought out in these Circulars that
the indenters should raise realistic indents and
the unmet indents for a quarter would not be
carried forward and would be treated as cancelled.
The Committee regret to note that post 1996 the
Ministry have not made any efforts to review the
indents in consultation with the users. Though
the Ministry had issued a Circular way back in
12 3 4

74
1991 followed by a reminder in 1996 asking the
indenters to make realistic indents, it appears that
thereafter it had not bothered to review the
situation and slept over the matter till Audit had
pointed out the mismatches in the Indent,
Production and Supply. It is only after Audit had
taken up review of ISP, the Ministry had woken
up to the issue and conducted meetings with the
respective State Governments and Union
Territories in 2004.   The Committee are of the
opinion that had the Ministry been alive to the
problem in the intervening period from 1996-97
to 2003-04, and taken remedial measures to correct
the imbalances between Indent and supply
things would not have come to such a pass.
Further, the possibility of scamsters exploiting
the situation arising out of consistent low supply
of stamp papers for counterfeit operations would
have been greatly minimised.
9. 119 M/o Finance Generally, paper manufacturers produce paper
(D/o Economic for supply to ISP as per the quantity stipulated
Affairs) in the supply order. Excess paper produced, if
any, is re-pulped by the paper mills.   As per the
agreement entered into by ISP with the paper
mills which produce paper for printing, the mills
should not produce and supply security papers
to other agencies. However, Audit review
revealed that ISP did not exercise any control
regarding actual quantities produced by these
mills against its supply orders, including the
wastages.  The Committee apprehend that
absence of control on the production of paper
entails risk of diversion for counterfeit operations.
In support of their contention that the extant
system of private paper mills producing paper as
per the quantity stipulated in the supply order of
ISP has been working well, the Ministry have
stated that the examination  reports  in respect of
the fake stamp paper cases that were sent by
State Police, CBI and other Investigating
Agencies to Forgery Detection Cell of ISP , for
examination, had  revealed that there are no forged
stamps/stamp papers wherein genuine paper
12 3 4

75
supplied to ISP by private mills has been used.
On the other hand, the Ministry have conceded
that ISP is not in a position to have full control
over private paper manufacturers with respect to
the quantity of paper produced since they supply
different kinds of papers not only to ISP but also
to many other users. The Committee are of the
view that despite the contractual obligation
whereunder the paper mills cannot produce more
than the quantity ordered by ISP without their
permission there is no guarantee that paper Mills
will not violate this condition.  Further ISP do not
have any mechanism to find out whether the mills
have been strictly adhering to this condition.
Under these circumstances it is naïve on the part
of ISP to repose confidence  in the private paper
mills.  Though the Ministry can find solace from
the fact that in none of the cases where forgery
has been detected by the investigating agencies,
genuine paper manufactured by private mills are
used, the Committee however, caution the ISP
not to become complacent.  The Ministry should
take extra caution and have a strict vigil and
constant monitoring on the functioning of the
private paper mills so that they do not divert the
stamp paper to unscrupulous persons for
counterfeit operations.  The Committee further
recommend that ISP should ensure that the paper
mills do not produce papers more than the
quantity ordered and also to evolve a mechanism
by which ISP can detect production of excess
paper by the paper mills.
10. 120 M/o Finance The Committee are informed that dandy roll, a
(D/o Economic device used for introduction of security
Affairs) watermark on to the paper during the course of
its manufacture is designed by ISP but
manufactured by private producers.  The paper
mills rather than ISP is responsible for
manufacture of dandy rolls through private
sources.  The manufacturers of dandy rolls are
small scale industrial units and do not have a
separate licence for their manufacture from ISP.
12 3 4

76
In his deposition before the Committee, the
Secretary (Economic Affairs), Ministry of Finance
had clarified that only low value security paper is
allowed to be manufactured by the Private Paper
mills using Dandy Rolls.  For High Value security
paper, ISP procures paper from the security paper
mill, Hoshangabad.  However, the review of
Control Systems in ISP over dandy rolls disclosed
disregard for security procedures of this high
risk device in as much as ISP did not maintain
control of the dandy rolls and their use through
the means of their custody, verification and legal
backing of agreement/oath by the private users.
The inspections by ISP officials were infrequent
and follow up actions were non-existent. At no
time, ISP assured itself that dandy rolls were not
misused not enter into any agreement with the
unit manufacturing dandy rolls. In the agreement
entered with the Supplier of paper, there are
precluding clauses whereby the Paper Supplier
is restrained to use dandy rolls for any other
purpose other than stated in the agreement. As a
further measure to improve the control on dandy
rolls, paper manufacturers are being asked to
obtain an undertaking from the dandy roll
manufacturers that they would not produce
dandy roll of the water mark used by ISP for any
other organization without the express approval
of  ISP.
11. 121 M/o Finance The Committee apprehend that duplicate
(D/o Economic production or theft/diversion of the dandy rolls
Affairs) is fraught with serious risk of these being misused
to produce paper for counterfeit production.  The
Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Finance  while deposing before the
Committee shared the apprehension of the
Committee that the private mills can make more
paper than what is required by virtue of their
possession of the Dandy Rolls.  The Secretary
mooted a suggestion that the only fool proof
mechanism for prevention of misuse of Dandy
Rolls is that all the papers should come from
Government controlled presses.  For this either
12 3 4

77
another Press should be set up or a new
manufacturing line be added to the existing
Government press.  The Committee cannot but
over emphasise the critical role played by Dandy
Rolls and any misuse of this critical input would
have a serious repercussions on the economy in
as much as it could not only lead to production
of counterfeit stamp paper but also loss of
revenue to the Central and  State Government
exchequers. The Committee regret to note that
there was a total lack of threat perception on the
part of ISP towards the high risk involved in the
use of Dandy Rolls in the production of Stamp
Papers Far from carrying out a risk assessment
on the probable misuse of Dandy Rolls by the
Private Paper Mills for excess production of
papers than the indented quantity for counterfeit
production of stamp papers, ISP had chosen to
rely upon the contractual obligation entered with
them.  It is only after discovery of large scale
counterfeit stamp papers in the recent past
followed by Audit review on their functioning
that ISP had become alive to the problem and has
since decided that hence forth Dandy Rolls will
be defaced/destroyed after the ordered quantity
of the paper is fully supplied by the mills. The
Committee recommend that with a view to prevent
misuse of Dandy Rolls, the custody and use of
dandy rolls should be controlled by ISP by way
of retaining the same with them and released only
for the duration of production of security paper.
Possibility of automatic embedding of  the number
of sheets of use with each dandy roll may also be
explored.  The Committee further recommend that
the feasibility of completely doing away with the
system of engagement of Private Paper Mills for
production of paper and entrusting the job of
producing all the papers required for security
paper production—both high and low value
security paper to the Government Security Press
should be explored. This can be done either by
augmenting the production capacity of the
Government Press or setting up a second line of
production.
12 3 4

78
12. 122 M/o Finance The Committee note that as per the documents
(D/o Economic maintained by India Security Press, 53 dandy rolls
Affairs) were in the custody of nine paper mills, many of
which are not manufacturing paper for ISP for
years.  ISP had not carried out physical
verification of 21 dandy rolls  that were lying
with seven paper mills after 1988-89.  The last
physical inspection was conducted  by ISP in
Titagarh Paper Mills, Kolkata  in 1996, in which
only 12 dandy rolls out of 26 were available.
Neither the 14 missing dandy rolls were traced
nor the 12 that were available, had been taken
over by ISP despite no business with this mill for
about 20 years.  According to the Ministry the
physical custody of dandy rolls remained with
paper mills as they belonged to them.  While
conceeding that the physical verification of dandy
rolls had not been conducted on a  regular basis,
the      Ministry , however, stated that the same
was carried out in the year 1987-88, 1991, 1996,
2003 and 2005.  The Ministry have now informed
that a mechanism has since been put in place
whereby inspection would be carried out on half-
yearly basis and effective verification of dandy
rolls would be done eliminating the possibility of
their misuse.  Henceforth, dandy rolls will be
defaced/destroyed after ordered quantity is
supplied by the mills. The Committee are
distressed to note  that ISP could not give any
plausible explanation for the irregular/infrequent
physical verifications of dandy rolls.  No
periodicity or interval appears to have been fixed
for the physical verification which is borne by
the fact that verification was sometimes carried
out after a yawning gap of more than 7 years,
which betrays lack of seriousness and most
importantly sensitivity to this important function
which is fraught with the risk of counterfeit
production.  It is only after the Committee were
seized of the matter that ISP had now decided to
conduct physical verification of dandy rolls at
half-yearly intervals.  What has surprised the
Committee is the fact that some paper mills which
are no longer producing paper for ISP are still in
12 3 4

79
possession of dandy rolls rather  than destroying
them.  ISP had justified the possession of dandy
rolls by these paper mills on the ground that they
lie with the paper mills since they belonged to
them, which is anything but inexplicable.  The
Committee expect that atleast in future ISP would
carry the physical inspection at regular intervals.
They also expect ISP would strictly ensure that
as soon as the mills produce the ordered quantity,
the dandy rolls are defaced/destroyed.  The
Committee recommend that ISP should set up a
monitoring mechanism both in headquarters as
well at each private paper mill which produce
papers for ISP to oversee that dandy rolls are
completely destroyed.
13. 123 M/o Finance Instances of short  and excess supply and supply
(D/o Economic of stamps and stamp papers of denominations
Affairs) other than indented or declared in the packing
list have come to the notice of the Committee
which is a high-risk deficiency that could point
towards pilferage of the printed stamps and stamp
papers. Sample check of documents relating to
different consignments in various States
disclosed short supplies with aggregate value of
Rs. 1453.75 crore i.e. Delhi (239.75 crore), Gujarat
(332.71 crore), Haryana (Rs 1.00 crore), Kerala
(Rs. 72.26 crore), Punjab (Rs 0.13 crore) and Uttar
Pradesh (Rs. 807.90 crore) and excess supplies of
stamps of value of Rs. 687.89 crore in six states
during 1996-2003 i.e  Delhi (Rs.15.73 crore),
Gujarat (Rs. 132.41 crore), Kerala (Rs.142.75 crore),
Orissa (Rs. 6.75 crore), Punjab (Rs.0.25 crore) and
Uttar Pradesh (Rs.390.00 crore). The Committee
are constrained to point out that India Security
Press did not take suitable remedial measures
despite a number of instances and complaints
about the packets dispatched by them containing
stamps of incorrect denominations, excess and
short supply.  The Committee hope that suitable
steps would be taken by ISP in future to avoid
such instances.
14. 124 M/o Finance Audit Review has revealed that there were three
12 3 4

80
(D/o Economic cases of theft of stamps from ISP shop floor with
Affairs) an aggregate value Rs. 1.17 crore.  Out of these,
two cases were reported to be pending in the
courts of law. In the third case involving theft of
stamps valued at Rs. 0.85 crore, which took place
in April 2002, the culprit was yet to be traced but
the case was reported to have been closed.  The
Ministry have clarified that the theft case relating
to India Foreign Bill Stamps amounting to Rs.0.85
crores has not been closed and the same is being
pursued with the concerned State police
authorities. An FIR had already been lodged with
State police.  Explaining the action taken against
the culprits involved in the theft cases, the
Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Finance during evidence deposed
that General Manager of ISP was suspended  and
arrested and later on dismissed from the service.
Besides, a few more employees have been
suspended/arrested and in one or two cases,  the
CBI after due verification, had subsequently
given  clean chit.  The Committee while expressing
their serious concern over the theft that occurred
in ISP shop floor, recommend that suitable penal
action should be taken against all the persons
found guilty in the theft cases. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the steps taken to
strengthen the security and vigilance systems in
the shop floor of ISP so as to prevent recurrence
of theft.
15. 125 M/o Finance The Committee find that India Security Press did
(D/o Economic not have an institutionalised system of
Affairs) surveillance/vigilance in discharge of its high risk
and vulnerable operation, except for a Forgery
Detection Cell, whose task was limited to
verification of the genuineness of the stamps,
whenever a complaint was received from the
indenters or investigating agencies. Even this
operation was approached in a routine manner,
limiting its role to mere reporting of the findings.
The Committee note that there was an inordinate
delay in the verification of the genuineness of
the stamps on the referred cases and ISP  did not
12 3 4

81
extend the scope of investigation to the
possibility of counterfeit on a large scale which
again points to the lack of threat perception by
ISP towards this high risk function.  The  Ministry
of Finance have contended that ISP is not an
investigative agency and its role is limited to
ascertaining genuineness of the documents
presented to it by various investigating agencies
like State Police, CBI etc.  According to the
Ministry, investigation of cases of forged stamps
is done by respective State Governments.  The
Committee note that many cases  relating to
forgery of stamps/ stamp papers had remained
un-investigated for years, sometimes on the
ground of non-receipt of the examination fee of a
mere Rs. 100 per document.   They further note
that a large number of the cases referred for
examination of genuineness of the stamps
pertained to Uttar Pradesh (241), Maharashtra
(294), Andhra Pradesh (156), New Delhi (140) and
Tamil Nadu (57), where incidentally a number of
cases relating to counterfeit stamp papers were
reported/found in the wake of Forged Stamp
Paper Scam. Out of the total 69,648 documents of
suspected counterfeit stamps consisting of non-
postal stamps and stamp papers, the examination
by the fraud detection unit disclosed fake stamps
in 50313 documents.   The Committee regret to
note that though the Ministry had subsequently
set up a Vigilance-cum Surveillance Cell which
had started functioning with effect from 1.3.2005,
the Cell is concerned only with activities within
ISP and it has nothing to do with intelligence
gathering and surveillance  all over the country.
Though it is appreciated that intelligence
gathering and surveillance relating to circulation
of counterfeit stamps in the economy pertains to
State and Central Intelligence Agencies,
nevertheless the Committee are of the opinion
that with a view to curb and prevent circulation
of large scale counterfeit stamp paper in the
system, the Ministry of Finance should explore
the possibility of setting a Centralised
Surveillance and Vigilance System comprising of
12 3 4

82
representative of ISP and State and Central
Investigative Agencies.  The modalities of
functioning of the system should be worked out
by Ministry of Finance in coordination with
Ministry of Home Affairs and in consultation with
respective State Governments. The system so
set up  should be alert to the error signals that
may manifest in various form viz. theft within ISP
and in transit, missing dandy rolls etc.   The
Committee further recommend that in view of the
ramifications of counterfeit stamps on the
economy as a whole ISP should therefore,
examine the  genuineness of stamps in respect of
all the complaints received irrespective of
whether the examination fee had been paid or
not.
16. 126 M/o Finance The Committee were concerned to note that the
(D/o Economic physical security within India Security Press,
Affairs) which ought to have multi-level reinforced
security system, had been lax. While
Maharashtra police managed the security at the
gates, the departmental security personnel were
responsible for security at the shop floor.
Though Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
replaced the Maharashtra police at the gate as
late as  October, 2002 and the department security
personnel at the shop floor with effect from
September, 2004, the Committee regret to note
that still some of the security related
recommendations made  by the Intelligence
Bureau were yet to be implemented as of March
2004.  The Committee have been subsequently
informed that out of total 38 recommendation,
35 have already been implemented.  The
remaining 3 recommendations that are pending
implementation relate to installation of Watch
Tower, CCTV system and the shifting of Trade
Union Offices.  The Ministry have informed that
Watch Tower and CCTV system  would be
installed by December, 2005.  The Committee
would like to be apprised as to how far the
implementation of recommendations made by
Intelligence Bureau  has helped in beefing/
12 3 4

83
strengthening the security set up in ISP.  They
also expect that the Ministry of Finance would
ensure that the remaining recommendations are
implemented at the earliest.
17. 127 M/o Finance The Committee were concerned to  note that far
(D/o Economic from dismantling the equipment and machinery
Affairs) used for printing and other operations in printing
of stamp paper, on ‘as is where is basis’, with a
view to eliminating any risk of their re-assembly
for counterfeit operation, and precluding the same
person/firm from buying the condemned
machinery of different types used in printing and
other associated operations etc., ISP had actually
facilitated knowledge of assembly of the
machines by permitting up to 10 representatives
of the successful bidder, M/s Unique Enterprises
to witness the dismantling of the machines before
their disposal for two months, in two spells, during
June-September, 1998. ISP was also negligent in
the sale of the condemned printing machine and
perforating machine to the same firm at different
points of time between June 1998 and September
1998.  The Committee were informed that only
bigger machines were dismantled so that it can
be taken out from the doors of the shop and other
machines have been sold as it is. The machines
such as Perforating Machines  were already
available with private security printers in India,
who were supplying commemorative postage
stamps to Department of Posts, Government of
India. In this connection the Ministry have tried
to explain that as per the terms and conditions of
the Tender Notice No. 5/97 (S. Nos. 11, 12 and 13)
the firms’ representatives were permitted to
witness the dismantling of the machines to ensure
that firm satisfies itself that all the parts of
machine are made available to them.  The
Ministry have contended that procedure
prescribed in General Financial Rules had been
followed for the disposal of machinery.  However,
they have added that keeping in view the
sensitivity and  security involved a new
procedure had since been introduced whereunder
12 3 4

84
disposal of machines is done after converting
them into scrap. The Committee are perplexed at
the casual and negligent approach adopted by
ISP towards the high risk function of dismantling
of printing machines, which is totally devoid of
any threat/risk perception.  Far from being alive
to the possible risk associated with such
operation such as chances of misuse of
machinery, the tender documents were designed
in such a manner that the knowledge of assembly
of machines was unwittingly passed on to the
bidder.  The issue had become all the more serious
and alarming and the motive of ISP behind
incorporation of certain clauses in the tender
notice questionable after the Fake Stamp Paper
Scam came into light.  It is only after the Scam
broke out that ISP had become wiser and decided
to adopt a new procedure whereunder the
obsolete machinery is disposed after converting
into scrap.  The Committee are of the firm view
that had this new procedure been put in place
earlier, the possibility of alleged misuse of the
machinery by the bidders would have been
completely eliminated.  Suitable deterrent action
should be taken against all those who are found
guilty.
18. 128 M/o Finance The Committee understand that several cases
(D/o Economic relating to fake stamp papers scam are currently
Affairs) under investigation by CBI.  The Committee were
informed that as on 12
th September, 2005 CBI had
registered and filed charge sheets in 64 cases in
the fakes stamp paper scam.  Out of these 39
were related to Abdul Karim Telgi, the kingpin of
the scam and the remaining 25 cases were stated
to be not directly linked to Telgi.  As regards
ISP’s role in the fake stamp papers scam, the
representative of CBI during evidence had
deposed that CBI had focussed on three
allegations relating to ISP namely – (i) physical
verification of Dandy Rolls; (ii) negligent disposal
of machinery; and (iii) artificial suppression of
supply of stamps.  The Committee recommend
that the Ministry of Finance should periodically
12 3 4

85
review the progress made in the cases relating to
ISP and urge upon the CBI to expedite the
investigation/examination of the cases.  The
Committee would like to be apprised of  the
findings of CBI in the matter of ISP related cases
together with suitable remedial Action Taken by
the Government to obviate recurrence of such
instances.
19. 129 M/o Finance The Committee are of the considered view that
(D/o Economic there is an urgent need to revamp/overhaul the
Affairs) functioning of ISP.  This has attained paramount
importance particularly in the wake of recent
fake stamp paper scam that has rocked the
country.  For this, an expert Committee
comprising of eminent personalities/
professionals drawn from different fields with
experience relevant to the functioning of ISP
should  be set up to examine the entire gamut of
activities relating to ISP.  The Expert Committee
should examine all the existing procedures/rules
in relation to indent, production, supply and
dispatch from the standpoint of threat/risk
perception.  Risk analysis with respect to all
activities pertaining to production  of  stamps
and stamp papers viz . procurement, short-
listing of private paper mills, dandy rolls, ink,
security etc. should be conducted so that the
scope for error and lapses in these processes
are minimised to a large extent.
20. 130 -do- The Committee note that though the Ministry of
Finance had taken a decision in principle to
encourage dematting of Stamp Papers way back
in December, 2003 i.e. 18/12/2003, the proposal
was  approved by the Government after more
than a year i.e. on 28/2/2005. Despite holding 3
meetings so far with State Revenue Secretaries
and Inspector   General (Registration and Stamps)
on 22/12/2003, 4/3/2004 and 2/9/2004,
respectively, the Committee regret to note that
dematting of Stamp Papers is yet to take a final
shape.  The Committee were given to understand
that some States are still in the process of
understanding the proposal.  The Committee
12 3 4

86
while expressing their unhappiness over the
tardy progress made in the implementation of
demat process recommend that Ministry should
make concerted efforts to convince all the States/
UTs  so that the demat of Stamp Papers is
implemented at the earliest. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the latest position in this
regard.
21. 131 M/o Finance Apart from dematerialisation of stamp papers,
(D/o Economic the Committee are of the considered view that in
Affairs) the present age of information technology other
alternative methods should be explored so as to
completely do away with the physical form of
the Stamp Papers.  The Ministry of Finance may
examine the feasibility of implementing various
ways and means to achieve these objectives.
12 3 4

PART  II
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006) HELD ON 14TH SEPTEMBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1715 hrs. on 14th September, 2005 in Committee
Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri R.L. Jalappa
4. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
5. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
6. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
7. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
13. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri M.S. Shekhawat — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri K.P. Sashidharan — Pr. Director, Audit (C), Mumbai
3. Ms. Parma Sen — Director (RC)
87

88
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS—
CURRENCY & COINAGE DIVISION)
1. Shri Ashok Jha — Secretary (EA)
2. Shri Ashok Chawla — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Arvind Mayaram — Joint Secretary
R
EPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDIA SECURITY PRESS, NASHIK
Mr. Prakash Narayan — General Manager
REPRESENTATIVE OF CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
Mrs. Archana Ramasundaran — Spl. IGP & Jt. Director, EOW-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Officers of the Office of C&AG of India briefed the
Committee on specific points arising out of Audit Report No. 14 of 2005 relating to
"Control Systems in India Security Press, Nashik".  Thereafter, the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and India Security Press,
Nashik were called in and the Committee took their evidence on the subject. The
Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) made a brief audio-
visual presentation on the subject. The Members sought clarifications on various
points arising out of the Audit Report as also the Advance Information furnished by
the Ministry on the subject.
3. As the evidence on the subject remained inconclusive, the Committee decided
to meet again on 15th September, 2005 for the purpose.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006) HELD ON 15TH SEPTEMBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. on 15th September, 2005 in Committee
Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri R.L. Jalappa
3. Shri Brajesh Pathak
4. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
5. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
6. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
7. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri M.S. Shekhawat — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri K.P. Sashidharan — Pr. Director, Audit (C), Mumbai
3. Ms. Parma Sen — Director (RC)
R
EPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS—
CURRENCY & COINAGE DIVISION)
1. Shri Ashok Jha — Secretary (EA)
2. Shri Ashok Chawla — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Arvind Mayaram — Joint Secretary
89

90
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDIA SECURITY PRESS, NASHIK
Mr. Prakash Narayan — General Manager
REPRESENTATIVE OF CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
Mrs. Archana Ramasundaram — Spl. IGP & Jt. Director, EOW-II
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, the
Officials of C&AG of India, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs—Currency & Coinage Division) and India Security Press, Nashik
to the sitting of the Committee.
3. Thereafter, the Committee resumed the oral evidence on Audit Report No. 14 of
2005, Union Government (Civil—Performance Audit) on "Control Systems in India
Security Press, Nashik which remained inconclusive on 14th September, 2005. The
Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) and other officers of
the Ministry and India Security Press replied to the various points/queries raised by
the Members. After some discussion, Hon'ble Chairman directed the Ministry of
Finance to furnish written information on all points relating to the subject, which were
raised by the Members during the evidence, at the earliest.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
5. The Committee then decided to undertake a Study Tour to Kochi, Mumbai and
Ahmedabad from 14th to 19th October, 2005 instead of 22nd to 27th September, 2005,
as decided earlier by them.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007) HELD ON 20TH JULY , 2006
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1215 hours in Committee Room 'D', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra   —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Brajesh Pathak
6. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
7. Shri Mohan Singh
8. Shri Kharabela Swain
9. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri V . Narayanasamy
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Shri Prashanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyaya — Additional Deputy C&AG
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General of Audit (CR)
3. Shri R.N. Ghose — Principal Director (AB)
91

92
4. Shri P. Shesh Kumar — Principal Director (RC)
5. Mrs. Sudha Krishnan — Principal Director (Direct Taxes)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF INFORMATION & BROADCASTING
1. Shri S.K. Arora — Secretary
2. Shri Raghu Menon — Additional Secretary & Financial
Advisor
REPRESENTA TIVES OF THE PRASAR BHARATI
1. Shri Navin Kumar — Chief Executive Officer
2. Shri Sanjeev Datta — ADG(A)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Commitee then took up for consideration of the
following draft Reports and adopted the same without any modifications/amendments.
(i) Draft Report on C&AG's Report No. 14 of 2005 for the year ended March,
2004, Union Government, (Civil-Performance Audit) relating to 'Control Systems in
India Security Press, Nashik'.
(ii)  XXX XXX XXX
(ii)  XXX XXX XXX
The Committee authorised the Chairman, to finalise these draft Reports in the light
of changes suggested by Audit through factual verification, if any, or otherwise and
to present the same to the Parliament.
3.  XXX XXX XXX
4.  A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.
MGIPMRND—1677LS—28-08-2006.