40
MANAGEMENT OF PROJECTS
RELATING TO UTILISATION AND
CONSERV ATION OF SOIL AND WATER
UNDERTAKEN BY INSTITUTES OF ICAR
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL
RESEARCH AND EDUCATION)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-07
FORTIETH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FORTIETH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MANAGEMENT OF PROJECTS RELATING TO
UTILISATION AND CONSERV ATION OF SOIL AND
WATER UNDERTAKEN BY INSTITUTES OF ICAR
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH
AND EDUCATION)
Presented to Lok Sabha on........................................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on..............................................
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February, 2007/Magha, 1928 (Saka)

PA.C. No. 1825
Price: Rs. 76.00
©2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007)................................. ( iii)
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. (v)
REPORT............................................................................................................. 1
APPENDIX I Chapter-II of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 5 of
2005), Union Government (Scientific Departments) relating
to “Management of Projects relating to Utilisation and
Conservation of Soil and Water undertaken by
Institutes of ICAR” .......................................................... 42
A
PPENDIX II Observations and Recommendations ............................. 54
PART -II
Minutes of the Sittings of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 5th January, 2006 and 13th February, 2007. .......... 65
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  —  Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
 4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V. Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional  Secretary
2.  Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint  Secretary
3.  Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
5. Smt.  A. Jyothirmayi — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee,
do present this Fortieth Report relating to “Management of Projects relating to
Utilisation and Conservation of Soil and Water undertaken by Institutes of ICAR” on
Chapter-II of Report of C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 5 of
2005), Union Government (Scientific Departments).
2.  The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 5 of
2005), Union Government (Scientific Departments) was laid on the Table of the House
on 6th May, 2005.
3.  The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) and Indian Council
of Agricultural Research on the subject at their sitting held on 5th January, 2006. The
Committee considered and finalised this Report at their sitting held on 13th February,
2007. Minutes of the sitting form Part-II of the Report.
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommen-
dations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and
have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
5.  The Committee would like to express their thanks to the Officers of the
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural Research and Education) and
Indian Council of Agricultural Research for the cooperation extended by them in fur-
nishing information and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6.  The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
N
EW DELHI; Chairman,
15 February,  2007                       Public Accounts Committee.
26 Magha, 1928 (Saka)
(v)

1
REPORT
Introductory
1. Natural Resource Management Division of Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR) is responsible for research on conservation, improvement and efficient
utilisation of soil and water. Five research institutes of ICAR are engaged in research
in these areas and the areas of research undertaken by them are as under:—
Sl. Name of Institute Research areas
No.
1. National Bureau of Soil Soil survey and mapping the soils of the country to
Survey and Land Use promote scientific and optimal land pedology, soil
Planning (NBSS&LUP), survey, land evaluation and land use planning.
Nagpur
2. Indian Institute of Soil Basic and strategic research on soils, especially
Science (IISS), Bhopal physical, chemical and biological processes related
to management of nutrients, water and energy and
developing advanced technologies for sustainable
systems of input management in soils.
3. Central Soil Salinity Basic and applied research for developing
Research Institute (CSSRI), strategies for salinity control, reclamation and
Karnal management of salt affected soils.
4. Water Technology Centre for Basic and applied research for developing
Eastern Region (WTCER), strategies for efficient utilisation of on-farm water
Bhubaneshwar resources to enhance agricultural productivity on
sustainable basis.
5. Central Soil & Water Research and development of strategies for
Conservation Research and controlling land degradation under all primary
Training Institute production systems, rehabilitation of degraded
(CSWCR&TI), Dehradun lands, updated technology in soil and water
conservation, watershed development and its
management and undertaking water harvesting
measures.
2. This Report is based on Chapter II of the Report of C&AG for the year ended
March, 2004 No. 5 of 2005, Union Government (Scientific Departments) relating to
"Management of projects relating to utilisation and conservation of soil and water
undertaken by Institutes of ICAR". Audit undertook a review covering the period
1999-2000 to 2003-2004 of the management of the projects undertaken to utilise and
conserve soil and water through test check of in-house projects, sponsored projects
and externally aided projects undertaken and completed by the aforesaid five institutes
with reference to the milestones and achievements of objectives and benefits to be
derived from them.
3. According to Audit Report, (i) NBSS&LUP, Nagpur could not achieve
objectives of soil survey, mapping and land use planning in three projects involving
an expenditure of Rs. 6.63 crore. Soil Survey reports were not prepared even after lapse

2
of five to twenty-five years; (ii) IISS, Bhopal did not achieve the desired results in soil
science research in two projects, despite expenditure of Rs. 55.25 lakh; (iii) CSSRI,
Karnal could not solve effectively the issues relating to reclamation and management
of alkaline and saline soils in two projects costing Rs. 12.82 crore. Map of salt affected
soils of India was also not prepared; (iv) In water management research, WTCER,
Bhubaneshwar failed to accomplish targeted results in three projects costing Rs. 36.39
lakh resulting in non-achievement of the objective of sustainable agricultural production
through management of canal water, rain water and waterlogged land;
(v) CSWCR&TI, Dehradun did not achieve the objectives of research in soil and water
conservation measures and land use systems for sustainable crop production in three
projects costing Rs. 37.90 lakh; and (vi) Technologies developed in 16 projects at a
cost of Rs. 2.44 crore were not transferred to end users.
Some of the important aspects of Audit findings are dealt with in the following
paragraphs.
I. National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning (NBSS&LUP), Nagpur
4. The aims and objectives of the Institute are as follows:—
(i) Soil survey and mapping of the soils of the country to promote scientific
and optimal land use in collaboration with relevant institutions and
agencies.
(ii) Research in the areas of Pedology, Soil Survey, Land Evaluation and Land
Use Planning.
(iii) Training, education and promotion of awareness on the soil resources
and its state of health.
Non-achievement of Objectives:
5. Audit para points out that in respect of three projects undertaken by
NBSS&LUP, the objectives were achieved partially and the delay in completion had
ranged from three months to seven years. The details of these projects are given as
under:
"(a) In collaboration with CSSRI, Karnal, NBSS&LUP undertook a project in May
1996 on "Preparation of soil resource inventory of coastal salt affected areas of
West Bengal and Orissa using satellite imagery and characterization and
classification of the soil to determine their potentialities, problems and
management" at an outlay of Rs. 16 lakh for a period of two years.
However, the project was continued even after the stipulated duration of two
years. SRC recommended in November 2000 to complete the project by 2001.
Ignoring the advice of SRC, the project was continued as of July 2004. The
annual progress reports of the project were not prepared regularly. In the annual
progress report for 2002-03, it was mentioned that due to pressure of other
projects, the work of this project could not progress as per the schedule and the
likely date of completion was determined as December 2005. ICAR stated in
December 2004 that extension of the project upto December 2005 was accepted

3
by SRC and added that the work was in progress and would be completed.
ICAR did not, however, indicate the remedial measures instituted to address the
delays.
(b) NBSS&LUP, Nagpur undertook a project on "Identification, characterization
and delineation of agro-economic constraints of oilseed based production
systems in rainfed eco system" from July 2000 to February 2003 at an estimated
cost of Rs. 55.41 lakh. The project was to facilitate identification of the appropriate
sowing time for specified areas and suggest strategies for improving the
productivity of rainfed oilseed crops. The rainfed oilseed based production
zones were to be delineated using Geographical Information System (GIS).
The final report of the project revealed that studies were conducted for four
crops in 16 districts as against the target of six crops in 19 districts. Further, data
on area and production of oilseeds were collected only in six districts as against
28 different districts targeted. Even in the 16 districts covered, no strategies for
improving the productivity of rainfed oilseed crops were suggested. The rainfed
oilseed-based production zones were also not delineated using GIS. Thus, the
benefits of improving the productivity of rainfed oilseeds could not be derived.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that against the target of 19 districts for six crops,
16 districts for four crops were covered as suggested by the Scientific Advisory
Panel and added that the data collected was processed to generate maps depicting
the oil seed production potential and constraints and were presented in different
thematic maps. However, it did not furnish the reasons for collection of data only
in six districts as against 28 districts as per the project proposal.
(c) ICAR sanctioned a project on "Land use Planning for management of agricultural
resources" from January 2001 to December 2003 at a cost of Rs. 9.32 crore. The
project aimed at developing the strategies and options for rational and scientific
land use plan at watershed level.
The project was extended up to December 2004. The progress reports of the
project up to March 2004 revealed that due to delay in receipt of funds, activities
like procurement of equipment, socio-economic survey, resource survey, different
kinds of mapping and crop experiment could not be completed as planned. The
economic analysis of alternate land uses to assess overall socio-economic aspect
was not started as of July 2004. Linkages with various organizations like
International Crop Research Institute for Semi Arid Tropics and CSSRI on various
aspects such as fixh varieties for coastal areas, animal component suitable for
coastal eco-system and technologies for different crop components of land use
models for coastal eco-system were yet to be developed. Further, field
experiments for cereals and pulses crops, development of soil site suitability for
different land use types, selection of suitable cropping system specific to each
agro-ecological zone and monitoring of soil and water qualities were yet to be
completed to achieve the aim of the project. Against the allocation of Rs. 9.32
crore, only Rs. 5.92 crore was spent as of March 2004.

4
ICAR stated in December 2004 that the work had already been started to conduct
economic analysis and alternate land uses to assess overall socio-economic
aspect and that activities were also simultaneously initiated to assess the data
for horticultural validation, development of soil site suitability criteria, suggesting
different crop/cropping sequence in specific agro-ecozone. However, the reply
is silent about the linkages to be developed with other institutes as envisaged in
the project".
6. Explaining the reasons for non-achievement of objectives by NBSS&LUP, the
Ministry have stated in a note as under:—
"(a) The proposal of the project 'Preparation of soil resource inventory of coastal salt
affected areas of West Bengal and Orissa using satellite imagery and
characterization and classification of the soil to determine their potentialities,
problems and management' was submitted in 1996 but actually approved in 1999
after the required review. It was envisaged to be completed by 2003 as discussed
in the SRC. The work on the Project could not be fully geared up due to priority
work of NATP. The project was again discussed in SRC 2004 and recommended
for extension upto December, 2005. However, requisite Satellite Data has been
received from National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), Hyderabad, only in
August, 2005. The data is being analyzed and then to be validated in the field,
which may take around 12 months period and it is expected to complete the
project by December, 2006. The instructions have been issued to all the scientists
to adhere strictly to the time schedules of the Projects. The progress is being
monitored on six monthly basis.
(b) The Project proposal  on "Identification, characterization and delineation of
agro-economic constraints  of oilseed based production systems in rainfed eco-
system" initially envisaged the work on six crops in 28 districts. However,
Scientific Advisory Panel (SAP) of National Agricultural Technology Project
recommended studies on only four crops viz. Groundnut, Soyabean, Rapseed/
Mustard and Sesamum in 16 districts. This revised target fixed by SAP was
commensurate with the amount sanctioned for the project. The final report has
been submitted. The constraints in production system for rain-fed oil seed crops
were identified and oil seed based production zones were delineated using GIS
system. The necessary maps on production potentials and contraints of the
rain-fed eco-region were prepared. The outputs would be useful for suggesting
appropriate strategies for improving the productivity of oil seed based rain-fed
eco-system.
(c) The progress of the project "Land use planning for management of agricultural
resources" was delayed due to non-receipt of funds in time. After receipt of the
funds in August, 2004, economic analysis was initiated and completed by
December, 2004. The linkages have also been built-up with ICRISAT, CSSRI,
State Departments of Animal Husbandry and Fisheries to have assessment of
Coastal Ecosystem, Fish Culture and Animal Components etc. The field
experiments for cereals and pulse crops, soil site suitability for different land use
types and selection of cropping systems specific to each agro-ecological zone
were done. Against the allocation of Rs. 9.23 crores only Rs. 5.92 crores were
spent. This NATP Project has been completed and report submitted."

5
7. Explaining the position in this regard, the Secretary (Ministry of Agriculture)
stated during Evidence as under:—
"As far as Nagpur is concerned, partial achievements in 13 projects has been
reported by Audit, which comes to less than 5 per cent. There were total 267
projects and out of that 13 cases of partial achievements were reported. That is
less than 5 per cent. As far as paras pertaining to NATP project are concerned
where socio-economic study is referred to, was not done, I am to submit that has
now been done and the work has been completed."
Improper Maintenance of Project Files
8. According to Audit project files in respect of research projects were not
properly maintained by NBSS&LUP. The Institute had completed 45 projects  and
terminated 15 projects before their completion during 1999-2004. Of the completed
projects, research project files were available for 19 projects only which were examined
in audit.
9. In accordance with the byelaws, rules and regulations of ICAR and instructions
issued by ICAR from time to time, research project files (RPFs) are required to be
maintained in three parts. The research project proposal is to be kept in RPF-I, which is
to be presented to Staff Research Council (SRC) for approval. Annual progress of each
project is to be kept in RPF-II, for review by SRC to evaluate the implementation of the
project. The final report in the form of RPF-III is required to be prepared and presented
to SRC and Research Advisory Committee (RAC) for overall review and evaluation of
the project. According to Audit, NBSS&LUP did not maintain the RPFs properly in
respect  of the projects implemented during 1999-2004. In case of 15 projects, which
were dropped midway, RPF-I only were available. As such reasons for termination of
the projects before their completion were not ascertainable. Besides, no records were
maintained for 10 completed projects. In 16 projects, RPFs were maintained intermittently.
In the absence of proper maintenance of RPFs, effectiveness of monitoring of research
activities by SRC/RAC cannot be ensured.
10. When asked about the reasons for non-maintenance of RPFs, by the Institute,
the Ministry stated in a note as under:—
"Consequent to the discontinuation of the Assessment  system being followed
earlier, there was some laxity on the part of the individuals. Hence, the submission
of RPFs was erratic and got delayed. In some cases, the concerned project
investigators (handling particular project) were deployed for other priority work
where their involvement was felt most essential such as NATP work. These
principal investigators could not make noticeable progress in their regular
projects and  hence RPF-II was not prepared.".
11. On being asked  as to when and for what purpose  the concerned project
investigators were deployed, the Ministry in a note explained as under:—
"More than 250 participants debated priority of mapping the soils at country

6
and State level in a workshop held during September 19—21, 1986 at Nagpur. As
per recommendation the concerned project investigators were assigned priority
job under mega project on Soil Resource Mapping  to bring out Soil Map of the
country on 1:1 m scale from 1986 to 2002. Similarly,  a World Bank aided time
bound project of more than Rs. 1000 crores was initiated in 1998-99 at the country
level. Some of the scientists were also engaged in the prioritized NATP Project
from 1998 to 2005".
12. The Committee enquired as to how ICAR was able to monitor the research
activities undertaken under various projects by the Research Institutes in the absence
of proper maintenance of files by them. In reply, the Ministry stated in a note as under:
"Although RPFs were not updated, scientists had information in field diaries,
registers, records of labs and photographs. The research activities under projects
were monitored through presentations before Scientific Research Councils,
Research Advisory Committees, Quinquennial Review Teams and Annual
Reports."
13. When asked whether any responsibility had been fixed on the officials
responsible for poor/non-maintenance of RPFs in respect of individual projects, the
Ministry in their reply stated as under:—
"The defaulting scientists have been warned on this count and issued strict
instructions for not repeating such lapses in future."
14. The Committee desired to know about the measures taken for proper
maintenance of RPFs in the future. In response, the Ministry have stated as under.
"Now strict instructions have been issued to submit the progress report in RPF
mode. The status of  completion of RPFs is being monitored regularly in SRC
meetings".
15. Audit has pointed out that NBSS and LUP had completed 45 projects and
terminated 15 in-house projects before their completion during 1999-2004. In this
connection, the Committee sought to know the reasons due to which these projects
were dropped mid-way. In response, the Ministry stated as under:
"The projects had to be temporarily dropped as the  scientists executing the
projects were assigned priority job in mega project on Soil Resource Mapping
and World Bank aided National Agricultural Technology Project (NATP). This
priority was decided by 250 scientists in a consultative process during a
workshop held at Nagpur on September 19—21, 1986. Similarly, NATP (World
Bank Project) was sanctioned by the competent authorities".
16. When asked whether the termination of these projects had affected the
overall research activity of the Institute, the Ministry in a note replied as under:—
"The temporary suspension of these projects did not affect overall research
activity and output of the Institute as the priority was reallocated for bigger cause of
Soil Resource Mapping under mega and NATP projects. The Soil Resource maps at
country and State levels were urgently desired for drawing up Soil Resource Use Plans
at national and regional levels".

7
Non-submission of Survey Reports
17. One of the mandates of NBSS & LUP was to conduct soil survey and publish
reports for land use planning. Audit had pointed out that twenty five field survey
reports were pending for periods ranging from  five to twenty-five years. It was observed
that field surveys of the districts of Chittur, Mysore and Chitradurga were conducted
partly in 1976 but were not completed fully. The soil survey reports had not been
submitted till August 2004. As a result,  the objective of land use planning was not
achieved fully.
18. The Committees, expressed the view that the delay in finalisation of reports
could often lead to projects losing their relevance and becoming redundant and desired
to know the steps taken by ICAR to overcome these problems. In reply, the Ministry
stated as under:—
"Nature and fundamental properties of soils do not change significantly in time
span of 20-30 years. It takes about 1000 years to form 2.5 cm layer of soils.
Therefore, information generated under these projects still holds good and is of
value. While reports were not brought out in time, some of the information was
utilised in preparing maps and in other ongoing or concurrent research projects.
Necessary instructions have been issued and scientists told to be vigilant in
future."
19. On being asked as to why the soils survey reports were not prepared even
after a lapse of five to twenty-five years, the representative of the Ministry stated
during evidence as under:—
"....in 1986 some other priority was given. Therefore, some of the reports were
given second priority. It was a decision taken at the national level that we have
to prepare national level plan first and the other projects, which are already
initiated, can be taken up later on. The one million scale map, as he said, has
already been prepared. When we prepared a national level map, then we took up
those 15 projects. They were kept in abeyance due to change in priority in 1986
because  the survey is a long range project. The priority of 15 projects was
changed in 1986. Now, those 15 projects have also been taken up.”
20. The Committee sought to know the rationale for spending money on a project
when reports on these projects are not given/published even after 25  years. To this,
the representative of the Ministry deposed as under:—
"It is because the decision was taken that we have to prepares the map at
different scales. One was, we have to do at one to one million scale, which is a
general map which cannot be used for proper planning. They  said you also
prepare the map at 1:2,50,000 scale for each State. Then the map has to be
prepared at Patwari scale. Now, we have given the Patwari scale also. It is because
when we come to the watershed management programme, the maps were prepared
at different scales. This process will further continue because new technologies
have come  in the agricultural field. They need more detailed analysis. So, it  was
a matter of change in scale. That was the main reason".

8
21. The witness added:—
"...to survey the country at Patwari scale it will take at least 60 to 70 years  to
cover this country."
22. As regards achievement of the objectives of Land Use Planning, the Ministry
have stated that Atlas was sent to all districts/State authorities for implementing the
suggested land use. It was also stated that interaction with district authorities was
made through coordination meetings and trainings on use of soil resource data for
sustainable land use.
23. When asked about the effectiveness of the measures taken by  the Ministry
for land use planning and whether any assessment had been made in this regard, the
Ministry stated as under:—
"The district atlases have been widely acclaimed by State and district user
agencies. The interaction meetings and trainings were also organized to sensitize
different stake holders. As on date, no systematic impact assessment studies on
the adoption of suggested land use plans by different users agencies have been
made by the Bureau".
Improper Maintenance of National Register of Soil Series
24. For identification of soil series alongwith their salient characteristics and
classification, a national register was required to be maintained. Indices according to
States and crops raised on the soil series were also to be prepared for ready reference.
However, the national register had not been updated and no information was furnished
regarding the year from which the register was to be updated. To complete this task,
correlation of soil series identified so far was required to be completed. Quinquenniel
Review Team (QRT) had observed that there was a backlog of correlation of more than
a thousand identified soil series.
25. In their reply (December 2004) to Audit, ICAR had stated that national register
of soil series was temporarily suspended due to national mission project on soil resource
mapping of different States on 1:2,50,000 scale and of the country on 1:1 million scale
initiated in 1986. It was also stated that State wise soil series had been registered and
correlated for 13 States. For the remaining States the work is in progress. However, the
timeframe for completion of the task was not given by the ICAR.
26. Explaining the reasons for improper maintenance of National Register of Soil
Series the Ministry have stated as under:—
"As the scientists remained busy in accomplishing the task of mega project on
Soil Resource Mapping and NATP mission mode projects, the work of correlation
of soil series at State and national levels and their indexing in the national
register could not be taken up between 1994-98".
27. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that the National register
of soil series was required to be updated from 1994. The updation has been resumed
from 1999.

9
II. Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal
28. The Institute came into existence on 16th April, 1988 at Bhopal,
Madhya Pradesh. The aims and objectives of this Institute are as follows:—
"I. To carry out basic and strategic research on soils especially physical,
chemical and biological processes related to management of nutrients
water and energy.
II. To develop advanced technology for sustainable systems of input
management in soils that are most efficient and least environmental
polluting.
III. To develop expertise and backstop other organizations engaged in research
on agriculture, forestry, fishery and various environmental concerns.
IV . To exchange information with scientists engaged in similar pursuits through
group discussions, symposia, conferences and publications.
V. To collaborate with State Agricultural Universities, National, International
and other Research Organizations in the fulfilment of the above
objectives".
29. IISS, Bhopal had completed 36 projects during the period 1999-2004 and out
of this, Audit had test-checked 19 projects. In two projects the objectives were achieved
only partially. The details of these projects are as under:—
"IISS undertook a project on 'Organic pools and dynamics in relation to land use
tillage and agronomic practices for maintenance of soil fertility' in May 2000 as
lead centre with six co-operating centres at an estimated cost of Rs. 1.08 crore to
be completed by December, 2003. The project was extended up to March 2004
with additional outlay of Rs. 3.14 lakh. The project was aimed to quantify the
changes in soil organic Carbon and Nitrogen pools to assess the mineralisation
potential and C-sequestration in soils of semi-arid and sub humid regions and to
fit experimental data in different models of C-sequestration. Rs. 36.42 lakh was
spent on this project by IISS till its completion. Completion report of the project
revealed that the project was implemented only in seven out of targeted eleven
districts. Due to delay in procurement of Carbon Hydrogen Nitrogen Sulphur
analyser and Furrier Transform Infrared Spectrophotometer, the chemical analysis
of the project was hampered. Due to non-materialisation of training of two
scientists in the USA in modelling of Soil Organic Matter (SOM) and recent
technique in SOM dynamics and measurements, one of the objectives of fitting
of experimental data in different models of C-sequestration could not be
achieved".
30. According to Audit, the reply of ICAR (December, 2004) contradicted the
facts stated in the project completion report that chemical analysis of the project was
hampered due to non-procurement of equipment and that fitting of data in different
models of C-sequestration could not be achieved due to non-materialisation of training
of two scientists. Further, ICAR had stated that the results could not be obtained for

10
Bhubaneswar and Hyderabad due to discontinuance of long-term fertilizer experiments
at those locations as well as inability to carry out solid sample analysis at Anantapur
and Jorhat.
31. The Committee sought to know the reasons for the partial achievement of
objectives in respect of two projects undertaken by IISS, Bhopal. In response, Ministry
of Agriculture informed the Committee as under:—
"The project was aimed to quantify the changes in Soil Organic Carbon (SOC)
and nitrogen pools to assess the mineralization potential and C-sequestration in
soils of semi-arid and sub humid regions and to fit experimental data in different
models of C-sequestration. The project proposal was sanctioned for only seven
centres at All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Long Term Fertilizer
Experiments (LTFE), IISS, Bhopal as lead centre and 6 co-operative centres namely,
Ranchi, Akola, Solapur, Bangalore, Raipur and Junagarh. As per the objective of
the project the target districts were fully covered. Barrackpore has been included
as voluntary centre and its results were presented in the final report. As per 12
and 13 Scientific Advisory Panel (SAP) recommendation, out of eleven districts,
four target districts i.e. Bhubaneswar, Hyderabad, Anantapur, and Jorhat were
dropped from this project and these centres were allotted to another project
"Assessment and improvement of soil quality and resilience for rainfed rice
production system" under National Agricultural Technology Project (NATP).
Even though the procurement of CHNS analyzer was delayed, most of the analysis
of carbon pools were completed with other methods. The CHNS analyzer was
procured afterwards and installed. Analysis of all the soil samples for various
organic pools has been completed on March 31, 2004. One of the objectives for
fitting of the experimental data into models could not be achieved due to lack of
training of scientist abroad, as such training facility is not available in India.
However, efforts are being made to fit and validate the data generated on Soil
Organic Matter (SOM) pools under at various centres into the Centuary Model
based on the knowledge gained by a scientist at AICRP LTFE centre (Coimbatore)
and the modeling will be completed by March 31, 2006.
The major achievements of the project were the quantification of changes in soil
organic C and N pools and evaluation of the effect of variables on soil organic
matter dynamics in various soils of the country. Imbalanced fertilizer application,
particularly N alone, could not bring the equilibrium for C balance even after 29
years of rice-based cropping system in an alluvial Inceptisol. Continuous
application of organic manure with mineral fertilisers has enriched organic pools".
32. A project on "Integrated Nutrient Management in major pulse based cropping
system and identification of the most productive and remunerative systems" was
undertaken by IISS from May 2000 to March 2004 as lead centre. Against the total
provision of Rs. 30.66 lakh an expenditure of Rs. 18.83 lakh was incurred. The project
involved six important cropping systems at different locations. The final report of the
project revealed that experiments on three cropping systems were not conducted and

11
experiments on another cropping system were not conducted in two out of four
locations. Consequently, the objective of identifying the most productive and
remunerative pulses based cropping system under different soil and nutrient managment
could not be achieved.
According to Audit the ICAR in their reply (December 2004) have stated that
since the project had to be executed under farmer's field condition in participatory
mode after selecting the farmers and villages in the target districts, the cropping
sequences were revised midway after considering the views of the farmers. The reply
revealed that this project was undertaken without giving due consideration to the
cropping sequences prevalent in the target districts resulting in revision of the
technical years programme after two eyars of starting the project.
33. In a note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Agriculture explained
their position to the Audit observation as under:—
"In order to identify the most productive and remunerative pulse based cropping
systems in three agro-eco regions of the country, NATP project was originally
proposed with 6 cropping sequences after thorough deliberations among the
participants and based on the literature survey. The cropping sequences were:
(i) soybean-chickpea, (ii) rice (paddy)-chickpea/lentil, (iii) black gram
(Urdbean)-chickpea, (iv) sorghum-chickpea, (v) sorghum-lentil, and (vi)
soybean-lentil. The project was undertaken in the rainfed areas with pulse based
cropping systems. Two most prevalent pulse based cropping systems were
chosen in each district. Bhopal centre has taken up soybean-chickpea and
soybean-lentil systems as these were the most prevalent pulse-based cropping
systems in Bhopal and Raisen districts. Similarly, sorghum-chickpea and black
gram-chickpea were taken up by Kanpur centre and soybean-chickpea and rice-
chickpea by Rewa centre for Rewa and Satna districts. Out of six cropping
systems originally proposed five systems were taken up in one centre or other
except sorghum-lentil systems. In the conclusion report in place of blackgram-
chickpea and rice (paddy)-chickpea, the same was written as Urdbean
(Blackgram)-chickpea and rice (paddy)-chickpea, respectively. It was apparently
not followed clearly by the audit party, and hence it was reported that three
cropping systems were not conducted. The project was executed under farmers'
field conditions in a participatory mode. The cropping sequences, which were
prevalent in a particular area were taken up. Kanpur centre could not take up
sorghum-lentil sequence as this cropping sequences was not prevalent in the
area. The project was under NATP and was scrutinized at every stage from its
formulation till satisfactory completion of the project through mid-term
evaluation and correction by the Scientific Advisory Panel (SAP), site
committee, facilitator of NATP (pulses).
The major objectives of the project were achieved. The salient findings are: Among
the different interventions, 75% NPK+2.5t Farmyard manure (FYM)/ha+soil
conservation measure proved to be better at Bhopal and Raisen districts whereas,
at other centres NPK+FYM proved better. Among the cropping systems, soybean-
chickpea rotation proved better at Bhopal and Raipur centres in Madhya Pradesh".

12
34. When enquired about the reasons for the subsequent changes in the original
project proposal and taking up only two cropping sequences were taken up instead of
six cropping sequences the Ministry stated in a note furnished subsequently to the
Committee as under:—
"In order to identify the most productive and remunerative pulse based cropping
systems in three agro-ecoregions of the country, the NATP sub-project (RPPS-
11) was originally proposed with 6 cropping sequences after thorough
deliberations among the participants and based on the literature survey. The
cropping sequences identified were: (i) soybean-chickpea, (ii) rice (paddy)-
chickpea/lentil, (iii) black gram (urdbean)-chickpea, (iv) sorghum-chickpea, (v)
sorghum-lentil, and (vi) soybean-lentil. Out of six cropping systems originally
proposed five systems were taken up except sorghum-lentil system which farmers
did not opt. This fact/change was brought to the notice of Scientific Advisory
Panel and they approved it. In the Final Report in place of blackgram its local
name urdbean was printed and that created confusion with autitors. It was
apparently not made clear to the audit, and they reported three cropping systems
which were actually five.
Moreover, a structured  Monitoring and  Evaluation (M&E) system was followed
for review. The final project report was accepted without any objection and the
AED (rainfed) in its letter congratulated the project workers and commended
them for successful completion of the project".
35. When asked whether all the cropping sequences could not be taken up due
to reluctance of farming community to participate in these projects, the Ministry replied
as under:—
"Only one (sorghum-lentil) sequence at Kanpur centre was not taken up as it
was not preferred by the farmers".
36. When further asked about the apprehensions of the farming community and
whether the same had been suitably addressed, the Ministry in reply have stated as
under:
"The one cropping sequence of sorghum-lentil did not fit into their changed
socio-economic and market situation. This item was also dropped by Scientific
Advisory Panel".
37. Enumerating the reasons for not achieving the desired results in Soil Science
Research projects, a representative of ICAR during evidence deposed as under:—
"In case of Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal, the project was proposed
and it was approved. Later on it came under the National Agricultural Technology
Project. We committed that we will do it in 11 districts. Then a SAP Committee
came and transferred four centres to other projects. They scaled down. There is
a proper proceeding also for this purpose and for this amount. They said you
can do only at seven centres. That is why, the work was scaled down from 11
centres to 7 centres. So, depending upon the resources, it was scaled down. It is
not that the result was not realised. This was scaled down with matching saving

13
of resources. It was done by the duly authenticated Scientific Committee so
that the outcome should be in line with the resources. This was not done by the
Institute".
38. In reply to a query about the reasons for non-achievement of objectives in
respect of Soil Organic Matter (SOM), the Ministry have stated that the concerned
scientist could not undergo requisite foreign training as his foreign deputation had
not materialised due to administrative reasons.
39. On being asked to specify the administrative reasons due to which the
concerned scientist could not proceed on foreign deputation for undergoing training,
the Ministry submitted as under:—
"A proposal of sending 6 scientists to Department of Natural Resource &
Mines, Brisbane, Australia was received from the Agro Ecosystem Director
(Rainfed), DRIDA, Hyderabad for a period of 2 weeks  i.e. March 10 to 24,
2003. The case was sent for approval of the Competent  Authority of the Council.
However, the Competent Authority i.e. the then President of ICAR (Hon'ble
Union Agriculture Minister) did not approve the proposal".
40. When asked as to why no suitable replacement was made to ensure that
work was not hampered the Ministry replied as under:
"Necessary replacement was made by using the alternative statistical models'
using SPSS package in place of originally proposed GCTE-SOMNET model in
the project".
41. The Committee desired to know as to what measures were taken by the
Ministry to ensure that such a situation did not occur in future. In reply, the Ministry
have stated as under:—
"In future proper orders will be issued either for dropping some work or to
adopt alternative course. Detailed instructions and guidelines to ensure timely
completion and report writing have been issued by headquarters and by
Institutes".
III. Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (CSSRI), Karnal
42. The Central Soil Salinity Research Institute was established in 1969, to
generate technologies for reclamation and management of salt affected soils, which
constituted nearly 7 million ha area at that time. Because of introduction of irrigation
without provision for adequate drainage the salinity problem was appearing in almost
all the canal command areas and sizeable area was going out of cultivation. Over the
years, the Institute has grown into an internationally recognized center of excellence
pursuing interdisciplinary research on salinity management and use of marginal quality
irrigation waters in different agro-ecological regions of the country. The institute has
three regional research stations, viz. Canning town (West Bengal) for manging coastal
salinity, Bharuch (Gujarat) for the management of salt affected Vertisols and Lucknow
(Uttar Pradesh) for managing alkali soils of Central and Eastern Gangetic plains. In
addition, the coordinating Unit of All India Co-ordinated Research Project on
Management of Salt-affected Soils and Use of Saline Water in Agriculture is also

14
located at the institute alongwith eight research centres in different agro-ecological
regions.
43. The aims and objectives of the Institute are as under:—
“I. To develop comprehensive information on the extent, characteristics,
genesis and classification of salt affected soils in different agro-climatic
zones of the country, and to monitor changes in benchmark soils.
II. To study salt and water dynamics and hydrology of salt affected soils and
to develop appropriate agro-chemical/biological/hydrological technologies
for prevention/amelioration/management of salinity prone as well as salt
affected soils.
III. To identify areas with poor quality surface and ground waters, to study
the factors governing their chemical composition and evolve methods for
reusing them for agriculture under different agro-ecologies.
IV . To collect, assess and develop plant genetic resources tolerant to stresses
arising due to excess of salts, sodicity and water stagnation and to identify
the traits responsible for tolerance to these stresses in selected plants of
economic importance and develop efficient varieties in collaboration with
relevant research programmes in the country.
V. To develop technologies suitable for reclamation/utilization of salt affected
soils under various constraints and management levels in major salt
affected areas.
VI. To serve as a centre for post-graduate education and training, both at
national and international levels in the field of soil salinity and related
aspects.
VII. To collaborate with agricultural universities, other central and state agencies
and international organizations in research, training and extension
programmes in reclamation/utilization of salt affected soils.”
44. During the period 1999-2004, CSSRI, Karnal had completed 72 projects
and out of this 40 were test-checked by Audit. According to Audit in two projects the
objectives were partially achieved. The details of which are given as under:—
“(i) CSSRI undertook an externally aided Indo-United Kingdom collaborative
research project on "Soil salinity and breeding of salt resistant crops (soil
salinity and breeding for salt resistant crops — rice, Indian mustard and
gram)" in March 1996 for five years at a total cost of Rs. 5.63 crore. Scrutiny
revealed that six scientists of CSSRI visited United Kingdom in the first
year of the project and undertook studies on alkaline soil instead of both
alkaline and saline soils. The progress report of 1996-97 revealed that
two of the six scientists who were abroad in connection with the project
did not contribute anything. The final report was not yet prepared as of
June 2004.

15
While accepting that the projects include both saline and alkaline soils
ICAR had stated (December 2004) that all scientists contributed to achieve
the project objectives and that the final report was being prepared. The
reply has to be viewed in the light of the fact that the progress report
clearly revealed non-contribution by the two scientists and the final report
was yet to be prepared even after a lapse of three years from the completion
of the project.
(ii) An All India coordinated research project on "Management of salt affected
soils and use of saline water in agriculture" was implemented from 1972 at
the coordinating unit at CSSRI, Karnal alongwith seven centres at State
Agriculture Universities (SAUs) and one at Agricultural College, Agra.
An amount of Rs. 7.19 crore was spent on the project during 1999-2004.
The benchmark survey for quality control of ground water was undertaken
from 1972 only in Guntur district of Andhra Pradesh, but no strategy had
been formulated as yet to solve the water problems of that area. Thus, one
of the objectives of evaluating the effect of poor quality water on soils and
crops was limited to only one region. Apart from this, there was unspent
balance of Rs. 1.02 crore accumulated with the centres over the years due
to non-adjustment of previous years' unspent balance while releasing
further grants to them".
45. When the Committee sought to know the reason for partial achievement
of objectives in respect of two projects undertaken by CSSRI, Karnal, the Ministry
have informed as under:—
"So far as the externally aided Indo-United Kingdom collaborative research
project on "soil salinity and breeding of salt resistant crops (soil salinity and
breeding for salt resistant crops — rice, Indian mustard and gram)" is concerned
all the scientists contributed to achieve the project objectives and undertook
studies on both alkaline and saline soils instead of only alkali soils. As per the
ICAR norms, the deputation report is to be submitted by the scientists within a
month of return. Specifically, in the case of two scientists namely, Dr. V .R. Babu
and Dr. A.B. Mondal, the deputation reports were not submitted within the
required period leading to the comments about their non-contribution in the
1996-97 report. However, they submitted their deputation reports in Nov. 1997
and Jan 1998 repsectively and these have been accepted by the Institute and
the council. The final report of the project was submitted on 18th Nov. 2004.
The internal experts from the institute and the Council have already seen the
final report of the project. There is no provision of getting the report evaluated
by the external experts. Moreover, the final report have also been submitted to
the funding agency and there is no adverse comments whatsoever by the funding
agency".
46. As regards All India Coordinated Research Project on "Management of Salt
Affected Soils and use of Saline Water in Agriculture" the Ministry have stated as
under:—

16
"Under above mentioned project, the water problems of the coastal belt of
Guntur area have been solved through studies on Doruvu technology. This
technology has been optimized to extract fresh water overlaying the saline
underground water in the region. The technology has found favours with the
farmers in the coastal belt. Further, as a follow up action on the studies
conducted in AP, a cess fund scheme was sanctioned under which benchmark
sites have been identified in the following irrigation commands in collaboration
with AICRP centres. The soils of these sites are being monitored by the centres
of the project as mentioned below.
Irrigation Command AICRP centres
Upper Ganga canal command Agra U.P.
Agra canal command -do-
Sharda Sahayak canal command -do-
Krishna Western Delta canal command Baptala, A.P.
Nagarjuna Sagar right canal command -do-
Godavari Westerb Delta canal command -do-
Tungbhadra canal command Gangawati, Karnataka
Indira Gandhi canal command Bikaner, Rajasthan
Narmada Sagar canal command Indore, M.P.
Upper Krishna canal command Tiruchirapalli, T.N.
Cauvery canal command -do-
Bhakra canal command Hisar, Haryana
Jawahar Lal Nehru canal command -do-
The soils of these sites have been characterized. The extent of salt affected
soils havebeen computed. The temporal changes in different benchmark sites
are being studied. After studying these aspects, possible land use planning will
be done.
Out of the total unspent figure of Rs. 1.02 crores, 78% (Rs. 78.19 lakhs
upto December, 2005) of the amount has been adjusted. Further, steps have
been initiated to minimize the unspent balance at each centre. The balance
amount will be adjusted in the current financial year when further grants
will be released. Instructions have also been given to the centres to effect
the purchase of items in the current financial year. As a result of these
steps, it is expected that there would be no unspent balance at the end of
current financial year".
Non-Preparation of Maps of Salt Affected Areas
47. In its meeting held in February 2000, the Research Advisory Committee
(RAC) had recommended preparation of maps for total salt affected areas of the

17
country to know the latest position of the country's salt affected areas. It
recommended that CSSRI should undertake this task of identification to have a final
and authentic record. ICAR was to coordinate with different agencies to prepare this
map upon a single figure. However, no timeframe had been fixed to complete the
task. The action taken report revealed that the map of salt affected soils on 1:2,50,000
scale for Bihar, Haryana, Orissa, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh
and West Bengal had been prepared. But for the remaining states, no work was started
as yet.
48. In their reply (December 2004) to the Audit, ICAR had stated that the
preparation of the maps was delayed since most of the  maps were designated as
restricted by Survey of India and it requied considerable time to get clearance from
the Ministry of Defence prior to their procurement from Survey of India.
49. When asked to furnish the status of preparation of maps of salt affected
soils, the Ministry have stated as under:—
"The Salt affected soils occur in only 15 states of India. The maps of eight
states namely; Bihar, Haryana, Orissa, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal were prepared earlier. The maps for the remaining
seven states namely; Andhra Pradesh, Andaman & Nicobar, Gujarat, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu have been prepared now. The total area
of salt affected soils in 15 states is computed to be 67,27,468 ha".
50. When asked as to how ICAR ensured that the recommendations made by
the RAC regarding preparation of maps of salt affected soils of India were carried
out by the CSSRI, the Ministry in their reply have stated as under:
"The CSSRI carried out recommendations of the RAC in preparation of salt
affected maps of India in coordination with NRSA and other agencies. The
role played by CSSRI includes formulation of mapping legend, deciding on
criterion on the ranges of soil PH, EC and ESP for different SAS classes,
provided ground truth data on SAS classes of different states and analysis of
key soil samples for salinity appraisal. During the process of mapping, the
CSSRI also played a vital role in reconciling and deciding a number of issues
on SAS class polygons, calculation of polygon extent, and purity percentages
of each SAS class".
Non-documentation of Traditional Wisdom
51. The RAC had recommended in February 2000 to refine and update the
traditional agricultural practices being followed in different parts of the country.
V arious traditional practices like soil- reclamation, land use, water management,
nutrient management etc. were to be collected and documented. However, CSSRI
had not taken any action on this issue as of June 2004. In December 2004, ICAR had
stated that due to constraints of non-availability of scientific personnel, documenting
the traditional wisdom was not taken up in detail and the study would be conducted in
future. It added that some information on traditional wisdom was collected from the
Gujarat region.
52. In this regard the Ministry have stated as under:—
"In fact, council have launched a mission mode project for the documentation

18
of indigenous traditional knowledge (ITKs) and till December, 2005, five
volumes of ITKs with two supplementaries running into around fifteen hundred
pages have already been published. This includes traditional knowledge on all
aspects of agricultures. In addition, additional systematic compilation eforts
on the traditional agricultural practices have been initaited. A research project
on documenting the traditional agricultural practiices is being undertaken in
the institute. Fiekld surveys have also been conducted for their documentation.
Based on the total information, the document is being prepared. it is in the
final stage of its editing and publication".
53. During evidence, the representatives of the Ministry explained as under:—
"As far as preparation of map is concerned, it is already complete. As far as
documentation of indigenous technical knowledge which was referred to is
concerned, we ahve brought about in general for the country five volumes on
indigenous technical knowledge including salt affected soils".
54. To a specific question, as to why the Ministry did not find it necessary to
initiate the project much earlier when RAC had recommended for documentation of
traditional wisdom way back in February, 2000, the Ministry clarified in a note as
under:—
"In fact, Council have launched a mission mode project for the documentation
of indigenous traditional knowledge (ITKs) much earlier and till December,
2005 five volumes of ITKs with two supplementaries running into around fifteen
hundred pages have already been published. This includes traditional knowledge
on all aspects of agriculture including soil reclamation, land use, water
management and nutrient management etc.In the mean time, the Research
Advisory Committee of the CSSRI, Karnal have also recommended for
documentation of traditinoal wisdom for salt affected areas. These were taken
up in July, 2004. Accordingly, systematic compilation efforts on the traditional
agricultural practices being followed in salt affected soils were initiated".
IV . Water Technology Centre for Eastern Region, Bhubaneshwar
55. As the Eastern Region of India was confronted with erratic and uneven
distribution of rainfall, frequent floods in its plains, soil erosion and drought in hills
and plateau and cyclones and salinity in coastal areas, a need was felt, to devise and
implement location-specific technologies for effective utilization and management
of soil & water resources of the region. Accordingly, the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research (ICAR) set up Water Technology Centre for Eastern Region
(WTCER) at Bhubaneswar on 12th May 1988 to generate the requisite technologies
for the region.
56. The aims and objectives of this Institute are as follows:—
I. To undertake basic and applied research for developing strategies for
efficient management of on-farm water resources to enhance agricultural
productivity on sustainable basis in the eastern region.

19
II. To provide leadership role and coordinate network of research with the
State Agricultural Universities in generating location-specific
technologies for efficient use of water resources in the eastern region.
III. To act as a centre for training in research methodolgies and technology
update in the areas of agricultural water management in the region.
IV . To act as repository of information on agricultural water management in
the eastern region.
V . To collaborate with relevant national and international agencies in
achieving the above objectives.”
57. Out of the 28 projects that were completed by WTCER during 1999-2004,
20 projects were test-checked by Audit. In three projects, partial achievement of the
objectives were noticed. The details of these Projects are discussed in the succeeding
paragraphs:—
(a) In order to formulate an integrated water and nutrient management strategy
for sustainable productivity of the eastern region by studying influence of
water regimes on soil chemical environment and availability of nutrients,
WTCER undertook a project on "Nutrient dynamics in soils under different
water management practices" in November 1998 and completed in
November 2001 after an expenditure of Rs. 21.61 lakh. The final report of
the project revealed that soil samples were collected only from two districts
of Orissa instead of major soil groups from different benchmark sites as
envisaged in the project. WTCER did not undertake micronutrient studies
(Zinc and Iron) as planned since the Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer
Costing Rs. 15.10 lakh was installed at the fag end of the project in
August 2001 and was made operational only in March 2002 after
completion of the project. Thus, achievement was limited to that extent.
In their reply furnished to Audit in December 2004, ICAR had stated that
micro-nutrient studeies could not be undertaken due to delay in receipt
and installation of Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometers.
(b) WTCER undertook a project on "Mitigation of water  logging from deltaic
low land rice eco-system for enhancing agricultural productivity" in 1998.
The duration of the project was five years at an estimated cost of
Rs. 19.29 lakh. The objectives of the project were inter alia to design
and develop suitable technology for rice-fish integration and to study
the socio economic feasibility of the prescribed tecnologies. The long-
term objectives were to provide a sustainable technology package for
the deltaic low land rice ecosystem for increase in agricultural
productivity. This integrated package in combination with aquaculture
was expected to be a viable alternative for utilisation of rainfed low land
of 20.5 million ha which was prone to water logging. The final report of
the project revealed that after studying only one aspect of rice-fish
integratison and an expenditure of Rs. 6.78 lakh, the project was
prematurely closed in 2000. Thus, an integrated package as planned was
not developed. WTCER stated in July 2004 that the principal investigator

20
and one co-investigator were granted study leave and another investigator
was transferred. It was decided to carry out the project with modified
objectives as per the SRC's decision. Thus, an integrated package as a
viable alternative for combating water logging in deltaic lowland rice
ecosystem was not developed.
(c) Another project on "Studies on agro-meteorological parameters for
evolving sustainable crop production strategies in selected location of
eastern region”: was undertaken by WTCER from January 1998 to January
2002. The objectives of the project were to compile agro-meteorological
parameters to study the agro-climatic feasibility of crop production in
West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar, eastern part of Uttar Pradesh, northern
Madhya Pradesh, north Andhra Pradesh, Assam and the adjacent states,
to analyse initial conditional probability of rainfall for evolving
sustainable crop production strategy in those locations and to
characterize drought periods and critical dry spell in respect of
agricultural crop production on the basis of water balance and rainfall
probability. The final report of the project revealed that WTCER collected
and compiled the data of selected zones of Orissa and West Bengal only.
Since these two locations were not sufficient for evolving any strategy
for crop production, the project was merged with another project titled
"Appraisal of resources base and identification of land, water, climate
and socio-economic constraints in managing water resources for
agricultural development in eastern India" in July 2000. In spite of the
merger, the earlier project started in January 1998 was continued without
any activity and declared completed in January 2002 after an expenditure
of Rs. eight lakh. However, even after merging the project no work was
undertaken for evolving crop production strategies for different agro-
climatic zones of eastern India as envisaged.
In their reply furnished to Audit (December 2004) ICAR had stated that owing
to the constraints in technical manpower, the project was planned to cover selected
locations of eastern India that represented different agro-climatic zones of Orissa
and West Bengal. According to Audit, the reply highlights weakness in management
of human resources. As a result the crop production strategies for whole of eastern
India could not be evolved.
58. In a note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have stated their position
in respect of the above projects, as under:—
"Twelve major soil groups covering entire state of Orissa were studied in the
Project. Micronutrient study was initiated to assess soil and crop management
impact on water quality by analysing water samples from various locations
only after the procurement of Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer at the
fag end of the Project. Such delays would be avoided in future by proper
assessment of equipment needs based on planned activities.
The Project was envisaged to develop an integrated technology in combination
with aquaculture as a viable alternative for combating water logging in low
land rice eco-system. The work could not be completed as the Principal

21
Investigator and one co-Principal Investigator proceeded on study leave while
another co-principal investiagor got transferred. It was decided to carry out
the Project with modified objectives to develop sustainable technology package
for low land rice eco system with surface drainage as per the Staff Research
Council decision. The work was carried out under the Project “Management
of excess water in medium and low lands for sustainable productivity" during
2000-2005. The Project developed a sustainable technology package for low
land rice eco-system with surface drainage. Realizing the success of the Project,
the State Government of Orissa has adopted this Technology.
The efforts were made to study agro-meteorological parameters in the States
of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, North Andhra Pradesh and Assam and Northern Eastern
States. The studies were confined only to selected zones of Orissa and West
Bengal. As these two locations were not sufficient for meeting the objectives
of the Project, the same was merged with another Project entitled "Appraisal
of resources base and identification of land, water, climate and socio-economic
constraints in managing water resources for agricultural development in Eastern
India". The agro-meteorological parameters were studied and data pertaining
to Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh and North Eastern States have been compiled
and crop production strategies formulated."
V . Central Soil and Water Conservation Research & Training Institute,
Dehradun
59. A chain of Soil Conservation Research, Demonstration and Training Centres
were established in 1954 (during the First Five Year Plan) and during the subsequent
Five Year Plans in different problem areas located at Dehradun, Kota, Vasad, Agra,
Chandigarh, Bellary, Udhagamandalam, Jodhpur and Chatra (Nepal) under the Central
Soil Conservation Board in the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperation. The Centres
at Dehradun, Kota, Vasad, Agra, Chandigarh, Bellary and Udhagamandalam were
reorganized into the present set up of Cetnral Soil and Water Conservation Research
and Training Institute (CSWCRTI) on 1st April 1974 with its headquarters at Dehradun.
Two new Centres at Datia (M.P.) and Koraput (Orissa) were added to this set up in
1986 and 1992, respectively. These nine Centre sare located in seven agroecological
regions to cater the location specific problems of the country.
60. The aims and objectives of the institute are as under:—
“ I . Undertake research and develop strategies for controlling land
degradation under all primary production systems and rehabilitation of
degraded lands in different agro-ecological zones of the country.
II. Act as a repository of information on the status of soil degradation/soil
and water conservation.
III. Provide leadership and co-ordinate research network with State
Agricultural Universities/Institutions/NGOs/State Departments for
developing location-specific technologies in the area of soil and water
conservaton.
IV . Act as the national and international Centre for training in research
methodologies and updated technology in soil and water conservation,
watershed development and its management.

22
V . Provide consultancy and collaborate with national and international
institutions in the field of soil and water conservation.”
61. Audit review revealed that CSWCR & TI, Dehradun had completed 86
projects during 1999-2000 to 2003-2004. But the project records were maintained
in respect of 16 projects only. Test-check of records of these projects by Audit had
revealed several shortcomings which are discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs.
62. As per Audit, CSWCR&TI, had not maintained research project files in
respect of 70 projects. When asked as to how in the absence of such files, the results
and data were presented before SRC and RAC, the Ministry responded as under:—
"Although, the research results pertaining to certain projects were not entered
into respective RPFs, the same were maintained by the concerned scientist in
the field observation sheets/data registers for presentation and evaluation before
SRC and RAC".
63. To a specific query as to how the projects were treated as completed in the
absence of proper project files, the Ministry have started:—
"Although the project files were not properly maintained, the mandated research
work was carried out by the concerned scientists. The data available in field
books, lab registers, annual reports, paper presented in the workshops and the
final outcome brought out in the form of reports were sufficient co-lateral
evidences. Hence, the projects were treated as completed accordingly. The
concerned project files are now propertly updated".
64. The Committee desired to know the internal management system prevalent
in ICAR. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:—
"The ICAR carries out basic, strategic, applied and anticipatory research in
agriculture at different institutes in participation with State Agricultural
Universities and certain other research bodies. The institutes have in its fold
large number of All India Coordinated Research Projects, Network Projects
and Adhoc Projects catering to the research needs at national, regional and
local levels. The research priorities are discussed and determined in Research
Advisory Committee, Staff Research Council, Directors' Conference and
Institute Management Committee meetings of the institutes. The institutes
get regular feed back on research needs and priorities from Regional Committee
Meetings, Annual General Body Meetings with members drawn from ICAR
HQ, State Functionaries and Farmer Groups. The day to day research problems
and needs are also discussed and proritized in DAC-ICAR interfaces held twice
a year. The projects are regularly monitored and evaluated by Quinquennial
Review Teams, Staff Research Councils, Research Advisory Committees and
Project Workshops of the Institutes. The Research Management Officials at
ICAR HQ (DG, DDGs' and ADGs') coordinate the whole affair for smooth and
effective functioning of the Research Management System. The Governing
Body of ICAR oversees, guides and sets forth the overall research agenda of
the council".

23
Non-achievement of Objectives.
65. The objectives of the institute were not achieved in respect of the following
projects undertaken by it. The details of the projects are as under:—
“(a) CSWCR&TI undertook a project on "Appraisal/Investigation of surface
and sub-surface water harvesting systems in the Nilgiris and adjoining
lower hills" from 1996 to 2000 at a total expenditure of Rs. 4.10 lakh.
The objectives of the project were  inter alia  to study the hydrologic
response in terms of hydrologic process controls and channel flow across
different spatial scales (size of watersheds) and land uses in Nilgiris, to
suggest rainfall catchment area and pond capacity relationship and
hydrologic budgeting of ponds. The final report of the project revealed
that hydrologic budgeting of ponds was not discussed, evidencing that
no activity was undertaken in this area. However, ICAR had stated that
the study was discontinued as the ponds had higher outflow than inflow
which could not be correctly accounted for as these types of ponds were
not only fed by surface runoff but also by spring (sub-surface). Therefore
the hydrologic budgeting could not be carried out. According to Audit
the reply of ICAR has to be viewed in light of the fact that investigation
was to be conducted both for surface and sub-surface water systems.
(b) A project on "Methodologies for development and analysis of watersheds
and decision support systems for interventions" was undertaken by
CSWCR & TI from October 1999 to December 2003 at a total cost of
Rs. 5.13 lakh. The project aimed to collect data on nine watersheds in
the Shiwaliks and to develop methodology for optimising land use patterns
in the watersheds leading to sustainable development. The final report
of the project revealed that methodology for development and analysis
of watershed could not be developed due to lack of interdisciplinary
team. Thus, the aim of the project was not achieved.
(c) Another project on "Development and evaluation of soil and water
conservation measures and land use systems for sustainable crop
production in Western Ghats of coastal region" was undertaken by the
Institute from June 2000 to September 2003 at an outlay of Rs. 52.15
lakh. The project was taken up for evolving and testing different bio-
engineering measures of soil and water conservation, water harvesting
system, water management alternatives and suitable land use systems
prevalent in the region. The project was implemented at State Horticulture
farm in Tamil Nadu, which represents the low elevation and high rainfall
zone of the Western Ghats. The final report of the project revealed that
conclusions could not be drawn because the experiment was conducted
with newly planted perennial crops like cardamom, pepper, mandarin
orange, bush pepper and tea which would take at least four to five years
for yielding. The project was, therefore, continued from October 2003
to March 2004 as in-house project. Thus, the benefit of evolving and
testing different bioengineering measures of soil and water conservation
could not be derived even after an expenditure of Rs. 28.67 lakh. However,
ICAR stated (in December 2004) that due to closure of the project in

24
September 2003 by Agro-Eco Directorate (Coastal) of National
Agricultural Technology Project, the project could run only for three
years. Further, due to termination of senior research fellow and the
experiment site being located at a faraway place from the research centre,
the experiments could not be carried out and had to be conducted in its
own farm. It added that had the project been continued upto August 2004,
data for three years could have been collected and conclusions drawn on
the initial establishment and growth of crops.”
66. Explaining the position about these three projects the Ministry have stated
as under:—
"(a) Central Soil and Water Conservation and Research and Training Institute
(CSWCR&TI), Dehradun undertook a project on 'Appraisal/Investigation
of surface and sub-surface water harvesting systems in the Nilgiris and
adjoining lower Hills' at a cost of Rs. 4.10 lakhs to suggest efficacy of
water harvesting systems in the Nilgiris and rainfall catchments and pond
capacity relationship/hydrologic budgeting of ponds. The study of sub-
surface hydrology is a long term study to arrive at definite conclusions.
As an NATP (Coastal) project the work was conducted for 3 year's duration
and continued as institute project for another three years because sub-
surface hydrology requires installations of piezometers or observation
wells and variations in rainfall has also to be taken into account. Hence,
the outcome of the study will be helpful in evaluating the water harvesting
systems in Nilgiris.
(b) The NATP project on Methodologies for Development and Analysis of
watershed and decision support systems for interventions at a cost of
Rs. 5.13 lakhs was undertaken in Shiwaliks to develop methodologies
for optimizing land use pattern in the watershed both at Dehradun and
Chandigarh. The research data emanated from the project could not be
analyzed due to non-availability of the requisite software at that point of
time. Now the software called FACILITATOR has been procured from
USA and the concerned scientist trained on the software. This study would
be completed by March, 2007.
(c) CSWCR&TI, Dehradun undertook a project on "Development and
evaluation of soil and water conservation measures and land use systems
for sustainable crop production in Western Ghats of coastal region" from
June 2000 to September 2003. Rs. 28.67 Lakhs were incurred on development
and evalulation of Soil and Water Conservation Measures and Land Use
Systems for sustainable crops production. The study found tangible
benefits of soil conservation measures (vegetative barriers) from Rs. 36000
to Rs. 54000 per hectare and intangible benefits from Rs. 11000 to 20000
per hectare. The newly planted perennial crops were put to act as vegetative
barriers which started serving their role in checking erosion and
conserving water after 4 to 5 years. The observations are being continued
on the perennial vegetation planted in respect of protection of soil and

25
water resources and enhancement of overall productivity from
September, 2003 onwards as an Institute project."
Non-transfer of technology
67. According to Audit sixteen technologies involving a total cost of Rs. 243.86
lakhs which were developed by the institutes of ICAR had not been transferred to the
end-users. The details of these are given in Annexure-I.
68. The Ministry in a detailed note have explained their position regarding
non-transfer of technologies as under:—
CSSRI, KARNAL
(a) The project on Soil site suitability maps for Bara tract area for different
crops was undertaken at the cost of Rs. 14.08 lakhs at RRS, Bharuch.
The project was aimed mainly at identifying bottlenecks in the present
land use pattern in the region and to suggest the plausible management
options. Since the region has been brought under irrigation from the
Sardar Sarovar irrigation project about one year back, in-depth studies
on changes in cropping pattern, soil characteristics and improvement in
soil for taking remunerative crops needs to be studied further before
transferring the developed package to the farmers. A project is being
formulated to study these aspects for a period of 3 years which would be
corroborated with pre-irrigation scenario.
(b) The second project on Biodrainage to control the water logging in
development of secondary Stalinization of canal irrigated soils was
funded by Ministry of Water Resources at a cost of Rs. 28.94 lakhs. The
objectives of the project were completed and the final report has been
accepted by the funding angency. Based on the findings of the studies,
the development departments of Haryana and Rajasthan States have
initiated further developmental/transfer of technology activities as
mentioned below:
* In Haryana, a project of Rs. 385 crores has been formulated by
CADA for implementation.
* Another proposal of Rs. 8.30 crores have been sent by Forest
department, Haryana to CADA, Govt of India for implementing
biodrainage in the districts of Sirsa, Fatehabad and Hisar in Bhakra
canal command and Bhiwani, Rohtak, Jhajjar and Sonepat in
Western Jamuna canal command.
* Based upon these findings, a project is already in action in Indira
Gandhi Nahar Pariyojana command in Rajasthan.
* Further, training lectures were given to forest officials, irrigation
engineers and other officials of Haryana and Rajasthan.
* The results of this project have also been disseminated through
13 research publications in different research journals.

26
* A training program has also been proposed to train 20 scientists/
officials on this concept.
(c) The third project on investigation and design of sub-surface drainage in
water logged alkali soils was undertaken at a cost of Rs. 4.10 lakhs to
study whether the concept of horizontal sub-surface drainage would work
in waterlogged alkali soils. The immediate objectives of the project were
fulfilled, and indicated that sub-surface drainage can work in alkali soils
also. This concept is being tested under actual waterlogged alkali soils
in Uttar Pradesh by a team of scientists from Regional Research Station,
Lucknow for further refinement, assessment and transfer to specific areas
of different states.
WTCER, BHUBANESHWAR
(a) The institute developed the Fish-crop rotational cropping technology meant
for optimizing 40 lakh ha of waterlogged shallow low land for conservation of water,
at a cost of Rs. 6.00 lakhs. The technology developed was successfully demonstrated
on farmers' fields in Khurda District of Orissa. For further, dissemination of this
technology in other eastern states, 150 agriculture/irrigation department officials
were trained. Besides, two leaflets were prepared on the subject and have been sent
to State Agricultural Departments.
(b) For conservation of water and yield enhancement, Drip Irrigation Technology
was developed at a cost of Rs. 6.03 lakh. The technology was successfully
demonstrated to show water economy as well as yield enhancement for vegetable
and horticulture crops. At present 2000 ha. area is under drip irrigation in Orissa.
This technology is being promoted through various state Agricultural/Horticultural
Departments. Further, Institute also imparted the training to 150 agriculture/
horticultural department officials to promote this technology in their respective
states.
(c) To provide irrigation to undulating Plateau area of Eastern India for enhancing
productivity, production and income as also to control run off, the technology of
low cost proof channels, tanks and run off cycling based irrigation system was
developed with a cost of Rs. 5.43 lakhs. This technology was successfully transferred
to farmers' fields in villages of Keonjhar of Orissa state. Large number of farmers
of plateau region of eastern India are adopting this technology. The institute has
further imparted training programmes and organized a national level workshop on
the subject in which around 230 state officials from agriculture and irrigation
department participated. On the subject one bulletins and two leaflets were prepared
and sent to various states to disseminate this technology to farmers.
(d) A technology for suggesting suitable sowing date for green gram in paddy
fallows based on receding soil moisture was developed at a cost of Rs. 6.75 lakhs.
This technology was successfully demonstrated in Khurda and Puri districts of Orissa
on farmers' fields. The developed technology is being further demonstrated through
All India Coordinated Research Project on Water Management at Jorhat, Shillong,
Kalyani, Bilaspur and Chiplima. Further, the institute organized training programmes
on the subject and 150 agricultural/irrigation department officials were trained to
further disseminate this technology in their respective states.

27
(e) To conserve excess rain water, optimum dike height under rice culture was
standardized with a cost of Rs. 21.92 lakhs. The developed technology was
successfully demonstrated in the villages of Dhenkanal district of Orissa. Further,
the institute organized training programmes on the subject and 150 agricultural/
irrigation department officials were trained to further disseminate this technology
in their respective states. One bulleting on the subject was prepared to transfer this
technology and was sent to respective states for disseminating this technology.
(f) The technology of moisture conservation and weed suppression package
for pointed gourd was developed at a cost of Rs. 20 lakhs and demonstrated in three
locations under different soil conditions. The technology has been taken up by the
farmers of coastal districts of Orissa and West Bengal. Further, the institute organized
training programmes on the subject and 150 agricultural/irrigation department
officials were trained to further disseminate this technology in their respective states.
One bulleting on the subject was prepared to transfer this technology and was sent to
respective states for dissemination.
CSWCR & TI,  DEHRADUN
CSWCR & TI, Dehradun, took up 4 projects costing Rs. 12.11 lakh. The
technologies developed under these projects, were transferred through various
training programmes meant for officers/extension workers of different development
departments of agriculture, forestry, soil conservation, animal husbandry and
irrigation and drainage etc. The technologies developed were also disseminated
through Lab to Land Programme, Institute Village Linkage Programme, Farmers'
trainings and Visits and Extension Publication, etc.
IISS, BHOPAL
(a) The institute has perfected the technologies for vermicomposting and
enriched organic manures at a cost of Rs. 16.92 lakhs. Two video films relating to
vermicomposting and enriched compost production technologies have been prepared
for distribution to state extension agencies. Technical bulletin on vermicomposting
has been published in Hindi language and distributed to farmers of Rajharh and Vidisha
districts during "Farmers' Meet Programmes". About 5—10% of the farmers in these
districts are practicing vermicomposting and enriched composting technologies.
(b) Integrated Plant Nutrient Supply (IPNS) technology developed by the
institute at a cost of Rs. 31.50 lakhs for  Soyabean-Wheat system has been
communicated to the Director of Agriculture, Madhya Pradesh. The IPNS technology
has been demonstrated to farmers in different villages of Bhopal, Vidisha, and Rajgarh
districts of Madhya Pradesh. Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) have also been
involved in popularization of technology at village level. In Mughaliahot village (Bhopal
district), IPNS technology produced 8—49% more soybean and 11—39% more
wheat yields as compared to farmers' practices. Similarly, farmers obtained 15—
22% higher soybean yield over their conventional practice in Geelakhedi  village

28
(Rajgarh district). Farmers' Meet Programmes have also been organized in adopted
village to show the performance of IPNS technology to the farmers of other adjoining
villages. IPNS technology has become popular among the farmers of this region i.e.
Bhopal, Vidisha and Rajgarh districts.
(c) Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) technology developed for oilseeds and
pulses at a cost of Rs. 69.88 lakhs, was demonstrated to farmers by conducting more than
255 demonstrations/field trials on over 100 farmers' fields in the participatory mode in 14
districts namely, Bhopal, Raisen, Satna, Rewa (MP), Hamirpur (UP), Bharatpur (Rajasthan),
Raichur (Karnataka), Parbhani and Latur (Maharashtra), Mahaboobnagar, Palem (AP),
Ranchi (Jharkhand), Nawansala and Ballowal (Punjab). Farmers were able to harvest about
14—23% more chickpea and 18—27% more lentil yidld through this technology. The INM
practices are gaining acceptance among the farmers in these districts.
69. When asked about the measures taken by ICAR for transfer of technologies to
the farmers that were developed by the Institutes, the Ministry have explained as under:
"The transfer of technology is undertaken through various training programmes,
"Lab to Land Programme", Institute Village Link Programme, farmers' fairs and
visits and publications etc. The Krishi Vigyan Kendras impart regular training
courses for dissemination of technologies. The poor linkages and coordination
between the Institutes and users have resulted into poor transfer of
technologies.”
70. In this regard during evidence, the Secretary deposed as under:
"As far as taking the technology to the farmer is concerned, you would kindly
agree, agriculture being a State subject, there is a collapse in the very basic
extension mechanism in this country and we are the sufferers on that count.”
71. The Committee desired to know the measures taken for improving the
coordination between the research institutes and State Government Agencies/line
Departments. In response the Ministry in a note have replied as under:
"Extension is a state subject. However, ICAR develops technologies,
demonstrates, passes on to the line departments and trains the farmers. A number
of the following mechanisms to facilitate cor-ordination between research
institutes and State Government Agencies/Line Departments, have been
improved.”
(i) ICAR Regional Committees
The ICAR has set up eight Regional Committees for research-education
and extension coordination in each of the eight agro-climatic regions of
the country. One DDG has been made nodal officer for each Regional
Committee to ensure better coordination.
The Regional Committees meet bi-annually to discuss and review the
current status of agricultural research, education and extension education
in the region, (ii) take decision on various problems faced by the region
either in the execution of the approved programmes or in tackling the

29
problems emerging afresh, and (iii) to identify in the transfer, refinement
and assessment of technology by extension agencies. The Regional
Committee provides a forum for meaningful dialogue amongst research
and development agencies in the field of agriculture, animal husbandry,
fisheries, horticulture, agroforestry etc. and help in forging an effective
liaison and coordination amongst ICAR Institutes, State Agricultural
Universities and the State Development Departments of Agriculture, Animal
Husbandry, Fisheries, Horticulture, Foresty, Irrigation, Rural Development
etc. The Regional Committees are very important for monitoring and
prioritizing the research and development needs of  the region, sensitizing
the planners and policy makers and to act as an interface between the
various research organizations and the development departments. The
recommendations arising out of the deliberations are communicated to the
concerned State Agricultural Universities, State Development Departments
and ICAR Institutes for taking necessary follow-up action.
(ii) Pre-Rabi/Kharif interface between Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation and ICAR
The interfaces between Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC),
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairy and Fisheries (DAHD&F) and
the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) are organized on pre-
season basis to evolve joint strategy in research and development sectors.
The recommendations are shared with the States during the National
Conference on Agriculture for Rabi/Kharif Campaign. A special emphasis
is laid on implementing the issues relating to strengthening of research-
extension-farmers linkages at various levels.
(iii) National Conference on Agriculture for Kharif and Rabi Campaign
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation of the Ministry of
Agriculture organizes each year National Conference on Agriculture for
Kharif and Rabi to interact with senior officers of the States/Union
Territories and the Central Government to discuss important issues relating
to Indian agriculture. The Vice Chancellors of Agricultural Universities
and senior officers of ICAR participate in the campaign to provide
necessary backstopping on technical issues.
(iv) Kisan Call Centres (KCC) — Coordination for responding
The DAC, Ministry of Agriculture launched Kisan Call Centres (KCC) on
January 21, 2004 across the country to deliver agricultural extension
services to the farming community. The purpose of these Call Centres is to
respond to issues raised by farmers instantly in the local language on
continuous basis. The KCC operates at three levels viz., Level-I, Level-II
and Level-III. The farmer's call landlines at the designated Call Centre for
the State through a Toll Free Number 1551 and the call is picked up first by
Level-I functionaries, who are agricultural graduates, and bases on the
available data base, the answer to the problem is provided.

30
However, if the call cannot be answered by Level-I, it is escalated to
Level-II, where a number of Subject-Matter Specialists (Agricultural
University Scientists/ICAR Scientists) identified in advance, pick up the
call and answer in the local language. The calls escalated from Level-II are
resolved by consulting State Department of Agriculture, ICAR Institute
and State Agricultural Universities and the replies are sent promptly by
Level-III (Government of India Institutes of the Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation).
(v) Research-Extension linkage at the district level
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), Ministry of
Agriculture has set up Agriculture Technology Management Agency
(ATMA). ATMA serves as a focal point for integrating research and
extension activities at the district level. ATMA Governing Board has been
constituted under the chairmanship of District Collector. Representatives
from Zonal Agricultural Research Station, key-line departments, KVK,
financial institution, market and input agency are the constituent members.
One of the key activities of ATMA is to prepare a Strategic Research and
Extension Plan (SREP) and its implementation by the various stakeholders.
(vi) C rop Weather Watch Group
This group meet every Monday and is chaired generally by an Addl.
Secretary of DAC and even Secretary when calamity is severe. ICAR is
always represented in this group to provide technical input for managing
drought, floods and other natural calamities.
72. When asked whether the Ministry/ICAR had encountered any hurdles in the
implementation of the programmes relating to transfer of technology, the Ministry
replied as under:
"Most of the extension staff in the states have been assigned other tasks. Posts
falling vacant are not being filled. Retraining of staff and retooling of extension
services is a dynamic process. It requires periodic capacity building. Input
agencies like seed, fertiliser, agro-chemical and credit etc. should also be brought
on board to expand the basket of extension services. IT based communications
like Kiosks, e-mail, voice mail, television and other multi-media products should
be promoted to improve impact and effectiveness of the extension. KVKs are
being interfaced with Director of Extension of State Agricultural Universities."
73. When enquired about the efforts made by the Department for providing
better linkages between various agencies so that the research benefits percolate down
to the actual users, the Ministry in their reply have stated as under:—
"The main agricultural extension system is operated by the State Governments.
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC). Ministry of Agriculture
has set up autonomous Agriculture Technology Management Agency (ATMA).
ATMA serves as a focal point for integrating research and extension activities at
the district level. One of the key activities of ATMA is to prepare a Strategic

31
Research and Extension Plan (SREP) and its implementation by the various
stakeholders.
The ICAR has established a network of Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVK) to aim at
technology assessment, refinement and demonstration of technology/products.
The KVK network is further interfaced with State Agricultural Universities through
their Directors of Extension.”
Bio-Drainage Technology
74. The Ministry while furnishing the status regarding transfer of Technology
had stated that all the technologies have been transferred except bio-drainage
technology which needed some refinements before its wider dissemination. When
asked to explain about the various aspects of Bio-drainage technology and their users,
the Ministry have stated as under:
"The development of waterlogging and secondary salinization in the canal
commands has led to tremendous loss of crop yields, damage to the houses and
roads, loss in rural employment and serious animal and human health problems.
Biodrainage is defined as the process of removing the excess soil water through
transpiration using bio-energy of the plant and radiation energy of the sun. It is
eco-friendly system of de-watering the land.
I. Does not have the problem of disposal of the drainage effluents.
II. Does not require skilled labour and can be adopted by the farmers
themselves.
III. It is a low cost technology and thus does not require huge financial input.
I V . Eco-friendly as it promotes the area under forests. Improves the
environment as the forest plant act as moderators of climate, windbreaks
and sink for carbon-di-oxide.
V. It generates revenue for the farmer from the sale of wood.
VI. Can be adopted along with the conventional subsurface drainage to reduce
the drainage effluents.”
75. The Ministry have added that the following refinements were required in
Bio-drainage Technology before its wider dissemination:—
"The technology requires further refinement in terms of identification of salt
tolerant bio-draining tree species and suitable co-crops for adoption in highly
saline waterlogged areas. Prosopis juliflora—  a fuel wood species has not been
tested under highly saline conditions. May be a combination of trees and sub-
surface drainage will be required. Further refinements on these lines are being
negotiated with Haryana Government. It will be in a partnership mode. For proper
implementation of this technology, it is also necessary to train the foresters,
engineers and Command Area Development officials. A training program,
accordingly, has been proposed to the Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR),
CAD, Govt. of India.”

32
76. When asked whether any of the research findings in respect of the projects
relating to utilisation and conservation of Soil and Water undertaken by Institute of
ICAR have been patented, the Ministry replied as under:
"No. Developed technologies are in public domain. State Governments have
implemented conservation technologies on 28.5 m ha with 14,577 crores
investment since plan period till March 2005. Watershed management is now a
transparent participatory process of equity, decentralisation and empowerment
of communities. These technologies are being considered to generate employment
specifically for the poor, landless and small holders. Assets of trees, grazing
lands and livestocks created on the wastelands by harnessing social capital can
generate self employment. These development findings do not fall under
patentable category.”
77. As regards the mechanism for dissemination of the research findings in
respect of the projects that were undertaken by ICAR in various parts of the country,
the Ministry in their note have stated as under:
"The main agricultural extension system is operated by the State Governments
since it is a state subject. The ICAR has established a network of Krishi Vigyan
Kendras (KVK) aiming at technology assessment, refinement and demonstration
of technology/products. The activities of the KVK include on-farm trail to identify
the location specific technologies under various farming systems, organizing
frontline demonstrations on the farmers' fields, training of trainers and limited
number of farmers to update their knowledge and skills.
Besides, the research findings emanating from different research projects are
disseminated through institute-village link programme, farmers' fairs,
exhibitions, goshthis, documentary films, extension publications and mass
media.”
78. The Committee desired to know about the training programmes imparted by
ICAR to the research personnel working in the research institutes. In reply, the Ministry
have explained the position as under:
"All recruitees to the position of Scientist in the entry grade of Rs. 8000-13500
initially undergo a mandatory Foundation Course for period of four months at
the National Academy of Agricultural Research Management (NAARM,
Hyderabad. The course comprises or orientation and capacity building, field
experience with rural perspective, exposure to multi-disciplinary research
perspective and evaluation. Besides, NAARM regularly conducts short term
courses for the senior research management positions to build up their research
management capabilities and skills.
As per provisions of the existing Career Advancement Scheme (CAS) of the
University Grants Commission (UGC) adopted by the Council with effect from
27.07.1998 any scientist for being placed in the next higher grade has to inter
alia participate/attend refresher course/summer/winter schools which is either
organized/sponsored by the Education division of the ICAR or UGC.”

33
79. On being enquired whether scientists working in ICAR are sent abroad for
training, the Ministry replied as under:
"The Scientists of the ICAR are also deputed for short-term/long-term training/
study visits abroad as per the provisions in the various Memorandum of
Understanding/Agreement with various countries and international research
institutions including organisation of the consultative groups (CG centres).
The Council deputed 211 scientists abroad under World Bank aided National
Agriculture Technology Project (NATP) and 95 scientists under various MoUs
and protocols with other countries in various reputed/identified institutions in
different priority areas during last three years. The scientists of the council are
also free to establish contact with any institution of repute to promote professional
competence and are allowed to avail sabbatical leave for a maximum period of
one year either within or outside the country.”
80. The Committee sought to know whether all the scientists sent abroad returned,
after their overseas training. In response, the Ministry replied as under:
"............all the scientists deputed for overseas training have returned and resumed
their duties. However, there are instances of two scientists in the entry grade
who proceeded abroad for acquiring Ph. D/Post Doctoral Fellowship but have
not resumed duties so far. The Council has initiated major disciplinary proceedings
action against these scientists as per provision of Rule 14 of CCS (CCA) rules as
made applicable for the scientists of the Council. In one case the Inquiry Officer
is to submit his report shortly and in the other the Inquiry report has been
received and the same has been forwarded to the charged officer as per rules.
The scientists deputed on various short-term/long-term training courses abroad
are governed by the provisions of the MoU/Bilateral Protocol(s)  with no liability
on the part of council except the admissible pay and allowances of the scientists
during the period of training.
The Scientists before proceeding on any specific training abroad execute a bond
stating that they shall serve the council for a period of four years from the date
of completion of the training, failing which the scientist will have to deposit/
refund the entire amount spent on his salary, subsistence allowance, the rupee
equivalent of the value of fellowship availed, the international air fare etc. as
applicable in the specific case.”

34
Observations and Recommendations
81. The Natural Resource Management Division in the Indian Council of
Agricultural Research is responsible for research on conservation, improvement
and efficient utilisation of soil and water in the country. To accomplish these tasks,
five research institutes of Indian Council of Agricltural Research are engaged in the
research activities in these areas. The National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use
Planning, Nagpur is engaged in conducting soil survey and mapping the soils of the
country to promote scientific and optimal land pedology, soil survey, land evalution
and land use planning. The Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal had been set up for
conducting basic and strategic research on soils, especially physical, chemical and
biological processes related to management of utrients, water and energy and for
developing advanced technologies  for  sustainable systems of input management in
soils. For basic and applied research for developing strategies for salinity control,
reclamation and management of salt affected soils, the Central Soil Salinity Research
Institute, was established at Karnal. In order to conduct basic and applied research
for developing strategies for efficient utilisation of on-farm water resources so as to
enhance agricultural productivity on sustainable basis, the Water Technology Centre
for Eastern Region was set up at Bhubaneshwar. With a view to control land
degradation under all primary production systems, rehabilitation of degraded lands,
updating technology in soil and water conservation, watershed development and its
management and undertaking water harvesting measures the Central Soil and Water
Conservation Research and Training Institute was set up in Dehradun.
82. The Committee are concerned to note that a review of the management of
in-house projects, sponsored projects and externally aided projects undertaken and
completed over the last five years by the aforesaid five institutes for utilisation and
conservation of soil and water with reference to the milestones and achievements of
objectives and benefits derived from them has revealed a number of deficiencies in the
system. These included non-maintenance of project files by two Research Institutes
namely National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning, Nagpur and Central
Soil and Water Conservation Research and Training Institute, Dehradun as required
under rules resulting in inadequate monitoring of the project by Staff Research
Council/Research Advisory Committee. Many research projects were concluded with
non-achievement/partial achievement of objectives despite time overruns.
Technologies developed were not transferred to the end users thereby defeating the
ultimate objective of dissemination. Further, there was underperformance in soil
survey, mapping of salt affected soils and documentation of traditional wisdom. These
issues have been discussd in detail in the following paragraphs.
83. The Committee regret to point out that National Bureau of Soil Survey and
Land Use Planning, (NBSS&LUP), Nagpur terminated 15 projects before their
completion during 1999-2004. What is surprising is the fact that no records were
maintained for 10 completed projects and in 16 projects, Research Project Files were
maintained intermittently. The Ministry have attributed these deficiencies to the fact
that in some cases the concerned project investigators handling the particular project
were deployed for other priority work where their involvement was felt most essential

35
such as National Agricultural Technology Project work, due to which these principal
investigators could not make noticeable progress in their regular projects and hence
RPFs were not prepared. As regards, improper maintenance of National Register of
Soil Series by the Institute, the Ministry have stated that the register could not be
updated as all the scientists remained busy in accomplishing the task of mega project
on Soil Resource Mapping and NATP mission mode projects. The Committee are not
convinced by these arguments put forth by the Ministry in the defence of NBSS & LUP,
Nagpur. In the absence of proper maintenance of Research Project Files and National
Register of Soil Series, effectiveness of monitoring of Research activities by Staff
Research Council, Research Advisory Committees cannot be ensured. Obviously the
Institute has not paid sufficient attention to these vital areas. The ICAR had also failed
to monitor such basic activities of the Institute which ultimately affected the functioning
of the Institute. At this stage the Committee cannot but emphasise that suitable steps
need to be taken to ensure that Research Project Files and all other such documents
including National Register of Soil Series are properly maintained.
84. Another area of concern in the working of National Bureau of Soil Survey
and Land Use Planning (NBSS&LUP) is the fact that it could not achieve the objectives
of Soil Survey, mapping of Land Use planning in three projects involving total
expenditure of Rs. 6.63 crores. In these three  projects there were partial achievement
of objectives and delay in completion ranged from three months to seven years. Soil
Survey Reports were not prepared even after lapse of five to twenty-five years although
conducting soil surveys and publishing report for land use planning was one of the
mandates of this Institute. A Project was undertaken in collaboration with CSSRI,
Karnal, in May 1996 on "Preparation of soil resource inventory of coastal salt affected
areas of West Bengal and Orissa using satellite imagery and characterization and
classification of the soil to determine their potentialities, problems and management"
at an outlay of Rs. 16 lakh was to be completed by December 2006 whereas the
stipulated period of completion was two years. In another project on "Identification,
characterization and delineation of agro economic constraints of oilseed based
production systems in rain fed eco system" taken up from July 2000 to February
2003 at an estimated cost of Rs. 55.41 lakhs studies were conducted for four crops in
sixteen districts as against the target of six crops in nineteen districts. Further data
on area and production by oil seed conducted only in six districts as against twenty-
eight different districts. Even in the sixteen districts covered, no strategies for
improving the productivity of rainfed oilseed crops were suggested. The rainfed oilseed
based  production zones were also not delineated using Geographical Information
System. Thus, the benefits of improving the productivity of rainfed oilseeds could not
be derived. In the third project on "Land use planning for management of agricultural
resources" from January 2001 to December 2003, only Rs. 5.92 crore were spent
against the allocation of Rs. 9.32 crore as of March 2004.
From the above it is evident that aforesaid three projects were undertaken by
the Institute of National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning (NBSS&LUP),
Nagpur without proper perception, Planning and preliminary background work
leading to unjustifiable delays, non-achievement of targets and under utilisation of
funds. The Committee are inclined to conclude that delay in completion of these

36
projects deprived the beneficiaries of the intended benefits. As these are the only
three projects test checked by the Audit, the Committee are of the view that there
might be more such projects undertaken by these Institutes where there could
have been similar delays and non-achievement of the laid down targets. The
Committee desire that these Institutes should show the requisite urgency in
completion of the projects within the stipulated periods and should take all
necessary measures to ensure that the objectives laid down under the projects
are fully and timely achieved.
85. In respect of working of Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal
the Committee have noticed that there were partial  achievement of objectives in two
projects undertaken during the period 1999-2004. An externally aided Indo-United
Kingdom collaborative research project on "Soil salinity and breeding of salt resistant
crops (soil salinity and breeding for salt resistant crops rice, Indian mustard and
gram)" was undertaken by the Institute in March, 1996 for five years at a total cost of
Rs. 5.63 crore. The scrutiny has revealed that two of the six scientists who went
abroad in connection with the project did not contribute anything and there was a
delay of about three years in completion of this project. The Ministry have informed
the Committee that the two scientists in question have submitted their deputation
reports in November 1997 and January 1998 respectively and the final report of the
project was submitted in November, 2004. The Committee however, have not been
informed as to why the two scientists submitted their reports late and what action was
taken by the Institute against them. It is, thus, clear that the delay in submission of
deputation Reports by the two scientists led to delay in overall completion of the
project. The Committee desire that a system ought to be put in place to ensure that the
scientists who are sent abroad submit their Reports timely and deterrent action
should be taken against those who do not comply with the instructions in this regard.
In another project namely "Management of salt affected soils and use of saline water
in Agriculture", in which the institute spent Rs. 7.19 crore during 1999-2004, the
benchmark suvey for quality control of ground water was undertaken from 1972 only
in Guntur district of Andhra Pradesh, but no strategy had been formulated as yet to
solve the water problems of that area. Further no benchmark surveys were carried
out at centres other than Guntur district. In this connection, the Ministry have
intimated that the water problems of the coastal belt of Guntur area have been solved
through studies on Doruvu Technology and this technology had found favours with
the farmers in the coastal belt. A number of benchmark sites have been identified in
various irrigation commands in Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu and Haryana and so on where the temporal changes in diffierent
benchmark sites are being studied with a view to make possible land use planning.
The Committee hope that expeditious steps would be taken to study conditions of
these sites to make their best use for agriculture requirements.
86. Another instance where there has been partial achievement of objectives
relates to two projects undertaken by the Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal,
IISS undertook a project on "Organic pools and dynamics in relation to land use
tillage and agronomic practices for maintenance of soil fertility" in May 2000 with
Bhopal as lead centre along with six co-operating centres at an estimated cost of

37
Rs. 1.08 crore to be completed by December 2003. The project was extended upto
March 2004 with additional outlay of Rs. 3.14 lakh and was aimed to quantify the
changes in soil organic Carbon and Nitrogen pools to assess the mineralisation
potential and C-sequestration in soils of semi-arid and sub humid regions and to fit
experimental data in different models of C-sequestration. Rs. 36.42 lakh was spent
on this project by IISS till its completion. Completion report of the project revealed
that the project was implemented only in seven out of targeted eleven districts.
Further due to delay in procurement of Carbon Hydrogen Nitrogen Sulphur analyser
and Furriar Transform Infrared Spectrophotometer, the chemical analysis of the
project was hampered. Due to non-materialisation of training of two scientists in the
USA in modelling of Soil Organic Matter (SOM) and recent technique in SOM
dynamics and measurements, one of the objectives of fitting of experimental data in
different models of C-sequestration could not be achieved.
IISS also undertook a project on "Integrated Nutrient Management in major
pulse based cropping system and identification of the most productive and remunerative
systems" from May 2000 to March 2004 with Bhopal as lead centre. Against the total
provision of Rs. 30.66 lakh an expenditure of Rs. 18.83 lakh was incurred. The project
involved six important cropping systems at different locations. The final report of the
project revealed that experiments on three cropping systems were not conducted and
experiments on another cropping system were not conducted in two out of four locations.
Consequently, the objective of identifying the most productive and remunerative pulses
based cropping system under different soil and nutrient management could not be
achieved. The Committee are constrained to point out that this project was undertaken
without giving due consideration to the cropping sequences prevalent in the targeted
districts resulting in revision of the technical programme after two years of starting
the project. The Committee hope that suitable lessons would be drawn by the Institute/
ICAR from these projects and due care would be taken in future to ensure timely
completion of the projects and for achievement of broad objectives.
87. In case of Water Technology Centre for Eastern Region, Bhubaneshwar
also the targeted results in three projects costing Rs. 48.90 lakh could not be acheived
resulting in non-achievement of the objective of sustainable agricultural production
through development of strategies for effective management of on-farm water
resources. Similarly, Central Soil & Water Conservation Research and Training
Institute, Dehradun did not achieve the objectives of research in soil and water
conservation measures and land use systems for sustainable crop production in
three projects costing Rs. 37.90 lakh. The Committee are not convinced by the
explanation given by the Ministry for non-achievement of targeted results in respect
of these projects. With a little bit of proper advance planning and farsightedness
these projects could have been properly and timely executed.
A review of the working of the aforesaid five institutes has reveal that there was
lack of proper planning, execution and monitoring of some of the research projects
undertaken. Consequently, there was time and cost overruns, leading to partial/
non-achievement of objectives and targets laid, defeating in the process the very
purpose for which these projects were conceived for implementation. The various

38
deficiencies/shortcomings that have been noticed points to the lack of effective
institutionalized monitoring mechanism either at ICAR or at the Ministry level. The
Committee recommend that ICAR should streamline/strengthen their monitoring
mechanism so that the projects are reviewed periodically and it is ensured that the
same are completed properly and expeditiously. If necessary ICAR/Ministry may put
in place requisite mechanism for the same.
88. Another disquieting feature of the functioning of these institutes is the fact
that in all sixteen technologies involving a total cost of about Rs. 2.44 crore that were
developed in the fields of water and soil conservation by the four institutes of Indian
Council of Agricultural Research, namely Central Soil Salinity Research Institute,
Water Technology Centre for Eastern Region, Central and Indian Institute of Soil
Science have not been transferred to the end-users i.e farmers. The Committee
regret to observe that despite spending large funds for research activities in the field
of agriculture, the benefits of technologies developed by the various institutes have
not percolated down to the end users in whose name research is being carried out.
The Ministry have stated that Indian Council of Agricultural Research develops
technologies, demonstrates and passes onto the line departments and also trains the
farmers. An autonomous body namely Agriculture Technology Management Agency
(ATMA) had been set up which serves as a focal point for integrating research and
extention activities at the district level. One of the key activities of ATMA is to prepare
a Strategic Research and Extension Plan and its implementation by the various
stakeholders. Indian Council of Agricultural Research has also established a network
of Krishi Vigyan Kendras to aim at technology assessment, refinement and
demonstration of technology/products. The Krishi Vigyan Kendras network is further
interfaced with State Agricultural Universities through their Directors of Extension. It
has further been stated that the technology transfer was also undertaken through lab to
land programme, Institute village link programmes, and farmers fairs, visits and Goshtis
etc. However, the Ministry have admitted that poor linkages and coordination between
the Institute and users had resulted in poor transfer of technologies. Despite setting up
of Krishi Vigyan Kendras and Agriculture Technology Management Agency it is quite
evident that these institutional mechanisms have miserably failed and as a result the
benefits of Agricultural Research could not reach the farmers. The Committee are of
the opinion that labours of research will come to naught, unless its fruits reach end
users. The Committee desire that whatever steps that are required to strengthen the
system should be taken so that the technologies reach the end users. For this if necessary,
the Ministry may study the feasibility of setting up of State level Agricultral Research
Extension Committees comprising representatives of Ministry of Agriculture, Indian
Council of Agricultural Research, State Government Officials, Farmers Associations,
and Non-Government Organisations involved in Agricultural Extension etc. for effective
coordination and supervision of various activities relating to transfer of technologies/
research inputs developed by various Agriculture Research Institutes to the farmers.
NEW DELHI: PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA
15 February, 2007 Chairman,
26 Magha 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee

39
ANNEXURE-I
NON-TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of Purpose of the technology Particulars of technology developed Cost
No. Institute
1. Central Soil (i) Proper resources characterization Soil site suitability maps for Bara tract area 1 4.08
Salinity Research and classification of soil, land for different crops
Institute, Karnal evaluation and land use planning
(ii) To solve the water logging Bio drainage to control the water logging in 2 8.94
problems development of secondary salinisation of
canal irrigated soils
(iii) To formulate design of sub- Process of waterlogged alkali soils which 4.10
surface drainage system in would economise the reclamation were
waterlogged alkali soils prepared
2. Water technology (i) To optimize 40 lakh ha. of Fish-crop rotational cropping technology 6.00
centre for Eastern waterlogged shallow low land
Region, Bhubaneshwar
(ii) For conservation of water Drip irrigation method for selected vegetables 6.03
(iii) Providing irrigation to Design of low cost proof channels and tanks 5.43
undulating levels of plateau are as and runoff cycling based irrigation system
of eastern India and bring a wide
change in productivity, production
and income in addition to run off
control

40
Sl. Name of Purpose of the technology Particulars of technology developed Cost
No. Institute
(iv) For saving of water and Process of suitable week for sowing green gram 6.75
different sowing dates in paddy fallows and in receding soil moisture
(v) For conservation of excess Optimum dike height 21.92
rain water
(vi) Conducting demonstrations Moisture conservation and weed suppression 20.00
at three locations under different package for pointed gourd.
soil conditions
3. Central Soil and Water (i) To assess the effect of various The vegetative barrier of vetiver grass was alone 2.93
Conservation Research conservation measures on runoff, able to arrest the runoff and soil erosion problem
and Training Institute soil and nutrients loss more effectively.
(CSWCR&TI) To evaluate the comparative of
Dehradun different conservation on the
yield of sorghum crop
(ii) To determine the effect of The hedge row of perennial pigeonpea was declared 2.36
perennial pigeon pea as a as quite effective and the effect of fixed row
vegetative barrier on soil and water cropping of various combinations of Ragi,
losses and production in Ragi, Kodomillet and perennial pigeonpea on biomass,
Kodomillet and lentil sequences grain production and Ragi.
(iii) To find out suitable crops Sorghum+Vetiver had drastically reduced the soil 2.52
practices which permit minimum loss indicating its suitability as best choice for
soil and nutrients loss and crop with Vetiver to conserve the soil most effective.
maximize the return Sorghum has also higher production in quantity per
ha. as compared to blackgram.

41
Sl. Name of Purpose of the technology Particulars of technology developed Cost
No. Institute
To work out the crop management
factor ('c' of USLE for selected crops
grown in the region)
(iv) To find out the suitable maize Wheat production was increased when ploughing 4.50
harvesting methods for maximum was done immediately after maize harvest and
wheat production soil was covered with maize stover
4. Indian Institute of (i) To enrich manurial value Enrich compost production 16.92
Soil Science (IISS), particularly sulphur and nitrogen
Bhopal content of compost
(ii) For enhancing and sustaining Integrated plant nutrient supply (INPS) for 31.50
productivity and soil health in soyabean-wheat system
soyabean-wheat system in Malwa
region
(iii) To determine the Nitrogen Integrated Nutrient Management (INM) for pulse 69.88
requirement in the absence or and oilseed.
presence of Farm Yard Manure
(FYM) and green manure without
any loss in yield and soil fertility
Total 243.86

42
APPENDIX-I
CHAPTER II: INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULTURAL  RESEARCH
Management of projects relating to utilisation and conservation of soil and
water undertaken by Institutes of ICAR
Highlights
* NBSS&LUP, Nagpur could not achieve objectives of soil survey, mapping
and land use planning in three projects involving an expenditure of Rs. 6.63
crore. Soil Survey reports were not prepared even after lapse of five to
25 years.
* IISS, Bhopal did not achieve the desired results in soil science research in
two projects, despite expenditure of Rs. 55.25 lakh.
* CSSRI, Karnal could not solve effectively the issues relating to reclamation
and management of alkaline and saline soils in two projects costing Rs. 12.82
crore. Map of salt affected soils of India was also not prepared.
* In water management research, WTCER, Bhubaneshwar failed to accomplish
targeted results in three projects costing Rs. 36.39 lakh resulting in non-
achievement of the objective of sustainable agricultural production through
management of canal water, rain water and waterlogged land.
* CSWCR&TI, Dehradun did not achieve the objectives of research in soil and
water conservation measures and land use systems for sustainable crop
production in three projects costing Rs. 37.90 lakh.
* Technologies developed in 16 projects at a cost of Rs. 2.44 crore were not
transferred to end users.
2.1 Introduction
Natural Resource Management Division of Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR) is responsible for research on conservation, improvement and efficient
utilisation of soil and water. Five research institutes of ICAR are engaged in research
in these areas. Areas of research undertaken by them are as under:
Sl. Name of Institute Research areas
No.
1. National Bureau of Soil Soil survey and mapping the soils of the country
Survey and Land Use to promote scientific and optimal land pedology,
Planning (NBSS&LUP), soil survey, land evaluation and land use planning.
Nagpur
2. Indian Institute of Soil Basic and strategic research on soil, especially
Science (IISS), Bhopal physical, chemical and biological processes related
to management of nutrients, water and energy and
developing advanced technologies for sustainable
systems of input management in soils.

43
Sl. Name of Institute Research areas
No.
3. Central Soil Salinity Basic  and  applied  research  for  developing
Research Institute strategies for salinity control, reclamation and
(CSSRI), Karnal management of salt affected soils.
4. Water Technology Basic  and  applied  research  for  developing
Centre for Eastern strategies for efficient utilisation of on-farm water
Region (WTCER), resources to enhance agricultural productivity on
Bhubaneshwar sustainable basis.
5. Central Soil & Water Research  and  development  of  strategies  for
Conservation Research controlling land degradation under all primary
and Training Institute production systems, rehabilitation of degraded lands,
(CSWCR&TI), updated  technology  in  soil  and  water  conserva-
Dehradun tion, watershed development and its management
and undertaking water harvesting measures.
2.2 Scope and objectives of audit
The present review, covering the period 1999-2000 to 2003-04, includes
observations on management of the projects undertaken to utilise and conserve soil
and water through test check of in-house projects, sponsored projects and externally
aided projects undertaken and completed by five institutes with reference to the
milestones and achievements of objectives and benefits to be derived from them.
2.3 National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning (NBSS&LUP), Nagpur
NBSS&LUP, Nagpur completed 45 projects and terminated 15 projects before
their completion during 1999-2004. Of the completed projects, research project files
were available for 19 projects only which were examined in audit.
2.3.1 Improper maintenance of project files
In accordance with the byelaws, rules and regulations of ICAR and instructions
issued by ICAR from time to time, Research Project files (RPFs) are required to be
maintained in three parts. The research project proposal is to be kept in RPF-I, which is
to be presented to Staff Research Council (SRC) for approval. Annual progress of each
project is to be kept in RPF-II, for review by SRC to evaluate the implementation of the
project. The final report in the form of RPF-III is required to be prepared and presented
to SRC and Research Advisory Committee (RAC) for overall review and evaluation of
the project. However, NBSS&LUP did not maintain the RPFs properly in respect of the
projects implemented during 1999-2004. In case of 15 projects, which were dropped
midway. RPF-I only were available. As such reasons for termination of the projects
before their completion were not ascertainable. Besides, no records were maintained
for 10 completed  projects. In 16 projects, RPFs were maintained intermittently. In the
absence of proper maintenance of RPFs, effectiveness of monitoring of research
activities by SRC/RAC cannot be ensured.

44
NBSS&LUP stated in August 2004 that in future proper maintenance of RPFs
would be ensured.
2.3.2 Non-achievement of objectives
In three projects, partial achievements of objectives and delay in completion
ranging from three months to seven years were noticed. These are discussed below:
(a) In collaboration with CSSRI, Karnal, NBSS&LUP undertock a project in May
1996 on "Preparation of soil resource inventory of coastal salt affected areas of West
Bengal and Orissa using satellite imagery and characterization and classification of the
soil to determine their potentialities, problems and management" at an outlay of Rs. 16
lakh for a period of two years.
However, the project was continued even after the stipulted duration of two
years. SRC recommended in November 2000 to complete the project by 2001. Ignoring
the advice of SRC, the project was continued as of July 2004. The annual progress
reports of the project were not prepared regularly. In the annual progress report for
2002-03, it was mentioned that due to pressure of other projects, the work of this
project could not progress as per the schedule and the likely date of completion was
determined as December 2005. ICAR stated in December 2004 that extension of the
project up to December 2005 was accepted by SRC and added that the work was in
progress and would be completed. ICAR did not, however, indicate the remedial measures
instituted to address the delays.
(b) NBSS&LUP, Nagpur undertook a project on "Identification, characterization
and delineation of agro-economic constraints of oilseed based production systems in
rainfed eco-system" from July 2000 to February 2003 at an estimated cost of
Rs. 55.41 lakh. The project was to facilitate identification of the appropriate sowing
time for specified areas and suggest strategies for improving the productivity of rainfed
oilseed crops. The rainfed oilseed based production zones were to be delineated using
Geographical Information System (GIS).
The final report of the project revealed that studies were conducted for four
crops in 16 districts as against  the target of six crops in 19 districts. Further, data on
area and production of oilseeds were collected only in six districts as against 28
different districts targeted. Even in the 16 districts covered, no strategies for improving
the productivity of rainfed oilseed crops were suggested. The rainfed oilseed-based
production zones were also not delineated using GIS. Thus, the benefits of improving
the productivity of rainfed oilseeds could not be derived.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that against the target of 19 districts for six crops,
16 districts for four crops were covered as suggested by the Scientific Advisory Panel
and added that the data collected was processed to generate maps depicting the oil
seed production potential and constraints and were presented in different thematic
maps. However, it did not furnish the reasons for collection of data only in six districts
as against 28 districts as per the project proposal.
(c) ICAR sanctioned a project on "Land use planning for management of
agricultural resoruces" from January 2001 to December 2003 at a cost of Rs. 9.32 crore.

45
The project aimed at developing the strategies and options for rational and scientific
land use plan at watershed level.
The project was extended up to December 2004. The progress reports of the
project up to March 2004 revealed that due to delay in receipt of funds, activities like
procurement of equipment, socio-economic survey, resource survey, different kinds of
mapping and crop experiment could not be completed as planned. The economic
analysis of alternate land uses to assess overall socio-economic aspect was not started
as of July 2004. Linkages with various organizations like International Crop Research
Institute for Semi Arid Tropics and CSSRI on various aspects such as fish varieties for
coastal areas, animal component suitable for coastal eco-system and technologies for
different crop components of land use models for coastal eco-system were yet to be
developed. Further, field experiments for cereals and pulses crops, development of soil
site suitability for different land use types, selection of suitable cropping system
specific to each agro-ecological zone and monitoring of soil and water qualities were
yet to be completed to achieve the aim of the project. Against the allocation of Rs. 9.32
crore, only Rs. 5.92 crore was spent as of March 2004.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that the work had already been started to conduct
economic analysis and alternate land uses to assess overall socio-economic-aspect
and that activities were also simultaneously initiated to assess the data for horticultural
validation, development of soil site suitability criteria, suggesting different crop/
cropping sequence in specific agro-ecozone. However, the reply is silent about the
linkages to be developed with other institutes as envisaged in the project.
2.3.3 Non-submission of survey reports
Conducting soil survey and publishing reports for land use planning was one of
the mandates of NBSS&LUP. Twenty five field survey reports were pending for periods
ranging from five to 25 years. It was observed that field surveys of the districts of
Chittur, Mysore and Chitradurga were conducted partly in 1976 but were not completed
fully. As such the soil survey reports were not submitted till August 2004. As a result,
the objective of land use planning was not achieved fully.
ICAR, while accepting the facts, stated in December 2004 that the survey work
undertaken before 1986 was suspended and complete manpower was put on national
project on soil resource mapping work. It added that the pending soil survey reports
would be complted by August 2005.
2.3.4 Costing of soil surveys
The cost of each survey was required to be worked out with reference to staff
salaries, travelling cost, depreciation of vehicles and related overheads, cost of base
maps, cost laboratory analysis, cartography work and cost of map publication.
However, NBSS&LUP did not work out the cost the the surveys though it
surveyed 25 States covering a total area of 2,90,577,440 hectare, five districts in the
States of Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka covering an area of 20,00,530 hectare,
11 research farms covering an area of 9800 heactare and 13 wastershed command area
covering the area of 2,90,125 hectare during 1997-98 to 2001-02.

46
ICAR stated in December 2004 that the costing of survey would be worked out
for future projects.
2.3.5 Improper maintenance of national register of soil series
A national register was required to be maintained for identification of soil series
along with their salient characteristics and classification. Indices according to states
and crops raised on the soil series are also to be prepared for ready reference. However,
the national register was not updated NBSS&LUP did not furnish information on the
year from which the register was to be updated. To complete this task, correlation of
soil series identified so far was required to be completed. Quinquenniel Review Team
(QRT) observed that there was a backlog of correlation of more than a thousand
identified soil series.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that national register of soil series was temporarily
suspended due to national mission project on soil resource mapping of different states
on 1:2,50,000 scale and of the country on 1:1 million scale initiated in 1986. It added that
state wise soil series had been registered and correlated for 13 States. For the remaining
States the work was in progress. However, it did not furnish the timeframe for completion
of the task.
2.4 Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal
During the period 1999-2004 IISS Bhopal completed 36 projects, of which 19
projects were test checked. In two project the objectives were achieved only partially.
Apart from this, technologies developed in three projects at a total cost of Rs. 1.18
crore were not transferred to the end-users as listed in Annexrue. ICAR did not furnish
reasons for non-transfer of technologies to the end-users.
2.4.1 Non-achievement of objectives
(a) IISS undertook a project on "Organic pools and dynamics in relation to land
use tillage and agronomic practices for maintenance of soil fertility" in May 2000 as
lead centre with six co-operating centres at an estimated cost of Rs. 1.08 crore to be
completed by December 2003. The project was extended up to March 2004 with
additional outlay of Rs. 3.14 lakh. The project was aimed to quantify the changes in soil
organic Carbon and Nitrogen pools to assess the mineralisation potential and
C-sequestration in soils of semi-arid and sub humid regions and to fit experimental
data in different models of C-sequestration. Rs. 36.42 lakh was spent on this project  by
IISS till its completion.
Completion report of the project revealed that the project was implemented only
in seven out of targeted eleven districts. Due to delay in procurement of Carbon
Hydrogen Nitrogen Sulphur analyser and Furrier Transfrom Infrared Spectrophotometer,
the chemical analysis of the project was hampered. Due to non-materialisation of
training of two scientists in the USA in modelling of Soil Organic Matter (SOM) and
recent  technique in SOM dynamics and measurements, one of the obejectives of
fitting of experimental data in different models of C-sequestration could not be achieved.

47
The contention of ICAR of December 2004 that the overall objectives of the
project had been achieved is not tenable. The reply of ICAR contradicts the facts
stated in the project completion report that chemical analysis of the project was
hampered due to non-procurement of equipment and that fitting of data in different
models of C-sequestration could not be achieved due to non-materialisation of training
of two scientists. Further, ICAR itself had stated that the results could not be obtained
for Bhubaneswar and Hyderabad due to discontinuance of long-term fertilizer
experiments at those locations as well as inability to carry out solid sample analysis at
Anantpur and Jorhat.
(b) IISS undertook a project on "Integrated Nutrient Management in major pulse
based cropping system and identification of the most productive and remunerative
systems" from May 2000 to March 2004 as lead centre. Against the total provision of
Rs. 30.66 lakh an expenditure of Rs. 18.83 lakh was incurred.
The project involved six important cropping system at different locations. The
final report of the project revealed that experiments on three cropping systems were
not conducted and experiments on another cropping system were not conducted in
two out of four locations. Consequently, the objective of identifying the most productive
and remunerative pulses based cropping system under different soil and nutrient
management could not be achieved.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that since the project had to be executed under
farmer's field condition in participatory mode after selecting the farmers and villages in
the target districts, the cropping sequences were revised midway after considering the
views of the farmers. The reply revealed that this project was undertaken without
giving due consideration to the cropping sequences prevalent in the targeted districts
resulting in revision of the technical programme after two years of starting the project.
2.5 Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal
CSSRI, Karnal completed 72 projects during 1999-2004, of which 40 were test
checked. In two projects the objectives were achieved partially, which are discussed in
the succeeding paragraphs. In three projects, technology developed at a cost of
Rs. 47. 12 lakh was not transferred to the end users as listed in Annexrue.
2.5.1 Non-achievement of objectives
(a) CSSRI undertook an externally aided Indo-United Kingdom collaborative
research project on "Soil salinity and breeding of salt resistant crops (soil salinity and
breeding for salt resistant crops-rice, Indian mustard and gram)" in March 1996 for five
years at a total cost of Rs. 5.63 crore. Scrutiny revealed that six scientists of CSSRI
visited United Kingdom in the first year of the project and undertook studies on
alkaline soil instead of both alkaline and saline soils. The progress report for 1996-97
revealed that two of the six scientists who were abroad in connection with the project
did not contribute anything. The final report was not yet prepared as of June 2004.
ICAR while accepting that the projects include both saline and alkaline soils
stated in December 2004 that all scientists contributed to achieve  the project objectives
and that the final report was being prepared. The reply has to be viewed in the light of

48
the fact that the progress reports clearly revealed non-contribution by the two scientists
and the final report was yet to be prepared even after a lapse of three years from the
completion of the project.
(b) All India coordinated research project on "Management of salt affected
soils and use of saline water in agriculture" was implemented from 1972 at the
coordinating unit at CSSRI, Karnal alongwith seven centres at SAUs and one at
Agriculture College, Agra.
Rs. 7.19 crore was spent on the project during 1999-2004. The benchmark survey
for quality control of ground water was undertaken from 1972 only in Guntur district
of Andhra Pradesh, but, no strategy had been formulated as yet to solve the water
problems of that area. Thus one of the objectives of evaluating the effect of poor
quality water on soils and crops was limited to only one region. Apart from this, there
was unspent balance of Rs. 1.02 crore accumulated with the centres over the years
due to non-adjustment of previous years' unspent balance while releasing further
grants to them.
ICAR's reply of December 2004 was silent about the fact why no benchmark
surveys were carried out at centres other than Guntur as well as on high accumulation
of unspent balances at coordinating centres.
2.5.2 Non-preparation of maps of salt affected soils
RAC in its meeting held in February 2000 recommended preparation of maps for
total affected areas of  the country to know the latest position of the country's salt
affected areas. It recommended that CSSRI should undertake this task of identification
to have a final and authentic record. ICAR was to coordinate with different agencies
to prepare this map upon a single figure. However, no time frame had been fixed to
complete the task. The action taken report revealed that the map of salt affected soils
on 1: 2,50,000 scale for Bihar, Haryana, Orissa, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal had been prepared, But for the remaining States, no
work was started as yet.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that the preparation of the maps was delayed
since most of the maps were designated as restricted by Survey of India and it
required considerable time to get clearance from the Ministry of Defence prior to their
procurement from Survey of India. The contention is not a valid ground for delay,
since the clearance issue is forseeable and could be resolved in time.
2.5.3 Non-documentation of traditional wisdom
The RAC recommended in February 2000 to refine and update the traditional
agricultural practices being followed in different parts of the country. Various traditional
practices like soil-reclamation, land use, water management, nutrient management etc.
were to be collected and documented CSSRI did not take any action on this issue as
of June 2004.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that due to constraints of non-availability of
scientific personnel, documenting the traditional wisdom was not taken up in detail

49
and the study would be conducted in future. It added that some information on
traditional wisdom was collected from the Gujarat region.
2.6 Water Technology Centre for Eastern Region, Bhubaneshwar
WTCER, Bhubaneshwar completed 28 projects during 1999-2004, of which
20 projects were test checked. In three projects, partial achievements of objectives
were noticed and are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. WTCER, Bhubaneshwar
did not transfer to the end users the technology developed at a total cost of Rs. 66.13
lakh in six projects as listed in annexute.  ICAR stated in December 2004 that efforts
were being made to transfer the technology to the users.
2.6.1 Non-achievement of objectives
(a) In order to formulate an integrated water and nutrient management strategy for
sustainable productivity of the eastern region by studying influence of water regimes on
soil chemical environment and availability of nutrients, WTCER undertook a project on
"Nutrient dynamics in soils under different water management practices" in November
1998 and completed in November 2001 after an expenditure of Rs. 21.61 lakh.
The final report of the project revealed that soil samples were collected only from
two districts of Orissa instead of major soil groups from different benchmark sites as
envisaged in the project. WTCER did not undertake micronutrient studies (Zinc and
Iron) as planned since the Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer costing Rs. 15.10
lakh was installed at the fag end of the project in August 2001 and was made operational
only in March 2002 after completion of the project. Thus, achievement was limited to
that extent.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that micronutrient studies could not be undertaken
due to delay in receipt and installation of Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometers.
(b) WTCER undertook a project on "Mitigation of water logging from deltaic low
land rice eco-system for enhancing agricultural productivity" in 1998. The duration of
the project was five years at an estimated cost of Rs. 19.29 lakh. The objectives of the
project were inter alia to design and develop suitable technology for rice-fish integration
and to study the socio-economic feasibility of the prescribed technologies. The long-
term objectives were to provide a sustainable technology package for the deltaic low
land rice eco-system for increase in agricultural productivity. This integrated package
in combination with aquaculture was expected to be a viable alternative for utilisation
of rainfed low land of 20.5 million ha. whichwas prone to water logging.
The final report of the project revealed that after studying only one aspect of
rice-fish integration and an expenditure of Rs. 6.78 lakh, the project was prematurely
closed in 2000. Thus, an integrated package as planned was not developed. WTCER
stated in July 2004 that the principal investigator and one co-investigator were granted
study leave and another investigator was transferred. It was decided to carry out the
project with modified objectives as per the SRC's decision. Thus, an integrated package
as a viable alternative for combating water logging in deltaic low land rice eco-system
was not developed.

50
(c) WTCER undertook a project on "Studies on agro-meteorological parameters
for evolving sustainable crop production strategies in selected location of eastern
region” from January 1998 to January 2002. The objectives of the project were to
compile agro-meteorological parameters to study the agro-climatic feasibility of crop
production in West Bengal, Orissa, Bihar, eastern part of Uttar Pradesh, northern
Madhya Pradesh, north Andhra Pradesh, Assam and the adjacent States, to analyse
initial conditional probability of rainfall for evolving sustainable crop production
strategy in those locations and to characterize drought periods and critical dry spell in
respect of agricultural crop production on the basis of water balance and rainfall
probability.
The final report of the project revealed that WTCER collected and compiled the
data of selected zones of Orissa and West Bengal only. Since these two locations were
not sufficient for evolving any strategy for crop production, the project was merged
with another project titled "Appraisal of resources base and identification of land,
water, climate and socio-economic constraints in managing water resources for
agricultural development in eastern India" in July 2000. In spite of the  merger, the
earlier project started in January 1998 was continued without any activity and declared
completed in January 2002 after an expenditure of Rs. eight lakh. However, even after
merging the project no work was undertaken for evolving crop production strategies
for different agro-climatic zones of eastern India as envisaged.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that owing to the constraints in technical
manpower, the project was planned to cover selected locations of eastern India that
represented different agro-climatic zones of Orissa and West Bengal. The reply
highlights weakness in management of human resources. As a result the crop
production strategies for whole of eastern India could not be evolved.
2.7 Central Soil and Water Conservation Research and Training Institute,
Dehradun
CSWCR&TI, Dehradun completed 86 projects during 1999-2000 to 2003-04, of
which 16 projects, where project records were maintained, were test checked.
Shortcomings noticed are detailed in succeeding paragraphs. CSWCR&TI, Dehradun
did not transfer to the end-users the technology developed in four projects at a total
cost of Rs. 12.31 lakh as listed in Annexure.
2.7.1 Improper maintenance of project files
CSWCR&TI, Dehradun did not maintain research project files in respect of 70
projects. In the absence of such files, it is not clear how SRC/RAC evaluated and
monitored the project.
2.7.2 Non-achievement of objectives
(a) CSWCR&TI undertook a project on "Appraisal/investigation of surface and
sub-surface water harvesting systems in the Nilgiris and adjoining lower hills" from
1996 to 2000 at a total expenditure of  Rs. 4.10 lakh. The objectives of the project were
inter alia to study the hydrologic response in terms of hydrologic process controls
and channel flow across different spatial scales (size of watersheds) and land users in

51
Nilgiris, to suggest rainfall catchment area and pond capacity relationship and
hydrologic budgeting of ponds.
The final report of the project revealed that hydrologic budgeting of ponds was
not discussed, evidencing that no activity was undertaken in this area.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that the study was discontinued as the ponds
had higher outflow than inflow which could not be correctly accounted for as these
types of ponds were not only fed by surface runoff but also by spring (sub-surface).
Therefore the hydrologic budgeting could not be carried out. The reply of ICAR has to
be viewed in light of the fact that investigation was to be conducted both for surface
and sub-surface water systems.
(b) CSWCR&TI, Dehradun undertook a project on "Methodologies for
development and analysis of watersheds and decision support systems for
interventions" from October 1999 to December 2003 at a total cost of Rs. 5.13 lakh. The
project aimed to collect data on nine watersheds in the Shiwaliks and to develop
methodology for optimising land use patterns in the watersheds leading to sustainable
development.
The final report of the project revealed that methodology for development and
analysis of watershed could not be developed due to lack of inter-disciplinary team.
Thus, the aim of the project was not achieved.
ICAR accepted the audit observations.
(c) CSWCR&TI, Dehradun undertook a project on "Development and evaluation
of soil and water conservation measures and land use systems for sustainable crop
production in Western Ghats of coastal region" from June 2000 to September 2003 at
an outlay of Rs. 52.15 lakh. The project was taken up for evolving and testing different
bio-engineering measures of soil and water conservation, water harvesting system,
water management alternatives and suitable land use systems prevalent in the region.
The project was implemented at State Horticulture farm in Tamil Nadu, which represents
the low elevation and high rainfall zone of the Western Ghats.
The final report of the project revealed that conclusions could not be drawn
because the experiment was conducted with newly planted perennial crops like
cardamom, pepper, mandarin orange, bush pepper and tea which would take at least
four to five years for yielding. The project was, therefore, continued from October 2003
to March 2004 as in-house project. Thus, the benefit of evolving and testing different
bio-engineering measures of soil and water conservation could not be derived even
after an expenditure of Rs. 28.67 lakh.
ICAR stated in December 2004 that due to closure of the project in September
2003 by Agro-Eco Directorate (Coastal) of National Agricultural Technology Project,
the project could run only for three years. Further, due to termination of senior research
fellow and the experiment site being located at a faraway place from the research
centre, the experiments could not be carried out and had to be conducted in its own
farm. It added that had the project been continued up to August 2004, data for three
years could have been collected and conclusions drawn on the initial establishment
and growth of crops.

52
Report No. 5 (Scientific Department)
ANNEXURE
Non-transfer of technology
(Rupees in lakh)
Sl. Name of Institute Purpose of the technology Particulars of technology developed Cost
No.
1. Central Soil Salinity (i) Proper resources characterization and Soil site suitability maps for Bara tract area for 14.08
Research Institute, classification of soil, land evaluation and different crops
Karnal land use planning
(ii) To solve the water logging problems Bio-drainage to control the water logging in 28.94
development  of secondary salinisation of canal
irrigated soils
(iii) To formulate design of sub-surface Process of waterlogged alkali soils which would 4.10
drainage system in waterlogged alkali soils economise the reclamation were prepared
2. Water Technology Center (i) To optimize 40 lakh ha. of waterlogged Fish-crop rotational cropping technology 6.00
for Eastern Region, shallow low land
Bhubaneshwar (ii) For conservation of water Drip irrigation method for selected vegetables 6.03
(iii) Providing irrigation to undulating levels Design of low cost proof channels and tanks and 5.43
of plateau areas of eastern India and bring a run-off cycling based irrigation system
wide change in productivity, production and
income  in addition to run off control
(iv) For saving of water and different sowing Process of suitable week for sowing green gram 6.75
dates in paddy fallows and in receding soil moisture
(v) For conservation of excess rain water Optimum dike height 21.92
(vi) Conducting demonstrations at three Moisture conservation and weed suppression 20.00
location under different soil conditions. package for pointed gourd.

53
Sl. Name of Institute Purpose of the technology Particulars of technology developed Cost
No.
3. Central Soil and Water (i) To assess the effect of various conservation The vegetative barrier of vetiver grass was alone 2.93
Corservation Research measures on runoff, soil and nutrients loss able to arrest the runoff and soil erosion problem
and Training Institute To evaluate the comparative of different more effectively
(CSWCR&TI) Dehradun conservation on the yield of sorghum crop
(ii) To determine the effect of perennial pigeon The hedge row of perennial pigeon was declared as 2.36
pea as a vegetative barrier on soil and water quite effective and the effect of fixed row cropping of
losses and production in Ragi, Kodomillet and various combinations of Ragi, Kodomillet and perennial
lentil sequences pigeon on biomass, grain production and Ragi.
(iii) To find out suitable crops practices which Sorghum +Vetiver had drastically reduced the soil 2.52
permit minimum soil and nutrients loss and loss indicating its suitability as best choice for crop
maximize the return. with  V etiver to conserve the soil most effective,
To work out the crop management factor Sorghum  has  also higher production in quantity
(of USLE for selected crops grown in the region) per ha. as compared  to blackgram.
(iv) To find out the suitable maize harvesting Wheat production was increased when ploughing 4.50
methods for maximum wheat production was done immediately after maize harvest and soil
was covered with maize stover.
4. Indian Institute of Soil (i) To enrich manurial value particularly Enrich compost production 16.92
Science (IISS), Bhopal sulphur and nitrogen content of compost
(ii) For enhancing and sustaining productivity Integrated plant nutrient supply (INPS) for 31.50
and soil health in soybean wheat system in soybean-wheat system
Malwa region
(iii) To determine the Nitrogen requirement in Integrated nutrient management (INM) for pulse 69.88
the absence or presence of farm yard manure and oilseed.
(FYM) and green manure wit hout any loss in
yield and soil fertility
Total 243.86

APPENDIX  II
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department
1. 81 Agriculture The Natural Resource Management Division in the
(Department Indian Council of Agricultural Research is responsible
of Agricultural for research on conservation, improvement and
Research and efficient utilisation of soil and water in the country.
Education) To accomplish these tasks, five research institutes
of Indian Council of Agricultural Research are
engaged in the research activities in these areas. The
National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land use
Planning, Nagpur is engaged in conducting soil
survey and mapping the soils of the country to
promote scientific and optimal land pedology, soil
survey, land evaluation and land use planning. The
Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal had been set
up for conducting basic and strategic research on
soils, especially physical, chemical and biological
processes related to management of nutrients, water
and energy and for developing advanced
technologies for sustainable systems of input
management in soils. For basic and applied research
for developing strategies for salinity control,
reclamation and management of salt affected soils,
the Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, was
established at Karnal. In order to conduct basic and
applied research for developing strategies for
efficient utilisation of on-farm water resources so as
to enhance agricultural productivity on sustainable
basis, the Water Technology Centre for Eastern
Region was set up at Bhubaneshwar. With a view to
control land degradation under all primary production
systems, rehabilitation of degraded lands, updating
technology in soil and water conservation, watershed
development and its management and undertaking
water harvesting measures the Central Soil and Water
Conservation Research and Training Institute was
set up in Dehradun.
2. 82 -do- The Committee are concerned to note that a review
of the management of in-house projects, sponsored
projects and externally aided projects undertaken
and completed over the last five years by the
aforesaid five institutes for utilisation and
54

55
conservation of soil and water with reference to the
milestones and achievements of objectives and
benefits derived from them has revealed a number of
deficiencies in the system. These included non-
maintenance of project files by two Research
Institutes namely National Bureau of Soil Survey and
Land Use Planning, Nagpur and Central Soil and
Water Conservation Research and Training Institute,
Dehradun as required under rules resulting in
inadequate monitoring of the project by Staff
Research Council/Research Advisory Committee.
Many research projects were concluded with non-
achievement/partial achievement of objectives
despite time overruns. Technologies developed were
not transferred to the end users thereby defeating
the ultimate objective of dissemination. Further, there
was underperformance in soil survey, mapping of
salt affected soils and documentation of traditional
wisdom. These issues have been discussed in detail
in the following paragraphs.
3. 83 Agriculture The Committee regret to point out that National
(Department of Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning,
Agricultural (NBSS&LUP), Nagpur terminated 15 projects before
Research and their completion during 1999—2004. What is
Education) surprising is the fact that no records were maintained
for 10 completed projects and in 16 projects,
Research Project Files were maintained intermittently.
The Ministry have attributed these deficiencies to
the fact that in some cases the concerned project
investigators handling the particular project were
deployed for other priority work where their
involvement was felt most essential such as National
Agricultural Technology Project work, due to which
these principal investigators could not make
noticeable progress in their regular projects and
hence RPFs were not prepared. As regards, improper
maintenance of National Register of Soil Series by
the Institute, the Ministry have stated that the register
could not be updated as all the scientists remained
busy in accomplishing the task of mega project on
Soil Resource Mapping and NATP mission mode
projects. The Committee are not convinced by these
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department

56
arguments put forth by the Ministry in the defence
of NBSS & LUP, Nagpur. In the absence of proper
maintenance of Research Project Files and National
Register of Soil Series, effectiveness of monitoring
of Research activities by Staff Research Council,
Research Advisory Committees cannot be ensured.
Obviously the Institute has not paid sufficient
attention to these vital areas. The ICAR had also
failed to monitor such basic activities of the Institute
which ultimately affected the functioning of the
Institute. At this stage the Committee cannot but
emphasise that suitable steps need to be taken to
ensure that Research Project Files and all other such
documents including National Register of Soil Series
are properly maintained.
4. 84 Agriculture Another area of concern in the working of National
(Department of Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning
Agricultural (NBSS&LUP) is the fact that it could not achieve the
Research and objectives of Soil Survey, mapping of land Use
Education) planning in three projects involving total expenditure
of Rs. 6.63 crores. In these  three projects there were
partial  achievement of objectives and delay in
completion ranged from three months to seven years.
Soil Survey Reports were not prepared even after
lapse of five to twenty-five years although
conducting soil surveys and publishing report for
land use planning was one of the mandates of this
Institute. A Project was undertaken in collaboration
with CSSRI, Karnal, in May 1996 on "Preparation of
soil resource inventory of coastal salt affected areas
of West Bengal and Orissa using satellite imagery
and characterization and classification of the soil to
determine their potentialities, problems and
management" at an outlay of Rs. 16 lakh was to be
completed by December 2006 whereas the stipulated
period of completion was two years. In another
project on "Identification, characterization and
delineation of agro economic constraints of oilseed
based production systems in rainfed eco system"
taken up from July 2000 to February 2003 at an
estimated cost of Rs. 55.41 lakhs studies were
conducted for four crops in sixteen districts as
against the target of six crops in nineteen districts.
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department

57
Further data on area and production by oil seeds
conducted only in six districts as against twenty-
eight different districts. Even in the sixteen districts
covered, no strategies for improving the productivity
of rainfed oilseed crops were suggested. The rainfed
oilseed based production zones were also not
delineated using Geographical Information System.
Thus, the benefits of improving the productivity of
rainfed oilseeds could not be derived. In the third
project on "Land use planning for management of
agricultural resources" from January 2001 to
December 2003, only Rs. 5.92 crore were spent against
the allocation of Rs. 9.32 crore as of March 2004.
From the above it is evident that aforesaid three
projects were undertaken by the Institute of National
Bureau of Soil Survey and Land use Planning
(NBSS&LUP), Nagpur without proper perception,
planning and preliminary background work leading
to unjustifiable delays, non-achievement of targets
and under utilisation of funds. The Committee are
inclined to conclude that delay in completion of these
projects deprived the beneficiaries of the intended
benefits. As these are the only three projects test
checked by the Audit, the Committee are of the view
that there might be more such projects undertaken
by these Institutes where there could have been
similar delays and non-achievement of the laid down
targets. The Committee desire that these Institutes
should show the requisite urgency in completion of
the projects within the stipulated periods and should
take all necessary measures to ensure that the
objectives laid down under the projects are fully and
timely achieved.
5. 85 Agriculture In r espect of working of Central Soil Salinity Research
(Department of Institute, Karnal the Committee have noticed that
Agricultural there were partial achievement of objectives in two
Research and projects undertaken during the period 1999-2004.
Education) An externally aided Indo-United Kingdom
collaborative research project on "Soil salinity and
breeding of salt resistant crops (soil salinity and
breeding for salt resistant crops rice, Indian mustard
and gram)" was undertaken by the Institute in
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department

58
March, 1996 for five years at a total cost of Rs. 5.63
crore. The scrutiny has revealed that two of the six
scientists who went abroad in connection with the
project did not contribute anything and there was a
delay of about three years in completion of this
project. The Ministry have informed the Committee
that the two scientists in question have submitted
their deputation reports in November 1997 and
January 1998 respectively and the final report of the
project was submitted in November, 2004. The
Committee however, have not been informed as to
why the two scientists submitted their reports late
and what action was taken by the Institute against
them. It is, thus, clear that the delay in submission of
deputation Reports by the two scientists led to delay
in overall completion of the project. The Committee
desire that a system ought to be put in place to ensure
that the scientists who are sent abroad submit their
Reports timely and deterrent action should be taken
against those who do not comply with the
instructions in this regard. In another project namely
"Management of salt affected soils and use of saline
water in Agriculture", in which the institute spent
Rs. 7.19 crore during 1999-2004, the benchmark
survey for quality control of ground water was
undertaken from 1972 only in Guntur district of
Andhra Pradesh, but no strategy had been formulated
as yet to solve the water problems of that area. Further
no benchmark surveys were carried out at centres
other than Guntur district. In this connection, the
Ministry have intimated that the water problems of
the costal belt of Guntur area have been solved
through studies on Doruvu Technology and this
technology had found favours with the farmers in
the coastal belt. A number of benchmark sites have
been identified in various irrigation commands in
Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Tamil Nadu and Haryana and so on where the
temporal changes in different benchmark sites are
being studied with a view to make possible land use
planning. The Committee hope that expeditious steps
would be taken to study conditions of these sites to
make their best use for agriculture requirements.
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department

59
6. 86 Agriculture Another instance where there has been partial
(Department of achievement of objectives relates to two projects
Agricultural undertaken by the Indian Institute of Soil Science,
Research and Bhopal. IISS undertook a project on "Organic pools
Education) and dynamics in relation to land use tillage and
agronomic practices for maintenance of soil fertility"
in May 2000 with Bhopal as lead centre along with
six co-operating centres at an estimated cost of
Rs. 1.08 crore to be completed by December 2003.
The project was extended up to March 2004 with
additional outlay of Rs. 3.14 lakh and was aimed to
quantify the changes in soil organic Carbon and
Nitrogen pools to assess the mineralisation potential
and C-sequestration in soils of semi-arid and sub
humid regions and to fit experimental data in different
models of C-sequestration. Rs. 36.42 lakh was spent
on this project by IISS till its completion. Completion
report of the project revealed that the project was
implemented only in seven out of targeted eleven
districts. Further due to delay in procurement of
Carbon Hydrogen Nitrogen Sulphur analyser and
Furrier Transform Infrared Spectrophotometer, the
chemical analysis of the project was hampered. Due
to non-materialisation of training of two scientists in
the USA in modelling of Soil Organic Matter (SOM)
and recent technique in SOM dynamics and
measurements, one of the objectives of fitting of
experimental data in different models of
C-sequestration could not be achieved. IISS also
undertook a project on "Integrated Nutrient
Management in major pulse based cropping system
and identification of the most productive and
remunerative systems" from May 2000 to March 2004
with Bhopal as lead centre. Against the total provision
of Rs. 30.66 lakh an expenditure of Rs. 18.83 lakh was
incurred. The project involved six important cropping
systems at different locations. The final report of the
project revealed that experiments on three cropping
systems were not conducted and experiments on
another cropping system were not conducted in two
out of four locations. Consequently, the objective of
identifying the most productive and remunerative
pulses based cropping system under different soil
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department

60
and nutrient management could not be achieved. The
Committee are constrained to point out that this
project was undertaken without giving due
consideration to the cropping sequences prevalent
in the targeted districts resulting in revision of the
technical programme after two years of starting the
project. The Committee hope that suitable lessons
would be drawn by the Institute/ICAR from these
projects and due care would be taken in future to
ensure timely completion of the projects and for
achievement of broad objectives.
7. 87 Agriculture In case of Water Technology Centre for Eastern
(Department of Region, Bhubaneshwar also the targeted results in
Agricultural three projects costing Rs. 48.90 lakh could not be
Research and achieved resulting in non-achievement of the
Education) objective of sustainable agricultural production
through development of strategies for effective
management of on-farm water resources. Similarly,
Central Soil & Water Conservation Research and
Training Institute, Dehradun did not achieve the
objectives of research in soil and water conservation
measures and use systems for sustainable crop
production in three projects costing Rs. 37.90 lakh.
The Committee are not convinced by the explanation
given by the Ministry for non-achievement of
targeted results in respect of these projects. With a
little bit of proper advance planning and
farsightedness these projects could have been
properly and timely  executed.
A review of the working of the aforesaid five institutes
has revealed that there was lack of proper planning,
execution and monitoring of some of the research
projects undertaken. Consequently, there was time
and cost overruns, leading to partial/non-
achievement of objectives and targets laid, defeating
in the process the very purpose for which these
projects were conceived for implementation. The
various deficiencies/shortcomings that have been
noticed points to the lack of effective institutionalized
monitoring mechanism either at ICAR or at the
Ministry level. The Committee  recommend that ICAR
should streamline/strengthen their monitoring
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department

61
mechanism so that the projects are reviewed
periodically and it is ensured that the same are
completed properly and expeditiously. If necessary
ICAR/Ministry may put in place requisite mechanism
for the same.
8. 88 Agriculture Another disquieting feature of the functioning of
(Department of these institutes is the fact that in all sixteen
Agricultural technologies involving a total cost of about Rs. 2.44
Research and crore that were developed in the fields of water and
Education) soil conservation by the four institutes of Indian
Council of Agricultural Research, namely Central Soil
Salinity Research Institute, Water Technology Centre
for Eastern Region, Central and Indian Institute of
Soil Science have not been transferred to the end-
users i.e. farmers. The Committee regret to observe
that despite spending large funds for research
activities in the field of agriculture, the benefits of
technologies developed by the varous institutes
have not percolated down to the end users in whose
name research is being carried out.
The Ministry have stated that Indian Council of
Agricultural Research develops technologies,
demonstrates and passes onto the line departments
and also trains the farmers. An autnomous body
namely Agriculture Technology Management
Agency (ATMA) had been set up which serves as a
focal point for integrating research and extension
activities at the district level.  One of the key activities
of ATMA is to prepare a Strategic Research and
Extension Plan and its implementation by the various
stakeholders. Indian Council of Agricultural Research
has also established a network of Krishi Vigyan
Kendras to aim at technology assessment, refinement
and demonstration of technology/products. The
Krishi Vigyan Kendras network is further interfaced
with State Agricultural Universities through their
Directors of Extension. It has further been stated
that the technology transfer was also undertaken
through lab to land programme, Institute village link
programmes, and farmers fairs, visits and goshtis
etc. However, the Ministry have admitted that poor
linkages and coordination between the Institute and
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department

62
users had resulted in poor transfer of technologies.
Despite setting up of Krishi Vigyan Kendras and
Agriculture Technology Management Agency it is
quite evident that these institutional mechanisms
have miserably failed and as a result the benefits of
Agricultural Research could not reach the farmers.
The Committee are of the opinion that labours of
research will come to naught, unless its fruits reach
end-users. The Committee desire that whatever steps
that are required to strengthen the system should
be taken so that the technologies reach the end users.
For this, if necessary, the Ministry may study the
feasibility of setting up of State level Agricultural
Research Extension Committees comprising
representatives of Ministry of Agriculture, Indian
Council of Agricultural Research, State Government
Officials, Farmers Associations, and Non-
Governmental Organisations involved  in Agricultural
Extension etc. for effective coordination and
supervision of various activities relating to transfer
of technolgies/research inputs developed by various
Agriculture Research Institutes to the farmers.
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department

MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006) HELD ON 5TH JANUARY , 2006
The Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 5th January, 2006 in Committee
Room "C", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Raghunath Jha
3. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
4. Dr. R. Senthil
5. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
6. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri R.K. Dhawan
8. Dr. K. Malaisamy
9. Shri V . Narayanasamy
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh
11. Prof. R.B.S. Verma
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya — ADAI
2. Shri R.P. Singh — Pr. Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural
Research & Education) and Indian Council of Agricultural Research
1. Dr. Mangala Rai — Secretary (DARE) and Director-General ICAR
2. Smt. Sushma Nath — Additional Secretary (DARE)
63

64
 3. Dr. Rita Sharma — Additional Secretary and FA (DARE/ICAR)
 4. Dr. J.S. Samra — Deputy Director-General (NRM), ICAR
 5. Shri H.C. Pathak — Director (Finance-ICAR)
 6. Dr. V .N. Sharda — Director, CSWCR&TI, Dehradun
 7. Dr. K.S. Gajbhiye — Director , NBSS&LUP, Nagpur
 8. Dr. P.D. Sharma — Assistant Director-General  (Soils)
 9. Dr. A. Subba Rao — Director, IISS, Bhopal
10. Dr. Gurbachan Singh — Director, CSSRI, Karnal
11. Dr. Ashwini Kumar — Director, WTCER, Bhubaneshwar
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers
and greeted everyone on the occasion of New Year. The Officers of the Office of
C&AG of India briefed the Committee on the specific points arising out of Chapter-II of
Audit Report No. 5 of   2005 (Scientific Department) regarding "Management of projects
relating to utilization and conservation of Soil and Water undertaken by institutes of
ICAR".
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agricultural Research & Education) were called in. The Secretary, Department of
Agricultural Research and Education gave a brief account of the achievements made
by the Research Institutes under ICAR and also explained the factual position with
regard to Audit findings. The Committee then sought clarifications on some points to
which the representatives of the Ministry could not give satisfactory replies.
4. After some discussion, Chairman directed the representatives of Ministry of
Agriculture to furnish the requisite information in writing on all the queries for which
the witnesses could not give proper replies. Since the discussion remained
inconclusive, the Committee decided to meet again to take further evidence on the
subject.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON 13TH FEBRUARY , 2007
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1315 hrs. on 13th February, 2007 in
Committee Room "B", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra   —   Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Khagen Das
 3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
 4. Shri Raghunath Jha
 5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
 7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
 8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
  9. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11.Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12.Dr. K. Malaisamy
13.Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Assistant Director
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (Reports Central)
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — DGACR
3. Shri A.N. Chatterjee — Director-General (Performance Audit)
65

66
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and Audit officials to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Reports and adopted the same without any modifications/amendments.
(i) Draft Report on "Management of Projects relating to utilization and
conservation of Soil and Water undertaken by institutes of ICAR" and
(ii) ** ** **
The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the light of
verbal and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by Audit or otherwise
and to present the same to Parliament.
3 . ** ** **
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

67
PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING AUTHORISED AGENTS:—
Sl. No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA PRADESH
1. M/s/ Ashok Book Centre, Benz  Circle, Vasavya Nagar, Vijayawada- 520006.
(A.P.)
BIHAR
2. M/s/  Progressive Book Centre, Zila School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002 (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem House, Connaught Place, P.B. No. 1113,
New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari Colony, Kingsway Camp, Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency, IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double Storey,
New Delhi-110024 (T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd. P-23, Connaught Circus, New Delhi-
110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India Corporation, Publishers, Importers  &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar, Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3, Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd. 2/18, Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002
(T. No. 23262515).
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80, Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts, Delhi-
110054 (T.No. 23911966).
11. M/s. Seth & Co. Room No. 31 D, Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768).
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol Bagh,
New Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book co., 125, Municipal Market, Connaught Place, P.B.
No. 708, New Delhi-110001 (T. No. 23411919).
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. A/15-17, Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C, Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.

68
MADHYA PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2621.
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India), 649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd Dhobi
Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PONDICHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative Assembly Department, Pondicherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies, 123, Third Street. Tatabad, Coimbatore-
641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37, Royappettah High Road, Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P.)
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair Building, Hazrat Ganj, GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.

69