1
46
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-2007
FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH   LOK SABHA
LOK    SABHA    SECRETARIAT
NEW    DELHI

FORTY-SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
[Action Taken on the 24th  Report of Public Accounts Committee
(14th  Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.4.07
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.5.07
L O K S A B H A S E C R E T A R I A T
N E W D E L H I
April, 2007/Chaitra, 1929 (Saka)

3
PAC No. 1831
Price : Rs. 64.00
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rule sof Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007) ....................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………......................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ……………………………………........................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which  have   been
accepted by Government .................................................. 7
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which  the  Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from Government ............................................................... 46
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations replies to which have
not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ........................................................................... 47
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies ..... 51
PART II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts  Committee
(2006-07) held on  19.4.2007............................................... 52
 APPENDIX
Statement of Observations and Recommendatio ............. 55

COMPOSITION  OF  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS   COMMITTEE
(2006 - 2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra    —    Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V. Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
(iii)

 SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayan — Under Secretary
5. Shri N.K. Jha — Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Forty-sixth Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 24th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on
“Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 19th  April, 2007. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with
the Committee.
N
EW DELHI;     PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
19 April, 2007 Chairman,
29 Chaitra, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in their 24th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on
Paragraph 2.1 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the
year ended 31 March 2003 (No. 4 of 2004), Union Government (Civil — Autonomous
Bodies) relating to “Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan”.
2. The 24th Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 24th February, 2006
contained 21 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes in respect of
all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (Department of School Education & Literacy) and these have
been categorized as under:—
( i ) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
Government :
Sl. Nos.  1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 & 19
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire  to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Sl.  No.      20
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration :
Sl. Nos.  2, 17 & 21
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
 Sl. No. 18
3. The Committee in their original Report on the subject had made the following
important Observations/Recommendations:—
(i) Noting the large sum of unspent amount of Non-Plan fund ranging from
Rs. 63.99 crores in 1997-98 to Rs. 128.00 crores in 2002-03, the Committee
had stressed that the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan should manage their
finances prudently and with greater propriety;
(ii) Apprehending the adverse impact of large shortfall to the tune of
Rs. 65.00 crore, Rs. 13.91 crore and Rs. 60.00 crore during the years 2002-03,
2003-04  and 2004-05 respectively in the receipt of Plan grant on the construction
schedule of the buildings and for making available necessary infrastructure
1

2
for the Kendriya Vidyalayas, the Committee had desired that the Ministry
of Human Resource Development (Department of Secondary and Higher
Education) should ensure that the Kendriya Vidyalaya do not face financial
constraints in respect of plan expenditure;
(iii) The Committee had desired that the Ministry should take the initiative and
coordinate with other departments to get land transfers to the Sangathan
effected expeditiously so that all the Kendriya Vidyalayas could be housed
in permanent buildings.  The Committee further desired that the existing
Kendriya Vidyalayas should be provided all the facilities and infrastructure
before their network is expanded; and
(iv) Noting the large shortfall in the meetings of the Core Committees and
Regional Advisory Committees required for effective monitoring and control
of the Sangathan over the functioning of the Vidyalayas, the Committee
had recommended that the Ministry should take appropriate steps to ensure
that all the Committees constituted by the Sangathan remain active.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of School Education & Literacy) have been reproduced in
the relevant Chapters of this Report.  In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee will
now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations, made in the Original Report, which need reiteration or merit
comments.
A. Monitoring over Organisational and Academic Activities of Kendriya Vidyalayas
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2, Para No. 88)
5. The Committee had observed that the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (KVS), set
up to pursue excellence and to set a pace in the field of education, did not exercise
proper control and monitoring over implementation of their academic and organizational
activities with the result that the objectives of setting up of the Sangathan could not
be fully achieved.
6. Apprising the Committee about the steps taken by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of School Education & Literacy) to exercise proper control
and monitoring of the various academic and organizational activities, the Ministry, in
their Action Taken Note, have stated as under:—
“In order to increase proper control and monitoring over the academic and
organizational activities, KVS has taken following steps: (a) it has made it
mandatory for the Regional Office to carry out minimum three Inspections of
every Kendriya  Vidyalaya within the region, (b) Study materials for students are
prepared and distributed to every student appearing for class X and XII
examinations, (c) A programme for structured revision and special classes has
been prepared and implemented, and (d) Computer aided education has been
promoted in a big way.  Grants have been given to school for the purchase of
computers and constructions and modernization of computer labs.”

3
7. The Committee regret to note that the Ministry of Human Resource
Development have not spelt out the follow-up steps taken by the Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan at their level to improve standards in the schools as  a sequel to their
inspection. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that inspection of schools
alone will not help maintain the requisite standards. While strengthening their
administrative control and monitoring mechanism, the Ministry and the Sangathan
should also  pay greater attention to the aspects relating to improvement of
infrastructure facilities and academic standards. It is thus important in this context
that issues of functional autonomy and professional independence of Kendriya
Vidyalayas are not lost sight of in the process of exercising control and supervision
over the Vidyalayas.
B. Status of School buildings and other Infrastructural facilities provided to KVS
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17, Para No. 103)
 8. Examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed that 215 Kendriya
Vidyalayas were functioning in temporary accommodation and permanent buildings
were to be constructed for them.  The Sangathan had contended that permanent
buildings could not be constructed due to delays in transfer of land in their favour.
The Committee had therefore asked the Ministry of Human Resource Development to
take the initiative and coordinate with other Departments to get land transfers to the
Sangathan expedited so that all the Kendriya Vidyalayas could be housed in permanent
buildings.  Wherever land transfers had already taken place, the Committee expected
the Sangathan to commence construction of Vidyalaya buildings without further loss
of time and provide them with the necessary infrastructure.
9. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes, have, inter-alia, stated as under:—
“The transfer of land for construction of school building is a continuous process.
The land transfer issues are taken up with the sponsoring authority right from
the year the school is opened and also as per commitment of sponsoring
authorities to provide suitable plot of land of 15 acres. The pending land issues
are being pursued at various levels i.e. KVS Hq. and MHRD. Due to these
efforts many cases were resolved. While furnishing the status of school buildings
(as on 31.03.2006), it was  informed by the Ministry that out of total 704 buildings
which were to be constructed by KVS, there were 579 KVs where permanent
buildings had already been constructed.  It was further informed that out of the
remaining 125 KVs where buildings remained to be constructed, in 63 cases
buildings were under construction and in 62 cases it was still to be started.
 Furnishing the breakup of the status of 62 cases, it has been stated that school
building was under planning in five cases, land was either under dispute and
formalities of lease/sanction was awaited in 19 cases and for the remaining
38 cases, even the land was not identified for transfer to KVS.”
10. The Committee note that the number of schools which were running in
temporary accommodation has come down from 215 to 125 as on 31st March, 2006.
In 63 cases, school buildings are still under construction. The Committee regret to note

4
that the construction work is yet to be started in 62 Vidyalayas.   Surprisingly out of
these 62 KVs, in 38 cases even the land has not been identified.  Further in 19 cases,
allotted lands are either under dispute or the sanctions are awaited.   This again
underlines the urgent need for effective coordination between the Ministry of Human
Resource Development and concerned sponsoring Authorities/Departments/
Sangthans  to get the land identified and transferred to the Sangathan at the earliest.
Reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee, therefore, call upon the
Ministry of Human Resource Development to coordinate assertively with concerned
Authorities/Departments to expedite the process of identifying and transferring
land so that the permanent building for the schools can be constructed without any
further delay and all the students of Kendriya Vidyalayas get the basic infrastructure/
amenities at the earliest.  The Committee further desire that the Ministry of HRD
and the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan should re-focus their efforts on providing all
the essential amenities to the Vidyalayas like laboratories, playground, furniture,
drinking water, toilets etc., and also ensure their proper upkeep.
C. Construction of facilities like Swimming Pools and Gymnasia on Build, Operate
and Transfer (BOT) basis
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18, Para No. 104)
11. With regard to provision of certain facilities in the Kendriya Vidyalayas,the
Committee had noted that the scheme for construction of swimming pools and gymnasia
on Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis in the premises of Kendriya Vidyalayas
envisaged that private parties would be allowed to undertake the construction with
their own funds. The students of Kendriya Vidyalayas were to be allowed to use these
facilities during school hours free of charge. Thereafter, the concessionaires would be
allowed to use these facilities commercially. The scheme further envisaged that this
arrangement would be operational for a period of 30 years whereafter all the facilities
created would be transferred over to the school. The Committee were informed by the
Ministry that this scheme was being reviewed and it was decided that the locations
where these facilities are functional, may be allowed to function for the time being and
the Principals may be asked to negotiate with the concessionaire on individual basis to
find out the modalities for terminating the contract or reducing the period of the
contract. The Committee while appreciating the idea behind such public-private
initiatives had desired that the Department and the Sangathan should ensure that
such well-meaning ventures do not end up in needless controversies involving one-
sided contracts. While the agreements were being re-negotiated and renewed, the
Committee had expected the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan to take a balanced and fair
approach while negotiating with the concessionaries and to ensure free access to
these facilities for the students of Kendriya Vidyalayas.
12. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have informed as follows:—
“The whole scheme of construction of swimming pools, gymnasium and other
facilities on Build, Operate and Transfer basis is being reviewed at the highest
level in the KVS. The opinion of the Solicitor General of India on the scheme
has been obtained and he has opined that the agreements with the private

5
parties are void ab-initio . Further action as appropriate is being taken by
KVS”
13.   With regard to the scheme for construction of swimming pools, gymnasia
etc. on Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis in the premises of Kendriya
Vidyalayas, the Committee have been apprised that the Solicitor General of India has
opined that the agreements entered with the private parties were void ab-initio. In
the light of this opinion, the Committee would now like the Ministry and the Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangathan to examine and consider the matter afresh for taking conclusive
action in the matter.  The Committee would await Ministry’s response in this regard.
D. Supervision, monitoring and control — meetings of general body and the
executive committees of KVS
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21, Para No. 107)
14. In their Report, the Committee had observed that the KVS operated through its
General Body called the Sangathan and its Executive Committee i.e. the  Board of
Governors, which is headed by the Minister of HRD. The Board is assisted by three
Standing Committees, namely the Finance Committee, the Academic Advisory
Committee and the Works Committee. The General Body is required to meet at least
once in a year and the Board of Governors thrice a year and its meetings should be
preceded by the meeting of the three Standing Committees.  The Committee were
constrained to point out that the General Body had met only during 1998-99 and
1999-2000 and thereafter no meeting was held. Similarly, the meeting of the Board of
Governors were also not being held as required and the meetings of the Standing
Committees were held even less than the number of meetings of the Board of Governors
.  Further, the meetings of the three Standing Committee were not being held as stipulated
before the meeting of the Board of Governors.  The Committee had further noted that
the Board of Governors did not meet for about three years after their last meeting held
in September 2001.  It was only when this subject was taken up for examination by the
Public Accounts Committee that the Board of Governors got activated and held meetings
in October 2004 and February, 2005.  Further, the Regional Advisory Committees,
which are required to periodically monitor the general functioning of the Vidyalayas
and their academic performance had not been constituted in eight regions.  In six
regions, these Committees had been constituted but had not held any meeting at all.
The Committee were thus inclined to conclude in their Report that the Core Committees
of the Sangathan as well as the Regional Advisory Committees were virtually inactive
over the years indicating complete lack of monitoring by the Sangathan over the
functioning of the Vidyalayas.
15. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Human Resource Development
(Deptt. of School Education and Literacy) have stated that  as per Rule 12 of the
Memorandum of Association (MoA), the meeting of the Sangathan shall  be held at
such time, date and place as may be determined by the Chairman to consider the
Annual Report(including Annual Accounts) of the Sangathan.  As per Rule 29 of the
MoA, the Board shall meet whenever the Chairman thinks fit.  During the period 2000
to 2003, meetings of KVS and for the period, 2001 to 2003, the meetings of the Board of

6
Governors could not be held.  Consequently, the decisions taken in the three Standing
Committees viz., the Finance Committee, the Academic Advisory Committee, and the
Works Committee could not be placed before the Board of Governors for confirmation.
However, for the last 2 years, the meetings of the Board are being held within intervals
of 6 months as per resolution passed in the 71st meeting held on 4th October, 2004.
The minutes of the meetings of all the Standing Committees held from November, 2001
were placed before  the 72nd meeting of the General Body  held on 22nd February, 2005
for approval of the decisions taken therein. The Regional Advisory Committees have
also been activated in all the Regional Offices.  In the Assistant Commissioners’
Conference 2006 held from 6th to 7th February, 2006, the practical problems faced by
the Assistant Commissioners in holding these meetings were discussed.
16. Despite the assurance given by the Ministry to ensure regular meetings of
the Sangathan and its Core Committees as well as the Regional Advisory Committees,
it is surprising to note that the meetings of the General Body and Board of Governors
were held way back on 22nd February, 2005 and the Action Taken Notes of the
Ministry furnished in December, 2006 do not give any information regarding the
number of sittings held thereafter. It is indeed a matter of dismay as to how the
Annual Report and Annual Accounts of the Sangathan were approved without the
meetings of the General Body/ Sangathan, although the Rules stipulate that the
meeting of the Sangathan shall be held to consider the Annual Report and Annual
Accounts. It is inexplicable that though on the one hand, the Ministry tried to justify
their laxity in holding the meetings of the Sangathan and its Core Committees by
taking shelter behind the provisions of their Memorandum of Association (which
does not specify periodicity of meetings); on the other, they have not been adhering to
the same Memorandum in regard to approval of Annual Reports and Annual Accounts.
In view of this, the Committee expect that the Sangathan would hold regular meetings
now onwards as per the true spirit of their Memorandum of Association to consider
various matters relating to the Sangathan including approval of Accounts. In this
regard, the Memorandum/ Rules may be suitably amended by prescribing periodicity
of meetings so as to have purposeful monitoring over the functioning of the
Vidyalayas.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the conclusive action
taken by the Ministry in this regard.

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Government of India had approved the scheme of Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan (KVS) in 1962 on the recommendations of the Second Central Pay
Commission. In 1965, an autonomous body – Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan was
established under the Societies Registration Act XXI of 1860 which took over the task
of opening and managing the Central Schools henceforth called Kendriya Vidyalayas
(KVs).  The Sangathan is wholly financed by the Govt. of India. The objective of this
scheme was to set up and monitor the Kendriya Vidyalayas to cater to the educational
needs of the children of transferable Central Government employees including Defence
personnel by providing a common minimum programme for education. This Sangathan
was expected to initiate and promote experimentation and innovation in school
education in collaboration with Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) and
National Council of Educational Research & Training (NCERT). The Sangathan has
established 933 Kendriya Vidyalayas with about 7.26 lakh students on its rolls.
[Sl. No. 1, Appendix II, Para 87 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As on 31.3.2006, there are 931 Kendriya Vidyalayas with 9.12 lakh students enrolled.
Recommendation
The Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan is financed out of the Non-Plan and Plan
budget of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Secondary
and Higher Education). Although there were small unspent balances on the Plan
Expenditure side, large funds under Non-Plan Head remained unspent and ranged
from 63.99 crore in 1997-98 to Rs. 128.00 crore in 2002-03. If the contention of the
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan that the Ministry permitted them to retain the unspent
balance to disburse the salaries and pension of two months i.e. March and April of
the next Financial Y ear is accepted,   the  fact,  however,  remains that  the extent of
funds retained by the Sangathan each year on the Non-Plan side was substantially
higher than the requirements of   disbursements  of  salaries and  pension during
March and April.  The Committee hope that the Sangathan will look into this aspect
and manage their finances prudently, and with great propriety so that unspent balances
are commensurate with the requirements and there is no scope for diversion and
misutilisation of funds.
[Sl. No. 3, Appendix II, Para 89 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
7

8
Action Taken
Noted for compliance. For the years 2003-04 and 2004-05, KVS retained funds only
to the extent required in the month of April for disbursement of pay & allowances &
pensionary benefits. The year wise amount retained is as follows:
Y ear  As on Amount of
unspent grant
2003-04 1.4.2004 Rs. 69.75 crore
2004-05 1.4.2005 Rs.50.50 crore
Recommendation
A disquieting feature of the availability and management of finances is the fact
that whereas there were unspent balances on the Non-Plan Expenditure, the Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangathan did not receive the amount eventually as asked for in the Revised
Estimates for Plan Expenditure. This is evident from the fact that during the period
2002-03 to 2004-05, there was shortfall to the tune of Rs. 65.00 crore, Rs. 13.91 crore
and Rs. 60.00 crore respectively in the amounts that were received for Plan Expenditure.
The Committee apprehend the adverse impact such large shortfalls in the receipt of
Plan grant may have on the construction schedule of the buildings and for making
available infrastructure for the Kendriya Vidyalayas across the country.  They,
therefore, desire that the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of
Secondary and Higher Education) should look into this aspect and ensure that in
future Kendriya Vidyalayas do not face financial constraints in respect of Plan
expend iture required by them.
[Sl. No. 4, Appendix II, Para 90 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry of HRD had enhanced the allocation for on-going construction
activities as well as for new buildings, under Plan as follows:
Y ear Amount (Rs. in Crores)
Proposed Approved RE
2002-03 85.00 85.00
2003-04 117.48 103.57
2004-05 110.00 112.00
2005-06 183.00 183.00
2006-07 235.00 235.00
The allocation was done keeping in view the actual requirements of KVS for
construction activities and  judicious utilization of resources.

9
Recommendation
The Committee find that the expenditure on project schools, which are run by the
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan on behalf of various PSUs and Institutes of Higher
Learning is to be met in full by these sponsoring bodies.  Funds covering six months
requirement are to be deposited with the Sangathan in advance in the month of April
and October each year.  Audit scrutiny has revealed that the Sangathan had incurred
expenditure of Rs. 26.52 crore in excess of the funds received from the sponsoring
bodies by diverting funds out of the grants received from the Ministry to meet the
expenditure on account of project schools. The Secretary, Department of Secondary
and Higher Education admitted  during evidence that “money was diverted”. According
to Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, a sum of Rs. 14.40 crore was due from the sponsoring
agencies of the project Vidyalayas which have already been closed down and a sum
of Rs. 12.73 crore was outstanding from the project schools which are functioning.
The KVS has explained that the sponsoring authorities could not settle the dues
since many of these public sector undertakings became sick and were unable to meet
the financial commitments. As regards the settlement of these dues, the Sangathan is
stated to have submitted a detailed proposal to the Department of Secondary and
Higher Education for consideration of the Committee of Secretaries. The Committee
desire that this matter be resolved early by the Department in co-ordination with
other related Departments of Government of India with a view to recovering the
amount due to the Sangathan.
[Sl. No. 5. Appendix II, Para 91 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry of HRD has already taken up the matter with the administrative
Ministries directly and also through the Cabinet Secretariat.
Recommendation
The Committee note that according to terms and conditions of the agreement for
opening of project schools, in the event of violation of terms and conditions by the
sponsoring authority, the Sangathan has the right to close down the Vidyalayas and
examine the distribution of assets and liabilities in consultation with Government of
India, 28 project schools, which were closed from 1997-98 to 2002-2003 were required
to pay Rs. 11.84 crore to the Sangathan as on 31st March, 2003 on account of short
deposit of expenditure incurred on them.  The assets of these closed project schools
were transferred by the Sangathan to the concerned sponsoring bodies without
effecting recoveries of outstanding dues. The Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan justified
the transfer of assets by stating that in the absence of ownership/title of the assets,
they could not dispose of such assets towards recovery of dues from the sponsoring
authorities and that if the assets are retained by the Sangathan for recovery of dues,
they have to bear the recurring and non-recurring expenditure on running of these
Vidyalayas and also to face litigation. The Committee do not find this reply tenable as
the agreement provides that in case of violation of terms and conditions, the Sangathan
has a right to distribution of assets in consultation with the Government of India. The
fact that this was not done is regrettable. The Committee would like the Sangathan to

10
be cautious in future and also reconsider their policy of opening and running such
project school involving PSUs so as to avoid recurrence of such instances.
[Sl. No. 6.  Appendix II, Para 92 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14thLok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Noted for future guidance.
The assets provided by the sponsoring authorities in the Project Sector Vidyalayas
belong to the sponsors. In the absence of ownership/title on the assets, the Sangathan
cannot dispose off such assets.
As regards recovery of outstanding dues in respect of Project Sector K.Vs which
have been closed due to failure of the sponsors in providing funds for meeting out
recurring and non-recurring expenditure, the Ministry has taken up the matters with
the Administrative Ministries of the PSUs through Cabinet Secretary. The Sangathan
has also taken up the matter with the Secretaries of the administrative Ministries.
Recommendation
Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi (VVN) Fund was created by the Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan in April, 2000 by merging the pupil fund, maintenance and development
fund and science fund in  each Kendriya Vidyalaya. The fund was maintained out of
monthly contributions received from   the students for maintenance and development
of the respective Vidyalayas.   All expenditure of  the Vidyalayas other than salaries,
office expenses and construction/repairs of staff quarters were to be met out of this
fund. The fund was required to be kept in a separate bank account and as far as
possible a year’s collection was to be utilized within the same year by way of well-
planned programmes for the development of the concerned Vidyalaya. The Committee
regret to observe that the Kendriya Vidyalayas were not able to utilize these funds
available with them under the Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi. This resulted in savings ranging
from 30 to 67 per cent during 2000-2001 (Sikkim–—30 per cent and Jammu & Kashmir
67 per cent) and 30 to 62 per cent in 2001-02 (Sikkim 30 and Jammu & Kashmir—
62 per cent). The Committee regret to observe that despite the inability of the Vidyalayas
to fully utilise the VVN Fund, the KVS enhanced the monthly rates of contribution
from Rs. 100 to Rs. 120 from all the students and Rs. 125 to Rs. 150 for science
students of Classes XI & XII from April 2002. What is surprising is the fact that KVS
issued instructions to transfer the surplus funds lying with the Vidyalayas as on
31st March, 2002 to their respective Regional Offices, which would utilize the funds
for purchase of land for new Kendriya Vidyalayas, construction of additional sections
and purchase of furniture under their region irrespective of the KVs which had
contributed to this fund. This action of KVS was in violation of VVN Rules according
to which the funds collected from the students were to be administered exclusively
for the purpose of maintenance and development of their Vidyalayas. The Secretary,
Department of Secondary and Higher Education, however, conceded during evidence
that they were guilty of trying to expend by using money collected from a particular
school. He admitted that “this went against the principle of raising resources because
if resources are raised from a particular school, it is imperative that the people who

11
contribute know where their money is going and they have the stake.” The Committee
are inclined to conclude that this instance is illustrative of the Sangathan’s efforts to
sacrifice maintenance & Development of individual Vidyalayas out of the funds
collected from their students at the alter of expansion. What is further disturbing to
note is that despite Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi not being utilized fully, monthly contributions
from students were enhanced by KVS.  The Committee cannot but deplore the
inadequate delegation of financial powers to the Vidyalayas for proper utilization of
the fund on the one hand and faulty administrative decision-making at the Regional/
Hqrs. level on the other. The Committee would like to emphasis the need for full
utilization of the Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi at the level of each Vidyalaya so that the
contribution received from the students are optimally utilized exclusively for the
maintenance and development of their own Vidyalaya.
[Sl. No. 7.  Appendix II, Para 93 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Scheme of Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi has been reviewed by the Finance Committee
of the KVS which has recommended a number of amendments in the existing Scheme,
the salient feature of which are as under:—
(i) The purpose for which the VVN has to be utilized and not to be utilized
have been specified in clearer terms.
(ii)  Preparation of Annual Budget & proper utilization of VVN during the year
has been emphasized.
(iii) The large Vidyalayas (exceeding students of 500) to contribute 10% of
their VVN collection to be utilized as under:-
1. 8% to the RO of which
(a) 5% for RO VVN Deposit  amount  for  redistribution  to  small
Vidyalayas of the Region; and
 (b) 3% go to the RO Sports Control Board Account.
2. 2% to KVS (HQ) National Sports Control Board Account.
(iv) The financial ceilings on various items of expenditure have also been
brought out clearly and the delegated powers to be exercised by the VMC/
RO/HQ have been defined clearly.
The revised Scheme of VVN has been notified  vide  OM No. F.6-7/2005-06/
KVS(Budget) dated 31.3.2006 effective from 1.4.2006. (Copy enclosed)
Recommendation
The Sangathan has laid down certain priorities for admission of students in Kendriya
Vidyalayas. The first priority, according to them, is assigned to children of transferable
Central Government employees including ex-servicemen, and second priority is for

12
the children of non-transferable Central Government employees (including
ex-servicemen).  The other five priorities include children of transferable and non-
transferable employees of Autonomous Bodies, Public Sector Undertakings etc. of
Govt. of India, children of transferable State Govt. employees, children of non-
transferable employees of State Govt., children of employees of Autonomous Bodies/
Public Sector Undertakings of State Government and lastly children from any other
category. In addition, 15 seats for RAW, 35 seats for MEA and 100 seats for the
Ministry of HRD are allocated over and above the sanctioned strength. The Committee
are, however, concerned to note that the percentage of admissions made under the
top most priority has been decreasing over the years. This is evident from the fact
that the percentage of admission under this category during the year 2001-02 was
56.67% and this gradually declined 55.40% in 2002-03, 43.25% in 2003-04 and 43.21%
in 2004-05. On the other hand, the percentage of admission under the last priority has
been gradually increasing during the aforesaid period. It was only a meager 1.32% in
2001-02 which sharply increased to 17.65% in 2002-03 and to 25.84% in 2003-04 while
somewhat plateauing off at 23.97% in 2004-05. The trend of admissions, which does
not seem to correspond to the priorities fixed indicate that extraneous consideration
seem to have weighted with the concerned authorities while admitting students to
KVs. The Committee would like to be apprised about the precise reasons for not
adhering to the priority schedule.
[Sl. No. 8, Appendix II, Para 94 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14thLok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Increase in the percentage of lower category children and fall in the percentage
of entitled transferable Central Govt. employees’ children was mainly because of
opening of 95 new schools in civil sector in the areas where there is not a large
presence of transferable Central Government employees.  With the introduction of
second shift schools, a large number of students belonging to Category VI and VII
were given admissions in second shift schools, though not at the cost of children
of Central Govt. employees. There was no special provision in 2001 for the admission
of State Govt. employee’s children (sponsoring agency) in Kendriya Vidyalayas.
Now as per present norms, 10 seats in each section of Class I and 10 seats in all
other classes put together are reserved every year for children of the sponsoring
agency (mostly State Governments).  In addition to this, 2 more children are admitted
at the discretion of the Chairman, VMC, each year over and above the class strength.
Due to inclusion of this clause, more State Govt. employees children are getting
admission in Kendriya Vidyalayas specially in civil sector schools.  In the recent
years, the academic performance of the Kendriya Vidyalayas has been quite
impressive and as a result there is a heavy rush to take admissions. As per norms,
if the children belonging to category I are not available in adequate number, the
candidates from lower priority categories will get opportunity for admission. The
fact remains that in absolute terms, the number of children belonging to category I
has not declined, but their percentage has declined.

13
Recommendation
As regards the recruitment of teaching and non-teaching posts, the Sangathan at
regional level was short-listing the candidates on academic performance and teaching
experience and by conducting the interviews.  However, in response to the
recommendations of the Shelja Committee constituted by the Ministry of HRD, it was
later decided to conduct recruitment centrally through open advertisement.  The
process included shortlisting the candidates through objective and descriptive type
examination followed by interview.  Conducting of examination in this regard was
outsourced to Education Consultants of India Ltd. (Ed.CIL),  an enterprise under the
control of Ministry of HRD.  However, in response to open tender, a private agency,
namely A.O.K.. Security Services Ltd. was awarded a contract for conducting the
examination for the year 2002-03 and 2003-04.  Surprisingly, for the subsequent year
i.e 2004-05 repeat order was assigned to this agency again without taking recourse to
fresh tender.
The Committee have now been informed that the Ministry of HRD has directed the
Sangathan  to assign the job of recruitment again to M/s. Ed.CIL during the current
year.  The Committee seek a factual report from the Ministry of HRD on the
circumstances under which Educational Consultants of India Ltd. were disregarded
for award of the job of recruitment in the year 2002 in favour of a private agency and
then reconsidered for this job again in the year 2005.  The Committee would also like
to be satisfied as to why the change was considered appropriate and beneficial to the
recruitment process of teaching and non-teaching staff.  The Committee hope that the
Ministry would ensure that only organizations with credibility and a proven track
record are selected for conducting recruitment examinations.
[Sl. No. 9,  Appendix II, Para 95 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
     Prior to 1999 the direct recruitments to the teaching posts used to be made by
short-listing the candidates on the basis of pre-determined evaluation criteria taking
into consideration the academic and professional achievements and co-curricular
activities followed by interviews.  Direct recruitment for the post of PRT, TGT and
Misc. categories of teachers was done at the regional level by constituting Selection
Board.  Promotions to the aforesaid posts from feeder grades/posts used to be done
centrally at the Hqrs.  The appointment of selected candidates was also done within
the region.  The promotions as well as appointment by direct recruitment of PGTs,
Vice-Principals and Principals were made centrally at the Hqrs. Level.  In this system
while the candidates from the universities that give liberal marks used to get included
in the short-lists, the relatively better candidates from the universities which do not
given liberal marks could not make it to the lists.  In order to remove such disparities,
it was decided on the recommendations of the Selja Committee to hold the written
examination to assess the  real potential and capabilities of the candidates irrespective
of the university or institution from which they were coming.

14
Need was felt for centralization in the recruitment process in order to ensure greater
degree of objectivity, transparency, uniformity in standards and selection of teachers
on the basis of proven merit as independently assessed on uniform and standard
criteria.  It was, therefore decided to centralize the recruitment of all teaching and non-
teaching posts except Group “D”.  In the new system, all candidates who possess the
requisite qualifications prescribed for the post are required to take written examination
and based on merit list, drawn on the basis of their performance in written test &
interview select panels are prepared.
In the year 1999 the recruitment work was awarded to Ed.CIL, an autonomous
body under the Ministry of Human Resource Development for selection of teachers
through a written examination and interview.  The process of recruitment including
examination and interview was completed by 1999-2000.  There was a complaint
regarding award of work of recruitment to Ed.CIL which was enquired into by the
CVC.  No formal agreement was entered into with Ed.CIL for execution of the work nor
were quotations invited for technical/financial bidding.
In view of the complaint and as the work for 1999-2000 was not awarded through
tendering, it was felt that the recruitment work be awarded to an independent agency
selected through open tenders.  During March 2001 an advertisement was published
in the newspapers inviting pre-qualification bids for undertaking various activities
pertaining to recruitment of various categories of teaching and non-teaching posts.
As the rates submitted by M/s A.O.K.  In house Securities Ltd. were lowest after
entering into an agreement with them the work of the recruitment for the year 2002-03
was entrusted to M/s A.O.K In-house Securities Ltd.
For the recruitment process of teachers for the year 2003-04, again tenders for
Technical and Financial bids were invited in August 2002, through advertisement in
the newspapers, which were processed by a Committee.  Again A.O.K. In-house
Securities Ltd. was awarded the work of recruitment through open tender on the basis
of lowest rates.  In the year 2004-05, based on the satisfactory performance of A.O.K.
in-house Securities   Ltd. the repeat order for the work as per the clause in the
agreement was awarded to them.
At present, the recruitment work is being given to Ed.CIL, which is a public sector
undertaking under the administrative control of Ministry of Human Resource
Development.
Recommendation
Under the Transfer Guidelines issued by the KVS in January, 2005 although all the
employees of the KVS are liable to be transferred at any time, no transfers will be
made, other than on administrative ground or on request made by the teachers,
outside the region identified for the purpose by KVS, except for the reasons/
circumstances explained under Clause 10(2) of the guidelines.  During his deposition
before the Committee, the Secretary, Department of Secondary & Higher Education
sought to assure the Committee in this regard that their attempt has been to minimize
the hardship of the teachers and they would not be transferred against their will,
unless there is a very valid reason to do so.  The Committee were given to understand
that the Sangathan is now following the philosophy of treating a teacher as a part of
the community and therefore if teachers wish to stay on throughout their career in

15
one school and if they are willing to forego their promotions they can do so.  The
Committee do appreciate this approach of treating teachers as part of the Community.
They, however, desire that the Sangathan should suitably simplify and modify their
Transfer Guidelines to reflect this liberal viewpoint. The Committee would also expect
the Department to consider sympathetically the cases of teachers/staff whose services
were terminated due to their absence from duty without leave for more than 15 days
on account of their transfer to far-flung areas under the transfer policy of the year
2000.
[Sl. No. 10,  Appendix II, Para 96 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is submitted that transfers of teachers are being done against vacancies on the
basis of request received.  As per transfer guidelines to minimize hardship to teachers
who were posted at hard / very hard station and NE Region and less than 03 years to
retire / medical grounds /  death of spouse they have been given choice station under
clause 10(2) of the transfer guidelines.
Teachers who were removed from services under Article 81(d) of Education Code
of KVS or took voluntary retirement and resigned from the services of KVS due to
transfer since 2000, an Amnesty Committee was constituted to provide them relief.
Based on the recommendations of the Committee 73 teachers were allowed to rejoin
their duties during 2005-06.
KVS has simplified and modified certain paras of transfer guidelines. The new
transfer guidelines are available on KVS website kvsangathan.nic.in.
Recommendation
As regards the student-teacher ratio in the Kendriya Vidyalayas, the Committee
note that as against total number of students of 7,87,251 the sanctioned posts of
teachers were 33,528 at the end of March, 2004. Based on this data, the Sangathan has
taken the stand that the student-teacher ratio comes to 1:24, which is comparable to
other reputed educational institutions like DPS and DAV . The Committee have been
given to understand that the sanctioned strength of posts of teachers was reduced to
28,549 in the year 2004-2005 from 33,529 in 2003-2004. During this period some teachers
were declared “surplus” by increasing the workload of teachers. These teachers were
to be adjusted in the 200 newly opened sections in existing Kendriya Vidyalayas and
in 100 new Kendriya Vidyalayas then proposed. Considering the fact that sanctioned
strength of the teachers has decreased as on 32st March, 2005, the student-teacher
ratio would be higher than that stated by the Sangathan. Further, as the student-
teacher ratio worked out by the Sangathan is based on the sanctioned posts of
teachers and not on their effective strength, the actual student-teacher ratio would be
still higher. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the work pressure on the
teachers, a fact also conceded by the Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of Secondary & Higher Education) during evidence,
requires to be reassessed in a realistic manner in order to ensure that the teachers are
able to pay adequate attention to their students and remain motivated to provide

16
quality education to them. Accordingly, the total strength of the teachers needs to be
reviewed judiciously. As according to KVS, there are 1464 vacancies as on
31st March, 2005, the Committee desire that these vacancies should be filled up
expeditiously so as to lighten the workload of teachers which would help them to pay
greater attention to the students.
[Sl. No. 11,  Appendix II, Para 97 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
KVS has fixed norms for deploying of number of teachers in a school, keeping in
view the number of sections, the number of classes in a school and the subjects
being taught. The total number of posts sanctioned as on 31.3.2006 in KVS is 44593.
The total number of teaching post is 36044 and the enrolment of the students in
KVs as on 31.3.2006 is 911993. Thus the students teacher ratio works out to 1:25.
The vacant sanctioned posts of teachers are to be filled up on part time contract
basis at Vidyalaya level thereby effective strength of teachers is almost equal to the
sanctioned strength.
Recommendation
The Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan organizes induction, in-service and refresher
training courses with a view to cover all the teachers in a cycle of 6 years. The
teachers’ training was, however, not given proper attention by the Sangathan as there
was shortfall in the number of teachers trained ranging from 40 to 47 per cent during
the period 1997-98 to 2001-2002. The Sangathan attributed this shortfall to the fact
that the teachers, who were imparted training during the last six years, were given
second priority for the training courses organized by the NCERT and a few courses
organized by the Sangathan. The Committee further note that though the Sangathan
had decided to establish five Zonal Training Institutes at Gwalior, Mumbai, Mysore,
Chandigarh and Kolkata for training of teachers and other categories of staff only
three of the Zonal Training Institutes have started functioning so far at Gwalior,
Mumbai and Mysore. According to the Sangathan due to resource constraints, they
have decided to make only three Training Institutes fully functional. The Committee
are inclined to conclude that the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan have not paid the
desired attention to the training needs of the teachers by allocating sufficient funds
to implement their decision to establish the five Zonal Training Institutes. The
Committee hope early steps would be taken to ensure that all Zonal Training
Institutes  are made fully functional and that the teachers receive the necessary
training regularly in an organized manner. The Committee would expect the Ministry
of HRD to remove the administrative or financial constraints, if any, faced by the
Sangathan on this count.
[Sl. No. 12,  Appendix II, Para 98 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

17
Action Taken
All the 3 ZIETs have been geared up to organize courses throughout the year.
Collaboration in training programme has also been made with other apex educational
institutions like NCERT/RIE/ISTM and shortfall has been brought down from 40% in
2001-02 to 18.9% in the year 2005-06.
It is further submitted that construction work of ZIET at Chandigarh is likely to
start shortly and land is being identified for ZIET at Kolkata.
Recommendation
In March, 1996 the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan started the scheme of “Model
Vidyalayas” with the objective of identifying and developing selected Kendriya
Vidyalayas into model educational institutions having well-equipped infrastructure
with computers, overhead projectors, colour TVs, Junior Science labs., well
equipped libraries, workshops, playgrounds etc. The Model Vidyalayas were
required to develop innovative programmes for improving the quality of education
and their progress was to be monitored at the Sangathan Headquarters. In this
regard, the Committee note that although an expenditure of Rs. 54.28 crores was
incurred on this scheme for 448 Model Kendriya Vidyalayas several shortcomings
were detected by Audit in the actual implementation of this scheme wherein the
required additional facilities were not created in many Vidyalayas declared as
“Model Vidyalayas”. For instance, in nine cases the same Vidyalayas were declared
as “Model Vidyalayas” and excess funds amounting to Rs. 90.14 lakh were released.
Further, in several Model Vidyalayas, funds amounting to Rs. 8.39 crore were
lying unspent Computer education was not being imparted at all in 28 Vidyalayas
declared as “Model Vidyalayas”, whereas in 23 “Model Vidyalayas’ where computer
education was being imparted, no computer instructor was appointed. Further
more, in 29 “Model Vidyalayas’’ computer facility was not being made available to
the students though the funds had been released for purchase of computers.
Even basic facilities like junior laboratories, playground and multipurpose hall as
envisaged in the scheme had not been developed in several of the Vidyalayas
declared as “Model Vidyalayas”. The Committee are surprised to note that funds
for creation/purchase of additional infrastructure in the “Model Vidyalayas” were
released on the basis of recommendations from the Regional Office and not on
the basis of actual requirement. The Sangathan, therefore, has admitted that “the
monitoring should have been much more elaborate and effective and there were
some lapses here and there.”
As per the advice of the Expenditure Finance Committee, the scheme of Model
Kendriya Vidyalayas was to be reviewed after 2 years of its implementation, which
has not been done so far. While appreciating the concept of Model Kendriya
Vidyalayas, the Committee would like to point out that the Sangathan should not
have waited for Audit to point out such lapses and there ought to be an inherent
mechanism in the system to detect such lapses with a view to taking corrective
action. The Committee hope that expeditious action would now be taken to review the
scheme with a view to identifying and rectifying its shortcomings as well as to evaluate
whether the objectives behind selecting KVs for development as Model Kendriya
Vidyalayas have been achieved. The Committee also expect that an effective

18
monitoring/control system would be put in place to oversee that the very purpose of
setting up the Model Vidyalayas is not defeated.
[Sl. No. 13, Appendix II, Para 99 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The scheme of Model Kendriya Vidyalayas was initiated during the year 1995-96.
Initially M/s Ed. CIL (A Government of India Enterprise) was entrusted with the work
of providing and installing the computers in the Model Kendriya Vidyalayas. The
delay in installation of computers is largely attributable to them. In some cases, the
building could not be completed by the Construction Agencies within the prescribed
time frame. However, now all the Model Kendriya Vidyalayas are fully equipped and
are having all the desired infrastructure and equipments. As on date no fund is lying
unspent. A list of 447 Model Kendriya Vidyalayas is enclosed as Annexure-II. Only
one KV inadvertently appears twice in the previous list.
The audit has not identified the names of 9 Vidyalayas where the funds were said
to have been released twice. In the absence of the specific details it may not be
possible to offer any comment. As per records of KVS there was no double release to
any Vidyalayas except in one case.  As soon as the case of double release of funds to
the Kendriya Vidyalaya, Lawrance Road, Delhi came to notice,  KVS took back the
unspent amount lying with the Vidyalaya concerned and utilized the same amount for
implementation of scheme in other KVs. KVS has also taken steps to prepare release
register to avoid similar mistake in future. The funds for creation/purchase of additional
infrastructure in the Model Kendriya Vidyalayas were released on the basis of the
recommendation from the Regional Office, who remained in constant touch with the
Kendriya Vidyalayas. The recommendations were based on actual condition, norms
and necessity of standard infrastructure for the identified Model Kendriya Vidyalayas.
Initially the Vidyalayas engaged computer teachers on part time contractual basis but
now regular posts of computer teachers, viz. PGT (Computer Science) in the pay scale
of Rs. 6,500-200-10,500 have been created and the number of such posts for the
academic session 2006-07 is 751.
KVS has reviewed the schemes of Model Kendriya Vidyalayas from time to time.
As a result KVS has achieved the following progress: (a) IT is used widely in all the
Model Kendriya Vidyalayas. It is used in teaching-learning process. (b) Teachers
prepare lesson plan using Internal sources. (c) Utilization of Multi –media sources
like, computers, LCD and OHP are widely used for classroom teaching. (d) Internal
sources are used for collection, compilation and dissemination of latest information
in the subject taught by the teachers. (e) Students for the purpose of self learning and
preparing their projects and assignments using computers. (f) Results (In Board
Examination) of Vidyalayas have appreciably improved. (g) Informatics Practices
developed as a subject at +2 stage. (h) number of Model KVs have been serving as
venues for in service training courses. Now KVS has introduced Computer Science,
Multi-media and Web Designing Courses also at +2 stage. KVS monitored the progress
of the scheme through Principals’ Conference, AC’s Conference, Annual Inspection,
monthly progress report etc. KVS has observed that the scheme or Model Kendriya

19
Vidyalayas has brought about significant transformation in the teaching learning
process in Kendriya Vidyalayas. Most of the Kendriya Vidyalayas are now set for
extensive use of IT right from the Primary classes to Senior Secondary classes. After
implementation of this scheme, there is a significant improvement reflected in the
academic result, which has registered all time high of 90.44% in X and 92.75% in XII
during 2003-04 in CBSE exams.
Recommendation
Although computer-aided education has become a significant part of schooling of
late, the Committee are constrained to point out that out of 7762 computers installed
in the Model Vidyalayas, 239 were non-functional and remained so for a period ranging
from six months to one year. From this, the Committee can imagine very well the state
of affairs of installation of computers and their functioning in non-Model Vidyalayas.
The Committee, therefore, unhappy over such a scenario, which quite obviously is
depriving the students from learning such an essential skill in the present day academic
environment. They, therefore, recommend that the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
should ensure in right earnest that at least the identified Model Vidyalayas are fully
ensure their continuous functioning. In this regard, the Committee further desire that
the terms and conditions agreed with the vendors providing computers for Model
Kendriya Vidyalayas to the Sangathan should be strictly enforced and any laxity/
default on their part much be taken note of so as to take remedial/panel action. The
Committee also urge Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan to direct the individual School
authorities to monitor maintenance and updating computers on a regular basis so as
to keep pace with the latest advancements in this field.
[Sl. No. 14, Appendix II, Para 100 of  Twenty Fourth Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
M/s. Ed. CIL (A Govt. of India Enterprise) was entrusted with the work of providing
and installing the computers in the Model Kendriya Vidyalayas. The delay in
installation of computers was due to them. In some cases, the building could not be
completed by the Construction Agencies within the expected time frame. However,
these initial teething troubles have now been overcome and the scheme has now
been implemented successfully in the designated 447 Model Kendriya Vidyalayas.
  The Sangathan has instructed the Regional Offices & Vidyalayas to ensure that
system are put in to place to ensure that computers in computer Lab remain functional
and any operational difficulties are removed expeditiously in the best interest of the
students.
Recommendation
What has surprised the Committee is the fact that KVs do not have computer
teachers as there are no sanctioned/regular posts for this subject. Only some ad hoc
arrangement seems to have been made for computer teachers and Sangathan has not
treated with due seriousness the issue of regular appointment of teachers (by creating
regular posts) to teach computer education as a subject in the Kendriya Vidyalayas.
This is evident from the fact that an organization called INTEL is stated to have

20
trained around 18,000 non-computer teachers in the handling of computers and basics
of computer education.  Apart from that, KVS also hired the services of professional
computer teachers on a contractual basis through school level/cluster level/regional
level advertisements by the Employment Exchanges. The Committee feel that
Sangathan should immediately approach the Ministry of HRD for creation of regular
posts of computer teachers in Kendriya Vidyalayas.
[Sl. No. 15, Appendix II, Para 101 of  Twenty Fourth Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
754 posts of PGT (Computer Science) have been sanctioned for the year 2006-07
and their recruitment rules have also been approved by Board of Governors of the
Sangathan. The action is on hand to fill up these posts.
   Recommendation
Regarding overall academic performance of the Kendriya Vidyalayas, KVS has
contended that students of the Kendriya Vidyalayas have performed better than
private schools at Board level during the year 2004. Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
has claimed that the pass percentage of the Vidyalayas at the X Board examination in
2004 was 90.44, while it was 84.83 for independent schools like DPS. The corresponding
figures for XII Board Exam. was  92.75% for KVs and 80.46% for schools like DPS. The
Committee feel that in the absence of figures of average percentage of marks secured
by the students of Kendriya Vidyalayas in the Board exam. It is not possible to take a
more comprehensive view on the performance of the Kendriya Vidyalayas. The
Committee hope and desire that   the   average   percentage   of marks in all subjects
as well as in    individual subjects secured by Kendriya Vidyalaya students in the
Board Exams should also compare favorably with that of other schools. They would
like to be apprised about the performance of KVs in this regard vis-à-vis other schools
like DPS.
[Sl. No. 16, Appendix II, Para 102 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC
(14th  Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The performance of Kendriya Vidyalayas in CBSE examinations has been quite
commendable and better than Independent schools as a whole.  A comparative result
of last five years is enclosed as Annexure-‘III’.
For last twenty years the system of awarding overall Division based on total marks
for aggregate based on total of subjects has been done away with the CBSE and
therefore comparison with other systems on this aspect cannot be done. However,
the details of broad marks zone under which the Kendriya Vidyalaya students feature
during the last three years is enclosed as Annexure-‘IV’.
Since CBSE does not analyze the results of DPS numbering about 200 in the
country separately, rather it analyses the   overall   pass % of independent schools
together, the result of DPS could not be compared with that of KVS.

21
Recommendation
In so far as the achievements in sports made by the students of Kendriya Vidyalayas
and the incentives offered to them for excelling in sports is concerned, the Committee
were made to understand  that sports has been a regular feature in the Kendriya
Vidyalayas right from inception.  In the school time-table four periods are earmarked
for sports activities for each class per week.  The Sangathan also organizes competitive
games at regional and national level wherein talented sports persons compete with
each other.  Provision has also been made at the school level for coaching talented
students by the Sports Authority of India.  The Committee further note that cash
prizes are given to the students for their achievements in various sports meets.  In
addition a relaxation of 25 marks spread over all subjects is granted  to student who
has participated in the KVS and SGFI meets for promotion to next higher class.
Regional Sports Control Board and KVS Sports Control Board also give financial aid
to schools from time to time to develop sports facilities in school.  The Committee
while appreciating the steps taken to promote sports in Kendriya Vidyalayas desire
that the sports culture should be inculcated in the students from early years  of
schooling itself and the students should be provided with ample opportunity requisite
infrastructure and with matching standardised facilities to develop their talents in
sports so as to help them achieve excellence in their chosen disciplines.
[Sl. No. 19, Appendix II, Para 105 of  Twenty Fourth Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Games and Sports are an integral part of curriculum from Class I onward in Kendriya
Vidyalayas.  Competitions are organized at Vidyalaya, Regional and National levels.
Efforts are on to augment sports facilities in Kendriya Vidyalayas based on feasibility
and needs of individual Kendriya Vidyalayas.

ANNEXURE I
KENDRIYA VIDYALAYA SANGATHAN
18, INSTITUTIONAL AREA,
SHAHEED JEET SINGH MARG ,
NEW DELHI
No. F.6-7/2005-06/KVS(Budget) Dated: 31.03.2006
Office Memorandum
Chapter 21 of Accounts Code for Kendriya Vidyalayas dealing with Vidyalaya
Vikas Nidhi was reviewed by the Finance Committee of the Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan in its meeting held on 08.03.2006 and has recommended the new
 Chapter 21 for approval of the Board of Governors. The Chairman, Board of Governors
of the Sangathan has approved the new Chapter 21 of the Accounts Code for Kendriya
Vidyalayas dealing with Vidyalaya  Vikas Nidhi under his delegated powers. A copy of
new Chapter 21 is enclosed. The new Chapter 21 is also duly published in the website
'kvsangathan.nic.in.'
The amended provisions of Articles 197 to 207 of Accounts Code for Kendriya
Vidyalayas (Chapter 21) will be effective from 01.04.2006.
-Sd-
(S. Jayaraman)
Dy. Commissioner(Fin.)
Encl: As above
Distribution:—
1. Asstt. Commissioner, KVS, all Regional Offices.
2. Principal, all Kendriya Vidyalayas.
3. All Officers and Sections at KVS(HQ).
4. The General Secretary, all Recognised Staff Association of KVS.
5. Guard File.
22

CHAPTER 21
VIDYALAYA VIKAS NIDHI
[Revised Chapter approved by the Hon'ble Chairman, KVS on 30.3.2006 effective
from 1st April, 2006]
197.  Background
Upto 31.3.1999, the Sangathan was charging money from students over and above
tution fee (to the extent applicable) under the following heads:
1. Pupil Fund, and
2. Science Fund
Instructions relating to these were contained in Chapter 21 and 5 of the Accounts
Code for Kendriya Vidyalayas (1989 Edition).
As decided in 63rd and 65th meetings of the Board of Governors held on 21.7.1998
and 19.3.1999 respectively, a third charge viz. towards “Maintenance & Development
Fund'' was levied w.e.f. 1.4.1999 @ Rs. 25/- per child per month.
However, in 66th meeting dated 16.9.1999 of the Board, it was decided that the
three funds i.e. (i) Pupil Fund, (ii) Science Fund and (iii) Maintenance & Development
Fund should be merged into a single fund called Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi (VVN) w.e.f.
the next financial year. Accordingly, the VVN was introduced w.e.f 1.4.2000. Rates at
which contribution towards Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi is to be collected from students
were approved by the Board of Governors from time to time as under, based on
recommendation of the Finance Committee:—
Sl. Date with Amount collected Amount Date on Date of
No. effect from from all students collected which approval by
except Science from Science recommended Board of
Students of Classes Students of by Finance Governors
XI and XII Classes XI Committee
and XII
1. 1.4.2000 Rs. 100/- Rs. 125/- 11.08.1999 16.09.1999
2. 1.4.2002 Rs. 120/- Rs. 150/- 12.12.2001 22.02.2005
3. 1.4.2004 Rs. 160/- Rs. 200/- 01.08.2003 22.02.2005
Contribution to VVN is being charged from all students and is collected on a
quarterly basis. However, the following are exempted from payment of VVN:—
23

24
(i) Children of the officers and men of the Armed Forces and Para-military
personnel killed or disabled during the hostilities in 1962, 1965, 1971, 1999
and Kargil war; and
(ii) as approved by Board of Governors in its meeting dated 14.12.2005, girls
studying in Class VI onwards, who are a single child in their family have
been exempted from payment of VVN contribution w.e.f. 1.1.2006.
The above rates are subject to revision as approved by Board of Governors from
time to time.
197-A. Classification of Vidyalayas
For the purpose of utilization of VVN, Vidyalayas shall be classified into two
categories as follows:—
"Small" Vidyalayas shall be those having once section each for class I to XII,
and total strength not exceeding 500.
"Large" Vidyalayas shall be those, which do not come within the category of
"Small" Vidyalayas.
197-B. Liability of "Large" Vidyalayas to contribute 10% of their VVN collection
to other Vidyalayas’  Activities:
'Large Vidyalayas’ shall transfer 10% of their quarterly collection under VVN to
various authorities outside the Vidyalaya in the last week of each quarter, as follows:
(i) 8% to the Regional Office of which
(a) 5% would go to the Regional Office VVN Deposit Account for re-
distribution to "Small" Vidyalayas of the Region, and
(b) 3% would go to the Regional Sports Control Board Account.
(ii) 2% to KVS HQs—National Sports Control Board Account.
197. C. Purposes for which VVN may be utilised
(1) Subject to the financial ceilings specified in Article 202, the Vidyalaya Vikas
Nidhi shall be utilized exclusively for the purpose of School Development.
(2) Broadly, the purposes for which the VVN may be utilized shall be the following:—
(i) Engagement of part time teachers (including Computer Instructors/
Teachers) on contract basis against leave vacancies, vacancies caused by
suspension of regular employees, and for other temporary activities, but
excluding remuneration of part-time teachers appointed against vacancies
in regular sanctioned posts. Remuneration of contract teachers appointed
against clear vacancies in regular sanctioned posts shall be met out of
School Fund i.e. Govt. Grant;
(ii) Petty Construction work undertaken;
(iii) Repairs and maintenance of
(a) School building including toilets, septic and overhead tanks, campus
and playground;

25
(b) Classroom furniture and fixtures;
(c) Laboratories and Laboratory equipments;
(d) Audio Visual and Musical Instruments; and
(e) Sports Articles/Goods.
(iv) Purchase of sports articles/kits;
(v) Sports Meets, Participation in Adventure Activities, SGFI Sports Meet,
etc.;
(vi) Scout & Guide Activity;
(vii) Pupil Societies; Annual Function, Other School Functions ( e.g. Republic
Day, Independence Day, Teachers' Day, etc.) and other Children Group
Activities;
(viii) School excursions;
(ix) Conduct of Examination and related activities;
(x) Incidental expenses connected with visits to the school by dignitaries like
Hon'ble Minister, Parliamentary Committees, etc.;
(xi) Beautification and horticultural development of the school campus
including tree plantation;
(xii) Purchase of laboratory equipment, audio visual aids, musical instruments
and library books;
(xiii)  Publication and printing of Vidyalaya Magazine and Student Diary;
(xiv) Purchase and maintenance of Computer Hardware and Software including
e-mail/inter-net facility for students;
(xv) Provision of first air and other necessary medical facilities during school
hours; and
(xvi) Security of the School.
197-D. Emergency Assistance to students in distress
In case of untimely death of the parent/guardian of a student, VMC may consider
financial assistance to such student for continuation of studies for that academic
session as per Article 202 subject to satisfaction that there are no other family members
to enable the student to pursue with studies.
197-E. Purposes for which the Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi shall not be utilized
The Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi shall not be spent on any purpose other than those
specified in Article 197-C. In particular, It shall not be utilized for:—
(i) Meeting expenditure on pay and allowances, office expenses other than
those specified in Article 202;

26
(ii) Construction/repairs of staff quarters;
(iii) Meeting expenditure in connection with the maintenance of NCC troops;
(iv) Meeting expenditure for the benefit of a particular person of persons
(including the officers of the Sangathan); and
(v) For running of bus service, subsidy for canteen, books, store or subsidy
of any kind.
197-F. Transfer of the 'Vidyalaya  Vikas Nidhi' to ‘School Fund’ and other purposes
is forbidden except for salary payments in emergency and in anticipation of receipt of
funds from the Sangathan.
198. Management of the Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi
Management of the Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi shall vest in the Vidyalaya Management
Committee of the Vidyalaya subject to instructions and guidelines of the KVS.
199. Budgetary Control
In March every year, each Kendriya Vidyalaya shall prepare and present its Annual
Budget in respect of VVN for the next financial year showing opening balance, estimated
receipts and expenses under various head for consideration and approval of the
Vidyalaya Management Committee. Expenditure out of  Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi shall be
incurred only after and in accordance with the budget approved by the Vidyalaya
Management Committee of the Vidyalaya.
200. Bank Account
The account of the 'Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi' should be maintained with State Bank of
India or any scheduled bank of Indian origin. As far as possible, each Vidyalaya will
maintain School Fund Account and VVN Fund Account in the same bank. The account
should be operated jointly by the Principal and Vice-Principal/Senior-most Teacher of
Vidyalaya. For meeting petty cash payments relating to the Fund, a permanent imprest
not exceeding Rs. 5000/- may be kept by the Principal. Rules regarding the operation
of the bank account and maintenance of Cash Book conained in Chapter 8 of the
Account Code would be followed.
201. Accounts
The Periodical account shall be prepared based on the Cash Book and Ledger
maintained and same are subject to internal audit as well as AGCR audit. The Annual
Accounts of the VVN alongwith the audit observations of the Accountant General,
Internal Audit Party of the Sangathan and replies thereon shall be placed before the
Executive Committee for consideration and adoption. A report on the working of the
fund should also be submitted to the VMC annually.

27
202.Financial Ceilings
The financial limit upto which expenditure can be incurred at the School level out
of VVN on various items per annum are as under:—
Sl. No. Item Financial limit
1. Engagement of part-time teachers Rs. 3.00 lakh per annuam subject
(including Computer to terms and conditions for such
Instructors/Teachers) on contract engagement as decided by the
basis. Commissioner from time to time.
Petty construction work Concerning Rs. 2.00 lakh per annum.
The school viz. toilets, sewerage tank,
 overhead tank, stage, activity room, etc.
3. Repairs and maintenance of: (a) Schools having one-section—
A. School building, its toilets, Rs. 1.00 lakh per annum;
septic and overhead tanks (b) School having two sections—
including playground and campus. Rs. 2.00 lakh per annum; and
(c) School having three or more
sections—Rs. 3.00 lakh per annum.
B. Classroom furniture & fixtures Rs. 10,000/- per annuam.
C. Lab Equipments Rs. 10,000/- per annuam.
D. Audio Visuals and Musical Rs. 10,000/- per annum.
Instruments
4. Purchase of classroom furniture Rs. 1.00 lakh per annuam.
and fixtures.
5. Purchase of Lab. Equipment Rs. 1.00 lakh per annum.
including consumables and also the
upkeep of the laboratories.
6. Purchase of audio visuals and Rs. 50,000/- per annum.
musical instruments.
7. Purchase of sports goods & kits; Rs. 1.00 lakh per annum.
prizes to winners in School Sports (Atleast 25% of the amount
and inter-class or inter-hourse should be utilized for Primary
matches; entry fees of the school Section of the School)
teams for tournaments, photography
and providing of refreshments.
8. Pupils Societies; Annual Function, Rs. 1.50 lakh per annum.
Other School Functions (e.g. Republic
Day, Independence Day, Teachers' Day, etc.
9. School excusions. Rs. 50,000/- per annum.
10. Conduct of Examinations. Rs. 1.00 lakh per annum.
III. Surplus funds
As far as possible, contributions made to the VVN in a year should be utlized
within that year itself as per well planned programme of activities aimed at over all

28
school development including the extra curricular activities, health and welfare of the
student community. Surplus funds i.e. funds remaining: unutilized shall be allowed to
be carried forward for a peiod of three years. Thereafter, the said unutilized balance,
which remains beyond three years, shall be transferred to VVN Deposit Account of
the Regional Office. Likewise, surplus funds remaining unutilized in Regional Office
VVN Deposit Account beyond a period of three years shall be transferred to VVN
Deposit Account of KVS HQ. The amount of VVN Deposit Account with KVS HQ
shall be reflected and adjusted in Non-Plan School Fund Deposit during that financial
year.
205.  Advance from the Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi
Save in execptional circumstances on grounds  of urgency, no advance should be
taken from the Fund except with the priod approval of the Executive Committee.
Advances in exceptional circumstances should satisfy the following requirements:—
(i) The expenditure to be met out of the advance should be a legitimate charge
against the 'Vidyalaya Vikas Nidhi'.
(ii) The advance is intended to meet expenditure at an outside place, which
cannot be precisely estimated and which cannot brook any delay in
payment in the normal course.
(iii) The advance should be limited to the anticipate expenditure. An account
of the advance should be rendered within a month after the event is over
and note of the advance should be kept in the Register of Advances and
Recoveries for the purpose of watching the adjustment thereof.
206. Reports and Returns
Each Kendriya Vidyalaya shall prepare a quarterly statement of receipts and
expenditure and furnish the same to the Regional Office on the 15th April, 15th July,
15th October and 15th January of each year in respect of each of the preceding
quarters. The Regional Office, in turn, shall submit a consolidated quarterly statement
of receipts and expenditure to the KVS Headquarters by 20th April, 31st July,
31st October and 31st January of each year in respect of the respective previous
quarters.
207.   Annual Accounts
Each Kendriya Vidyalaya shall prepare Annaul Accounts in respect of 'Vidyalaya
Vikas Nidhi' in the prescribed forms and submit to the Regional Office alongwith the
Annual Accounts for 'School Fund'. The Regional Office shall include the same in its
consolidated Annual Accounts and forward it to the Sangathan. The accounts so
received shall be incorporated as part of Annual Accounts of KVS.

ANNEXURE II
LIST OF  448  MODEL  KENDRIYA  VIDY ALAY AS
Sl. Name of K.V. Covered Sector Civil/Defence Y ear of inclusion
No. under Model KV Scheme as Model KV
12 3 4
1. Ahmedabad Region
1. IFCO Gandhidham Project 1995
2. Ahmedabad No. 1 Civil 1996-97
3. Surat No. 1 Civil 1998-99
4. Sector-30, Gandhinagar Civil 1990-00
5. EME Baroda Civil 1999-2000
6. Jamnagar No. 1 Defence 1999-2000
7. AFS Bhuj Defence 1999-2000
8. Ahmedabad Cantt. Defence 1999-2000
9. Gandhinagar Cantt. Defence 1999-2000
10. Baroda No. 1 Civil 1999-2000
11. Dhrangadhara Defence 1999-2000
12. INF Line Jamnagar Defence 1999-2000
13. INS Valsura Jamnagar Defence 1999-2000
14. Rajkot Civil 2000
15. Jamnagar S.U. Defence 2000
16. No. 2 Bhuj Cantt. Defence 2000
17. AFS Naliya Defence 20 00-01
18. Bhavnagar Para Civil 2000-01
19. V allabh Vidhyanagar Civil 2000-01
20. Dantiwada Civil 2000-01
2. Bangalore
21. No. 1 Vasco-De-Gama Defence 19 96-97
22. No. 1 Hubli Civil 1996
23. Belgaum Cantt. Defence 1998
24. INS Mandovi Defence 19 98-99
29

30
25. Malleshwaram Civil 1999-2000
26. Hassan Civil 1999-2000
27. No. 1 Managalore Civil 1999
28. No. 1 Jalahalli Defence 1999
29. ASC & Centre, Bangalore Defence 1999
30. Bidar Defence 1999-2000
31. Kannur Defence 1999
32. Bellary Civil 1999-2000
33. Dharwad Civil 1999-2000
34. Wap Yelahanka Project 1999
35. Keltron Nagar Civil 1999-2000
36. No. 2 Vasco-De-Gama Defence 2000
37. Hebbal Defence 2000-2001
38. No. 2 Jalahalli Defence 2000-2001
39. Gulberga Civil 2000-2001
40. Bambolin Camp Defence 2000-2001
41. No. 2 Kasargod Civil 2000-2001
42. Payyanur Civil 2000-2001
43. AFS Yelahanka Defence 2000-2001
44. IISC Bangalore Inst. of High 2000-2001
45. Ootacmund Civil 2000
46. DFRL Mysore Civil 2000-2001
47. Meg & Centre Defence 19 96-97
3. Bhopal Region
48. No. 1 of Itarsi Defence 1999-2000
49. Raigarh Civil 1999-2000
50. No. 3 Jhansi Defence 1999-2000
51. No. 1 Gwalior Civil 1996-97
52. No. 1 Jhansi Defence 1996
53. No. 2 Gwalior Defence 1999-2000
54. No. 3 Gwalior Defence 1999-2000
55. Of Chanda Defence 2000-2001
56. Hosangabad 2000-2001
12 3 4

31
57. Talbhat Defence 2000-2001
58. No. 1 Bhopal Civil 1996
59. Pachmarhi Defence 1999
60. Bairagarh Defence 1999-2000
61. Mhow Defence 1999-2000
62. Nepanagar Civil 2000-2001
63. Guna Civil 1999-2000
64. Kamptee Defence 1999-2000
65. Bhandara Defence 2000-2001
66. Babina Defence 1999-2000
67. Ratlam Civil 2000-2001
68. Khargaon Civil 2000-2001
69. Pulgaon Defence 2000-2001
70. Ujjain Civil 1999-2000
71. No. 1 Sagar Defence 1999-2000
72. Khandwa Civil 2000-2001
73. Neemuch Defence 1999
74. Dewas Civil 1999-2000
75. Amla Defence 1999-2000
76. No. 2 CPE Itarsi Defence 2000
77. VSN Nagpur Defence 1999-2000
78. No. 1 Indore Civil 1999-2000
79. Sehore Civil 2000-2001
80. Ambarjhari Defence 2000-2001
81. No. 2. Bhopal Civil 2000-2001
82. No. 2 Jhansi Defence 2000-2001
83. Karera Defence 2000-2001
84. Chattarpur Civil 2000-2001
4. Bhubaneswar Region
85. No. 1 BBSR Civil 1996-97
86. Sambalpur Civil 1997
87. No. 1 Bokaro Civil 1996
88. Puri Civil 1999
89. Dhanbad Civil 1999
12 3 4

32
90. AFSI No. 1 Kalaikunda Defence 1999
91. Of Bolangiri Defence 1999
92. Brahampur Civil 1999
93. Khurda Road Civil 2000-01
94. AFS Salua Defence 2000
95. Koraput Civil 2000
96. Adra Civil 2000
97. AFS No. 11 Kalaikunda Defence 2000-2001
98. No. 2 Kharagpur Civil 2000
99. Sundergarh Civil 2000-2001
100. Chakardharpur Civil 2000
101. Baripada Civil 2000-2001
102. Bondamunda Civil 2000-2001
103. C uttack Civil 2001
104. IIT Kharagpur Inst. of High 2001
105. Balasor Defence 1999-2000
106. ARC Charbatia Project 1999-2000
107. INS Chilka Defence 1998-1999
108. Jharsugdha Civil 2000-2001
109. Gomoh Civil 2000-2001
5. Kolkata Region
110. Asansol Civil 2000
111. Bagdogra Defence 1999
112. Ballyganj Defence 1999
113. Army Barackpore Defence 1997
114. AFS Barackpore Defence 1999
115. Bengdubi Defence 1998
116. Binnagudi No.1 Defence 1999
117. Binnagudi No.2 Defence 2000
118. Chittranjan Civil 1999
119. Command Hospital Defence 2000
120. Cooch Behar Defence 2000
121. Cossipore Defence 2000
122. Dum Dum Of Defence 2000
12 3 4

33
123. Fout William Defence 1999
124. Gangtok Civil 1998
125. Hasimara Defence 1999
126. Ishapur No.1 Defence 2000
127. Ishapur No.2 Defence 2000
128. Kanchipara No.1 Defence
129. Khaprail Defence
130. Panagarh Defence
131. Salt Lake No.1 Civil 1996
132. Salt Lake No.2 Civil 2000
6. Chandigarh Region
133. Sector-47, Chandigarh Defence 19 97-98
134. Jhakhoo Hill, Shimla Civil 1997-98
135. No.1 Bhatinda Cantt. Defence 19 97-98
136. N o.1 Ambala Cantt. Defence 19 97-98
137. No.1 Jalandhar Cantt. Defence 19 97-98
138. No.1 Chandimandir Defence 1999-2000
139. No.1 Patiala Defence 1999-2000
140. Faridkot Defence 1999-2000
141. No.1 Firozpur Cantt. Defence 1999-2000
142. No.3 Bhatinda Defence 1999-2000
143. No.2, 3 BRD AFS Chandigarh Defence 1999-2000
144. N o.2 Ambala Cantt. Defence 1999-2000
145. Sector-31 Chandigarh Defence 2000-2001
146. Hamirpur Town Civil 2000-2001
147. No.1 Adampur Defence 2000-2001
148. AFS Barnala Defence 2000-2001
149. No. Halwara Defence 2000-2001
150. Suranasi Defence 2000-2001
151. Kapoorthala Cantt. Defence
152. RCF Hussainpur Civil
153. Sector-29 Chandigarh Defence
154. No.2 Firozpur Cantt. Defence
12 3 4

34
155. No.3 Jallandhar Cantt. Defence
156. No.4 Bhatinda Defence
157. High Ground Chandigarh Defence
7. Chennai
158. No.1 Calicut Civil 2000-2001
159. Pattom Civil 1996-97
160. E rnakulam Civil 1999-2000
161. N o.1 Cochin Defence 1998
162. HVF Avadi Defence 19 98-99
163. AFS Avadi Defence 20 00-01
164. N o.1 Tambaram Defence 1999
165. IIT Channai H L 20 00-01
166. Coimbatore Civil 2000
167. No.1 Trichy Defence 1996
168. Madurai Civil 2000-01
169. Ashok Nagar Civil 2000
170. AFS Sulur Defence 1999-2000
171. Island Ground Defence 2000-2001
172. No.1 Port Blair Civil 2000-2001
173. No.2 Port Blair Defence 1999-2000
174. N o.2 Tambaram Defence 2000-2001
175. No.1 Palghat Civil 1996-97
176. Minambakkam Civil 1996
177. CLRI Chennai HL 20 00-01
178. Nadaluva Defence 2000
179. N o.2 Cochin Defence 2000
180. DSQA Complex Civil 2000-2001
181. Pallipuram Civil 2000
182. Port Trust Cochin Civil 1999-2000
183. CRPF Avadi Civil 2000-2001
184. Pangode Defence 1999-2000
185. OCF Avadi Defence 2000
186. Arakkonam Defence 1999-2000
12 3 4

35
187. Ostapalam Civil 2000
188. Malappuram Civil 2000-2001
189. No.2 Trichy Defence 2000-2001
190. Kanjikode Civil 1999-2000
191. Mandapam Civil 2000
192. No.1 Pondicherry H L 1998-1999
8. Dehradun
193. IMA Dehradun Defence 1999
194. OFD Dehradun Defence 1999-2000
195. Upper Camp, Dehradun Defence 2000
196. FRI Dehradun Project 1996-1997
197. Saiwala 2000-2001
198. DL Meerut Defence 1998-1999
199. Lansdowne Defence 2000-2001
200. No.2 JLA Bareilly Defence 2000
201. JRC Bareilly Defence 2000-2001
202. AFS Bareilly Defence 1996-1997
203. K ashimpur Civil 2000-2001
204. Ranikhet Defence 1999-2000
205. Almora Civil 2000-2001
206. Banbasa Cantt. Defence 1999-2000
207. Pithoragarh Defence 1999-2000
208. HBK No.1 Civil 1995-96
209. AFS Sarswa Defence 1999-2000
210. Birpur. Dehradun Defence 1999-2000
9. Delhi
211. No.1 Faridabad Civil 1999
212. Hissar Cantt. Defence 2000-2001
213. Nahara Civil 2000-2001
214. Sainik Vihar Civil 2000-2001
215. Keshavpuram Civil 2000-2001
216. Masjid Moth Civil 1999-2000
12 3 4

36
217. Vikaspuri Civil 1998
218. Pitampura Civil 2000
219. T agore Garden Civil 1999
220. V ishesh KV Civil 1998-1999
221. Gole Market Civil 1999-2000
222. NOIDA Civil 2000-2001
223. New Friends Centre Civil 2000-2001
224. S ector-4 RK Puram Civil 2000-2001
225. Paluwas Bhiwani Civil 2000-2001
226. Lawrence Road Civil 2000-2001
227. Andrews Ganj Civil 1999-2000
228. Palwal Civil 2000-2001
229. No.1 Delhi Cantt. Defence 1999-2000
230. AGOR Colony Civil 1999-2000
231. Shalimar Bagh Civil 1999-2000
232. S ector-8 RK Puram Civil 1999-2000
233. No.3 Delhi Cantt. Defence 2000-2001
234. Janakpuri Civil 2000-2001
235. Pushp Vihar Civil 2000-2001
236. INA Colony Civil 2000-2001
237. AFS Gurgaon Defence 2000-2001
238. No.2 Delhi Cantt. Defence 2000-2001
239. AFS Tughlakabad Defence 1999-2000
240. Sector 2 RK Puram Defence 1999-2000
241. Sirsa No.1 Defence 1999-2000
242. New Mehrauli Road Civil 1999-2000
243. No.2 Faridabad Civil 2000-2001
10. Guwahati
244. No. 1 Tezpur Defence
245. Eacupper Shillong Defence
246. No. 1 Itanagar Civil 1997
247. Khanapara Civil 1997
248. No. 1 Jorhat AFS Defence
249. Missamari Defence
12 3 4

37
250. No. 2 Tezpur AFS Defence
251. Narangi Defence
252. Laitkor Peak Defence
253. Borjhar AFS Defence
254. Digaru AFS Defence
255. CRPF Amerigog Civil
256. Tura Civil
257. No. 2 Itanagar Civil
258. Umaroi Cantt. Defence
259. Dtengavalley Defence
260. New Bongaigaon Civil 2000
261. Tezu Civil 2000
262. Pasighat Civil 2000
263. Lokra Civil 2000
264. Kokrajhar Civil 2001
265. Chabua AFS Defence 2001
266. Rupa Defence 2001
267. Alog Civil 2001
268. Happy V alley Defence 2001
11.  Hyderabad
269. No. 1 Uppal Civil 1997
270. No. 2 Nausena Bagh Defence 1997
271. Picket Defence 1999
272. NPA Shivarampally Civil 1999
273. W altair Civil 1999
274. Trimulgherry Defence 1999
275. Of Eddumailaram Defence 1999
276. Guntur Civil 1999
277. Begumpet Defence 1999
278. No. 2 Srivijay Nagar Defence 1999
279. No. 1 Golconda Defence 2000
280. No. 1 AFS Hyderabad Defence 2000
281. No. 1 Nausena Bagh Defence 2000
12 3 4

38
282. No. 1 Tirupathi Civil 2000
283. Bolaram Defence 2000
284. Nad Vaizag Defence 2000
285. Malkapuram Defence 2000
286. Guntakal Civil 2000
287. AFS Hakimpet Defence 2000
288. No. 2 Golconda Defence 2000
289. Anantapur Civil 2000
290. CRPF Hyderabad Defence 2000
291. INS K alinga Defence 2000
292. Gachibowli Civil 2000
293. AFS Sluryalanka Defence 2000
294. K urnool Civil 2000
295. No. 2 AFA Hyderabad Defence 2000
296. No. 1 Srivijaya Nagar Defence 2000
297. No. 1 Vijaywada Civil 2000
298. No. 2 Vijaywada Civil 2000
299. NFC Nagar Civil 2000
300. Srikakulam Civil 2000
301. No. 2 Tirupathi Civil 2001
12. Jabalpur
302. No. 1 GCF Jabalpur Defence 1995
303. No. 1 STC Jabalpur Defence 1999
304. Rewa Civil 1999
305. Bilaspur Civil 1999
306. Raipur Civil 1999
307. Damoh Civil 1999
308. Jabalpur COD Defence 1999
309. Kham aria OF Defence 2000
310. Katni OF Defence 2000
311. Jabalpur CMM Defence 2000
312. Jabalpur No. 2 GCF Defence 2000
313. Durg Civil 2000
12 3 4

39
314. Narsinghpur Civil 2000
315. S atna Civil 2000
316. Shahdol Civil 2000
317. Ambikapur Civil 2000
318. Jabalpur VF Defence 2001
319. D hana Defence 2001
13. Jaipur
320. Jaipur Cantt. No. 2 Defence 1996
321. Jodhpur AFS No. 1  Defence 1996
322. Suratgarh AFS No. 1 Defence 1999
323. Udaypur No. 1 Civil 1999
324. Bikaner No. 1 Defence 1999
325. Alwar Civil 1999
326. Ajmer CRPF No. 1 Civil 1999
327. Jaipur No. 1 Civil 1999
328. Kota No. 1 Defence 1999
329. Bharatpur Civil 1999
330. Mount Abu Civil 1999
331. Jaisalmer Defence 1999
332. Uttarlai Defence 1999
333. Jhalawar Civil 1999
334. Nasirabad Defence 1999
335. D eoli Defence 1999
336. Sri Ganganagar Cantt. Defence 1999
337. Jalipa Cantt. Defence 1999
338. Bewar Jodhpur Defence 2000
339. Bikaner No. 2 Nal Defence 2000
340. Jaipur Cantt. No. 4 Defence 2000
341. Jhunjhunu Civil 2000
342. Jaipur No. 5 Civil 2000
343. Rewari Civil 2000
344. Suratgarh Cantt. Defence 2000
345. Jodhpur Army No. 1 Defence 2000
12 3 4

40
346. Itarana, Alwar Defence 2001
347. Churu Civil 2001
348. Bhilwara Civil 2001
349. Narnaul Civil 2001
350. Jaiplur No. 3 Civil 1999
14. Jammu
351. Jammu No. 1 Civil 1999
352. Pathankot No. 1 Defence 1999
353. Udhampur No. 1 Defence 1999
354. Akhnoor No. 1 Defence 1999
355. Srinagar No. 1 Defence 1999
356. Amritsar No. 1 Defence 1999
357. Palampur Defence 1999
358. Pathankot No. 3 Defence 2000
359. Nagrota Defence 2000
360. Srinagar No. 2 Defence 2000
361. Jammu No. 2 Defence 2000
362. Kaluchak Defence 2001
363. Nangalbhur Defence 2001
364. Pathankot No. 2 Defence 2000
15. Mumbai
365. Colaba No. 1 Defence 1999
366. Colaba No. 2 Defence 1996-1997
367. Colaba No. 3 Defence 2000-2001
368. Powai IIT H.L. 1998-1999
369. Karanja Nad Defence 2001-2002
370. Koliwada Civil 1999
371. Bhandup Defence 2000-2001
372. Thane AFS Defence
373. Mankhurd
374. Pune SC Defence
375. Army Area Defence 2000
376. Pune Beg Defence 1996
12 3 4

41
377. Pune AFS No. 2 Defence 2000-2001
378. Pune CME Defence 2000
379. Ganeshkhind Defence 1999
380. Pune NDA Defence 1999-2000
381. Dehu Road No. 1 Defence 2000
382. Dehu Road O.F Defence 2000-2001
383. Lonavala Defence 2000-2001
384. Ahmednagar No. 1 Defence 1999-2000
385. Ahmednagar VRDE Defence 2000-2001
386. Devlali No. 1
387. Devlali AFS Defence 2000-2001
388. Nasik Road Defence 1999-2000
389. Nasik ISP Civil 2000-2001
390. Ojhar Defence 2000-2001
391. Bhusawal Defence 2000-2001
392. Aurangabad Defence 2000
16. Patna
393. Kankarbagh Patna Civil 1997-1998
394. Muzaffarpur Civil 1998-1999
395. Samastipur Civil 1998-1999
396. Danapur Cantt. Defence 1999-2000
397. Dipatoli Ranchi Defence 1999-2000
398. Gaya No. 1 Civil 1999-2000
399. Ramgarh Cantt. Defence 1999-2000
400. Hinoo Ranchi Civil 1999-2000
401. V aranasi Cantt. Defence 1999-2000
402. Gaya No. 2 Defence 2000-2001
403. Hazaribagh BSF Civil 2000-2001
404. Jamalpur Civil 2000-2001
405. Singarshi Defence 2000-2001
406. Mokamehghat CRPF Civil 2000-2001
407. V aranasi DLW Civil 2000-2001
408. Mughalsarai Civil 2000-2001
12 3 4

42
409. Katihar Civil 2000-2001
410. B'Road, Patna Civil 2000-2001
411. S onepur Civil 2000-2001
412. Garhara Civil 2000-2001
413. Patratu Civil 2000-2001
17. Silchar
414. Sewak, Dimapur Civil 1997-1998
415. Kunjaban, Agartala Civil 1997-1998
416. Lamphelpat, Imphal Civil 1997-1998
417. Silchar Civil 1999-2000
418. Dinjan Cantt. Defence 2000-2001
419. Lanlgjing, Manipur Civil 2000-2001
420. Diphu, Assam Civil 2000-2001
18. Lucknow
421. Alinganj, Lucknow Civil
422. Lucknow AMC Defence
423. Amhat, Sultanpur Civil
424. Azamgarh Civil
425. Baad, Mathura Civil
426. Bamrauli, Allahabad Defence
427. Bulandshahar Civil
428. Fatehgarh Defence
429. Gomtinagar, Lucknow Civil
430. G orakhpur Defence
431. Kanpur IIT H.L.
432. Kanpur Cantt. Defence
433. Manauri, Allahabad Defence
434. Mathura Cantt. Defence
435. Mau Civil
436. Memaura Defence
437. New Cantt. Allahabad Defence
438. Agra AFS No. 1 Defence
439. Armapur No. 1 Kanpur Defence
12 3 4

43
440. Agra Cantt. No. 2 Defence
441. Chakeri No. 2 Kanpur Defence
442. Hazratpur OEF Defence
443. Kanpur OEF Defence
444. Phulpur IFFCO. Allahab  Project
445. Raebareli Civil
446. Shahjahanpur Cantt. Defence
447. Shahjahanpur OCF Defence
448. UNNAO Civil
12 3 4

ANNEXURE III
The comparative performance of Kendriya Vidyalayas with other organizations
during the last 5 years in Class X and Class XII examinations conducted by CBSE is
as follows:
ClassX 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
KVS 81.8 85.55 84.69 90.44 89.85
JNV 87.0 88.65 88.50 91.43 90.82
Independent Schools 86.4 85.63 83.39 84.83 85.87
Total (CBSE) 66.6 69.53 68.02 76.60 74.60
Class XII 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
KVS 83.9 86.46 88.67 92.75 92.47
JNV 84.2 83.53 85.26 87.68 87.80
Independent Schools 82.9 83.32 81.07 80.46 81.28
Total (CBSE) 75.2 75.20 73.59 80.40 77.80
Kendriya Vidyalaya Results at a Glance
Year- Year- Year- Year- Year- Year- Year- Y ear-
2002 2003 2004 2005 2002 2003 2004 2005
Class-X Class-X Class-X Class-X Class-XII Class-XII Class-XII Class-XII
App. 53427 53065 53404 60617 35898 36041 37461 42545
Passed 48707 44943 48299 54956 31036 31959 34748 39419
Pass% 85.55 84.69 90.44 89.85 86.46 88.67 92.75 92.47
33% to<45% 4853 2162 3195 2766 364 249 268 333
% age 9.08 4.07 6.62 5.03 1.01 0.69 0.77 0.84
45% to<60% 17200 16047 16283 18043 10264 9222 8473 9950
% age 32.19 30.24 33.71 32.83 28.59 25.59 24.38 25.24
60% to<75% 23654 26734 16718 19942 20408 22488 18978 21322
%age 44.27 50.37 34.61 36.29 56.85 62.39 54.62 54.09
75% to <90% 8783 10346 10874 12808 5146 5601 6705 7417
% age 16.44 19.49 22.52 23.31 14.34 15.54 19.30 18.82
90% & above 329 794 1229 1397 264 233 324 327
% age 0.61 1.50 2.54 2.54 0.74 0.65 0.93 0.83
44

ANNEXURE IV
Annual Report 2001
Results
The fruits of the endeavors towards academic excellence are reflected in the
 perteance of the Kendriya Vidyalaya students in the examinations conducted by the
Central Board of Secondary Education (CCBSE) at the end of Class X and Class XII.
KVS Results in Detail
App. Passed Pass % 33% 45% 60% 75% 90%
to to to to to
45% 60% 75% 90% above
Year 2000 Class X 51937 40519 78.00 5964 15765 12255 6121 414
Year 2001 Class X 52783 42796 81.08 4557 16949 14279 6798 213
Year 2002 Class X 53427 48707 85.55 4853 17200 14871 8454 329
Year 2000 Class XII 12963 27462 83.00 889 10230 11689 4325 329
Year 2001 Class XII 34251 28743 83.92 1045 11261 12142 4078 218
Year 2002 Class XII 35898 31036 86.46 364 10264 15262 4882 264
The comparative performance of Kendriya Vidyalayas with other organizations
during the last 5 years in Class X and Class XII examinations conducted by CBSE is
as follows:
Class X 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
KVS 76.8 77.9 77.8 81.8 85.55
JNV 85.8 84.7 87.0 87.0 88.65
Independent Schools 87.7 86.5 86.4 85.4 85.63
Total (CBSE) 63.2 64.4 65.4 66.6 69.53
Class XII 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
KVS 79.9 83.1 83.0 83.9 86.46
JNV 81.2 87.5 83.3 84.2 83.53
Independent Schools 83.4 84.8 84.8 82.9 83.32
Total (CBSE) 72.6 74.68 76.35 75.2 75.20
45

CHAPTER III
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee were informed by the representative of the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education that there was a view in the Government that since the Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangathan provides reasonable quality education at an affordable cost
some of the more backward areas should be covered. The Government was therefore
planning to open new Kendriya Vidyalayas all over the country in those districts
which have no Kendriya Vidyalayas and which had concentration of different backward
groups-tribal, scheduled castes, minorities, OBCs and persons with disabilities.  The
Committee note that the Department have thus identified 50 districts for opening
Kendriya Vidyalayas.  However, the Department has conceded that by such expansion,
they were actually departing from their original mandate and that if the Kendriya
Vidyalayas expand indiscriminately, it may weaken their administration. The Committee
would thus like the Ministry to examine this proposal carefully and all the relative
advantages/disadvantages should be considered before expansion of Kendriya
Vidyalayas.  At the same time, they would like the Ministry to ensure that the existing
Kendriya Vidyalayas are provided all the facilities and infrastructure before expansion
of the network of Kendriya Vidyalayas.
[Sl. No. 20, Appendix II, Para 106 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Government has approved opening of 50 new schools, in addition to regularization
of 95 schools opened in 2003-04 and 2004-05. Adequate provisions have been made
to provide Plan fund as per the actual requirement of KVS. Government has also
sanctioned funds to meet expenditure on basic facilities to be provided for existing
KVs and construction of 129 buildings.
46

 CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
While the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan had been set up to pursue excellence
and set a pace in the field of education, they did not exercise proper control and
monitoring over implementation of their academic and organizational activities with
the result that the objectives of setting up of the Sangathan could not be fully achieved.
V arious deficiencies/shortcomings in the working of the Sangathan have been brought
out in the Audit review, which was conducted on sample checking of records of
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan (Headquarters), 17 Regional Offices and 163 Kendriya
Vidyalayas covering the period from 1997-98 to 2002-2003. These have been discussed
in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 2, Appendix II, Para 88 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In order to increase proper control and monitoring over the academic and
organizational activities KVS has taken following steps:—
(a) It has made it mandatory for the Regional Office to carry out minimum
three Inspections of every Kendriya Vidyalaya within the region.
(b) Study materials for students are prepared and distributed to every student
appearing for class X and XII examinations.
(c) A programme for structured revision and special classes has been prepared
and implemented.
Computer aided education has been promoted in a big way. Grants have been
given to school for the purchase of computers and constructions and modernization
of computer labs.
Recommendation
The Committee have been given to understand that Kendriya Vidyalayas are
opened in the civil sector on the recommendations of different Ministries/Department
of Central Government/State Government or the Central Government Employees
Welfare Coordination Committee. Similarly, they are opened on the recommendations
of the Ministry of Defence in the defence sector. Kendriya Vidyalayas are also opened
in the Institutes of Higher Learning and in the Project Sector. According to the norms
laid down for the location of new Kendriya Vidyalayas, the sponsoring authority
should provide 15 acres of land free of cost and make available, free of cost and make
available, free of rent or on a nominal rent, temporary accommodation to house the
47

48
school till such time the Sangathan can build its own building for the school on the
land allotted to it. Audit has pointed out that out of 770 Kendriya Vidyalayas,
259 Kendriya Vidyalayas functioned from temporary accommodation and there was
inordinate delay in land transfer to the Sangathan. According to KVS 215 Kendriya
Vidyalayas at present are functioning in temporary accommodation and permanent
buildings had to be constructed for them. The Sangathan contended that permanent
buildings could not be constructed due to delayed transfer of land to the Sangathan.
The Committee have now been informed that they have achieved some progress on
this front and 146 cases of land transfer have been cleared so far. As there has been
inordinate delay in land transfers, the Committee would like the Ministry of HRD to
take the initiative and coordinate with other Departments to get land transfers to the
Sangathan expedited so that all the Kendriya Vidyalayas could be housed in permanent
buildings. Wherever land transfers have already taken place, the Committee would
expect the Sangathan to commence construction of buildings without further loss of
time and provide them with the necessary infrastructure.
[Sl. No. 17, Appendix II, Para 103 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC
 (14th
  
Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The transfer of land for construction of school building is a continuous process.
2.     The land transfer issues are taken up with the sponsoring authority right from
the year the school is opened and also as per commitment of sponsoring authorities
to provide suitable plot of land of 15 acres. The pending land issues are being pursued
at various levels i.e. KVS Hq. MHRD and due to these efforts many cases were
resolved.
3.  BOG in its 72nd meeting held on 22.02.05 has revised land norms as under:—
(a) Location:— Metropolitan Cities (like Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai,
Chennai)
 Lower Limit:— 4.00 acres (40% building area & 60% play field or
subject to master plan).
(b) Location: — Hilly Terrain
Lower Limit:— Contiguous plot(s) fairly leveled measuring 6.00 acres
(c) Location:— Urban Area
 Lower Limit:— 8.00 acres.
(d) Location:— Rural /Semi Urban Area
Lower Limit:— 10.00 acres
With these revised norms some of the land cases may be finalized.

49
4.  Out of 833 KVs opened up to 31.3.2003 the status where KVS is yet to provide
building is as under:—
• Total No. of KVs                 :       833
• KV in project/                      :       127
IHL/where building
is to be provided
by sponsoring authority
• KV Abroad                          :         02
• Building to be                     :        704
      constructed by KVS
5.  STA TUS OF SCHOOLS BUILDING AS ON 31.03.2006.
*Building to be constructed by KVS :  704
*KVs with permanent building 579
*KVs where building are to be
  constructed 125
*Building already under construction  63
*Balance cases for which construction
   work is yet to start. : 62
6. BREAK UP SHOWING STA TUS OF 62 CASES:
School Building under planning : 05
Allotted land under dispute/change
of land and formalities of
Lease/sanction awaited : 19
*Land yet to be identified for
  transfer to KVS : 38
TOTAL  62
Recommendation
The KVS functions through its General Body called the Sangathan and its Executive
Committee i.e. the  Board of Governors, which is headed by the Minister of HRD. The
Board is assisted by three Standing Committees constituted by it viz., the Finance
committee, the Academic Advisory Committee  and the Works Committee. The General
Body is required to meet at least once in a year and the Board of governors thrice a
year and its meetings should be preceded by the meeting of the three Standing
Committees.  The Committee are constrained to point out that the General Body had
met only during 1998-99 and 1999-2000 and thereafter no meeting was held. Similarly,
the meeting of the Board of Governors were also not being held as required and the
meetings of the Standing Committees were held even less than the number of meetings
of the Board.  Further, the meetings of the three Standing Committee were not being

50
held before the meeting of the Board of Governors.  It is also inexplicable as to why
the minutes of the meetings of the Works Committee, Finance Committee and the
Academic Advisory Committee were not placed before the Board of Governors for
confirmation.
What is surprising is the fact that the Board of Governors did not meet for about
three years after their last meeting which was held in September 2001.  It was only
when this subject was taken up for examination by the Public Accounts Committee
that the Board of Governors got activated and held meetings in October 2004 and
February, 2005.  Further, the Regional Advisory Committees, which are required to
periodically monitor the General functioning of the Vidyalaya and their academic
performance had not been constituted in eight regions.  In six regions, these Committees
had been constituted but had not held any meeting.  The Committee are thus inclined
to conclude that the Core Committees of the Sangathan as well as the Regional
Advisory Committees were virtually inactive over the years. The large shortfall in the
meetings of the Core Committees is indicative of complete lack of monitoring and
control of the Sangathan over the functioning of the Vidyalayas.  The Committee has
now been promised that the Sangathan has taken steps to ensure regular meetings of
the Core Committees as well as that of Regional Committees.  They hope that the
Ministry of HRD would take suitable steps to ensure that all Committees constituted
by the Sangathan remain active with a view to exercising proper control and monitoring
over implementation of the Sangathan’s academic and organizational activities.
[Sl. No. 21, Appendix II, Para 107 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC
 (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per Rule 12 of the Memorandum of Association, the meeting of the KVS shall
be held at such time, date and place as may be determined by the Chairman to consider
the Annual Report(including Annual Accounts) of the Sangathan.  As per Rule 29 of
the MOA, the Board shall meet whenever the Chairman thinks fit.  During the years
2000-2003 meetings of KVS and for the years, 2001-2003, the meetings of the BOG
could not be held.  Consequently, the decisions taken in the three Standing Committees
viz., the Finance Committee, the Academic Advisory Committee, and the Works
Committee could not be placed before the BOG for confirmation.
However, for the last 2 years, the meetings of the BOG are being held within
intervals of 6 months as per resolution passed in the 71st meeting of the BOG held on
4.10.2004.  The minutes of the meetings of all the standing committees held from
November, 2001 were placed before  the 72nd meeting of the BOG held on 22.2.2005
for approval of the decisions taken therein.
The Regional Advisory Committees have also been activated in all the Regional
Offices.  In the Assistant Commissioners’ Conference 2006 held from 6th to
7th February, 2006, the practical problems faced by the Assistant Commissioners in
holding these meetings of the RAC were discussed for resolving the problems so as
to hold the meetings regularly and effectively.  Also the General Body of the Sangathan
held its meeting on 22.02.2005.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES
Recommendation
With regard to provision of necessary infrastructure/facilities, the Committee note
that the scheme for construction of swimming pools and gymnasia on Build, Operate
and Transfer(BOT) basis in the premises of Kendriya Vidyalayas envisaged that
private parties  would be allowed to undertake the construction with their own funds.
The students of Kendriya Vidyalayas were to be allowed to use these facilities  during
school hours free of  charge. Thereafter, the Concessionaires will use these facilities
commercially.  The scheme further envisaged that arrangement would be there for a
period of 30 years where after all the facilities created would be transferred over to the
school.  The Committee have been informed that this scheme is being reviewed and it
has been decided that the locations where these facilities are functional, may be
allowed to function for the time being and the Principals may be asked to negotiate
with the concessionaire on individual basis to find out the modalities for terminating
the contract or reducing the period of the contract.  The Committee while appreciating
the idea behind  such public-private initiatives, desire that the Department and the
Sangathan should ensure that such well-meaning ventures do not end up in needless
controversies involving one-sided contracts.  As the agreements are being
re-negotiated and renewed, the Committee would expect the Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan to take a balanced and fair approach while negotiating with the
concessionaires, at the same time ensuring free access to these facilities by the
students of Kendriya Vidyalayas.
[Sl. No. 18, Appendix II, Para 104 of Twenty Fourth Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The whole scheme of construction of swimming pools, gymnasium and other
facilities on Build, Operate and Transfer basis is being reviewed at the highest level in
the KVS.  The opinion of the Solicitor General of India on the scheme has been
obtained and he has opined that the agreements with the private parties are void
ab-initio.  Further action as appropriate is being taken by KVS.
N
EW DELHI;     PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
19 April, 2007 Chairman,
29 Chaitra, 1929 (Saka)              Public Accounts Committee.
51

PART II
EXTRACT OF MINUTES OF THE TWENTY -FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD  ON 19TH APRIL, 2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 19th April, 2007 in Room No. "53",
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Ragunath Jha
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
9. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
52

53
Officers of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri P.K. Kataria — Pr. Director of Audit (RC)
2. Shri Nand Kishore — Pr. Director of Audit (AB)
3. Ms.Sudha Krishnan — Pr. Director of Audit (DT)
4. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director of Audit (INDT)
5. Ms.Subhashini Srinivasan — Pr. Director of Audit (Railways)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following draft
Reports:—
(A) Draft origional Reports on the following subjects:
( i ) xx xx xx
(ii) xx xx xx
(iii) xx xx xx
(B) Draft Action Taken Reports on Action Taken by the Governmnt on the
following Reports:
( i ) xx xx xx
(ii) xx xx xx
(iii) 24th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to “Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan”;
(iv) xx xx xx
The Chairman invited suggestions of the Members on the draft Reports. After
discussing the contents of the draft Reports in brief, the Committee adopted the
same.
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the light of
verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by
the Audit or otherwise and present the same to Parliament.
4. As the term of the Committee ends on 30th  April, 2007,  the Chairman apprised
the Members of the work done by the Committee in their current term. He stated that
during the present term, the Committee have finalized twenty Reports (11 Original and
9 Action Taken), out of which thirteen Reports have already been presented and the
remaining seven will be presented in the current Session of Parliament. He expressed
his thanks to all the Members for the co-operation extended by them in making this
possible and hoped that this momentum would be carried through to the next
Committee.

54
5. The Chairman specially expressed his thanks to the Members namely,
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy, Shri Madan Lal Sharma, Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
and Shri R.K. Dhawan, for their co-operation and contribution in the successful
working of the Committee. These Members will not be part of the Public Accounts
Committee in the next term beginning from 1st May, 2007.
6. On behalf of the Committee, the Chairman placed on record their appreciation
of the Officers/Staff of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the Committee for
their hard work and dedication in rendering Secretarial assistance to the Committee.
7. The Committee also expressed their thanks to the C&AG of India and his
team for providing assistance to the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STA TEMENT OF OBSERV A TIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para No. Ministry/ Department Observations/Recommendations
No.
12 3 4
1. 7 M/o Human Resource The Committee regret to note that the
Development (Department Ministry of Human Resource
of Secondary and Higher Development have not spelt out the
Education) follow-up steps taken by the Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangathan at their level to
improve standards in the schools as  a
sequel to their inspection. In this regard,
the Committee are of the view that
inspection of schools alone will not help
maintain the requisite standards. While
strengthening their administrative control
and monitoring mechanism, the Ministry
and the Sangathan should also  pay
greater attention to the aspects relating
to improvement of infrastructure facilities
and academic standards. It is thus
important in this context that issues of
functional autonomy and professional
independence of Kendriya Vidyalayas are
not lost sight of in the process of
exercising control and supervision over
the Vidyalayas.
2. 10        -do- The Committee note that the number of
schools which were running in temporary
accommodation has come down from
215 to 125 as on 31st March, 2006.  In 63
cases, school buildings are still under
construction. The Committee regret to
note that the construction work is yet to
be started in 62 Vidyalayas.   Surprisingly
out of these 62 KVs, in 38 cases even the
land has not been identified.  Further in
19 cases, allotted lands are either under
55

56
dispute or the sanctions are awaited.   This
again underlines the urgent need for
effective coordination between the
Ministry of Human Resource
Development and  concerned sponsoring
Authorities/Departments/Sangathans  to
get the land identified and transferred to
the Sangathan at the earliest. Reiterating
their earlier recommendation, the
Committee, therefore, call upon the
Ministry of Human Resource
Development to coordinate assertively
with concerned Authorities/ Departments
to expedite the process of identifying and
transferring land so that the permanent
building for the schools can be
constructed without any further delay
and all the students of Kendriya
Vidyalayas get the basic infrastructure/
amenities at the earliest.  The Committee
further desire that the Ministry of HRD
and the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
should re-focus their efforts on providing
all the essential amenities to the
Vidyalayas like laboratories, playground,
furniture, drinking water, toilets etc., and
also ensure their proper upkeep.
3 . 1 3 M/o Human With Regard  to the scheme for
Resource construction of swimming pools
Development gymnasia etc. on Build, Operate and
(Department of Transfer (BOT) basis in the premises of
Secondary and Kendriya Vidyalayas,, the Committee
Higher Education) Have been apprised that the Solicitor
General of India has opined  that the
agreements entered with the private
parties were void  ab-initio. In the light
of this opinion, the Committee would now
like the Ministry and the Kendirya
Vidyalaya Sangathan to examine and
consider the matter afresh for taking
consclusive  action in the matter. The
Committee would await Ministry’s
response in this regard.
12 3 4

57
4 . 1 6 M/o Human Despite the assurance given by the
Resource Ministry to ensure regular meetings of
Development the Sangathan and its Core
(Department of Committees as well as the Regional
Secondary and Advisory Committees, it is surprising to
Higher Education) note that the meetings of the General
body and Board of Governors were held
way back on 22nd  February, 2005 and
the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry
furnished in December, 2006 do not give
any information regarding the number of
sittings held thereafter. It is indeed a
matter of dismay as to how the Annual
Report and Annual Accounts of the
Sangathan were approved without the
meetings of the General Body/Sangathan,
although the Rules stipulate that the
meeting of the Sangathan shall be held to
consider the Annual Report and Annual
Accounts. It is inexplicable that though
on the one hand, the Ministry tried to
justify their laxity in holding the meetings
of the Sangathan and its Core Committees
by taking shelter behind the provisions
of their Memorandum of Association
(which does not specify periodicity of
meetings); on the other, they have not
been adhering to the same Memorandum
in regard to approval of Annual Reports
and Annual accounts. In view of this, the
Committee expect that the Sangathan
would hold regular meetings now onwards
as per the true spirit of their Memorandum
of Association to consider various
matters relating to the Sangathan
including approval of Accounts In this
regard, the Memorandum/ Rules may be
suitably amended by prescribing
periodicity of meetings so as to have
purposeful monitoring over the
functioning of the Vidyalayas. The
Committee would like to be apprised
about the conclusive action taken by the
Ministry in this regard.
12 3 4
MGIPMRND—2179LS(S5)—8.6.2007.