ACCELERATED POWER
DEVELOPMENT AND REFORM
PROGRAMME (APDRP)
MINISTRY OF POWER
PUBLIC   ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2008-2009
SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK   SABHA   SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
77


SEVENTY-SEVENTH  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
ACCELERATED POWER DEVELOPMENT
AND
REFORM PROGRAMME (APDRP)
MINISTRY OF POWER
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23 Oct., 2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23 Oct., 2008
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
September, 2008/ Bhadra, 1930 (Saka)


P.A.C. No. 1879
Price :  Rs. 170.00
© 2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

                                                          CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2008-09)............................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
REPORT ................................................................................................... 1
PART-I
BACKGROUND  ANALYSIS
I. I NTRODUCTORY ........................................................................................... 1
II. A CCELERATED POWER DEVELOPMENT AND REFORM PROGRAMME ................... 4
(i) Audit Examination ............................................................................. 8
(ii) Gist of Audit findings ........................................................................ 9
III. A UDIT P ARAGRAPHS
(i) Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) Losses..................... 10
(ii) Billing/Metering done on assessment basis ..................................... 12
(iii) Incorrect Reporting of Losses........................................................... 14
(iv) System and Consumer Metering ....................................................... 15
(v) Periodical checking of metering ........................................................ 16
(vi) Reliability and quality of power supply ............................................ 16
(vii) Lack of improvement in respect of Consumer Complaints................ 17
(viii) Energy Accounting and Audit .......................................................... 18
(ix) Gap between Average Revenue Realisation (ARR) and Average
Cost of Supply (ACS) not eliminated ................................................ 20
(x) Release and Utilisation of APDRP Funds—Funds not released and
monitored project-wise...................................................................... 21
(xi) Non-opening of separate accounts for APDRP funds ...................... 22
(xii) Utilisation of Funds—No requirement for statements of Expenditure
(SOEs) and  Utilization Certificates (UCs)......................................... 22
(xiii) Incorrect Reporting of Expenditure ................................................... 23
(xiv) Improper maintenance/non-availability of accounting records at State
level................................................................................................... 24
(xv) Surplus Funds ................................................................................... 24
(xvi) Diversion and Parking of Funds ........................................................ 25

(xvii) Non-release/Delayed release of Funds by States to SEBs/Utilities and
non-levy of consequent penalty ....................................................... 25
(xviii) Incentive mechanism......................................................................... 27
(xix) Incentive mechanism has not taken off ............................................. 27
(xx) Reform Measures—Non-accountability of Circles and Feeders ....... 29
(xxi) Unbundling of SEBs.......................................................................... 29
(xxii) Formation of State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC) and
Formation of  State Level Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC).... 30
(xxiii)Ineffective Vigilance and legal measures to prevent theft of energy... 30
(xxiv) Project Planning, Management and Implementation ......................... 33
(xxv) Information Technology (IT) enabling .............................................. 34
(xxvi) Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting ............................................. 35
(xxvii) Lack of direct linkage between physical and financial progress ....... 38
(xxviii) Inspection of APDRP Projects .......................................................... 38
(xxix)Monitoring by State Level Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC)... 40
(xxx) APDRP Phase-II................................................................................ 40
PART-II
RECOMMENDATIONS    AND  OBSERV ATIONS............................       43
ANNEXURES
1. Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2007-2008) held on 18th January, 2008............................................. 57
2. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2008-2009) held on 15th September, 2008 ......................................... 60
3. Copy of the entire Report of the Comptroller and  Auditor General of
India for the year ended March, 2006. ............................................... 63
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri  Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri P. S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
15. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Raashid Alvi
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Prof. P. J. Kurien
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Seventy-seventh Report relating to “Accelerated Power Development
and Reform Programme (APDRP)” on Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended
31st March, 2006 (No. 16 of 2007), Union Government (Civil—Performance Audit).
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31st March, 2006
(No. 16 of 2007), Union Government (Civil — Performance Audit) was laid on the Table
of the House on 17th  May, 2007.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Power
on the subject at their sitting held on 18th January, 2008. The Committee considered
and finalised this Report at their sitting held on 15th September, 2008.  Minutes of the
sittings form Annexures to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations and
Observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry
of Power for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing information and tendering
evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
13 October, 2008 Chairman,
21 Asvina, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

R E P O R T
PART-I
BACKGROUND  ANALYSIS
Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP)
This Report is based on the Audit review contained in Report of the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India for the year ended 31st March, 2006,
No. 16 of  2007, Union Government (Civil—Performance Audit) relating to “Accelerated
Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP)”.
I. Introductory
Power is a critical infrastructure for economic growth. The economic acceleration
would greatly depend upon a commercially viable power sector that is able to attract
fresh investments. The Government of India regards the restoration of financial viability
of the power sector as one of the foremost challenges not only for the sake of the
sector but also for the fiscal health of the State Governments and overall performance
of the economy. The Power Sector has been receiving adequate priority ever since the
process of planned development began in 1950. The Ministry of Power which started
functioning independently with effect from 2nd July, 1992 is primarily responsible for
the development of electrical energy in the country. The Ministry is concerned with
perspective planning, policy formulation, processing of projects for investment
decisions, monitoring of the implementation of power projects, training and manpower
development etc. In all technical and economic matters, Ministry of Power is assisted
by the Central Electricity Authority (CEA).
Generation and Power Supply Position
2. The overall generation in the country has increased from 264 Billion Units
(BUs) during 1990-91 to 662.52 BUs during 2006-2007. The overall generation in Public
utilities in the country from 2001-02 onwards is as under:—
Y ear Generation (BUs)
2001-02 515.2
2002-03 531.6
2003-04 558.3
2004-05 587.4
2005-06 617.5
2006-07 662.52
2007-08 586.00
1

2
Power Supply Position
3. The Power supply position from 2001-02 onwards is as under:—
Y ear Energy Energy Energy Energy
Requirement availability shortage shortage
(MU)  (MU) (MU) (%)
2001-02 522537 483350 39187 7.5
2002-03 545983 497890 48093 8.8
2003-04 559264 519398 39866 7.1
2004-05 591373 548115 43258 7.3
2005-06 631554 578819 52735 8.4
2006-07 690587 624495 66092 9.6
2007-08 608804 554248 54556 9.0
Peak Demand
4. Shortfalls in electricity supply and power cuts remain a problem in many areas
of India. Increase in capacity, through additional generation, transmission and
distribution facilities, continue to lag behind growth in demand. The position of peak
demand and supply during the period 2001-02 to 2007-08 is as follows:—
Y ear Peak Peak Peak Peak
demand Met shortage shortage
(MW)  (MW) (MW) (%)
2001-02 78441 69189 9252 11.8
2002-03 81492 71547 9945 12.2
2003-04 84574 75066 9508 11.2
2004-05 87906 77652 10254 11.7
2005-06 93255 81792 11463 12.3
2006-07 100715 86818 13897 13.8
2007-08 107010 90793 16217 15.2
Capacity Addition
5. While shortages are presently being experienced by each region, it is much
more acute in the case of some regions and a large number of states are affected.
Substantial capacity is, therefore, added to the Indian Power System. The growth
targets for generation capacity in Power sector are set out by the Central Electricity
Authority in a series of Five  Year Plans. The target fixed for capacity addition in

3
Central, State and private sectors and the likely achievement thereof during 10th Five
Year Plan is as given below:—
(All Figures in MW)
Sector Hydro Thermal Nuclear T otal
Target Likely Target Likely Target Likely Target Likely
fixed achieve- fixed achieve- fixed achieve- fixed achieve-
ment ment ment ment
Central 8742 4495 12790 7830 1300 1400 22832 13725
State 4481 2991 6676 4604 0 0 11157 7595
Private 1170 700 5951 1230 0 0 7121 1930
Total 14393 8186 25417 13664 1300 1400 41110 23250
6. The achievement of the Ministry vis-à-vis the targets during the 8th , 9th and
10th Plans is, however, as follows:—
(in MW)
Plan wise Target Actual Percentage
8th 30538 16423 (54%)
9th 40245 19015 (47%)
10th 41110 23250 (56%)
(likely)
7. It would reveal from the above figures that as against the target of 41110 MW
fixed for the 10th Plan only 23250 MW (56%  of the target) has been achieved. The
reasons for shortfall in achieving 10th plan targets are as follows:—
(i) Delay in technology tie-ups.
(ii) Pre-implementation stage delay —
(a) Delay in award of works.
(b) Projects not taken up/financial closure not achieved/funds not tied up.
(c) Delay in project clearance/investment decision.
(iii) Delay during implementation by suppliers/contracting agencies.
(iv) Reasons beyond control of project authorities—
(a) Delay in environmental clearance/geological surprises/ R&R/ litigation.
(b) Law and order problems.
(v) Non-availability of gas.
(vi) Nuclear projects identified.
(vii) Adjustment due to change of size of units.

4
Capacity Addition Programme in the 11th Plan
8. The National Electricity Policy (NEP) envisages demand for power to be fully
met by 2012 and energy and peaking shortages to be overcome. This entails provision
of adequate reliable power, at affordable cost with access to all citizens. To fulfil the
objectives of the NEP, a capacity addition of 78,577 MW has been proposed for the
11th Plan. This capacity addition is expected to provide a growth of 9.5% to the power
sector.
9. The capacity addition programme is being continuously kept under watch by
the Central Government in consultation with the State Governments. A number of
specific action points have been identified to achieve this extremely large capacity
addition programme. All out efforts are being made to complete the ordering of the
projects, wherever it is yet to be done so as to achieve the 11th Plan Target.
II. Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme
10. The Ministry of Power has already initiated several measures towards reforms
and other policy measures for helping the State power utilities to bring improvement in
their efficiency towards bringing about commercial viability in the power sector. Some
of the major initiatives were establishment of regulatory mechanism at Central and
State  level, restructuring of the State power utilities, metering of feeders and consumers,
energy accounting and auditing etc.
11. Due to the inability of State power utilities to systematically fund essential
activities relating to the upgradation of the sub-transmission and distribution system
and renovation and modernisation of old plants, developmental activities in the power
sector had not taken place in an organised and comprehensive manner, resulting in
shortages, poor quality of supply and frequent interruptions. The commercial losses
of the State Electricity Boards had been escalating. In order to address these issues,
the Government of India (GoI), in February 2001, launched the Accelerated Power
Development Programme (APDP).
The APDP was formulated to finance specific projects relating to:—
/circle6Renovation and Modernisation (R&M)/life extension/uprating of old power
plants (thermal and hydel); and
/circle6Upgrading and strengthening of sub-transmission and distribution network
(below 33KV or 66 KV), including energy accounting and metering in the
distribution circles in a phased manner.
Of this, the upgradation of sub-transmission and distribution network was considered
most important component of the APDP. This programme was to continue till the end
of the 11th Five Year Plan i.e. 2012. An amount of Rs. 1000 crore was budgeted as APDP
funds among the States in 2000-01 for various schemes under the above categories.
12. Since the implementation of APDP has several shortcomings GoI decided to
restructure the concept of APDP from merely an investment window to also a mechanism
for supporting power sector reforms in the States linked to the fulfilment of performance
criteria by way of benchmarks. To “incentives” the reform process, it was proposed to

5
reward the actual improvement in the performance of the utilities by way of reduction
in commercial losses and increased revenue realisation. Therefore, APDP was renamed
as “Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme” (APDRP) in the Union
Budget 2002-03.
13. The Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP) was
launched, with the primary objective of reduction in the Aggregate Technical and
Commercial Losses and significant improvement in revenue realisation by the State
Utilities, in 2002-03 as additional Central Assistance to finance projects relating to the
upgradation of sub-transmission and distribution network and renovation and
modernization of old plants, developmental activities in the power sector. The
Government of India approved Additional Central Assistance of Rs. 40,000 crore during
10 Plan under APDRP, out of which Rs. 20,000 crore was towards Investment component
(Grant + Loan), and Rs. 20,000 crore (Grant) under Incentive component.  As of
March 2006, the Ministry had released a total amount of Rs. 6131.70 crore on
583 projects involving a  total project cost of  Rs. 19180.46 crore, of which the reported
utilization was Rs. 9507.20 crore (including counter part funding).
Organisational set-up for APDRP
/circle6At the Central level, the Distribution Division in the Ministry of Power (MoP),
under the overall charge of the Joint Secretary, is responsible for release of
funds, approval of projects, signing of Memoranda of Agreement (MoA),
monitoring, processing of incentive claims etc.
/circle6In addition, a  Steering Committee, chaired by Secretary (Power) and comprising
members from the Central Electricity Authority (CEA), Ministry of Finance
(MoF), Planning Commission, National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC),
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (PowerGrid), Power Finance
Corporation (PFC) and Rural Electrification Corporation (REC), has been
constituted to consider the proposals under APDRP and to review the
implementation of the programme.
/circle6NTPC and Power Grid have been designated as the Lead Advisor-cum-
Consultants (Lead AcCs).
/circle6At the State level, the projects sanctioned under APDRP are implemented by
the State Electricity Boards (SEBs)/State Utilities/State Electricity Departments
(SEDs).
Aims and Objectives of APDRP
14. The main aims and objectives behind the initiation of the programme, are as
follows:—
(a) Reduction of AT&C losses from the existing around 60% to around 15% in
five years to begin within the urban areas and high density/consumption
areas.
(b) Significant improvement in revenue realization by reduction in commercial
losses leading to additional realization of an additional Rs. 20,000 crore
approximately over a period of 4-5 years.

6
(c) Reduction of technical losses would result in additional energy of nearly
6,000 – 7,000 MW to the system, avoiding the need of 9,000 to 11,000 MW of
fresh capacity addition besides avoiding investments to the tune of Rs. 40,000
to Rs. 60,000 crore.
(d) Quality of supply and reliable, interruption-free power will encourage usage
of energy efficient equipments/appliances, which will further lead to
improvement in availability of energy.
(e) Reduction in cash losses on a permanent basis to the tune of Rs.15,000 crore.
(f) Distribution reform will help States to avoid heavy subsidies, which are given
to SEBs/State Utilities by State Governments.  They would be able to invest
this amount for providing basic services like Health, Education, and Drinking
Water etc.
APDRP Components
15. The programme has two components:—
(A) An investment component for strengthening and upgradation of the sub-
transmission and distribution system; and
(B) An incentive component to motivate Utilities to reduce cash losses.
Details of these components are given below:—
A. Investment Component
16. Under this component, network strengthening works were to be financed in
a ratio of 25:25:50 (25% grant and 25% loan from Government of India, and 50% loan
from financial institutions). For special category States, financing was in a ratio of
90:10 (90% grant and 10% loan from Government of India). From 2005-06 onwards, on
the recommendation of the 12th Finance Commission, the loan component from GoI
was withdrawn, making it a 25:75 scheme for non-special category States. The allocation
of funds to the States was not based on State quota but on the basis of their
preparedness towards reforms, preparation of projects and their implementation.
B. Incentive Component
17. Incentive in the form of grant was to be paid to Utilities, which actually
reduced their cash losses. With 2000-01 as the base year, 50% of the amount by which
a Utility was able to reduce its cash losses was to be paid as incentive. It was felt
essential to integrate the investment programme in the distribution segment with an
incentive mechanism linked to efficiency improvement. It was envisaged that it will
help the Utilities to bring about commercial viability through improvement in billing
and collection efficiency, which were considerably low at the time of introduction of
the programme.

7
Funding Mechanism
Non-Special Category States
/circle625% of the project cost is met by GoI in form of grant.
/circle6Remaining 75% is met by the Utility in form of counterpart funding from
PFC/REC or other FIs.
Special Category States
/circle690% cost of the projects is met by GoI in form of grant.
/circle6Remaining 10% is met by the Utility in form of c/part funding from PFC/REC
or other FIs.
/circle6The States of J&K, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Uttaranchal and constitutent
States of NER fall under this category.
/circle6GoI provided 25% loan to non-special category and 10% to special category
States upto 2004-05. It was discontinued after that on recommendations of
12th Finance Commission.
Conditions for availing benefits under APDRP
Memoranda of Understandings (MoUs)
18. As part of the six-level strategy, at the State level, the MoP insisted on
signing of MoUs covering the following major reforms:—
/circle6Setting up of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs);
/circle6Restructuring of SEBs, viz. unbundling into separate entities for generation,
transmission and distribution and corporatisation of unbundled entities;
/circle6Removing cross subsidies and tariff anomalies, and providing budgetary
support to SEBs towards subsidies;
/circle6Introduce private participation in generation, transmission and distribution;
/circle6Filing of first tariff petition by SEB/ Utility with SERC, and implementation of
tariff orders of the SERC; and
/circle6Securitisation of dues of Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) to the
SEBs/ Utilities
Memoranda of Agreements (MoAs)
19. In order to enable the SEBs/Utilities to manage distribution on a profit centre
approach and to improve their performance on the basis of certain benchmarks, the
signing of a Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) by them with the MoP for power
reforms was made a pre-requisite for release of funds under APDRP. The key reforms
envisaged through the MoA were as follows:—
/circle6100 per cent metering for each 11 KV feeder and also for consumers;

8
/circle6Energy accounting and audit;
/circle6Distribution Circles to be operated as independent profit centres with adequate
delegation of powers, with the Superintending Engineer as the Circle Chief
Executive Officer (CEO);
/circle611 KV feeders to be operated as business units, with the Junior Engineer as
the feeder manager; and
/circle6Turnkey contracting system to be adopted by the SEBs/Utilities.
Procedure for Sanction, Implementation and Monitoring
20. In brief, the procedure for sanction and implementation of projects under
APDRP is as follows:—
/circle6SEBs/Utilities prepare Detailed Project Reports (DPRs),  containing the
activities to be implemented by the utilities, which are submitted to the AcCs.
/circle6The DPRs are scrutinized and vetted by the AcCs, and submitted to the MoP
for the consideration of the APDRP Steering Committee.
/circle6After the proposal is approved by the Steering Committee, the MoP approaches
the MoF for release of funds.
/circle6MoF releases funds to the States. SEBs/Utilities obtain counterpart funds
from Financial Institutions and open escrow account.
/circle6SEBs / Utilities take up the tendering process and award contracts.
/circle6Monitoring of the programme is done by MoP, Lead AcCs/local AcCs, State
level/ District level Distribution Reforms Committees.
(i)  Audit Examination
21. A performance audit of APDRP, covering the period from 2002-2003 to
2005-2006, was taken up with the objectives of assessing whether:—
/circle6The intended objectives of APDRP viz. reduction in AT&C losses, 100 per
cent system and consumer metering, improvement in quality and reliability of
power supply, energy accounting and audit, and reduction in the gap between
Average Revenue Realisation (ARR) and Average Cost of Supply (ACS)
have been effectively achieved.
/circle6There was adequate and effective control over the release and utilisation of
APDRP funds.
/circle6The incentive mechanism envisaged under APDRP has been successfully
implemented.
/circle6The reforms sought to be achieved through the MoUs and MoAs with the
State Governments and SEBs/Utilities has been effectively implemented.
/circle6The process for planning, implementation of APDRP was adequate and
effective, and the projects were executed economically and efficiently.

9
/circle6Information Technology (IT) applications and Computer Aided Tools were
effectively implemented for improving distribution performance.
/circle6There was a system of adequate monitoring to evaluate the programme and
take corrective steps.
22. For this purpose, Audit selected a sample of 294 projects in 29 States/UTs
having a total approved cost of Rs. 10255.21 crore for detailed examination. Audit has
reviewed the performance of APDRP with t he objectives of assessing whether the
intended objectives of APDRP have been effectively achieved. The process for planning,
implementation of APDRP was adequate and effective, and the projects were executed
economically and efficiently etc.
(ii)  Gist of Audit Findings
23. The Audit have noticed the following significant weaknesses in the project
planning, management and  implementation process of APDRP:—
/circle6The primary objective of APDRP of reducing Aggregate Technical and
Commercial Loss (AT&C Loss) by 9 per cent per annum was not achieved, as
the reduction between 2001-02 and 2004-05 was just 1.68 per cent per annum.
/circle6The progress in metering of Distribution Transformers (DTs), was not adequate
as only 3 States had shown 80 to 100 per cent metering.
/circle6The number of feeder trippings and duration of outage, as well as failure rate
of DTs, was much higher than permissible in most States.
/circle6Effective energy accounting and auditing had not been possible in most
States, primarily due to lack of 100 per cent system metering, lack of
accountability at the circle and feeder levels, and inadequate computerisation.
/circle6Only 3 out of 29 States had achieved the target of elimination of the gap
between Average Revenue Realization (ARR) and Average Cost of Supply
(ACS) and in fact, in 8 States, this gap had shown a deteriorating trend.
/circle617 out of 29 States either did not operate separate account heads and bank
accounts for APDRP funds, or did not operate them correctly.
/circle6Audit of 294 projects involving utilisation of funds revealed instances of
incorrect financial reporting amounting to Rs. 676.09 crore.
/circle6There were instances of diversion of funds amounting to Rs. 181.78 crore by
10 States for unauthorised purposes, and diversion of Rs. 432.23 crore by
7 States for adjustment against various dues of the Utilities.
/circle6As of March 2006, three States did not return surplus funds amounting to
Rs. 51.07 crore, while eight States failed to release Rs. 412.03 crore  of APDRP
funds to the SEBs/Utilities.
/circle6The percentage of registering theft cases was low ranging between 0.28 per
cent to 14.08 per cent, and the percentage of conviction was even lower,
ranging between zero and 10.61 per cent.

10
/circle6Most SEBs/Utilities had not adopted turnkey contracting, and had executed
the works departmentally or on semi-turnkey basis.
/circle6There was lack of direct linkage between physical and financial progress of
APDRP projects at the Ministry’s level. The mechanism for inspection of
APDRP implementation was inadequate.
24. Deposing before the Committee during evidence, the Secretary Ministry of
Power conceded that there were some drawbacks in the formulation of the scheme.
The Committee have examined in detail the various issues raised by the Audit in their
Report. The same have been discussed in detail in the succeeding paragraphs.
III. Audit Paragraphs
(i) Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) Losses
25. AT&C Loss is considered a clearer measure of the overall efficiency of power
distribution, since it measures technical and commercial losses.
AT&C Loss is calculated as
(Energy Input – Energy Realised) /x1100
Energy Input
Where
Energy Realised  =  Energy Billed x Collection Efficiency, and
Collection Efficiency = 
Amount Realised/x1 100
Amount Billed
26. While launching APDRP in March 2003, it was envisaged that AT&C Losses
would be brought down from the existing level of about 60 per cent to around 15 per
cent in five years, to begin with in the urban areas and high density/consumption
areas. This implied that reduction of AT&C Loss @ 9 per cent per annum was targeted.
27. Audit analysis of the State-wise A T&C Loss for the years 2001-02 and 2005-
06, revealed that it was still very high, and ranged between 15.86 per cent in Goa and
72.74 per cent in Mizoram. Except in the States of Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil
Nadu, the A T&C Losses continued to be very high in other States. The reduction in
A T&C Loss in most States was marginal. Thus, the primary objective of APDRP of
reducing AT&C Loss by 9 per cent per annum had not been achieved.
28. As per the data compiled by the Ministry, AT&C Loss at the national level
came down from 38.86 per cent in 2001-02 to 33.82 per cent in 2004-05. The reduction in
A T&C Loss of 5.04 per cent during three years implied a reduction of 1.68 per cent per
annum against the target of 9 per cent per annum. As per the report, AT&C Loss had,
in fact, gone up between 2001-02 and 2004-05 in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Assam,

11
Manipur, Meghalaya, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala and Pondicherry. The region-wise
position of AT&C Loss, as per the report, was as follows:—
Region-wise position of AT&C losses (in per cent)
Region 2001-02 2004-05
East 47.34 44.85
North-East 40.65 41.59
North 46.01 40.64
South 27.63 23.81
West 39.60 32.73
29. To a query of the Committee as to how do the Ministry plan to achieve the
targeted reduction of A T&C losses at 9 per cent per annum the Ministry of Power
replied as under:—
“The losses in any system would, however, depend on the pattern of energy
use, intensity of load demand, load density, and capability and configuration of
the transmission and distribution system that vary for various system elements.
However, taking into consideration the Indian conditions such as development
in the transmission and distribution sector to far flung rural areas, quality of
T&D equipment and meters available in the country, maintenance practices,
configuration of system, its spatial jurisdiction, nature of loads etc., it would be
reasonable to aim for the energy losses between 10 – 15 % in different States.
The Ministry plans to target 15% A T&C in the urban areas and high density/
consumption areas.”
30. When asked about the formulation of any base line data on the basis of
which Ministry of Power envisaged that AT&C losses would be brought down from 60
percent to around 15 percent in 5 years, the Ministry informed that no base line data
was available and it is being proposed to establish base line data system under Part-A
of the re-structured APDRP for 11th Plan. Once baseline data is established and verified
by independent agency, 15% AT&C loss in the project area shall be targeted through
system strengthening projects under Part-B.
31. In response to the Committee’s query about the Ministry’s current projected
time frame for achievement of AT&C loss of 15 percent nationally, the Ministry replied
that the target is to achieve 15% A T&C loss in the project area by the end of the 11th
Plan. According to the Ministry of Power, since it is proposed to include rural areas
also under APDRP, the extent of implementation in a state depends on the concerned
State Government Utilities.
32. In connection with the achievement of AT&C loss of 15 percent, the Secretary
MoP deposed before the Committee during evidence that:—
“This 15 percent reduction may not be possible across the country. But
at least in areas where the APDRP programme is going to be implemented, we

12
expect that this should be the expected baseline level. The performance in
some of the States have been patchy according to the varied levels of
administration and superintendence, while some States have, by and large,
confirmed to the form that is required of that, the content and the spirit
certainly found missing.”
33. As regards the steps taken to ensure that the States re-orient their efforts
under APDRP towards reduction of AT&C losses, the Ministry replied that:
“The APDRP in XI Plan is being revised as Centrally sponsored scheme. In
the revised APDRP, it is proposed to establish the system for base line data
and IT applications for energy accounting/auditing first under the Part – A
shall be in the form of loan. The loan shall be converted into grant once the
establishment of the required system is achieved and verified by an
independent agency, and the target of 15% A T&C loss in project area is
attained. The system strengthening & up-gradation projects shall be taken
up under the Part-B of the programme. Funds for Part-B shall also be provided
initially as loan. Conversion of 50% (90% for special category States) of loan
to grant will take place on achieving State-specific milestones of the second
phase of reforms and on reaching and maintaining the target of 15% AT&C
losses in the programme areas. Conversion of loan to grant will take place in
five equal annual tranches on third-party verification that the A T&C losses
continue to be below 15% in each of the five years. Any slippage in a particular
year will disqualify the Utility from conversion of that year’s tranche into
grant.”
(ii) Billing/Metering done on assessment basis
34. Audit Paragraph revealed that despite the stated objectives of 100 per cent
system metering as well as consumer metering, a significant number of installations
remained unmetered, and the computation of energy consumed was made on
“assessment” basis, consequently adversely affecting the veracity of the source data
for computation of AT&C loss.
Audit examination at the State level revealed the following:—
/circle6In Kerala, the energy metered and billed included the unmetered energy
consumption under ‘Kutir Jyothi Scheme’ and public lighting taken on
assessment basis.
/circle6In Jharkhand, unmetered supply, in four sampled circles, ranged between
67.8 per cent and 39.93 per cent of total energy, as stated by the SEB. However,
the basis of calculation of unmetered supply was not made available and thus
the estimation of unmetered energy was purely a hypothetical exercise.
/circle6In Uttaranchal, test check of records revealed that in four implementing units
in Haldwani, Roorkee, Ranikhet and Srinagar Circles, billing continued to be
made for ‘Public Lamps’ and ‘Public Water Works’ on assessment basis in the
absence of metering details.

13
/circle6In Karnataka, even after four years of signing of MOA, large numbers of
installations were yet to be metered (March 2006). As against 10,59,366
Irrigation Pumpsets (IP sets), 4,41,843 Bhagya Jyothi (BJ)/ Kutir Jyothi (KJ)
installations, and 26,570 street lights where meters were to be fixed as on
31 March 2005, only 98,892 IP sets (9.3 per cent), 2,14,067 BJ/KJ installations
(48 per cent) and 11,918 street lights (44 per cent) could be metered.
/circle6In Tripura, a fair amount of supplied energy was not metered but accounted
for on the basis of assessment. During 2005-06 about 10-14 per cent of the
energy billed was unmetered and was being accounted for on the basis of
assessment. There were no prescribed norms for assessment of unmetered
consumers. The criteria for assessment was not uniform among various billing
authorities (average for last three months,  connective load, minimum charge
or even lump sum), which was bound to be deficient in correct and accurate
assessment of losses.
35. Replying to a query as to whether the Ministry have ascertained the reasons
from the SEBs for resorting to billing/metering done only on assessment basis, they
stated that billing/metering of electrical energy is the responsibility of State power
Utilities. Ministry of Power has not ascertained the reasons from SEBs for resorting to
billing/metering on assessment basis. However, SEBs resort to billing/metering on
assessment basis either due to non-availability of metering or defective/damaged
metering system.
36. As regards the steps taken by the Ministry to minimize the extent of billing on
assessment basis, so as to improve the authenticity of AT&C loss data, the Committee
have been informed:
“Billing on assessment basis can be minimized only with the improvement in
metering of all segments of consumers. Under 5.55 of Electricity Act 2003,
metering has been made mandatory after two years from the approved date
(i.e. after 9th June 2005) except if this period is extended by the SERC.  In the
proposed APDRP Phase II, power Utilities shall establish reliable and
automated systems for sustained collection of accurate base line data through
Automatic Meter Reading (AMR) on feeders & DTs and IT adopted energy
accounting system first under the Part-A of the project. The loan for
establishing the Base-line Data System shall be converted into grant only
after verification by an independent agency.”
37. On being asked as to how the Ministry ensure 100 per cent feeder, DT and
consumer metering, they stated in a written note as under:—
“Metering of Distribution Transformers was not targeted earlier under APDRP
as it was envisaged to carry out energy accounting & auditing at 11 KV
feeder level.  However, subsequently, it was felt that for fixing accountability
at the lowest level, energy auditing at DT level will be better.  Therefore,
monitoring of metering at DT level was started in 2004-05.  It is proposed to
give high priority to DT metering during XI Plan. Under the proposed APDRP
II, automated IT enabled energy accounting systems based on DT metering
will be encouraged in big way.”

14
38. Audit also highlighted that there were no prescribed norms for assessment of
unmetered consumers and the criteria for assessment was not uniform among various
billing authorities.
39. The Committee desired to know as to whether any attempt has been made to
make the assessment procedure uniform among various billing authorities. In view of
this, the Ministry of Power stated that there has not been any attempt to make the
assessment procedure uniform.
(iii) Incorrect Reporting of Losses
40. Audit examination revealed significant instances of incorrect reporting of
AT&C losses by the States/ Utilities, which were not detected by MoP due to lack of
verification and validation of compiled data as detailed below:—
/circle6In Kerala, the AT&C losses reported to MoP for the year 2005-06 were less
than the actual A T&C losses, with the difference in the figures ranging between
2 to 24 per cent in respect of 9 projects.
/circle6In Chhattisgarh, the details of A T&C loss of the State reported to ACCs/
Ministry by the SEB, and those furnished to the State Electricity Regulatory
Commission (SERC) were inconsistent for the period 2001-02 to 2004-05.
/circle6In Arunachal Pradesh, the figures of A T&C losses for the years 2002-06 with
the State Electricity Department (SED) and Power  Grid were not in agreement,
and the figures reported by the SED were higher by 2 to 9 per cent.
/circle6The collection efficiency is to be worked out as a percentage of the amount
realized against amount billed. However, it was observed in Kerala (10 divisions),
Maharashtra (one division) and Meghalaya that the amount billed as
generated by the computerized billing system did not include arrears, while
the amount realized included the arrears. The above inaccuracy in calculating
the collection efficiency results in lowering the AT&C loss percentage.
/circle6In West Bengal, the SEB (eight selected circles/towns) had not disclosed
AT&C losses aggregating to Rs. 25 crore to the GoI during 2005-06. Against
the actual AT&C losses of 552.87 million Kilowatt Hours (Kwh), it had reported
only 474.18 million Kwh to the GoI.
/circle6Due to incorrect reporting of energy billed in respect of 5 sampled circles in
Himachal Pradesh, the AT&C losses as reported by the Circles to the SEB and
as reported by the SEB to the MoP for the years 2002-03 to 2005-06 were not
in agreement, with the differences ranging between 6 and 33 per cent.
/circle6In Madhya Pradesh, the figures relating to Energy Input, Energy Metered,
Energy Billed, Revenue Billed and Revenue Collected furnished to NTPC
(ACC) by the SEB varied from those received from the field offices in respect
of 3 towns (Chhatarpur, Damoh and Balaghat).

15
41. When enquired as to whether any study has been conducted regarding
incorrect reporting of losses, the Ministry stated that they have not conducted any
study in this regard. Loss data reported by States are scrutinized by ACCs before the
same are compiled at Ministry.
42. Informing about the measures taken to streamline the procedures so as to
make verification and validation of compiled data fool proof, the Ministry of Power
inter-alia stated as under:—
“The physical verification & validation of data can be done on sample basis
for very few scheme areas. Information Technology could play a major role to
make collection of base line data reliable and verifiable. Ministry of Power in
the next phase of APDRP is considering creation of IT based system which
will collect all meter information through automatic system without manual
intervention. The basic business processes of the Utility will also be IT
enabled and all customers of the Utility will be indexed and mapped to the
distribution assets. This will enable to create reliable baseline data without
human intervention. The system after completion will be verified by third
party evaluator and they will certify the creation of reliable baseline data.’’
(iv) System and Consumer Metering
43. Audit review indicated that the progress in metering of DTs, which is an
essential tool to control A T&C losses, was not adequate as only 3 States had shown
80 to 100 per cent metering. As regards feeder and consumer metering, despite the
Ministry’s reports showing a high percentage of metering in most States, audit
examination at the State level showed significant deficiencies, in addition to misreporting
of data on installation of meters.
44. While offering their comments on the Audit Observation that only three
States had shown 80 to 100 percent metering, the Ministry of Power stated:—
“The progress of DT metering is indeed not up to the expected level mainly
due to reluctance from the middle level executive citing the reason of increase
in meter reading load which they are unable to manage even for the existing
customers. As AMR system has not developed in the country at the initial
stage of APDRP due to interoperability issues of different meters and
penetration of GSM/ CDMA network for collecting meter data mainly from
the DT meters. However it is expected the interoperability issues are likely to
be resolved as meter manufacturers are likely to agree for sharing of protocol
with Utilities and converting of meter data into common format and also at
present the telecommunication network has spread to entire country and
communication cost has also decreased drastically which will support AMR
program for system meters as envisaged in proposal of 11th plan APDRP.”
45. While giving justification for high percentage of feeder and consumer metering
in most States when there are significant deficiencies, in addition to misreporting of
data on installation of meters, the MoP stated that due to dynamic nature of the
business the percentage completion as reported by ministry and the same verified in

16
the field may vary. Moreover meters removed due to errors or defect are not reported
to MoP. The Utilities will be forced to install and maintain the system meters due to
performance base conditionality for converting loan to grant  as proposed for 11th
plan APDRP.  As AT&C loss to be brought down to the desired level, the Utilities has
to improve consumer metering status as well.
(v) Periodical checking of metering
46. The purpose of installation of meters would be served only if the SEB/ Utility
conducted checks as per the prescribed periodicity to verify that the installed meters
were not being tampered with and were working efficiently. Audit examination, however,
revealed that in Jharkhand, Punjab, Assam, West Bengal, Karnataka, Haryana and
Manipur, periodical checking of meters was not a regular feature and the shortfall in
checking of meters in these States ranged between 13 and 96 per cent during 2005-06.
47. On being asked as to whether the Ministry have sought explanation from the
concerned States for not conducting periodical checking of meters, the MoP replied:—
“Ministry has not sought any direct explanation from the concerned States
for not conducting periodical checking of meters. However, Ministry has
been insisting/advising all States through signing of MOA under APDRP;
review meetings taken by Ministry with State officials; formal interactions of
ACCs with State officials to carry out periodical energy accounting and
auditing to pin point / analyse reasons of the A T&C loss so that the corrective
actions can be taken by them for reducing the same. One of the corrective
measures is the checking of meters and replacement / rectification of defective
meters.’’
(vi) Reliability and quality of power supply
48. One of the expected benefits of APDRP was improved quality and reliability
of power supply, which would encourage usage of energy efficient equipment/
appliances, which would further lead to improvement in availability of energy. The key
performance parameters for quality and reliability were:—
/circle6Frequency of feeder tripping (number of trippings per feeder per month), and
average duration of feeder outages (average outage duration per feeder per
month);
/circle6Failure rate of DTs;
/circle6Average Power Factor; and
/circle6Consumer Complaints and Disposal Time.
49. Audit scrutiny highlighted significant deficiencies in the quality and reliability
of power supply. The number of feeder trippings and duration of outage, as well as
failure rate of Distribution Transformers, was much higher than permissible in most
States.
50. While spelling out their views in regard to the deficiencies in the quality and
reliability of power supply, the MoP in their written note submitted to the Committee,

17
stated that it was due to deficiencies in the quality and reliability of Power supply, old
and overloaded distribution systems, lack of proper maintenance of distribution system,
no proper MIS etc.
51.On being asked as to why the cases pointed out by the Audit were not
noticed by the Internal Audit Wing, the MoP stated in a note that no Audit has been
carried out by the Internal Audit wing. However, ACCs appointed by the Ministry
have pointed out the similar cases during their random field inspections in the States.
(vii) Lack of improvement in respect of Consumer Complaints
52.Reduction in the number of consumer complaints is one of the benchmarks
for improved quality and reliability of power supply. This, coupled with effective
redressal of complaints, would reflect better customer satisfaction.
53.Audit examination however revealed significant deficiencies in this area, as
summarized below:—
/circle6In Chhattisgarh, the DPRs provided for establishment of 26 consumer
complaint centres at a cost of Rs 0.59 crore in all the APDRP circles and
towns. However, it was observed in audit that the SEB had not taken up this
work as of September 2006.
/circle6In Tamil Nadu, there was a significant increase in the number of consumer
complaints in 2005-06 as compared to pre-APDRP levels in 2001-02, in respect
of Chennai Metro circle and it increased from 44,798 (2001-02) to 99,807
(2005-06).
/circle6A system for recording consumer complaints, and recording of corrective
and preventive actions was not developed in Assam.
/circle6In West Bengal, the number of consumer complaints in 8 selected projects
was 3,181 against the target of  2,349 during 2005-06.
/circle6In Gujarat, in three projects (Baroda, Himmatnagar and Surat) out of the
selected five projects, the number of consumer complaints received during
2002-06 was 81,254, 30,000 and 1,12,130 against the target of 70,000, 45,000
and 1,25,000 respectively.
/circle6In Andhra Pradesh, there was only 13 percent and 70 percent reduction in
consumer complaints as against the targets of 50 percent and 85 percent in
Tirupati and Warangal Circles respectively.
54.While furnishing details of the system prevailing in the Ministry/States to
promptly attend to and redress the complaints of the consumers, the MoP stated as
under:—
“Section 42 of the Electricity Act 2003 provides for establishment of a forum
for redressal of grievances of the consumers in accordance with the guidelines
as may be specified by the State Commission. Any consumer, who is aggrieved
by non-redressal of his grievance has also the option to represent his
grievance to an authority known as Ombudsman, who shall settle the

18
grievance of the consumer within such time and in such manner as may be
specified by the State Commission.
Further, State Power Utilities have been advised to establish consumer care
centres for addressing consumer grievances / complaints related to no supply,
metering, billing, payments, delay in new connections etc.  Utilities in the
State of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh,
Karnataka, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Assam, Punjab, Rajasthan,
Jharkhand, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Tripura & West Bengal
have established customer care centres in their select towns.’’
55.The Committee sought to know the reasons for increase in the number of
consumer complaints. The MoP in their written submission stated:—
“With the increase in consumer base, improved procedures for receiving the
complaints at customer care centres and mass awareness about the customer
care centres, number of registered complaints may have increased but at the
same time complaints are being attended more effectively and promptly.’’
(viii) Energy Accounting and Audit
56.One of the most important measures to ensure reduction of commercial losses,
with relatively lower capital investment, is comprehensive energy accounting and
audit, which would enable quantification of losses in different segments of the system
and their segregation into commercial and technical losses.
57.Energy accounting involves preparation of accounts of the energy flow to
various segments and various categories of consumers and how it has been consumed
out of the total available quantum over a specified time period. Energy audit involves
analysis of energy accounting data in a meaningful manner to evolve measures to
introduce checks and balances in the system to reduce leakages and losses and also to
improve technical performance. In order to achieve effective energy accounting and
audit, it is imperative that meters are installed at all levels  i.e. feeder, distribution
transformers and consumers, meter readings are taken regularly and reconciled, and
proper consumer indexing is done through GIS mapping and linked to the billing
system so that loss pockets are identified and corrective measures taken.
58.Audit, however, observed that effective energy accounting and auditing was
not being carried out in the States. Effective energy accounting and auditing had not
been possible in most States, primarily due to lack of 100 percent system metering, lack
of accountability at the circle and feeder levels and inadequate computerization.
59.The Committee desired to know about the steps taken to ensure that States
carry out effective energy accounting & Auditing at the feeder and DT level and that
necessary pre-requisites for such auditing and accounting viz. 100 per. cent system &
consumer metering, regular/automatic system for meter reading, reconciliation consumer
indexing and other IT related activities are put in place, the Ministry informed as under:—
“The Utilities were to carry out energy accounting and auditing at 11 kv
feeder level after installing meters on all the feeders and consumers. Energy

19
accounting in APDRP towns have been started by most of the Utilities.
However, for effective energy audits, it has been felt that consumer indexing
and DT metering will be required. The work has been taken up subsequently
by some of the Utilities. Keeping in view the poor progress by Utilities in this
area, the Ministry is proposing highest importance to the energy auditing
during XI Plan. Investment under APDRP during XI Plan (except works
required for effective energy audit) will not be allowed before establishment
of energy audit procedures and validation of base-line data in APDRP covered
towns.’’
60.The Committee further sought to know as to whether the cases of lack of
100 percent system metering, lack of accountability at the circle and feeder levels and
inadequate computerization have been examined by the Ministry in consultation with
concerned States. The MoP stated in a note that these issues are discussed/consulted
regularly with State power Utilities in various review meetings taken by the Ministry
officials / ACCs.
61.As regards the steps taken to improve the system metering and to maintain
linkages between feeder, DT and consumer metering, the Ministry informed the
Committee as under:—
“For effective energy audits, it has been felt that consumer indexing and DT
metering will be required.  The work has been taken up subsequently by some
of the Utilities.  Keeping poor progress by Utilities in this area, the Ministry
has also felt a need for better maintenance and authenticity of base-line data
and is proposing to establish authenticated baseline data as one of the
objectives of restructured APDRP during XI Plan. Utilities will be required to
place meters at all feeders, distribution transformers and consumers in the
towns to be covered under APDRP. All the assets and consumers will be
mapped and indexed. Feeder & DT meters and bulk consumer meters will be
read remotely and the base-line data shall be established. This base-line data
will have to be got validated through independent auditors to be appointed
by the Ministry.’’
62.Specifying the reasons for low progress made in respect of IT enabling activities
which will be helpful in effective and meaningful energy audit and accounting, the
MoP stated:—
“Ministry had constituted an IT Task Force headed by Sh. Nandan Nilekani,
Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Infosys. This Task Force recommended a clear
cut roadmap for distribution Utilities for adoption of IT based on their present
status.  Ministry also emphasized on implementation of computerised billing,
data logging, MIS, SCADA etc.
However, Utilities were of the view that the distribution infrastructure was
weak and that infrastructure building was required initially in the distribution
and that modernization activities can be taken up only after the existing
network was brought to a certain level. Keeping this in view the Utilities took
up strengthening of electricity network and gave a secondary treatment to IT

20
enabling. Some of the Utilities adopted IT enabling activities for
implementation in selected areas and were able to reap the benefits in form of
better consumer services and efficient working.
The Ministry is proposing to give higher importance to Information
Technology especially in the areas of energy accounting & auditing and
consumer care during XI Plan.”
(ix) Gap between Average Revenue Realisation (ARR) and Average Cost of Supply
(ACS) not eliminated
63.One of the objectives of APDRP was the ‘narrowing and ultimate elimination
of the gap between unit cost of supply and revenue realization within a specified time
frame’. Further, as per the instruction of Ministry of Power, the ARR should be rupee
one above the per unit ACS. An analysis of the Audit revealed that this objective was
far from being achieved, as of March 2006. Only 3 out of 29 States (Chhattisgarh, Goa
and Delhi) had achieved the target of elimination of the gap between ARR and ACS.
Further, in Bihar, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Assam, Uttar Pradesh, Mizoram
and Nagaland, the gap between ARR and ACS had shown a deteriorating trend.
64.Attributing the reasons for the gap between ARR and ACS, the Ministry
informed as under:—
“High cost of generation, high cost of power purchase, high maintenance
cost, poor billing and metering, high AT&C loss beyond the levels allowed
by the regulator etc., are the main reasons for the gap between ARR and ACS.
With the improved operation efficiency maintenance cost may be reduced to
some extent. To meet the growing demand for the power, State power Utilities
have to purchase high cost power which increases the ACS.”
65.Further, regarding the measures taken to reduce the gap between ACS &
ARR, the MoP submitted as under:—
“Additional Central Assistance was provided under APDRP to States for
taking up following technical, commercial and management measures to reduce
the gap between ACS & ARR:
(a) Technical Measures
/circle6Upgradation and strengthening of the weak distribution system
/circle6Relocation of distribution sub-stations and /or provision of additional
distribution sub-stations
/circle6Installation of lower capacity distribution transformers to serve a smaller
number/cluster of consumers and substitution of distribution transformers
with those having lower no-load losses
/circle6Installation of shunt capacitors
/circle6Adoption of High V oltage Distribution System (HVDS)
/circle6Regular maintenance of distribution network

21
/circle6GIS mapping of sub transmission and distribution network including
compilation of data.
/circle6IT intervention.
(b) Commercial Measures
/circle6Improvement in metering and billing (Efforts for metering all feeders &
consumers, computerization of billing system, using spot billing machines).
/circle6Improvement in revenue collection (Customer care centres with various
improved and easy methods of collection, e-payment facilities, Customer
information about metering billing and collection on websites introduced,
Disconnection of defaulters, Faster settlement of billing complaints).
/circle6Timely filing of Annual Revenue Realisation (ARR) with SERC.
/circle6Adoption of Multi Year Tariff.
(c) Management Measures
/circle6Adoption of energy accounting and auditing.
/circle6Proper network planning for future expansion.
/circle6Preparation of long-term plans on regular basis for phased strengthening
and improvement of the distribution systems along with associated
transmission system.
/circle6Training of employees.”
(x) Release and Utilisation of APDRP Funds
Funds not released and monitored project-wise
66.The APDRP guidelines stipulated that funds should be released in separate
tranches individually for each project, linked to the release of counter part funds and
project spending. However, the MoP did not recommend release of funds project-wise,
but recommended lump sum releases for each State as a whole on the basis of the total
projects approved by the Steering Committee. Further, there was no system for
monitoring utilisation of APDRP funds on a project-wise basis; the monitoring reports
on utilisation showed project cost and total reported expenditure (APDRP and counter
part funds put together). Hence, there was also no mechanism for detecting cases of
diversion of funds between different APDRP projects.
67.Elaborating on the existing monitoring mechanism for release and utilization
of APDRP funds on a project-wise basis, the Ministry stated as under:—
“Ministry has a system for monitoring release and utilization of APDRP funds
on a project-wise basis. APDRP funds are released in three tranches. The first
tranche is released as 10% of the project cost on sanction of the project (s).
The subsequent tranches are recommended for release to MoF on utilisation
of first tranche along with equal amount of fund project-wise and not on lump
sum basis. However, MoF restricts the release depending upon the availability

22
of allocation to the State and availability of budget. In such circumstances, it
is not possible to allocate restricted released fund to all or limited projects
eligible for next tranche.
The above distortion has crept in due to the fact that in X Plan APDRP was a
Centrally Assisted Programme. In the proposed re-structured APDRP for XI
Plan, it has been recommended to convert it into a Central Sector Scheme.
Also in the proposed scheme for XI Plan, funds shall initially be released to
Utilities by institutions in the form of loan which shall be converted into grant
after achieving the pre-determined targets.”
(xi) Non-opening of separate accounts for APDRP funds
68.In terms of the APDP/ APDRP guidelines, States receiving APDP/ APDRP
assistance would have to open a separate account / sub account head immediately for
separate accounting classification. A separate account in a Scheduled Bank/
Nationalized Bank was also required to be opened. Funds required to implement projects
under APDP/APDRP schemes were to be released by the Ministry of Finance, on the
recommendation of the MoP, directly to this separate account. States which did not
open a separate account for this purpose were not entitled to receive any funds under
APDRP. However, the MoP continued to recommend release of funds without the
stipulated certificates from the State Governments regarding opening of a separate
account head and expenditure statements prepared from the State monthly accounts.
Even the MoF did not object to such recommendations and released funds in the
absence of the stipulated requirements.
69.Audit examination of the records of the State Governments and SEB/Utilities
confirmed non-compliance with these conditions. 17 out of 29 States where the
programme is being implemented, either did not operate separate account heads and
bank accounts for APDRP funds, or did not operate them correctly.
(xii) Utilisation of funds
No requirement for statements of Expenditure (SOEs) and Utilization Certificates
(UCs)
70.In respect of APDRP , no conditions regarding either UCs or SOEs were
incorporated in the guidelines, despite requirement of UCs in the prescribed proforma
specified in the GFR.
Audit examination further revealed that:
/circle6SEBs/ Utilities/ SEDs did not submit UCs regularly, nor were they furnishing
the status of funds utilisation in a consistent format. Further, these were
being intimated only while requesting release of the next installment of funds.
/circle6The Ministry of Power did not maintain any consolidated record of UCs
received against each sanction/ release, and consequently, was not in a
position to verify the actual quantum of funds utilised for implementation of
APDRP.

23
/circle6Though the Ministry had released Rs. 6131.70 crore up to 31st March 2006,
UCs in the format prescribed in the GFR for only Rs. 103.52 crore (1.7 per cent)
were found in the records of the MoP.
(xiii) Incorrect Reporting of Expenditure
71.Audit examination revealed that the expenditure reported by SEBs / Utilities
to the Ministry / ACCs was not correct, mainly due to the following reasons:
/circle6Expenditure was booked at DPR rates, even though actual procurement cost
was lower.
/circle6The reported expenditure was inflated by inclusion of works not in DPR,
quantities in excess of DPR provision, incomplete works, works done under
normal development schemes, works done with old/ repaired equipment, and
centage / consultancy charges. Audit examination of 294 projects in 29 States
with a total project cost of Rs. 10255.21 crore, in respect of which the reported
utilisation of funds (as of March 2006) was Rs. 5617.64 crore, revealed instances
of incorrect financial reporting, amounting to Rs. 676.09 crore, which
constituted 12 per cent of the reported utilisation.
72.On being enquired as to whether the Ministry have a system for verification
of expenditure reported by State Governments/Utility, the Ministry informed that:
“The expenditure under APDRP is auditable by the statutory auditors of the
Utilities. Ministry does not have resources to audit each and every expenditure
made by Utilities under the programme. However, ACCs do randomly check
the bookings and point out discrepancies found to the Utilities.”
73.While specifying the reasons mainly responsible for instances of incorrect
financial reporting amounting to Rs. 676.00 crore, the MoP stated:
(a) “Expenditure booked at DPR rates, though actual cost of procurement/
execution was lower mainly for downward trend of rates of static meters.
(b) Some of the Utilities like Karnataka awarded projects at 30-40% higher rates
than sanctioned DPR rates and booked the expenditure at actual whereas
same was to be restricted to DPR rates or at actual whichever is lower.
(c) Inclusion of new works not covered under DPR and quantities executed in
excess of DPR provisions.
(d) Works done under normal maintenance/capital works booked under APDRP.
(e) Use of Old and repaired equipments.
(f) ACCs  are reconciling the inconsistencies in the financial reporting with the
State Power Utilities further regular or action for recovery shall be
recommended only after completion of the reconciliation”.
74.As regards the measures contemplated to curb the tendency of incorrect
financial Reporting, the MoP submitted:
“During inspection of APDRP implementation on random basis, a number of
deviations in cost and quantity executed as compared to DPR provisions

24
were noted and based on extent of deviations, utilization figures as submitted
by Utilities were restricted / disallowed by the ACCs / MoP . The amount
disallowed was only a rough estimate by lead ACCs and the States have
been advised to submit reconciliation of expenditure as per APDRP guideline
and sanctioned DPR provisions. Most of the Discoms are yet to submit the
same.
Further, APDRP guideline as well as MOA conditions envisages execution of
APDRP Projects on turnkey basis, but only a few Utilities adopted turnkey
concept of execution. Contemplating the difficulties in traceability of materials
under departmental execution of APDRP schemes well in advance, the model
procedure for maintaining records and booking of cost in case of departmental
execution has been handed over to States during review meetings. The same
was done with a purpose to curb the tendency of incorrect financial reporting
by Utilities executing APDRP projects on departmental basis.”
(xiv) Improper maintenance/non-availability of accounting records at State level
75.Audit examination revealed that proper accounting and related records in
respect of APDRP projects were not maintained in almost all the States, which affected
the authenticity of the reported expenditure.
76.On being asked as to what action has been taken to ensure proper maintenance
of accounting and related records, the Ministry replied in a note:—
“The maintenance of records was in a bad shape earlier. Only some of the
utilities were having procedures in place.  With the assistance of ACCs and
close monitoring of APDRP by Ministry, the procedures have improved
significantly in all the Utilities with varying degree.  The employees of the
Utilities have come to know about various Key Performance Indicators on
which performance of the networks have to be recorded & monitored, which
was not existing earlier. The improvement in record maintenance has been
appreciated by the independent evaluators.”
77.Further as regards the system for verification of expenditure reported by the
State Governments, the Ministry stated:—
“Under the guidelines/MOA, utilities are required to submit bi-monthly reports
for utilisation. The reports are submitted project-wise to ACCs/MoP and
compiled. Further, utilisation is submitted by CEOs of the utilities from time to
time for release of next tranche. The utilities are having their own audit
procedures and practices of internal & Government audits. ACCs do randomly
check the bookings and point out discrepancies found to the utilities.”
(xv) Surplus Funds
78.Audit examination revealed that surplus funds amounting to Rs. 51.07 crore
in respect of the Haryana, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka States were not returned by
the States to the Government of India.

25
79.The Committee desired to know as to whether there is any mechanism in the
Ministry to ensure that surplus funds are returned to Government of India within a
specified time frame. The MoP, in this regard stated as follows:—
“States have been asked to submit the utilization certificates in the prescribed
format of the Ministry of Finance for the funds released under APDRP. Also
ACCs are reconciling the inconsistencies in the financial reporting with the
State Power Utilities. Further action for recovery shall be recommended only
after the completion of the reconciliation.”
(xvi) Diversion and Parking of Funds
80.Audit examination revealed numerous instances of diversion of funds,
amounting to Rs. 181.78 crore in ten States, for various unauthorised purposes such as
payment of salaries for work charged employees, clearing past liabilities of the SEBs/
Utilities, expenditure on items not related to APDRP, renovation of guest house etc.
Further, the State Governments diverted a total of Rs. 432.23 crore by adjustment
against various dues of the Utilities, which was effectively equivalent to short release
of funds for APDRP projects.
81.In their reply to the Committee’s query regarding seeking explanation from
the concerned States for diversion of funds, the Ministry Stated that the States have
been asked to submit the utilization certificates for the funds released under APDRP
and they have started submitting the same.
82.As regards the checks exercised to obviate the instances of diversion of
funds for unauthorized purposes, the MoP informed that State Utilities have been
asked to open separate account for APDRP fund. However, many of the Utilities either
did not open the separate account or did not operate these accounts due to various
problems in their accounting procedures.
(xvii) Non-release/Delayed release of funds by States to SEBs/Utilities and non-levy
of consequent penalty
83.The APDRP Guidelines stipulate that:—
/circle6The State Government shall release the funds provided under APDRP to the
State Power Utilities within a week of its credit to the State Government
account and send a confirmation to the GoI; otherwise, it would be treated as
diversion of funds.
/circle6If any State Government/ Utility diverts or is deemed to have diverted such
funds, the equivalent amount would be adjusted with 10 per cent penal interest
against the next installment of Central Plan Assistance to be released to that
State Government in that year or in the subsequent year.
84.A review of various reports of the MoP confirmed that one of the reasons for
delayed implementation of APDRP projects was delay in release of APDRP funds by
the State Governments to the State Power Utilities/ SEBs. However, audit examination
revealed that:—
/circle6The Ministry was not monitoring the details of delay in transfer of funds by
the State Government to the SEBs/ Utilities in respect of each release by the
Central Government.

26
/circle6The Ministry did not levy penal interest in even a single case of delayed
release of APDRP funds.
/circle6In the absence of any deterrent action, the State Governments continued to
delay the transfer of APDRP funds to the implementing agencies, adversely
affecting the progress of APDRP projects.
85.Further, during the test check of records relating to release of funds to SEBs/
Utilities by the State Governments, it was observed that in many cases the State
Government did not  release the entire funds released by GOI, thereby defeating the
purpose for which APDRP was introduced.
86.As of March 2006, a total of Rs. 412.03 crore were yet to be released by
various State Governments: Maharashtra (Rs. 75.97 crore), Nagaland (Rs. 15.99 crore),
Arunachal Pradesh (Rs.15.13 crore), Karnataka (Rs. 12.52 crore), Assam (Rs. 15.00
crore), Mizoram (Rs. 7.10 crore), Andhra Pradesh (Rs. 265.10 crore) and Sikkim
(Rs. 5.22 crore). Further, Audit examination revealed significant delays in release of
APDRP funds ranging from 7 days to 1095 days, by the State Governments.
87.The Committee enquired as to how the Ministry justify the proper utilization
of APDRP funds when there were significant delays in release of APDRP funds ranging
from 7 days to 1095 days by the State Governments to the SEBs/Utilities. The Ministry
stated in a note:—
“Under the Additional Central Assistance (ACA) by GOI, funds are released
to the State Govt. for further transfer to the implementing agencies. There
have been reports of delay in transfer of APDRP fund by State Governments
to the Utilities. The matter was taken up by MoP with MoF for direct release
to the Utilities. MoF informed that under the provisions of ACA, fund can be
directly released to the Utilities only on specific request by State Govt. The
matter was then referred to the State Govt., which did not agree to do so.
Issue of delay in transferring the funds from State Governments to State
Power Utilities had been taken up with the State Governments during review
meetings and through letters held at various levels with Ministry of Power.”
88.The Ministry further stated that longer delay was noticed in the beginning of
the programme, but due to the close monitoring by Ministry & ACCs the situation
improved later on. Keeping this delay in view, MoP is proposing taking up of APDRP
under Central Scheme during XI Plan.
89.The Committee further sought to know as to how would the taking up of
APDRP as a central sector scheme overcome delayed release of funds by the States to
the Utilities. The Ministry stated as follows:—
“In the proposed Central Sector Scheme, funds shall be released directly to
the State Power Utilities where as in the present case of ACA, Ministry of
Finance release the funds to the State Government and the State Government
further releases funds to the State Power Utilities. Long delays in transferring
the funds from State Government to State Power Utilities can be avoided by

27
releasing funds directly to the State Power Utilities under the proposed Central
Sector Scheme.”
90.On being asked as to what steps have been taken by the Ministry to ensure
that the funds of Rs. 412.03 crore which were yet to be released by the State Governments
as of March 2006 have actually been released, the Ministry stated that the States have
been asked to submit the utilization certificates for the funds released under APDRP. If
States do not submit the utilization certificate of full amount released under APDRP,
steps for recovering the unutilized funds with the States shall be taken up.
91.The Committee again asked the Ministry to ensure immediate calculation and
recovery of penal interest from the State Governments for delay in release of funds, the
MoP stated that calculation and recovery of penal interest shall be done through
Ministry of Finance.
(xviii) Incentive mechanism
92.The older Accelerated Power Development Programme (APDP) was project
based and input focused rather than performance/output oriented. The ‘Expert
Committee on State-specific Reforms – Structuring of APDRP, Reform Framework and
Principles of Financial Restructuring of SEBs’ headed by Deepak S. Parekh felt that
unless incentive was given towards achieving lasting improvements, the results were
not likely to be sustainable in the long run. The incentive scheme was conceived to
make MoAs more successful and conducive for effective implementation. Under the
scheme, the State Government would be incentivised upto 50 per cent of the actual
total loss reduction by SEBs/ Utilities.
(xix) Incentive mechanism has not taken off
93.The incentive scheme was conceived to make MoAs more successful and
conducive for effective implementation. Under the scheme, the State Government
would be incentivised upto 50 per cent of the actual total loss reduction by SEBs/
Utilities.
94.The incentive mechanism of APDRP was not successful, with just Rs. 1575.02
crore released as of January 2007, against the 10th Five Year Plan provision of
Rs. 20,000 crore. Further, most of the claims pertained to the years 2001-02 to 2003-04,
which indicated that the objective of reducing cash losses of SEBs/Utilities through
an incentive mechanism had largely not been achieved. Audit examination also revealed
a number of deficiencies, such as allowing an ineligible claim, disallowance of incentive
claims on grounds not reflected in the guidelines, and lack of a mechanism for verifying
utilisation of the incentive grant for improvement of the power sector.
95.Apprising the Committee of the mechanism in the Ministry for ensuring that
the incentives are actually utilized for improvement of power sector, the Ministry
informed that there is no mechanism in the Ministry for this purpose. States shall be
asked to submit the details of utilization of funds released against incentive also.

28
96.On being asked as to why only Rs. 1,575.02 crore were released as incentive
as of January 2007 against the  10th Five Y ear Plan provision of Rs. 20,000 crore, the
Ministry stated as under:
“Financial year 2000-01 was kept base year for incentive calculations. However,
many of the States declared free power afterwards to agriculture thereby
increasing the subsidy. This resulted in increase of cash loss (net of subsidy)
by such States and inspite of showing significant improvement; many Utilities
could not become eligible for incentive.
It may be clarified that incentive claims are filed by Utilities after statutory
audit is completed and because of this claims for a particular year is received
quite late from the Utilities.
Nine States have shown reduction of cash loss amounting to Rs. 5753.22
crore and became eligible for APDRP incentive of Rs. 2876.61 crore.
Government has released Rs. 1959.70 crore. Balance could not be released by
the Ministry of Finance due to low allocation of budget. State-wise details are
given below:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. State Cash Loss Eligibility Incentive
No. Reduction  Released
1. Andhra Pradesh 530.22 265.11 265.11
2. Gujarat 2078.62 1039.31 533.81
3. Haryana 210.98 105.49 105.49
4. Kerala 289.82 144.91 109.27
5. Maharashtra 275.78 137.89 137.89
6. Punjab 503.88 251.94 145.05
7. Madhya Pradesh 595.02 297.51 114.95
8. Rajasthan 275.42 137.71 137.71
9. West Bengal 993.48 496.74 410.42
 Total 5753.22 2876.61 1959.70’’
97.The Committee desired to know about the mechanism prevalent in the
Ministry for ensuring that the incentives are actually utilized for improvement of
power sector. The MoP in their written information submitted to the Committee
stated that there is no such mechanism in the Ministry. As per APDRP guidelines the
grant under incentive component shall be utilized in improvement of power sector
only. States shall be asked to submit the details of utilization of funds released
against incentive also.

29
(xx) Reform Measures
Non-accountability of Circles and Feeders
98.A key administrative intervention under APDRP was ensuring accountability
at the circle and the feeder level by:
/circle6Redesignating Distribution Circles as independent profit centres (with
adequate delegation of powers) and the Superintending Engineer as the CEO.
/circle611 KV feeders to be operated as business units, with the Junior Engineer
designated as the feeder manager.
/circle6Ensuring accountability by having MOUs, setting out specific targets to be
achieved, executed by the SEBs/Utilities with the CEOs of the Circles, who, in
turn were to execute MOUs with their subordinate officials, who would
ultimately execute MOUs with the Feeder Manager.
99.Audit review of APDRP highlighted that the administrative intervention
envisaged under APDRP of ensuring accountability at the circle and feeder level by
redesignating Distribution Circles as independent profit centres and feeders as business
units was not successful. While many States had designated the Circle Superintending
Engineer and Junior Engineer as Circle CEO and Feeder Manager, no administrative
measures were taken to ensure accountability and responsibility.
100. The Committee asked the Ministry as if they have contemplated any measures
to ensure accountability and responsibility among the circles Superintending Engineer
and Junior Engineer who have been redesignated as Circle CEO and Feeder Manager.
The MoP in their note stated that they are proposing new measures to bring better
accountability during XI Plan APDRP.  It is proposed to bring higher accountability by
way of incentivizing the APDRP project areas in form of conversion of loan into grant
against achieving target reduction of loss. The employees of the Utilities shall also be
eligible for additional incentive on achieving the targets.
(xxi) Unbundling of SEBs
101. Audit Paragraph revealed that Transmission and Distribution and
corporatisation of unbundled entities, had not taken place as of March 2006 in Arunachal
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jharkhand, Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab and Sikkim.
Further, in Kerala and Tamil Nadu, although the State Electricity Boards were functionally
segregated into three profit centres namely Generation, Transmission and Distribution,
the annual accounts had, however, not been prepared separately for each profit centre.
In the absence of separate profit centres for Generation, Distribution and Transmission
and determination of transfer pricing etc., the separate Profit and Loss accounts prepared
at the circles of Distribution wing merely represented ad hoc management information,
and the purpose of distinct profit centres had not largely been achieved.
102. While offering their comments on the Audit observation, the MoP stated
that 14 States have unbundled/corporatised. Himachal  Pradesh, Punjab, Chhattisgarh,
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Bihar, Jharkhand and Meghalaya have taken extension for different

30
reasons as per the provisions in the Act. The basic objective of unbundling/
corporatisation is to bring more accountability and better control in the power
business.
103. The Committee desired to know as to whether the Ministry have sought
explanation from the State for not proposing the annual accounts separately for each
profit center namely Generation, Transmission and Distribution. The Ministry informed
in this regard that they have not sought any explanation from the concerned States in
this regard.  However, they have been insisting for unbundling/Corporations of the
State Power utilities according to the provisions in the Electricity Act.
(xxii) Formation of State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC) and Formation
of State level Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC)
104. Audit examination reveals that State Electricity Regulatory Commission
(SERC) was constituted in 23 out of 29 States. In Jammu & Kashmir and Goa, though
the SERCs had been constituted, they were not functional as no Tariff Orders had been
issued as of March, 2006. Further, the Distribution Reforms Committees (DRCs) were
constituted in various States with delays ranging upto 731 days.
105. In this connection, the Ministry have stated that SERCs have been constituted
in 25 States. Mizoram and Manipur have notified the Joint ERC. Distribution Reforms
Committee (DRC) has been constituted in the States and regular meetings are taking
place. DRC has not been constituted in J&K, the review meetings are being held
regularly in coordination with Central Electricity Authority, which is assisting the State
as AcC.
(xxiii) Ineffective Vigilance and legal measures to prevent theft of energy
106. Theft of electricity, in the form of unauthorized connections from the electricity
supply system, tampering, by-passing of meters by the consumers etc. constitutes a
substantial part of commercial loss. Hence, vigilance and legal measures to prevent
theft are critical to reduce non-technical losses/commercial losses. The “Guidelines for
reduction of Transmission and Distribution Losses” issued by the CEA and the MOAs
prescribe various measures for reducing commercial/non-technical losses, e.g. setting
up of vigilance squads, framing suitable policies and mechanisms for detection and
follow-up of cases involving theft of energy, making full use of legal provisions for
launching prosecution against offenders and conducting periodic review of cases,
and imposing severe penalties for tampering with meter seals.
107. Audit Paragraph highlighted that the MoP’s monitoring was confined to
setting up of special courts and special Police Stations by the States. They did not
have a mechanism for monitoring periodically the effectiveness of vigilance and legal
measures in different States to prevent theft of energy. The percentage of registering
theft cases was low ranging between 0.28 per cent to 14.08 per cent, and the percentage
of conviction was even lower, ranging between zero and 10.61 per cent.

31
 108. Audit examination at the State level also revealed ineffective vigilance and
legal measures to prevent theft of energy, as detailed below:—
/circle6“Though envisaged under the Electricity Act, 2003, special police stations
were set up only in seven States (Gujarat, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tripura,
West Bengal and Delhi). Also, special courts were not established in Arunachal
Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura and Tamil Nadu.
/circle6Vigilance squads were not strengthened/set up in Assam, Rajasthan and
Sikkim.
/circle6 In Chhattisgarh, only 39 FIRs were lodged during three years ending
2004-05. During 2005-06, 694 FIRs were lodged. However, not a single
conviction has taken place so far.”
109. As regards the measures adopted by Utility for preventing theft of energy,
the Ministry informed:—
“Under MOA, Utilities were required to set up vigilance teams and take
effective measures towards reduction of theft and pilferage of electricity.
However, only few of the States took up effective measures and succeeded in
significant reduction of theft. To further emphasize on reduction of theft,
legal provisions have been provided in the Electricity Act, 2003. Under the
Electricity Act, 2003 theft of electricity has been made a cognizable offence.
Under Section 135 of the Electricity Act, 2003 whoever dishonestly taps lines
or cables or service wires, tampers, damages or destroys meters etc., shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term, which may extend to three years or
with fine or with both. In accordance with the provisions of the Act, States
are required to constitute special courts and special police stations to handle
cases related to theft of electricity. Ministry is monitoring action taken by
States in this respect.
Theft control measures adopted by power Utilities are discussed and
appropriate remedial actions suggested in the monitoring & review meetings
taken by Ministry officials.”
110. On being asked that mere setting up of special courts and special police
stations by the States would prevent the theft of energy, the MoP replied that setting
up of special courts and special police stations are the provisions in the Electricity Act
to help the States in dealing effectively with the cases of energy theft. Technical and
administrative measures are also needed to control the theft of energy.
111. While providing details of improvements brought about by these measures
in minimizing the theft of energy, the MoP stated that States have reported the detection
of 15,19,020 cases of theft during last four years. Out of this 1,61,372 cases have been

32
reported convicted and Rs. 1,091.15 crore has been realized. State-wise details in this
regard are given below:—
Action Taken by States for Theft Control
State Special Special Theft Cases Amount
Court Police cases convicted released
Stations detected (Nos.) (in Cr.)
(Nos.)
A.P. Yes Yes 416434 157692 53.19
Arunachal Pradesh Y es No
Assam
Bihar 2116 2.13
Chhattisgarh Y es No 5448 1 42.55
Delhi Yes Yes 52993 138.50
Goa
Gujarat Yes Yes 201662 299 123.40
Haryana Y es No 125504 2858 58.05
H.P. Yes Yes 1337 0.81
J&K
Jharkhand 3501 1.27
Karnataka Yes Yes
Kerala
M.P. Yes Yes
Maharashtra Y es Y es 167705 130 103.24
Orissa No Y es
Punjab 150387 73.44
Rajasthan Y es Y es 241382 98 118.75
Tamil Nadu Yes No 8892 23.10
U.P. Yes 86033 194 351.10
Uttaranchal Y es
West Bengal Yes Yes 1552 566 13.04
Manipur 880
Meghalaya Y es
Mizoram 3856 0.07
Nagaland Y es
Sikkim Yes
Tripura Yes 48135 97 1.27
Total 1476122 1611938 922.90

33
(xxiv) Project Planning, Management and Implementation
112. Audit review of the APDRP pointed out significant weakness in the project
planning, management and implementation process. Some of those are illustrated below:
(i) There was inadequate examination of DPRs by the Steering Committee, with
641 projects being approved in just 9 meetings,
(ii) Frequent modifications were made in the scope of work under the approved
DPRs, without obtaining prior or Post-facto approval from the GoI,
(iii) Significant deficiencies in DPRs covering issues such as incorrect cost
estimation, incorrect quantity estimation, excess use of material, unrealistic
setting of targets,
(iv) Most SEBs/Utilities had not adopted turnkey contracting, and had executed
the works departmentally or on semi-turnkey basis,
(v) In some cases, the turnkey packing was so distorted that it negated the
concept of single point responsibility, which was the objective of turnkey
contracting.
113. In addition, the Audit also detected numerous deficiencies in individual
projects across different aspects, covering execution of out-of-scope items, lack of
economy in procurement and execution, excess payments to contractors and other
inefficiencies in execution of works/items of work etc.
114. Replying to the Audit objections, the Ministry have explained as under:—
“AcCs and Utilities have been informed not to book any expenditure on
activities not covered in the sanctioned projects and reconcile the project
progress in view of audit findings. States have also been asked to submit the
utilization certificates in the prescribed format of the Ministry of Finance for
the funds released under APDRP. Further action for recovery shall be
recommended only after the completion of the reconciliation.”
115. Reasons for shortfall in APDRP implementation as stated by the MoP during
the presentation made before the Committee are as follows:—
(i) Reduced project cycle;
(ii) slow implementation of the programme by States;
(iii) inadequate Project Management skills;
(iv) delay by States in Passing on funds;
(v) delay in awarding the contracts by States;
(vi) non-availability of required quantity of material and contractors due to high
demand; and
(vii) increase in prices of raw material.

34
116. As regards the Action Taken to plug the loopholes in the project, planning
management and implementation process, the MoP stated:—
“APDRP guideline as well as MOA conditions envisages execution of APDRP
Projects on turnkey basis, but only a few Utilities adopted turnkey concept of
execution. The Utilities who adopted turnkey concept, performed better with
faster pace of progress, eliminated chances of  use of old/repaired equipments
and better quality of execution.
For better project planning, management and implementation process,  CEA
has issued guidelines for preparation of schemes for  ST&D projects.
Moreover, Lead AcCs prepared standard bidding documents for turnkey
execution of Sub-Transmission & Distribution works as well as specifications
for special projects e.g. pre-paid metering system, data acquisition system,
GIS based consumer indexing and asset mapping etc.
Lead AcCs also carry out inspection of APDRP implementation on random
basis as per direction of Steering Committee for the purpose of better
monitoring of implementation process. Further, the deviations found, if any,
had been taken up in DRC meetings and also at various review meetings held
by MoP.
To make APDRP more meaningful & result oriented during XI Plan, It is
proposed to re-structure APDRP with revised terms and conditions as a
Central Sector Scheme. The focus of the programme shall be on actual,
demonstrable performance in terms of loss reduction. Establishment of reliable
and automated systems for sustained collection of accurate base line data,
and the adoption of Information Technology in the areas of energy accounting
will be essential before taking up the regular distribution strengthening
projects. This will enable objective evaluation of the performance of Utilities
before and after implementation of the programme, and will enforce internal
accountability leading to pressure to perform on officers and staff.
Initially funds for projects under both the parts shall be provided through
loan. GOI shall provide the necessary grant money as and when it becomes
payable on eligibility based on outcome.”
(xxv) Information Technology (IT) enabling
117. According to the APDRP guidelines, IT and Computer Aided Tools for
revenue increase, outage reduction, monitoring and control played a vital role in
distribution management. IT applications would be used in such processes in the
distribution sector to ensure higher revenues as a result of segregation of T&D losses,
and controlling commercial losses, especially for metering, meter reading, billing,
collection and outage reduction. However, Audit examination revealed poor progress
in IT works, in particular those relating to customer indexing, digital mapping, and
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA).

35
118. On being asked  as to what steps the Ministry have taken to ensure effective
implementation of IT enabling tools by the Utilities, the MoP replied as under:—
“Ministry had constituted an IT Task Force headed by Sh. Nandan Nilekani,
CEO, Infosys. This Task Force recommended a clear cut roadmap for
distribution Utilities for adoption of IT based on their present status.  Ministry
also emphasized on implementation of computerised billing, data logging,
MIS, SCADA etc.
However, Utilities were of the view that the distribution infrastructure was
weak and that infrastructure building was required initially in the distribution
and that modernization activities can be taken up only after the existing
network was brought to a certain level. They also were of the view that the
payback period for investment in these areas was higher. Keeping this in
view the Utilities took up strengthening of electricity network and gave a
secondary treatment to IT enabling. Some of the Utilities adopted IT enabling
activities for implementation in selected areas and were able to reap the benefits
in form of better consumer services and efficient working.
The Ministry is proposing to give higher importance to Information
Technology especially in the areas of energy accounting & auditing and
consumer care during XI Plan.”
In this connection, representative of the MoP added during evidence that:—
“IT-enable baseline data system is very essential. We are going to fund this
one hundred percent. The loan given for this purpose will be converted one
hundred percent into a grant because otherwise we believe that the States
will not be incentivised to invest into an IT framework. IT infrastructure
which is absolutely essential.”
(xxvi) Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting
119. Audit Paragraph indicated that while the APDRP guidelines stipulated that
the projects were to be completed within at most 36 months of the date of sanction, the
financial progress of APDRP projects, as reported by the Ministry was way behind
schedule.
120. An analysis of delays in completion reveals the following position:—
Sl. Date of Projects Number of Scheduled Number of Percentage
No. Sanctioned Projects Completion Projects of comple-
Sanctioned date (assum- completed ted pro-
ing maximum as of jects
of 36 months October 2006
1. 16.07.2002 57 7/05 05 9
2. 25.09.2002 72 9/05 03 4
3. 20.11.2002 203 11/05 21 10
4. 20.05.2003 66 5/06 04 6
5. 28.11.2003 08 11/06 NIL 0
6. 20.09.2004 93 9/07 NIL NA
7. 23.03.2005 69 3/08 NIL NA
8. 03.08.2005 15 8/08 NIL NA

36
121. The delay in progress of works and failure to complete works in time would
result in non-achievement or partial achievement of the desired objectives, and further
time and cost over-runs. Analysis of the reasons for slow progress revealed that there
was no shortage of funds for implementation, as nearly 54 per cent of the 10th Five
Year Plan provision of Rs. 20,000 crore was still available for sanction. Instead,  the
delays were mainly due to poor planning and execution, and lack of commitment and
involvement of the implementing agencies.
122. In their reply submitted to Audit in February, 2007, the MoP stated that:—
/circle6The execution of projects was delayed due to various reasons on the part of
the State Governments not transferring the APDRP funds in timely fashion to
the Utilities, and delayed action on the part of the implementing Utilities. The
low allocation of budget by the Government during 2005-06 and 2006-07 also
affected the implementation to some extent.
/circle6Some of the projects where implementation had not started long after sanction
had been closed by the Steering Committee in its meeting in November 2006,
and some other projects had been short closed due to various reasons.
/circle6Many of the projects showed 90 per cent completion on the basis of financial
progress even after completion of the project on physical term for want of
final reconciliation and non-payment of final bills for want of completion of
performance guarantee period.
123. As regards the steps taken to remedify the situation, the MoP informed the
Committee that the APDRP for XI Plan has been proposed as Central Sector Scheme
where funds shall be released directly to State Power Utility. Information Technology
shall be adopted extensively to make it self regulated and result oriented.
124. On being asked as to whether the Ministry has undertaken evaluation
study by independent agency regarding implementation of APDRP projects, the
Ministry in their note furnished to the Committee stated as follows:—
“The Ministry took up an evaluation exercise of the programme through
independent agencies such as Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad
(IIMA), Administrative Staff College of India, Tata Consultancy Services,
The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), and SBI Caps.
The evaluators observed that there were considerable improvements in the
quality of DPR preparations, awareness towards commercial aspects of the
business, theft control and in respect of improvement in meeting, billing &
collection efficiencies. However, they were of the opinion that there was
scope of further improvements. The evaluators recommended continuation
of the programme beyond X Plan. However, they suggested a number of
conditions/initiatives, which may be made in the programme and its guidelines,
so that better results can be derived out of APDRP. The main suggestions
were as follows:
(a) Direct release of APDRP fund to SEB/Utilities;

37
(b) concrete action plan with implementation strategy was required for the
quick and fast implementation of IT initiatives;
(c) adherence to reform conditions mentioned in the MoA’s signed by the
Utilities need to be further defined in terms of specific milestones which
must be strictly adhered to deadlines may be chalked out for each
milestone with the condition that funding would be stopped in case of
milestones were not met;
(d) the DPR should be supported by historical data and reliable forecast of
long term demand. This will ensure that capacity planning was in line
with expected load growth;
(e) more attention needs to be paid to the preparation of realistic DPRs and
these should be based on proper system studies after looking at actual
field conditions;
(f) the Utilities may be given some flexibility to alter schemes;
(g) there was need for providing detailed specification in the contracts/
agreement to ensure quality of material/equipment. Test certificates for
major materials should be insisted and inspection of equipment/material
has should be carried out at manufacturer’s works;
(h) undertake anti-theft measures more vigorously to curb commercial losses;
(i) world class IT organizations should be Commissioned directly by MoP
to drive the IT initiatives in distribution sector;
(j) improving project management procedures-reporting, risk management,
project planning and monitoring;
(k) outsourcing of project implementation on a turnkey basis to speed up
implementation;
(l) improving the data quality and availability of MIS data in electronic
format at the Circle offices;
(m) monitoring could be on fewer and more important parameters. Monitoring
of APDRP should be the key responsibility of SEBs/Utilities and not just
the AcCs;
(n) third party assistance needs to be adopted for assessment of quality and
progress;
(o) detailed audits need to be undertaken after completion of all the works to
realistically assess cost and time overruns (if any) and reasons for the
same;
(p) cash incentive by the Central Government for better performing states
should continue to motivate them for improving their performance.
However, calculation of the financial performance of SEB/Utilities should
be simplified; and
(q) more emphasis on training of the distribution companies personnel.’’

38
(xxvii) Lack of direct linkage between physical and financial progress
125. The MoP’s monitoring and reporting of progress of APDRP projects in
terms of percentage completion was based on the reports of utilisation of funds from
the State Governments vis-à-vis the project outlay, rather than on actual physical
progress. While the Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) from the State Governments
did give details of physical progress, the Ministry’s status reports did not involve
compilation of the data on physical progress, but was restricted to financial utilisation.
This gives a misleading picture of the status of implementation of APDRP.
126. Replying to the Audit observation, the MoP stated:—
“The monitoring of the APDRP projects is based on physical as well as
financial parameters. The reports from the Utilities are compiled by AcCs
both on financial and the physical basis and examined by them. Physical
data, being voluminous, is being examined by Ministry & Steering Committee
from time to time.”
(xxviii) Inspection of APDRP Projects
127. Audit Paragraph highlighted that the mechanism for inspection of APDRP
implementation was inadequate, the MoP did not have a consolidated record of all
such inspections by the AcCs, and Audit could not ascertain whether any corrective
action was taken on the findings/recommendations of such inspection reports by the
Ministry and SEBs/Utilities.
128. While informing about the extant mechanism prevalent in the MoP to review
the APDRP Projects, the Ministry stated in a note as under:—
“All State Electricity Boards (SEBs)/Utilities are required to submit monthly
progress report in respect of progress of execution of Accelerated Power
Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP) projects, funds utilisation
etc. In addition, the Steering Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary
(Power), Ministry of Power and State level Distribution Reforms Committees,
reviews the progress of works under APDRP and proper utilisation of funds
released under APDRP from time to time.
Secretary (Power) and other senior officers of the Ministry of Power also
reviews the progress of the projects sanctioned during their visit to the
States and convening meetings with the States/SEBs/Utilities officers.  In the
review meetings, the reasons for slow progress are identified and States are
requested to take remedial measures to speed up implementation of APDRP
projects.”
In order to make monitoring system strong, the Ministry stated:—
“Ministry appointed NTPC, POWERGRID, CPRI, MECON and National
Productivity Council as Advisor cum Consultant, which are monitoring the
implementation of APDRP schemes on continuous basis. In addition, they
pursue critical issues directly with the SEBs/Utilities and bring it to the notice
of Ministry of Power.  JS (Distribution) regularly reviews APDRP with the

39
AcCs. These issues are being taken up with the SEBs/Utilities by the Ministry
during various reviews taken by Minister of Power / Secretary (Power) /
Joint Secretary (Distribution) from time to time. Number of such meetings has
taken place at Joint Secretary (D) level specifically for APDRP related issues
and at Secretary (Power) level for comprehensive review of state power sector
including APDRP.”
129. While submitting information  regarding the number of inspections conducted
during the past three years, and the action proposed during these inspections for
overcoming the shortfalls, the MoP stated as follows:—
“155 random inspections have been conducted through lead AcC NTPC
during the past three years in various States.
Corrective action proposed in each Inspection Reports are compiled and
feedback  provided to  the Chairperson of the Utility, CEO of the project area
along with photographic evidence of the field condition for corrective action
which thereafter is being taken up  at  each of the reviews and at times  follow
up  from MoP.  The objective of random inspection had been :
(a) Scheme implementation in the project is in line with sanctioned DPR.
(b) Field Quality and adherence to standard engineering practices including
adherence to national codes.
(c) Methodology adopted for booking of cost to the APDRP schemes.
(d) Traceability of the equipment installed to letter of award/purchase order.
(e) To ensure only new equipment is provided for repair/renovated
equipments are not used since the cost estimates in the DPRs had been
based on the new purchase by the Utilities.
(f) MoA implementation in the scheme area.
(g) Creation of APDRP objective and reform awareness in the field staff.
Findings during the inspection had been based on the above mentioned
objectives which differ from Utility to Utility and scheme area to scheme area
within the Utility.”
130. The Committee enquired as to whether the MoP keep record of such
inspections, the Ministry informed:—
“MoP, though is not having full record of such inspections, the same is
available with respective ACCs. ACCs appraise MoP about the salient findings
of the field inspection. The same are taken up / discussed at appropriate level
during review meetings / correspondence from MoP.
Moreover, ACCs have been asked to provide copy of the inspection reports
to Ministry also and this is made available by   the ACCs.”

40
(xxix) Monitoring by State Level Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC)
131. Audit Scrutiny revealed that a State Level Distribution Reforms Committee
was required to be constituted within one month of signing of the Memorandum of
Agreement with the MoP. The Committee was to meet once in two months and review
the progress of project implementation, compliance of MoU / MoA conditions,
performance against targets and benchmarks. Audit scrutiny at the State level further
revealed that the required number of meetings of DRC to review the progress of project
implementation etc. was not held, with the shortfall in holding the specified number of
meetings ranging up to 80 per cent in various States. The CEO of the Circle, along with
AcCs, was to monitor and review the achievements on technical, commercial and
benchmarks every month. The records of such reviews along with the reasons and
action proposed for overcoming shortfall were to be intimated to the MoP, but the
same was not done and the MoP did not have any such records.
132. As regards the composition of the State Level Distribution Reform Committee,
it is stated that in accordance with the requirement of Memorandum of Agreement
signed by the Utilities, State Governments have constituted Distribution Reforms
Committees (DRC), chaired by State Government Representative from Energy
Department and Members i.e. Chairperson from the Utility, MoP/its representative and
other concerned members from distribution and finance for periodic evaluation of
programme, progress and the benefits.
133. State Level Distribution Reform Committee discusses the State specific
issues and time bound action plan is made to resolve the issues. Formal record notes
or minutes of meeting are circulated among the participants and copy of the same is
also sent to MoP. The unresolved issues are taken up during high-level meetings by
MoP. MoP / AcC writes letter to the concerned to resolve the issue at the earliest and
take up the issue to the State highest level.
134. The Committee have been informed that 68 meetings of DRC have taken
place in various States during the last three years.
(xxx)  APDRP Phase - II
135. Details of the APDRP Phase-II are as follows:—
“It is proposed to continue APDRP during the XI Plan with revised terms and
conditions as a Central Sector Scheme. The focus of the programme shall be
on actual, demonstrable performance in terms of loss reduction. Establishment
of reliable and automated systems for sustained collection of accurate base
line data, and the adoption of Information Technology in the areas of energy
accounting will be essential before taking up the regular distribution
strengthening projects. This will enable objective evaluation of the
performance of Utilities before and after implementation of the programme,
and will enforce internal accountability leading to pressure to perform on
officers and staff. It is also proposed to extend the programme to rural areas
and take up feeder separation & HVDS projects in high-load density rural
areas.

41
Projects under the scheme shall be taken up in Two Parts. Part-A shall include
the projects for establishment of baseline data and IT applications for energy
accounting/auditing & IT based consumer service centers. Part-B shall include
regular distribution strengthening projects. The activities to be covered under
each part are as follows:
Part–A: Preparation of Baseline data for the project area covering Consumer
Indexing, GIS Mapping, Metering of Distribution Transformers and Feeders,
and Automatic Data Logging for all Distribution Transformers and Feeders
and SCADA / DMS system for big cities only. It would include Asset Mapping
of the entire distribution network at and below the 11 KV transformers and
include the Distribution Transformers and Feeders, Low Tension lines, poles
and other distribution network equipment.  It will also include adoption of IT
applications for redressal of consumer grievances, meter reading, billing &
collection, establishment of IT enabled consumer service centers etc. The
baseline data shall be verified by an independent agency appointed by the
Ministry of Power, based on which the Steering Committee will fix the targets
for reduction of A T&C loss.
Part–B: Renovation, modernization and strengthening of 11 KV level
Substations, Transformers/Transformer Centers, Re-conductoring of lines at
11 KV level and below, Load Bifurcation, Load Balancing, HVDS, installation
of capacitor banks and mobile service centers etc. In exceptional cases, where
sub-transmission system is weak, strengthening at 33 KV or 66 KV levels may
also be considered.
Initially funds for projects under both the parts shall be provided through
loan. GoI shall provide the necessary grant money as and when it becomes
payable on eligibility based on outcome.”
136. Intimating about the specific steps taken to monitor the effectiveness of the
proposed measures, the Ministry stated as under:—
“A Steering Committee under Secretary (Power) comprising of representatives
of Ministry of Finance, Planning Commission, Central Electricity Authority,
Power Finance Corporation, Rural Electrification Corporation, selected
State Governments (on one year rotation basis) and of Ministry of Power will
(a) Sanction projects, including modification or revision of estimates;
(b) Monitor and review the implementation of the Scheme;
(c) Approve the guidelines for operationalisation of various components of
the scheme;
(d) Appoint agencies for verification and validation of baseline data systems,
for verifying the fulfilment of programme conditions by Utilities; and
(e) Approve conversion of loan into grant upon fulfilment of the necessary
conditions.

42
Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC) at the State level under the
Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary/Secretary Power/
Energy constituted by the State will monitor the Scheme at the State level.”
137.  As far as privatization of this sector, the representative of MoP deposed
before the Committee as under:—
“There is an alternative to this system in the Electricity Act, 2003, that is a
franchise you can give out a licensed area to a franchise for a particular
period rather than giving or privatizing it for eternity where you cannot take
back if there is a lack of performance. Under the franchise system, you can
give it for a particular number of years. This new innovation has taken place.
We are closely looking at the performance of this new system and we are
quite hopeful about it.”

PART- II
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERV ATIONS
138. The Ministry of Power (MoP) is primarily responsible for the development
of electrical energy in the country. The Ministry is concerned with perspective
planning, policy formation, processing of projects for investment decisions,
monitoring of the implementation of power projects etc. The Ministry also provides
financial support in the form of grants to the States. The Committee note that as
against the sanctioned allocation of funds, the Ministry of Power had been able to
spend 92.21% during the year 2004-05, 87.98% during 2005-06 and only 57.60%
in 2006-07. The Committee are concerned that the funds allocated to the Ministry of
Power have not been fully utilized during these three years. The utilization of funds
sharply decreased from 92.21% in 2004-05 to 57.60% in 2006-07. The poor
utilization of the earmarked funds by such an important Ministry, resulting in non-
achievement of targets set under various programmes is indeed disconcerting. The
Committee cannot but express their displeasure over the lackadaisical approach of
the Ministry, as many schemes/programmes for power reforms could not make proper
progress and the funds remained idly parked year after year, which would have been
gainfully utilized for the fund-starved schemes/programmes. The Committee desire
that the Ministry of Power should examine critically the reasons responsible for
such a dismal situation, and evolve realistic parameters to avoid such wide variations
between the sanctioned provisions and actual expenditure.
[Sl. No. 1]
139. The Committee note with concern that there has been an increase in
energy shortage during the Xth Five Year Plan ranging from 7.5%  in 2001-02 to
9.6% in 2006-07. The peak power shortage has also increased from 11.8% in
2001-02 to 15.2% in 2007-08.  Power capacity addition targets have also not been
achieved during Xth Plan period, as against the target of capacity addition of
41110 MW, only 23250 MW has been achieved. The reasons responsible for shortfall
in achieving 10th Plan targets have been cited as delay in technology tie-ups, delay in
award of works, projects not taken up, financial closure not achieved, delay in project
clearance/investment decision etc.  As the problem has assured serious proportions,
the Committee recommend that a thorough review should be conducted  by the
Government to remedy the situation. The Ministry of Power should work out a strategy
to bridge the energy gap and meet the ever-increasing demand of energy,  while
supplementing strongly the efforts at the State level. In this context, the Government
should also undertake a comprehensive programme to renovate and modernize old
power plants located in different States.
[Sl. No. 2]
43

44
140. With a view to addressing the issues of inability of State Power Utilities to
systematically fund essential activities relating to the upgradation of the
sub-transmission and distribution system and renovation and modernization of old
plants which resulted in shortages, poor quality of supply, frequent interruptions and
escalation in commercial losses to the State Electricity Boards, the Government of
India in February, 2001 launched the Accelerated Power Development Programme
(APDP).  The APDP could not produced the desired results during the first year of its
initiation. Therefore, for quick turnaround of the power sector and to reward the
actual improvement in the performance of the Power Utilities by way of reduction in
commercial losses and increased revenue realization, it was renamed as “Accelerated
Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP)” in the Union Budget
2002-03. The project had an outlay of Rs.  40,000 crore as Additional Central Plan
Assistance to the State Governments during the 10th Five Y ear Plan (2002-2007). Of
this amount, the investment component was for Rs. 20,000 crore, with the remaining
Rs. 20,000  crore for the incentive component.
[Sl. No. 3]
141. The basic objectives of the programme were:—
(i) Reduction of Aggregate Technical and Commercial Losses (AT & C Losses)
from around 60 percent to around 15 percent in five years, to begin with in
the urban areas and high density/consumption areas, which implied a targeted
reduction of 9 percent per annum.
(ii) Significant improvement in revenue realization by reduction in commercial
losses leading to additional realization of Rs. 20,000 crore approximately
over a period of 4-5 years.
(iii) Reduction of technical losses which would result in additional energy of
nearly 6,000-7,000 MW to the system.
(iv) Improvement in quality of supply and reliable, interruption free power.
(v) Reduction in cash losses on a permanent basis.
(vi) To help States to avoid heavy subsidies, which are given to SEBs/State Utilities
by State Governments.
[Sl. No. 4]
142. The operation of the programme was governed by the conditions laid down
in the Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) and Memoranda of Agreement (MoA)
signed between the State Electricity Boards (SEB)/Utilities and the Ministry of Power.
The major conditions for availing benefits under APDRP are as follows:—
(i) Setting up of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs);
(ii) Restructuring of SEBs, viz. unbundling into separate entities for generation,
transmission and distribution and corporation of unbundled entities;
(iii) Removing cross subsidies and traffic anomalies and providing budgetary
support to SEBs towards subsidies;

45
(iv) Introduce private participation in generation, transmission and distribution;
(v) 100 percent metering for each KV feeder and also for consumer;
(vi) Energy accounting and audit;
(vii) Distribution Circles to be operated as independent profit centers, with
Superintending Engineer as Circle Chief Executive Officer (CEO);
(viii) 11 KV feeders to be operated as business units, with the Junior Engineer as
the feeder Manager; and
(ix) T urnkey contracting system to be adopted by the SEBs/Utilities.
[Sl. No. 5]
143. The Committee’s examination of the subject is based on the Audit review of
the performance of programme in 294 approved APDRP projects during the period
2002-03 to 2005-06.  Examination of the subject by the Committee in detail has
revealed that the avowed objectives of the APDRP have not been fully achieved. There
have been significant deficiencies in the implementation of the programme. The
Committee have dealt with these deficiencies and various aspects of the programme
in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 6]
144. One of the basic objectives of APDRP was to reduce Aggregate Technical
and Commercial Losses (AT&C Losses) from the existing level of about 60 percent to
around 15 percent in five years which implied reduction of AT&C Losses @ 9 percent
per annum. The Committee, however are constrained to observe that as against the
targeted reduction of 9 percent per annum in AT&C Loss, a reduction of only
1.68 percent per annum has been achieved between 2001-02 and 2004-05. The figure
was still very high, and ranged between 15.86 percent in Goa and 72.74 percent in
Mizoram. It is thus evident that the objective of reduction of AT&C Losses, as envisaged
in the programme, remained largely unfulfilled. The Committee are dismayed that
the Ministry of Power have not elaborated convincingly the reasons for not achieving
the targeted reduction in AT&C Losses. Although the Secretary, Ministry of Power
conceded in this regard during evidence that the goal of 15 percent loss may not be
possible, as the performance in some of the States have been patchy due to varied
levels of administration and superintendence. What is astonishing is the fact that
there were significant deficiencies even in the maintenance of records relating  to
AT&C Losses including absence of proper guidelines and supporting records.
Consequently, the data reported by the Ministry could not be regarded as authentic,
accurate and acceptable. The Committee are dismayed that the Ministry of Power did
not have any mechanism at all to assess and monitor the significant reduction in
AT&C losses, which is considered a wherent measure of the overall efficiency of
power distribution. Further, as regards formulation of any baseline data on the basis
of which Ministry of Power could envisage that the AT&C losses would be brought
down to 15%, the Committee have been informed that the Ministry have proposed to
establish the same under the re-structured APDRP for XI Plan. Considering the fact

46
that APDRP was meant for quick turnaround of the power sector, the Committee
consider it unfortunate that no worthwhile efforts were made by the Ministry with a
view to ensuring that the programme was actually implemented in consonance with
the envisaged objectives during X Five Year Plan. They did not yet have any mechanism
to ensure that the objectives of the APDRP are met even after the completion of fifth
year of the programme. The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to take
corrective measures now with a view to ensure that the programme is properly
implemented at least in the XI Five Year Plan and to re-evaluate the targets for AT&C
Losses so that the targeted reduction in these losses is achieved in the reformulated
APDRP in XI Plan.
[Sl. No. 7]
145. One of the key reforms envisaged through the Memorandum of Agreements
with the Ministry of Power indicated 100 percent metering for each 11 KV feeder and
also for consumers. The Committee, however, note that a significant number of
installations remained unmetered, and the computation of energy consumed was
made on assessment basis, consequently affecting the veracity of the source data for
computation of AT&C losses. In case of Jharkhand, unmetered supply in four sample
circles, ranged between 67.8 percent and 39.93 percent of total energy. The States did
not have any basis of calculation of unmetered supply and thus the estimation of
unmetered energy was reduced to a purely  hypothetical exercise. The Committee are
surprised to note that the Ministry of Power have also not ascertained the reasons
from SEBs for resorting to billing/metering on assessment basis. There were also
no prescribed norms for assessment of unmetered consumers and the criteria for
assessment was  not uniform either among various billing authorities, which was
bound to result in deficiencies in making accurate assessment of losses. It is, thus,
evident that the Ministry of Power have not made any earnest attempt to make the
assessment procedure uniform. Various bottlenecks such as non-availability of
metering or defective/damaged metering system etc that come in the way of correct
and accurate assessment of supply could have been very-well removed by taking
timely remedial action. While deploring the laxity on the part of the Ministry of
Power in taking corrective measures to minimize the practice of billing on assessment
basis by improving the metering system for various segments of consumers, the
Committee would like the Ministry to issue fresh directions to the State Governments
for making the assessment procedure more organized and uniform with significant
reduction in the AT&C Losses.
[Sl. No. 8]
 146. Another objective of APDRP was to make 100 percent metering of feeders,
Distribution Transformers (DTs) and consumer connections. The Committee find
that while there was considerable improvement in terms of reported feeder and
consumer metering, the progress in metering of Distribution Transformer was not
adequate as only 3 States had shown 80 to 100 percent metering, whilst there was no
information in respect of 10 States, with consequent lack of control on AT&C losses
and inadequate energy accounting and auditing. Feeder and consumer metering at
the State level also showed significant deficiencies, in addition to misreporting of

47
data on installation of meters. While conceding that the progress of Distribution
Transformer metering was indeed not upto the expected level, the Ministry have
informed that it was mainly due to the middle level executives pleading  increase in
meter reading load and their inability to manage even for the existing customers.
The Committee fail to understand as to why no advance action was taken for the
posting of additional personnel which were badly needed for installation and
maintenance of meters and to ease the meter reading load. At least now they would
expect that early action would be taken to fulfil the requirement of additional personnel
at all the levels so that implementation of the programme does not suffer.
The Committee have now been informed in this regard that the Utilities will be
forced to instal and maintain the system meters due to performance base conditionality
for converting ‘loan’ to ‘grant’ as proposed for 11th Plan APDRP. Since the Distribution
Transformer metering is an essential tool to control AT&C losses, the Committee
hope that the Ministry will closely monitor the installation and maintenance of system
meters in 11th plan in a time-bound manner including augmenting the strength of
the middle level executives so that the SEBs/Utilities complete 100 percent feeder,
Distribution Transformer and consumer metering in all ongoing and completed
APDRP projects within a clearly defined time frame. They should also ensure that
the funds for APDRP projects should be released only after completion of 100 percent
metering. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the details of installation
of meters during XI Plan under APDRP and action taken against the defaulting
States which only can serve as an objective index of the efforts made by the Ministry
of Power in this direction in the revised APDRP during XI Plan.
 [Sl. No. 9]
147. The Committee find that in States like Jharkhand, Punjab, Assam, West
Bengal, Karnataka, Haryana and Manipur, periodical checking of meters was not a
regular feature and the shortfall in checking of meters in these States ranged between
13 and 96 percent during 2005-06. Although the Ministry have been advising the
States through review meetings etc. to carry out periodical energy accounting and
auditing, evidently, these measures have not produced the desired results. Since the
purpose of installation of meters would be served only if the SEB/Utility conducted its
periodical checking  so as to ensure that installed meters were not being tampered
with and were working efficiently, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Power
should pursue the matter forcefully with all concerned State Governments to mitigate
this serious problem.
[Sl. No. 10]
148. One of the most important pre-requisites for ensuring reduction of
commercial losses, with relatively lower capital investment, is comprehensive energy
accounting and audit, which would enable quantification of losses in different segments
of the system and their segregation into commercial and technical losses. The
Committee have, however, observed that effective energy accounting and auditing was
not being carried out in the States. It had not been possible in most States due to lack
of 100 percent system metering, lack of accountability at the circle and feeder level

48
and low progress in respect of IT enabling activities such as consumer indexing,
digital mapping, Automated Meter Reading instruments, Data Loggers etc. The
Committee have been informed that keeping in view the poor progress by Utilities in
this area, the Ministry are proposing to establish authenticated baseline data as one
of the objectives of restructured APDRP during XI Plan, through which all the assets
and consumers will be mapped and indexed. Feeder and Distribution Transformer
(DT) meters and bulk consumer meters will be read remotely and the base-line data
will have to be got validated through independent auditors to be appointed by the
Ministry. The Committee would welcome and await the implementation of these
measures. Since the whole purpose of metering was defeated in the absence of linkages
between feeder, Distribution Transformer and consumer metering, the Committee
desire that the Ministry should work out the modality of regular and effective
monitoring of the programme in consultation with SEBs so as to ensure that all
States carry out effective energy accounting and auditing at the feeder and Distribution
Transformer levels.
 [Sl. No. 11]
149. The Committee’s examination further revealed that one of the objectives
of APDRP was the narrowing and ultimate elimination of the gap between unit cost of
supply and revenue realization within a specified time frame. The Committee find
that the objective of elimination of the gap between Average Revenue Realisation
(ARR) and Average Cost of Supply (ACS) remained a distant goal. Only 3 out of
29 States had achieved this target, and in fact, in 8 States, the gap between ARR and
ACS had shown a deteriorating trend. According to Ministry of Power, as many of the
Utilities had increased the subsidy over the years, monitoring of ARR on subsidy and
revenue realized basis would show the correct status. Audit did not accept the reply of
the Ministry on the ground that since the reduction of subsidies to SEBs/Utilities is
one of the key objectives of APDRP, using ARR on subsidy realized basis would not be
appropriate. Moreover, high cost of generation, high cost of power purchase, high
maintenance cost, poor billing and metering, high AT&C loss beyond the levels
allowed by the regulator etc. are stated to be the main contributory reasons for the
gap between ARR and ACS. During the course of examination of the subject by the
Committee, several technical, commercial and managerial measures were stated to
have been taken by the Ministry to reduce this gap, such as, upgradation and
strengthening of the weak distribution system, relocation of distribution sub-stations,
provision of additional distribution sub-stations, improvement in metering and billing,
timely filling of Annual Revenue Realisation with State Electricity Regulatory
Commissions and proper network planning for future expansion etc. The Committee
desire that these well-conceived measures ought to be implemented earnestly in
letter and spirit, which would surely go a long way in eliminating the gap between
Average Revenue Realisation  and Average Cost of Supply in future. The Committee
may be apprised of the results achieved therefrom.
[Sl. No. 12]
150. In terms of the APDRP guidelines, States receiving assistance under this
programme would have to open a separate account/sub-account head for separate

49
accounting classification. States which did not open a separate account for this purpose
were not entitled to receive any funds under APDRP. However, the Ministry of Power
continued to recommend release of funds without the stipulated certificates from the
State Governments regarding opening of a separate account head and expenditure
statements prepared from the State monthly accounts. The Committee find that 17
out of 29 States where the programme was being implemented, either did not operate
separate account heads and bank accounts for APDRP funds, or did not operate them
correctly. The Ministry of Power have tried to explain that  many of the Utilities could
not open separate accounts due to various problems in their accounting procedures.
Evidently, there is no mechanism presently available with the Ministry to assess
actual utilization of funds released for this programme. The Committee also wonder
as to how in the absence of separate accounting classification, the Ministry could
ensure that the funds earmarked for APDRP were not being spent for other purposes.
While strongly disapproving the failure of the Ministry to act sternly against such
financial irregularities, the Committee recommend that the matter should be enquired
into and responsibility be fixed for the lapses. The Ministry should henceforth ensure
that the accounts of APDRP funds are maintained separately, reconciled periodically
with banks and got audited regularly.
[Sl. No. 13]
151. The Committee find it strange that in respect of APDRP no conditions
regarding Utilization Certificates (UCs) or Statements of Expenditure (SOEs) were
incorporated in the guidelines, despite requirement of UCs in the prescribed proforma
specified in the GFR. Further, the expenditure reported by SEBs/Utilities to the
Ministry was not correct on the ground that expenditure was booked at Detailed
Project Report (DPR) rates, even though actual procurement cost was lower. The
reported expenditure was inflated by inclusion of works not in Detailed Project
Reports, incomplete works, work done under normal development schemes, work
done with old/repaired equipment etc. Audit of 294 projects in 29 States with a total
project cost of Rs. 10255.21 crore, involving utilization of funds reported to be
Rs. 5617.64 crore as of March 2006, revealed instances of incorrect financial
reporting amounting to Rs. 676.09 crore, which constituted 12 percent of the reported
utilization. The Committee express their dissatisfaction in the matter and recommend
that responsibility of the officers be fixed for the lapses in maintenance of records, its
compilation and incorrect reporting of figures.
As regards the system for verification of expenditure reported by State
Governments/Utilities, the Committee have been informed that the Ministry does not
have the resources to audit each and every expenditure made by Utilities under the
programme. However, Advisor cum Consultants (AcCs) do randomly check the
bookings and point out the discrepancies to the Utilities. But with  a view to curbing
the tendency of incorrect financial reporting by Utilities executing APDRP projects
on departmental basis, the model procedure for maintaining records and booking of
cost has been handed over to States during review meetings. From these facts it is
abundantly clear that the procedure for verification of the expenditure reported by
State Governments/Utilities leaves a lot to be desired. Considering the fact that the

50
Ministry does not have resources to audit every expenditure of the Utilities, and the
fact that there are several cases of default, the Committee recommend that the Ministry
of Power and the SEBs/Utilities should evolve a coordinated and integrated system of
record-keeping and reporting with periodical reconciliation of figures in order to
avoid incorrect financial reporting by the State Governments/Utilities.
[Sl. No. 14]
152. During the course of examination, the Committee have come across several
instances of inadequacies in some of the States regarding utilization of funds. Some
of the major deficiencies/irregularities noticed are as follows:
(i) Expenditure reported by SEBs/Utilities to the Ministry/AcCs was not correct,
in respect of 29 States, there were instances of incorrect financial reporting.
(ii) Proper accounting and related records in respect of APDRP Projects were
not maintained in almost all the States.
(iii) Surplus funds amounting to Rs. 51.07 crore not returned by the States to
the Government of India.
(iv) Instances of diversion of funds amounting to Rs. 181.78 crore in ten States.
(v) Non-release/Delayed release of funds by States to SEBs/Utilities and Non-
levy of consequent penalty.
[Sl. No. 15]
153. There were also instances of diversion of funds by 10 States amounting to
Rs. 181.78 crore for unauthorized purposes, and diversion of Rs. 432.23 crore by
7 States for adjustment against various dues of the Utilities, which was effectively
equivalent to short release of funds for APDRP projects.  With regard to seeking
explanation from the concerned States for diversion of funds, the Ministry have merely
stated that the States have been asked to submit the Utilization Certificates for the
funds released under APDRP. The State Utilities have also been asked to open separate
account for APDRP funds. However, many of the Utilities either did not open separate
account or did not operate these accounts due to various problems in their accounting
procedures. Undoubtedly, such cases not only reveal inadequacies in the governmental
machinery but also leave scope for proliferation of corrupt practices in the system.
This therefore, underscores the need for streamlining the procedures for utilization
of funds. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the entire matter of diversion of
funds should be thoroughly looked into and responsibility be fixed for the lapses in
maintaining the funds.
[Sl. No. 16]
154. As regards the release of funds by States to SEBs/Utilities, the APDRP
guideline stipulate that the State Governments shall release the funds provided under
APDRP to the State Power Utilities within a week of its credit to the State Government
Account and send a confirmation to the Government of India. The Committee find as
of March, 2006 eight States failed to release Rs. 412.03 crore of APDRP funds to the
SEBs/Utilities. There were significant delays on the part of the State Governments in

51
release of APDRP funds ranging from 7 days to 1095 days. The Ministry was not
monitoring the details of such delays, nor did they  levy penal interest  even in a single
case of delayed release of APDRP funds. In many cases, the State Governments did not
release the entire funds released by the Union Government. Evidently, there was no
proper system in Ministry of Power to ensure timely release of funds to the State
Governments or their early utilization. The Committee have been informed that
keeping such delays in view, Ministry of Power is proposing to take up  APDRP under
Central Sector Scheme during 11th Plan, under which, funds shall be released directly
to the State Power Utilities. The Committee deplore the fact that till now no procedure
has been evolved by the Ministry nor prescribed by the State Governments for
management of grants. With regard to the funds of  Rs. 412.03 crore which were yet
to be released by the State Governments, the Ministry have stated that the States have
been asked to submit the Utilization Certificates for the funds released so far. The
Ministry have apparently taken this action only now after the matter was considered
by the Committee. Had these steps been initiated earlier, the delay in release of funds
could have been easily avoided. Again, in regard to the calculation and recovery of
penal interest from the State Governments for delay in release of funds, the Ministry
stated that it will be done through Ministry of Finance. Considering the fact that
delayed implementation of APDRP projects was due to delayed/non-release of funds
by the State Governments to the State Power Utilities/SEBs, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry should devise a sound mechanism for release of Grants to the State
Governments. Further, immediate onward release of the funds to the SEBs/Utilities
by the State Governments also warrants urgent attention of the Ministry.
 [Sl. No. 17]
 155. The Committee find that the incentive mechanism of APDRP was not
successful, with just Rs. 1575.02 crore released as of January, 2007 against the
provision of Rs. 20,000 crore envisaged in the 10th Five year Plan. Further, most of
the claims pertained to the years 2001-02 to 2003-04, which indicated that the objective
of reducing cash losses of SEBs/Utilities through an incentive mechanism had largely
not been achieved. Audit examination also revealed a number of deficiencies like
allowing  ineligible claims, disallowance of incentive claims on the grounds not
reflected in the guidelines, and lack of  mechanism for verifying utilization of the
incentive grant for improvement of the power sector. While responding to these
shortcomings, the Ministry have clarified that many States had shown increase in
cash loss and as such they could not become eligible for incentive. The Committee are
surprised to note that there is no mechanism in the Ministry of Power for ensuring
that the incentives are actually utilized for improvement of power sector only. It is
obvious that the incentive mechanism has not been working under this programme,
indicating that the actual cash loss reduction in most States has been rather poor.
Further, it is a matter of serious concern that the Ministry released incentive claims
to the SEBs/Utilities without satisfying themselves that the incentives were being
utilized for the power sector only. As the incentive scheme was conceived to make the
MOAs more successful and conducive for effective implementation of the programme,
any flaw in this process will vitiate its very objective. The Ministry of Power should,
therefore, establish a sound mechanism for ensuring that the incentive claims of

52
States/Utilities are scrutinized properly in the Ministry before establishing eligibility
and realization of the incentive. The Ministry should also consider withholding  the
claims of the defaulter States who have been utilizing the incentives for other purposes.
The release of incentive claims should be subject to physical target achievement and
not to financial targets alone.
[Sl. No. 18]
 156. The Committee note that the administrative intervention envisaged under
APDRP of ensuring accountability at the circle and feeder level by re-designating
distribution circles as independent profit centres and feeders as business units was
not successful. The Committee regret to note that while many States had designated
the Circle Superintending Engineer and Junior Engineer as Circle CEO and Feeder
Manager, no administrative measures were taken to ensure accountability and
responsibility. In Arunachal Pradesh, Punjab, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh, even the designation of the JEs as Feeder Manager has not been done.
With a view to ensuring accountability and responsibility among the circle CEOs and
Feeder Managers, the Committee desire that a system of disincentive/incentive should
be introduced at the distribution circle and feeder level for achievement of targets.
[Sl. No. 19]
157. Theft of electricity, in the form of unauthorized connections from the
electricity supply system, tampering, by-passing of meters by the consumers etc.
constitute a substantial part of commercial loss.  The Committee find that the Ministry
did not have a mechanism for monitoring periodically the effectiveness of vigilance
and legal measures in different States to prevent theft of energy. The percentage of
registering theft cases was low ranging between 0.28 percent to 14.08 percent, and
the percentage of conviction was even lower, ranging between zero and 10.61 percent.
According to the Ministry, setting up of special courts and special police stations are
the provisions in the Electricity Act to help the States  in dealing effectively with the
cases of energy theft. The Committee have been informed that as a result of these
measures, detection of 15,19,020 cases of theft during last four years have been
reported by the States, out of which 1,61,372 cases have been reported convicted and
Rs. 1091.15 crore has been realised. The Committee are not satisfied with the number
of cases reported and convicted during  the past four years, as out of more than 15
lakh cases detected only 1,61,372 cases have been convicted which implies that no
serious efforts have been made by the State Utilities to address this issue. The
Committee have been informed that Ministry of Power was monitoring action taken
by States for constituting Special Courts and Special Police Stations to handle cases
related to theft of electricity, and this was proposed to be made as a condition for
eligibility for APDRP funds during the 11th Plan. As theft of energy constitutes a
substantial part of commercial loss, the Committee would like the Ministry to ensure
adherence to the guidelines in this regard, namely, setting up vigilance squads,
detection and follow-up of cases involving theft of energy, making full use of legal
provisions for launching prosecution against offenders and conducting periodic review
of cases and imposing severe penalties for tampering with meter seal. Installation of
automated systems and application of Information Technology for recording of data
should also be accorded priority for this purpose.
[Sl. No. 20]

53
158. The Committee’s examination of the subject has revealed that there were
significant weaknesses in the project planning, management and implementation
process. There was inadequate examination of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) by
the Steering Committee, with 641 projects being approved in just 9 meetings. Clearly,
this would not have enabled the Steering Committee to exercise detailed scrutiny of
the project before according approval. Most SEBs/Utilities had not adopted turnkey
contracting, and had executed the works departmentally or on semi-turnkey basis; in
some cases the turnkey packaging was so distorted that it negated the concept of
single point responsibility which was the objective of turnkey contracting. Obviously,
this was a clear case of negligence on the part of the Ministry which overlooked this
lapse and which resulted in lack of coordination while carrying out the works. The
Committee therefore, recommend that during 11th Plan period, the projects under
the programme should be awarded only on turnkey basis as originally stipulated in
the scheme, so that the problems arising out of lack of coordination between civil
works and electrical works are avoided.
The audit also detected numerous deficiencies in individual projects across
different aspects, covering execution of out-of-scope items, lack of economy in
procurement and execution excess payments to contractors and other inefficiencies.
The contributory reasons as adduced by the Ministry for shortfall in APDRP
implementation are reduced project cycle, slow implementation of the programme by
States, inadequate project management skills, delay by States in passing on funds,
delay in awarding the contracts by States, non-availability of required quantity of
materials and contractors etc. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry hardly
convincing as these are the reasons which are rather routine in nature and could
have been taken care of, if timely steps were taken. The Committee consider it
unfortunate that the Ministry had left the entire programme at the mercy of the State
Governments, although the monitoring of the implementation of the programme was
the responsibility of the Ministry. Considering the fact that the APDRP was launched
for quick turnaround of the power sector, the Committee are dismayed that no urgency
was showed by the Ministry for evolving a monitoring mechanism.
[Sl. No. 21]
 159.  According to APDRP guidelines, Information Technology (IT) and
Computer Aided Tools for revenue increase, outage reduction, monitoring and control
play a vital role in distribution management. The performance Audit of APDRP and
the Committee’s examination of the issues raised by Audit has revealed poor progress
in IT works, in particular those relating to customer indexing, digital mapping and
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition, which could play a vital role in revenue
increase, reduction in AT&C losses, and controlling commercial losses especially
for metering, meter reading, billing, collection and outage reduction. Although, IT
task force constituted by the Ministry had recommended a clear cut roadmap for
distribution Utilities for adoption of IT based on their present status. However, the
Utilities did not accept the said proposal on the ground that the distribution
infrastructure was weak. They  therefore, gave preference to strengthening the
electricity network and gave secondary treatment to IT enabling. The reply of the

54
Ministry is not tenable, as it confirms lack of adequate efforts by the Ministry of
Power in ensuring the actual implementation of IT tools, which resulted in the lack of
effective energy accounting and auditing, which was critically dependent on IT.
Considering the fact that the IT applications would be used in the distribution sector
to ensure higher revenues as a result of segregation of Transmission & Distribution
Losses (T&D Losses) and controlling commercial losses, especially for metering,
meter reading, billing, collection and outage reduction, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry should take up IT enablement on priority in order to ensure that the
envisaged objectives of power distribution reform are achieved. They should fix up a
deadline for this purpose, by which if the States do not adopt the IT based system, they
should be disallowed not only sanction of funds but also the availability of more power
in their States. Stringent guidelines are also required to be issued by the Ministry to
State Governments in this regard. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
outcome of the steps taken in the matter.
[Sl. No. 22]
 160. The Committee find that though the APDRP guidelines stipulated that the
projects were to be completed within at least 36 months of the date of sanction, the
progress of APDRP projects was way behind schedule, resulting in non/partial
achievement of the desired objectives, even though nearly 54 percent of the 10th Five
year plan provision of Rs. 20,000 crore was still available for sanction. The factors
cited by the Ministry for this are non-transferring the APDRP funds in timely manner
to the Utilities and delayed action on the part of the implementing Utilities. In this
regard, the Committee have been apprised that many of the projects showed 90 percent
completion on physical terms, pending final reconciliation and  non-payment of final
bills for want of completion of performance guarantee period. The Committee are not
inclined to accept the explanation given by the Ministry on the ground that majority of
projects were sanctioned between 2002 and 2003 and issues like final reconciliation
and completion of performance guarantee period should have been settled by now. The
Committee feel that the delays were mainly due to poor planning, execution and lack
of commitment of the implementing agencies. Since the delay in progress of works
and failure to complete works in time would result in non/partial achievement of the
desired objectives and further time and cost over-runs, the Committee would emphasize
the need to take effective steps for stricter monitoring and control over the APDRP
projects.
[Sl. No. 23]
 161. Yet another case of APDRP implementation which required attention is
the system of evaluation and the follow-up action thereafter. Evaluation of APDRP is
stated to be undertaken by the Ministry through independent agencies such as Indian
Institute of Management, Ahmedabad, Administrative Staff College of India, Tata
Consultancy Services, Tata Energy and Resources Institute and SBI Caps. The
aforesaid Evaluators have observed that though there were considerable improvements
in the billing, metering and collection efficiencies, there was scope for further
improvements. They have, therefore, recommended continuation of the programme
beyond 10th Five Year Plan. However, they have suggested a number of initiatives to

55
be included in the programme so as to derive better results. The main suggestions of
the Evaluators in this regard included direct release of APDRP funds to SEBs/Utilities,
concrete action plan for quick and fast implementation of IT initiatives, preparation of
realistic Detailed Project Reports, undertaking anti-theft measures more vigorously,
out sourcing of project implementation on a turnkey basis, improving the data quality
and availability of MIS data in electronic format at the Circle Office etc. Keeping in view
the grave nature of irregularities, the large scale misuses and also taking into account
the enormous amount of revenue foregone, the Committee regret to note that the follow-
up action of the suggestions made by the Evaluators was highly  inadequate. The Ministry
of Power should overcome their laxity on this count and act promptly on the findings of
the evaluation study commissioned by the Ministry themselves.
[Sl. No. 24]
 162. The Committee’s examination has revealed that the mechanism for
inspection of APDRP projects by the Ministry of Power was inadequate. The Committee
are perturbed to note that even though 155 random inspections have been conducted
through lead Advisor cum Consultants viz., NTPC during the past three years in
various States, the Ministry did not have a consolidated record of all such inspections.
According to the Ministry, the record is available with respective Advisor cum
Consultants, who apprise Ministry of Power about the salient findings of field
inspection. The Committee note that the reports of these inspections were not provided
to Audit also. In the absence of such reports, the objectives of the field inspections,
findings of the AcCs and the follow-up action taken thereon by the State Utilities
could not be ascertained at all. This also dis-enabled the Ministry of Power to monitor
the status of implementation and bring about requisite improvements in the systems
and procedures. The Committee are therefore, of the view that stringent measures
are urgently required to revamp the existing monitoring/supervisory mechanism
prevailing in the Ministry.
[Sl. No. 25]
163. The Committee note that while the State level Distribution Reforms
Committee (DRC) was to meet once in two months to review the progress of project
implementation, compliance of MoU/MOA conditions, performance against targets
and benchmarks, the required number of meetings of DRC was  not held, with the
shortfall in holding the specified number of meetings ranging up to 80 percent in
various States. The Committee have been informed that State level DRC discusses the
State specific issues and time bound action plan is made to resolve the issues. Formal
record notes or minutes of the meeting are circulated among the participants and
copy of the same is also sent to Ministry of Power. The Committee note that this
procedure is not being followed, as the records of such reviews along with the reasons
for not following the procedures and action proposed for overcoming shortfall were
not intimated to the Ministry of Power. Since serious deficiencies have been noticed
in the implementation of the APDRP, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Power must review the situation and take immediate  steps so that the State level
Distribution Reform Committee is made functional and its working supervised in an
effective manner.
[Sl. No. 26]

56
164. To sum up, the facts stated in the foregoing paragraphs revealed several
shortcomings in the implementation of APDRP. The primary objective of the
programme of reducing Aggregate Technical and Commercial Losses (AT&C Losses)
by 9 percent per annum had not been achieved. There were serious deficiencies in
system metering (in particular Distribution Transformer metering) and consumer
metering. There were also major shortcomings in the quality and reliability of power
supply. Besides, effective energy accounting and auditing  had not been possible in
most States, primarily due to lack of 100 percent system metering, lack of
accountability at distribution circle and feeder levels and inadequate computerization.
Significant deficiencies were noticed in the systems and procedures for release and
utilization of APDRP funds. There were instances of incorrect financial reporting by
the States to the Central Government. In addition, instances of irregular diversion of
funds, and non-return of surplus funds were noticed. The incentive mechanism was
not successful, there were weaknesses in the project planning, management and
implementation process as well as in the mechanism for reporting, monitoring and
inspection. The Committee regret to conclude that the APDRP did not succeed fully
in achieving its objectives. The Committee have been informed that the APDRP will be
continued during the 11th plan with revised terms and conditions as a central sector
scheme. According to the Ministry of Power establishment of reliable and automated
systems for sustained collection of accurate base line data and the adoption of
Information Technology in the areas of energy accounting in 11th Plan will enable
objective evaluation of the performance of State Power Utilities before and after
implementation of the programme, and will enforce internal accountability.
Considering the fact that a considerable amount has already been spent on the
programme during 10th Five Year Plan, the Committee take a serous view of the
failures in fully achieving the objectives of such a laudable and crucial programme.
The Committee desire that in the light of the facts brought out in this Report and the
suggestions made, Government should take corrective action now with a view to
ensuring that the scheme is properly implemented at least in the 11th Five Year Plan.
[Sl. No. 27]
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
13 October,  2008 Chairman,
21  Asvina, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE-I
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 18th JANUARY , 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. on 18th January, 2008 in Committee
Room "D", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri R.L. Jalappa
3. Shri Brajesh Pathak
4. Shri K.S. Rao
5.  Shri Mohan Singh
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
7. Shri Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Prof. P.J. Kurien
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF C&AG OF INDIA
1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller and Auditor General
2. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (RC)
3. Shri A.N. Chatterji — DG (PA)
4. Shri K.R. Sriram — P r. Director (ESM)
REPRESENTA TIVES OF MINISTRY OF POWER
1. Shri Anil Razdan — Secretary (Power)
57

58
2. Shri S.M. Dhiman — Member, (GO&D) Central Eectricity
Authority
3. Shri Jayant Kawale — Joint Secretary, (Distt.)
REPRESENTATIVES OF NATIONAL THERMAL POWER CORPORATION LTD.
1. Shri R.S. Sharma — Director, (Commercial)
2. Shri R.C. Dhup — General Manager, (APDRP)
REPRESENTA TIVES OF POWER GRID CORPORA TION OF INDIA LTD.
1. Shri R.P. Singh — Chief Managing Director
2. Shri V .K. Sharma — Additional General Manager,
(APDRP)
REPRESENTA TIVE OF POWER FINANCE CORPORATION
Dr. V .K. Garg — Chief Managing Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to the
sitting of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has
been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Power
on C&AG's Report No. 16 of 2007 (Civil —Performance Audit) relating to "Accelerated
Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP)". Thereafter, the Officials of
the C&AG of India briefed the Committee on the points arising out of the Audit Report.
3. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Power were called in. The Chairman
read out the contents of the Direction 58 by the Speaker regarding secret nature of the
proceedings of the Committee.
4. Thereafter, the Secretary, Power introduced his colleagues to the Committee.
The officials of the Ministry made a brief Power Point Presentation on the points
arising out of the Audit Report. The witnesses also replied to some of the queries
raised by the Members of the Committee. As the witnesses could not complete their
replies to all queries raised by the Members, the Honb'ble Chairman directed the
Ministry to furnish the information as desired by the Members in writing at the earliest,
particularly in regard to:—
(i) Non-achievement of primary objective of APDRP of reducing Aggregate
Technical and Commercial Loss (AT&C Loss) by 9 percent per annum;
(ii) Deficiencies in the maintenance of records relating to AT&C losses;
(iii) Steps taken to ensure 100% metering at the levels of feeder, Distribution
Transformers (DTs) and consumers;
(iv) Mechanism to verify correctness of data in respect of AT&C losses, metering
billing etc. furnished by the States;
(v) Diversion of APDRP funds for unauthorised purposes by the States, and the
system prevalent in the Ministry to prevent the same;
(vi) De layed release of funds by the States to the utilities;

59
(vii) Measures taken to prevent theft of energy;
(viii) Weakness in the project planning, management and implementation process,
especially with regard to turn-key contracting;
(ix) Poor-progress in implementation of APDRP projects; and
(x) Reason for shortfall in APDRP implementation and revised steps proposed
to be taken for achieving all the objectives of APDRP during 11th Five Year
Plan.
5. A copy of  the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

60
ANNEXURE-II
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2008-2009) HELD ON 15th SEPTEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hours in Committee Room 'B', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
8. Shri Sita Ram Singh
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
10. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Raashid Alvi
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Prof. P.J. Kurien
14. Dr. K. Malaisamy
15. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary-II
6.  Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary-II

61
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri Anupam Kulshreshtha — ADAI (RA)
2. Shri Nand Kishore — Director General of Audit
(Performance Audit)
3.  Ms. Mahua Pal — Principal Director of Audit (DT)
4. Shri P.K. Kataria — Principal Director of Audit
(Report Central)
R
EPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
1. Smt. Sushma Nath — Secretary (Expenditure)
2. Smt. L.M. V as — Additional Secretary
3. Shri V .N. Kaila — Controller General of Accounts
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILW AY BOARD)
Smt. Sudha Chobe — Financial Commissioner
(Railways)
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
1. Shri P.V . Bhide — Secretary (Revenue)
2. Shri N.B. Singh — Chairman (CBDT)
3. Shri Ajai Singh — Member (L&C)
4. Shri S.S. Khan — Member (IT)
5. Shri S.S.N. Moorthy — Member (A&J)
6. Shri Shaikh Naimuddin — Member
7. Shri Arbind Modi — Joint Secretary (TPL-I)
8. Shri R.K. Tiwari — CIT (A&J)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers
to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting
has been convened for a briefing by the Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) on ‘‘Inadequate monitoring and delay in submission of remedial/
corrective Action Taken Notes’’ by the concerned Ministries/Departments on the
various paragraphs/subjects contained in the Reports of the C&AG of India; and non-
submission of Action Taken Replies on 54th Report of PAC on ‘‘Excesses over Voted
Grants and Charged Appropriation (2005-2006)’’.
3. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) were called in. The Chairman read out the provisions of Direction 58 of
the Directions by the Speaker regarding confidentiality of proceedigns. The Secretary,
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) explained to the Committee the reasons

62
for non-submission of Action Taken Notes on 54th Reprot of PAC on "Excesses over
V oted Grants and Charged Appropriation (2005-2006)" and assured the Committee that
the same will be furnished shortly after vetting by Audit. As regards, delay in submission
of remedial/corrective  “Action Taken Notes” by the concerned Ministries/Departments
on the various paragraphs/subjects contained in the Reports of the C&AG of India,
the Secretary stated that the Ministry is seized of the matter and steps are being taken
for effective monitoring and timely submission of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
Notes. The Hon'ble Chairman directed the Secretary (Expenditure) that all the pending
Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes should be furnished within a period of three
months along with the reasons for such delay. The Chairman also asked Audit officials
to furnish Ministry-wise position of the paras on which Action Taken Notes are awaited
from the concerned Ministries/Departments.
4. The representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
then withdrew.
5. Thereafter, the Committee proceeded to take oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and Central Board
of Direct Taxes (CBDT) on Chapter-I (Paragraph Nos. 1.9.1 to 1.9.6, 1.10.1 to 1.10.4,
1.21.1 to 1.21.3 and 1.24.1 to 1.24.4) and Chapter-II (Paragraph Nos. 2.7.1 to 2.7.2, 2.8.1
to 2.8.3.1 and 2.9.1 to 2.9.3.1) of C&AG's Report No. PA 7 of 2008 for the year ended
March, 2007, Union Government (Direct Taxes) relating to (i) ‘‘Review on Assessments
of Banks’’; and (ii) ‘‘Review on Appreciation of Third Party Reporting/Certification
in Assessment Proceedings’’ respectively. Then the representatives of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) were called in and the Committee commenced oral
evidence on the subjects. The Secretary, Department of Revenue and the Member,
CBDT explained in detail the position of the Ministry on the Audit findings and remedial
action taken thereon. To certain queries for which the witnesses could not give
satisfactory replies, the Hon'ble Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry
to furnish the requisite information in writing at the earliest.
6. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the Draft Report
on C&AG's Report No. 16 of 2007 (Entire Report), Union Government (Civil—
Performance Audit) relating to ‘‘Accelerated Power Development and Reform
Programme (APDRP)’’ and adopted the same without any amendments/modifications
and authorized the Chairman to finalize and present the Report to Parliament in the
light of factual verification, if any, done by the Audit.
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

Performance Audit
of
Accelerated Power Development and Reform
Programme
(Ministry of Power)
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India
for the year ended March 2006
UNION GOVERNMENT (CIVIL)
NO. 16 OF 2007
(PERFORMANCE AUDIT)
63

CONTENTS
Paragraph Page
Preface 66
Overview 67
Highlights 68
Summary of recommendations 71
Distribution Reforms—Background 1 73
Electricity Generation, Transmission and Distribution 1.1 73
Accelerated Power Development Programme (APDP) 1.2 74
Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme 1.3 74
(APDRP)
Expected Benefits from APDRP 1.4 74
APDRP—Salient Features 2 75
Organisational Setup 2.1 75
APDRP Components 2.2 75
Investment Component 2.3 75
Incentive Component 2.4 77
Conditions for availing benefits under APDRP 2.5 77
APDRP Expenditure 2.6 78
Audit Objectives and Scope 3 78
Audit Criteria 4 79
Audit Methodology 5 79
Sample Selection 5.1 79
Achievement of APDRP Objectives 6 80
Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT & C) Losses 6.1 80
System and Consumer Metering 6.2 86
Reliability and Quality of Power Supply 6.3 90
Energy Accounting and Audit 6.4 94
64

65
Gap between Average Revenue Realisation (ARR) and Average 6.5 98
Cost of Supply (ACS) Not Eliminated
Release and Utilisation of APDRP Funds 7 99
Funds Release 7.1 99
Utilisation of Funds 7.2 101
Incentive Mechanism 8 111
Background 8.1 111
Incentive Mechanism has not taken off 8.2 111
Inadmissible Incentive Claims—Rajasthan 8.3 112
Not allowing Incentive Claims 8.4 112
No mechanism for ensuring utilisation of incentives for 8.5 113
improvement of power sector
Reform Measures 9 114
No accountability of Circles and Feeders 9.1 114
Unbundling of SEBs 9.2 115
Formation of State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC) 9.3 115
Formation of State Level Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC) 9.4 115
Ineffective vigilance and legal measures to prevent theft of energy 9.5 115
Project Planning, Management and Implementation 10 117
Project Planning and Approval 10.1 117
Project Implementation 10.2 118
Information Technology (IT) enabling 11 120
Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting 12 120
Summary of reported financial progress 12.1 120
Lack of direct linkage between physical and financial progress 12.2 123
Inspection of APDRP Projects 12.3 124
V ery few projects evaluated 12.4 124
Monitoring by State Level Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC) 12.5 125
Conclusion 13 125
Annexure I to XIX 127-163
List of Abbreviations 164

PREFACE
This report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India containing the results
of performance audit of Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme
(APDRP) has been prepared for submission to the President of India under Article 151
of the Constitution.
The audit was conducted through test check of records of the Union Ministry of
Power, Union Ministry of Finance and State Electricity Boards/Utilities/Departments
in 29 States/Union Territories during the period June to October 2006. The period
covered under the audit was 2002-03 to 2005-06.
66

OVERVIEW
The Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP) was
launched, with the primary objective of reduction in the Aggregate Techical and
Commercial Losses and significant improvement in revenue realisation by the State
utilities, in 2002-03 as additional Central Assistance to finance projects relating to the
sub-transmission and  distribution network. The project had a total outlay of
Rs. 40,000 crore— Rs. 20,000 crore each for the investment and incentive components—
for the 10th Five Year Plan Period. As of March 2006, the Ministry had released a total
amount of Rs. 6131.70 crore on 583 projects involving a total project cost of
Rs. 19180.46 crore, of which the reported utilisation was Rs. 9507.20 crore (including
counter part funding).
A Performance Audit of the Scheme revealed that the primary objective of APDRP
of reducing AT & C Loss by 9 per cent per annum had not been achieved. There were
serious deficiencies in system metering (in particular Distribution Transformer metering)
and consumer metering. There were also significant deficiencies in the quality and
reliability of power supply, which was targeted under APDRP. Also, effective energy
accounting and auditing had not been possible in most States, primarily due to lack of
100 per cent system metering, lack of accountability at the distribution circle and
feeder levels, and inadequate computerisation.
The audit also showed significant deficiencies in the systems and procedures
for release and utilisation of APDRP funds. There were instances of incorrect financial
reporting amounting to Rs. 676.09 crore by the States to the Central Government. In
addition, instances of irregular diversion of funds amounting to Rs. 614.01 crore, and
non-return of surplus funds of Rs. 51.07 crore were noticed.
The incentive mechanism which was a part of APDRP was not successful, with
just Rs. 1575.02 crore released as of January 2007, as against the 10th Five Y ear Plan
provision of Rs. 20,000 crore. Further, most of the incentive claims pertained to the
years 2001-02 to 2003-04.
There were significant weaknesses in the project planning, management and
implementation process, as well as in the mechanisms for reporting, monitoring and
inspection.
The Ministry needs to take major and effective steps to exercise stricter monitoring
and control under APDRP to ensure that the envisaged objective of distribution reform
is achieved.
67

MINISTRY OF POWER
Performance Audit of Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme
Highlights
• The primary objective of ARDRP of reducing Aggregate Technical and
Commercial Loss (AT& C Loss) by 9 per cent per annum was not achieved, as
the reduction between 2001-02 and 2004-05 was just 1.68 per cent per annum.
Further, there were significant deficiencies in the maintenance of records
relating to AT&C Loss, including absence of proper guidelines and supporting
records, billing on assessment basis and incorrect reporting of AT&C Loss by
the States. Consequently, the data reported by the Ministry could not be regarded
as authentic and accurate.
(Paragraphs 6.1.1 and 6.1.2)
• The programme envisaged 100 per cent metering of feeders, Distribution
Transformers (DTs) and consumer connections. The audit showed that the
progress in metering of DTs, which is an essential tool to control AT&C losses,
was not adequate as only 3 States had shown 80 to 100 per cent metering. As
regards feeder and consumer metering, despite the Ministry's reports showing
a high percentage of metering in most States, audit examination at the State
level showed significant deficiences, in addition to misreporting of data on
installation of meters.
(Paragraph 6.2)
• There were significant deficiencies in the quality and reliability of power supply,
which was targeted under APDRP. The number of feeder trippings and duration
of outage, as well as failure rate of Distribution Transformers, was much higher
than permissible in most States.
(Paragraph 6.3)
• Effective energy accounting and auditing had not been possible in most States,
primarily due to lack of 100 per cent system metering, lack of accountability at
the circle and feeder levels, and inadequate computerisation.
(Paragraph 6.4)
• The objective of elimination of the gap between Average Revenue Realisation
(ARR) and Average Cost of Supply (ACS) was far from being achieved. Only
3 out of 29 States had achieved this target, and in fact, in 8 States, the gap
between ARR and ACS had shown a deteriorating trend.
(Paragraph 6.5)
68

69
• There was no mechanism for release and monitoring of APDRP funds on a
project-wise basis. 17 out of 29 States where the programme was being
implemented, either did not operate separate account heads and bank accounts
for APDRP funds, or did not operate them correctly.
(Paragraph 7.1)
• The Guidelines did not specify submission of Utilisation Certificates, supported
by detailed Statements of Expenditure. Audit of 294 projects involving utilisation
of funds reported to be Rs. 5617.64 crore as of March 2006, revealed instances
of incorrect financial reporting amounting to Rs. 676.09 crore.
(Paragraphs 7.2.1 and 7.2.2)
• Audit revealed instances of diversion of funds amounting to Rs. 181.78 crore
by 10 States for unauthorised purposes, and diversion of Rs. 432.23 crore by
7 States for adjustment against various dues of the utilities, which was
effectively equivalent to short release of APDRP funds.
(Paragraph 7.2.5)
• As of March 2006, three States did not return surplus funds amounting to
Rs. 51.07 crore, while eight States failed to release Rs. 412.03 crore of APDRP
funds to the SEBs/utilities.
(Paragraphs 7.2.4 and 7.2.6)
• The incentive mechanism of APDRP was not successful, with just Rs. 1575.02
crore released as of January 2007, against the 10th Five Year Plan provision
of Rs. 20,000 crore. Further, most of the claims pertained to the years
2001-02 to 2003-04, which indicated that the objective of reducing cash losses
of SEBs/Utilities through an incentive mechanism had largely not been
achieved. Audit examination also revealed a number of deficiencies, such as
allowing an ineligible claim, disallowance of incentive claims on grounds not
reflected in the guidelines, and lack of a mechanism for verifying utilisation
of the incentive grant for improvement of the power sector.
(Paragraph 8)
• The administrative intervention envisaged under APDRP of ensuring
accountability at the circle and feeder level by redesignating Distribution
Circles as independent profit centres and feeders as business units was not
successful. While many States had designated the Circle Superintending
Engineer and Junior Engineer as Circle CEO and Feeder Manager, no
administrative measures were taken to ensure accountability and
responsibility.
(Paragraph 9.1)
• The Ministry did not have a mechanism for monitoring periodically the
effectiveness of vigilance and legal measures in different States to prevent
theft of energy. The percentage of registering theft cases was low ranging

70
between 0.28 per cent to 14.08 per cent, and the percentage of conviction was
even lower, ranging between zero and 10.61 per cent.
(Paragraph 9.5)
• There were significant weaknesses in the project planning, management and
implementation process. There was inadequate examination of DPRs by the
Steering Committee, with 641 projects being approved in just 9 meetings.
Most SEBs/Utilities had not adopted turnkey contracting, and had executed
the works departmentally or on semi-turnkey basis; in some cass, the turnkey
packaging was so distorted that it negated the concept of single point
responsibility, which was the objective of turnkey contracting. In addition, the
audit also detected numerous deficiencies in individual projects across different
aspects, covering execution of out-of-scope items, lack of economy in
procurement and execution, excess payments to contractors and other
inefficiencies.
(Paragraph 10)
• There was lack of direct linkage between physical and financial progress of
APDRP projects at the Ministry's level. The mechanism for inspection of
APDRP implementation was inadequate.
(Paragraphs 12.2 & 12.3)

Summary of Recommendations
• Ministry may take steps to (a) ensure that States re-orient their efforts under
APDRP towards reduction of AT&C Loss; (b) independently verify the
authenticity of reported AT&C Losses; and (c) minimise the extent of billing/
metering done on assessment basis.
• Ministry may ensure that (a) SEBs/Utilities complete 100 per cent feeder, DT
and consumer metering in all ongoing and completed APDRP projects within
a clearly defined time frame; (b) such metering data is fully validated in an
independent fashion; and (c) further funds for APDRP projects are released
only after 100 per cent metering is validated.
• Ministry may take steps to ensure that all States carry out effective energy
accounting and audit at the feeder and DT levels, and necessary pre-requisites
for such auditing and accounting e.g. 100 per cent system and consumer
metering, regular/automated system meter reading and reconciliation and
consumer indexing and other IT enabling activities are implemented
immediately.
• In order to have a comprehensive monitoring of the programme, the MoP
should monitor together the release of funds and progress on a project-by-
project basis.
• Ministry should ensure that the separate identity of APDRP funds is maintained,
and that separate accounts are opened not only by the State Government but
also the SEB/utility concerned.
• Ministry should ensure that annual annual Utilisation Certificates, duly
supported by detailed Statements of Expenditure, are submitted by the concerned
State Governments in the prescribed formats in respect of each APDRP project.
• Ministry may insist on immediate onward release of the funds retained by the
State Governments, ensuring, that in the process, the State Governments make
no adjustments or deductions from APDRP releases. Ministry may also ensure
immediate calculation and recovery of penal interest from the State
Governments for delay in release of funds. Further, the Ministry may also
institute a formal mechanism for monitoring the delay in release of funds by
the State Governments.
• Ministry may ensure that States comply with the letter and spirit of the MOA
and ensure target-based accountability at the Distribution circle and feeder
level.
• Ministry may set up a mechanism for monitoring the effectiveness of legal and
vigilance measures adopted by SEBs/Utilities for preventing theft of energy.
71

72
• Ministry's monitoring and reporting mechanism should capture both physical
and financial progress, facilitating direct linkage and comparison, and
corrective action in case of wide variations between physical and financial
progress.
• Ministry may take steps to ensure (a) that all DPRs are subjected to critical
examination by the Steering Committee for technical and financial feasibility
before approval (b) the independent, advisory role of ACCs is clearly demarcated
as opposed to implementation responsibilities, and (c) there is a well-defined
mechanism for inspection of  APDRP  projects by ACCs and review of corrective
action thereon.

Ministry of Power
Performance Audit Report of Accelerated Power Development and Reform
Programme
1. Distribution Reforms—Background
1.1 Electricity Generation, Transmission and Distribution
Generation, transmission and distribution are the three main commercial aspects
related to production and distribution of electricity:
> Electricity is generated or produced in different types of thermal, hydro-electric
and nuclear power plants.
> The generated electricity is then transmitted at high voltages (generally 110
KV or above) through a network of transmission lines, and is then passed
through step down transformers that lower the voltage, and distributed to
various consumers at different voltages.
A brief diagram showing the generation, transmission and distribution of
electricity is given below:
Figure 1: Generation, Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
GENERATOR
EXTRA HIGH VOLTAGE
TRANSFORMER e.g. 220/33 KV
POWER SUB-STATION WITH POWER
TRANSFORMER e.g. 33/11 KV
TRANSMISSION LINE
SUB-TRANSMISSION
LINE
DISTRIBUTION LINE -
High Tension (HT)
HT CONSUMER
DISTRIBUTION
TRANSFORMER
DT
METER
CONSUMER METER 1
C 1 C 2 C 3
LT CONSUMERS
CONSUMER METER 2 CONSUMER METER 3
DISTRIBUTION LINE -
Low Tension (LT)
/barb2left
/barb2left
/barb2left
/barb2left
/barb2left
73

74
1.2 Accelerated Power Development Programme (APDP)
Due to the inability of State power utilities to systematically fund essential
activities relating to the upgradation of the sub-transmission and distribution system
and renovation and modernisation of old plants, developmental activities in the power
sector had not taken place in an organised and comprehensive manner, resulting in
shortages, poor quality of supply and frequent interruptions. The commercial losses
of the State Electricity Boards had been escalating. In order to address these issues,
the Government of India (GoI), in February 2001, launched the Accelerated Power
Development Programme (APDP). The scheme would finance specific projects relating
to:
• Renovation and Modernisation (R&M)/life extension/uprating of old power
plants (thermal and hydel); and
• Upgrading and strengthening of sub-transmission and distribution network
(below 33KV or 66 KV), including energy accounting and metering in the
distribution circles in a phased manner.
APDP was to continue till the end of the 11th Five Year Plan i.e. 2012. An amount
of Rs. 1000 crore was budgeted as APDP funds among the States in 2000-01 for various
schemes under the above categories.
1.3 Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP)
For quick turnaround of the power sector, GoI decided to restructure the concept
of APDP from merely an investment window to also a mechanism for supporting power
sector reforms in the States linked to the fulfilment of performance criteria by way of
benchmarks. To "incentivise" the reform process, it was proposed to reward the actual
improvement in the performance of the utilities by way of reduction in commercial
losses and increased revenue realisation. Therefore, APDP was renamed as "Accelerated
Power Development and Reforms Programme" (APDRP) in the Union Budget 2002-03.
1.4 Expected Benefits from APDRP
The following major benefits of the programme were envisaged:
• Reduction of Aggregate Technical and Commercial Losses (AT&C Losses)
1
from around 60 per cent to around 15 per cent in five years, to begin with in the
urban areas and high density/consumption areas, which implied a targeted
reduction of 9 per cent per annum in AT&C Losses.
• Significant improvement in revenue realization by reduction of commercial and
technical losses
• Improved quality of supply and reliable interruption-free power.
• Decrease in the burden of heavy subsidies to SEBs/Utilities.
1
Aggregate Technical and Commercial Loss (AT&C Loss) is considered the clearest measure of the
overall efficiency of power distribution as it measures technical and commercial losses. By contrast,
Transmission and Distribution Loss (T&D  Loss) does not capture losses on account of non-
realisation of payments.

75
2. APDRP—Salient Features
2.1 Organisational Setup
> At the Central level, the Distribution Division in the Ministry of Power (MoP),
under the overall charge of the Joint Secretary, is responsible for release of
funds, approval of projects, signing of Memoranda of Agreement (MoA),
monitoring, processing of incentive claims etc.
> In addition, a Steering Committee, chaired by Secretary (Power) and comprising
members from the Central Electricity Authority (CEA), Ministry of Finance
(MoF), Planning Commission, National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC),
Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (Power Grid), Power Finance Corporation
(PFC) and Rural Electricification Corporation (REC), has been constituted to
consider the proposals under APDRP and to review the implementation of the
programme.
> NTPC and Power Grid have been designated as the Lead Advisor cum
Consultants (Lead ACCs).
> At the State level, the projects sanctioned under APDRP are implemented by
the State Electricity Boards (SEBs)/State Utilities/State Electricity Departments
(SEDs).
2.2 APDRP Components
APDRP has two components:
> An investment component for strengthening and upgradation of the sub-
transmission and distribution system; and
> An incentive component to motivate utilities to reduce cash losses.
2.3 Investment Component
APDRP has an outlay of Rs. 40,000 crore as Additional Central Plan Assistance
to the State Governments during the 10th Five Year Plan (2002-07). Of this amount, the
investment component was for Rs. 20,000 crore, with the remaining Rs. 20,000 crore for
the incentive component.
The funding mechanism under the investment component was as follows:
> For Special Category States
2
, APDRP would finance 100 per cent project cost in
the ratio of 90 per cent grant and 10 per cent soft loan.
> For other States, APDRP would finance 50 per cent of the project cost (ratio of
grant and loan would be 1:1 i.e. 25 per cent grant and 25 per cent loan) and the
SEBs/Utilities would have to arrange the remaining 50 per cent of the funds
from PFC/REC or other financial institutions as counter part funds.
2
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim and Uttaranchal are Special Category States.

76
With effect from November, 2005, the loan component of 10 per cent for Special
Category States and 25 per cent for other States was dispensed with.
The release of funds is in instalments, linked with the release of counter part
funds and project spending; the pattern differs for Special Category States and other
States. Details of the pattern of release of funds are given in Annexure-I.
2.3.1 APDRP Interventions
The technical, commercial and administrative interventions under APDRP were
prioritised into Category A and Category B items, as follows:
Table 1: Category A and B Items under APDRP
Category-A Items Category-B Items
Targeted to reduce commercial losses and Targeted to reduce technical
increase reliability by: losses and capacity augmentation
by:
> Feeder Metering > New Sub-Stations
> Distribution Transformer (DT) Metering > New Lines
> Sub-Station R&M (Renovation and > Bifurcation of Feeders
Modernisation)
> Capacitor Placement > Reconductoring
> Distribution Transformer R&M
> Service Connection Improvement
> IT enabling, including Sub-station Automation
2.3.2 Procedure for Sanction, Implementation and Monitoring
In brief, the procedure for sanction and implementation of projects under APDRP
is as follows:
> SEBs/Utilities prepare Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), containing the activities
to be implemented by the utilities, which are submitted to the ACCs.
> The DPRs are scrutinized and vetted by the ACCs, and submitted to the MoP
for the consideration of the APDRP Steering Committee.
> After the proposal is approved by the Steering Committee, the MoP approaches
the MoF for release of funds.
> MoF releases funds to the States. SEBs/Utilities obtain counterpart funds from
Financial Institutions and open escrow account.
> SEBs/Utilities take up the tendering process and award contracts.
> Monitoring of the programme is done by MoP , Lead ACCs/local ACCs, State
level/District level Distribution Reforms Committees.

77
2.4 Incentive Component
Under the incentive component, the State Governments would be incentives
upto 50 per cent of the actual total loss reduction by SEBs/Utilities. The grant under
this component was to be utilised exclusively for the improvement of the power Sector.
The salient features of the incentive scheme are as follows:
> The year 2000-01 would be taken as the base year for calculation of loss reduction
in subsequent years.
> Losses would be calculated net of subsidy.
> Revenue would be considered on net realization basis ( i.e. increase in receivables
would be factored into the calculation).
> Incentive in subsequent years would be given on the incremental loss reduction
(disallowing regression, if any).
> All qualifications on the audited accounts in the audit report having a bearing
on reduction of expenses or inflation of income would be factored in. Similarly,
any change in accounting policy having the effect of decreasing expenses or
increasing the period of amortization/depreciation would also be factored in.
2.5 Conditions for availing benefits under APDRP
2.5.1 Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs)
As part of the six-level strategy, at the State level, the MoP insisted on signing
of MoUs covering the following major reforms:
> Setting up of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs);
> Restructuring of SEBs, viz. unbundling into separate entities for generation
transmission and distribution and corporatisation of unbundled entities;
> Removing cross subsidies and tariff anomalies, and providing budgetary support
to SEBs towards subsidies;
> Introduce private participation in generation, transmission and distribution;
> Filing of first tariff petition by SEB/Utility with SERC, and implementation of
tariff orders of the SERC; and
> Securitisation of dues of Central Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) to the
SEBs/Utilities.
2.5.2 Memoranda of Agreements (MoA)
In order to enable the SEBs/Utilities to manage distribution on a profit centre
approach and to improve their performance on the basis of certain benchmarks, the
signing of a Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) by them with the MoP for power
reforms was made a pre-requisite for release of funds under APDRP. The key reforms
envisaged through the MoA were as follows:
> 100 per cent metering for each 11 KV feeder and also for consumers;

78
* Energy accounting and audit;
* Distribution Circles to be operated as independent profit centres with adequate
delegation of powers, with the Superintending Engineer as the Circle Chief
Executive Office (CEO).
* 11 KV feeders to be operated as business units, with the Junior Engineer as the
feeder manager; and
* Turnkey contracting system to be adopted by the SEBs/Utilities.
2.6 APDRP Expenditure
The progress of expenditure as of 31st March, 2006 under the investment
component was as follows:—
Table 2: Year-wise details of Project Cost, APDRP Component, Release and
Utilisation
(All figures in Rs. Crore)
Y ear Project Revised APDRPComponent Release Counter Counter Utilisation
Cost Investment Part Fund Part Fund
Grant Loan T otal Grant Loan T otal sanctioned drawn
2002-03 14051.44 4534.87 725.48 5260.35 1030.04 725.48 1755.52 4562.64 493.70 586.81
2003-04 1777.52 721.09 993.99 1715.08 1362.52 993.99 2356.51 1211.39 1315.71 2718.97
2004-05 3054.63 1652.39 554.75 2207.14 873.98 554.75 1428.73 977.46 1042.42 3390.66
2005-06 296.87 82.08 0.00 82.08 590.94 0.00 590.94 292.85 1235.21 2810.76
TOTAL 19180.46 6990.43 2274.22 9264.65 3857.48 2274.22 6131.70 7044.34 4087.04 9507.20
State-wise details are given in Annexure-II.
3. Audit Objectives and Scope
A performance audit of APDRP, covering the period from 2002-2003 to 2005-
2006, was taken up with the objectives of assessing whether:—
* The intended audit of APDRP viz. reduction in A T&C losses, 100 per cent
system and consumer metering, improvement in quality and reliability of power
supply, energy accounting and audit, and reduction in the gap between ARR
and ACS have been effectively achieved.
* There was adequate and effective control over the release and utilisation of
APDRP funds.
* The incentive mechanism envisaged under APDRP has been successfully
implemented.
* The reforms sought to be achieved through the MoUs and MoAs with the
State Governments and SEBs/Utilities has been effectively implemented.
* The process for planning, implementation of APDRP was adequate and effective,
and the projects were executed economically and efficiently.

79
* Information Technology (IT) applications and Computer Aided Tools were
effectively implemented for improving distribution performance.
* There was a system of adequate monitoring to evaluate the programme and
take corrective steps.
4. Audit Criteria
The main audit criteria used for the performance audit were:—
* Guidelines for implementation of APDRP issued by the MoP;
* MoUs and MoAs with the State Governments and SEBs/Utilities;
* Guidelines for Reduction of T&D Losses issued by the CEA (February 2001);
* Guidelines for Development of Sub-Transmission and Distribution Systems by
Committee of Experts and CEA (November 2001); and
* DPRs for APDRP Projects.
5. Audit Methodology
The Performance Audit of the Programme commenced with an entry conference
with the MoP in February 2006, in which the audit methodology, scope, objectives and
criteria were explained. During this meeting, the MoP also made a presentation on the
status of APDRP.
The period covered under the audit was 2002-03 to 2005-06. Field audit of the
relevant records of the MoP, MoF, and SEBs/Utilities/SEDs was conducted at the
Ministry and 29 States/UT
3
 between June and October 2006.
An exit conference was held in January 2007 with the MoP, where the audit
findings were discussed in detail. Representatives of NTPC, Power Grid and CEA were
also present at this conference.
The draft audit report was issued to the Ministry in January 2007. Replies were
received from the Ministry, as well as from NTPC and Power Grid, in January/February
2007, which have been suitably incorporated in the report.
Audit gratefully acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the
MoP, NTPC, Power Grid and CEA, and their officials at various stages of conduct of
the performance audit.
5.1 Sample Selection
Of the 583 approved APDRP projects (as of March 2006) in 29 States/UT, a
sample of 294 projects was selected for detailed examination. These projects had a
total approved cost of Rs. 10255.21 crores (including counter part funding), and as of
3
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and West Bengal.

80
March 2006, the reported utilisation of funds was Rs. 5617.64 crore. The process of
sample selection is summarised below:—
* In every State, 25 per cent of the Circles (subject to increase in order to cover
the required number of projects) were selected.
* From within the selected Circles, the projects were stratified into two categories
(a) projects which had been evaluated by external agencies, and (b) other
projects, and the required sample of projects selected separately from each
stratum.
Details of the sampling procedure followed are given in Annexure-III.
6. Achievement of APDRP Objectives
6.1 Aggregate Technical and Commercial (AT&C) Losses
6.1.1 Projected Reduction in AT&C Losses not achieved
Hitherto, T&D Loss (Transmission & Distribution Loss) was being used to
measure the efficiency of power distribution. However, this measure has the following
anomalies:—
* T&D loss does not capture losses on account of non-realisation of payments.
* In absence of feeder metering in the past, a substantial portion of T&D loss,
including theft of electricity, was attributed to agricultural consumption. Utilities
were overestimating agricultural consumption, and showing a lower value for
T&D Loss.
By contrast, A T&C is considered a clearer measure of the overall efficiency of
power distribution, since it measures technical and commercial losses.
AT&C Loss is calculated as
(Energy Input — Energy Realised) x 100
Energy Input
where
Energy Realised = Energy Billed x Collection Efficiency, and
Collection Efficiency = Amount Realised x 100
Amount Billed
While launching APDRP in March 2003, it was envisaged that AT&C Losses
would be brought down from the existing level of about 60 per cent to around 15 per
cent in five years, to begin with in the urban areas and high density/consumption
areas. This implied that reduction of AT&C Loss @ 9 per cent per annum was targeted.
The State-wise details of AT&C Loss for the years 2001-02 and 2005-06, which
came to light in the audit, are given in Annexure-IV. Analysis revealed that AT&C Loss
was still very high, and ranged between 15.86 per cent in Goa and 72.74 per cent in
Mizoram. Except in the States of Goa, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, the AT&C

81
Losses continued to be very high in other States. The reduction in AT&C Loss in most
States was marginal. Thus, the primary objective of APDRP of reducing AT&C Loss
by 9 per cent per annum had not been achieved.
Audit examination of the AT&C Loss in States on a circle/project-wise basis
revealed the following:—
* In respect of Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka (5 out of 14
projects test checked), Madhya Pradesh (12 towns), Manipur and Meghalaya,
the losses increased as compared to the base year, indicating that SEBs/Utilities
had not taken adequate steps to reduce the AT&C losses.
* In Delhi, the AT&C Losses ranged from 47.3 per cent to 66.1 per cent (5 districts
of BYPL) and 49.5 per cent to 73.1 per cent (3 districts of BRPL) and as high as
53.93 per cent in Mangolpuri (NDPL).
* In Himachal Pradesh, the AT&C Losses for 2005-06 in 6 circles test checked in
Audit ranged from 24.33 to 70.43 per cent.
Audit findings narrated above are corroborated by the October 2006 Report of
the Task Force of the MoP on Restructuring of APDRP, which indicated that as per the
data compiled by the Ministry, AT&C Loss at the national level came down from 38.86
per cent in 2001-02 to 33.82 per cent in 2004-05. The reduction in AT&C Loss of 5.04 per
cent during three years implied a reduction of 1.68 per cent per annum against the
target of 9 per cent per annum. As per the report, AT&C Loss had, in fact, gone up
between 2001-02 and 2004-05 in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand, Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala and Pondicherry. The region-wise position of
AT&C Loss, as per the report, was as follows:—
Table 3: Region-wise position of AT&C losses (in per cent)
Region 2001-02 2004-05
East 47.34 44.85
North-East 40.65 41.59
North 46.01 40.64
South 27.63 23.81
West 39.60 32.73
6.1.2 Data regarding AT&C losses not authentic
Audit examination also revealed significant deficiencies in the maintenance of
records relating to calculation of AT&C losses as explained in the succeeding
paragraphs. Hence, the data reported by the MoP on AT&C Losses could not be
regarded as authentic, accurate and acceptable.

82
6.1.2.1 Absence of proper guidelines/procedures and supporting records
Audit examination revealed that:—
* SEBs/Utilities had not issued any detailed guidelines to the field offices
regarding calculation of A T&C losses.
* SEBs/Utilities had not evolved any system for study and correct assessment of
technical and commercial losses separately at the State, circle, feeder and
Distribution Transformer (DT) levels.
* Automated Data Logger System had not been implemented in all sub-stations,
and computerization of Low Tension (LT) Billing and consumer indexing was
sporadic.
* There was no evidence of verification of A T&C data by the Ministry, or a
uniform approach for collecting and compiling the source data and calculating
A T&C losses.
Audit examination also revealed systemic, deficiencies in record maintenance in
several States, as detailed below:—
* In Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Sikkim,
the data relating to Input Energy, Metered and Billed Energy, etc. was not
supported by any working details, in the absence of which it was not possible
to ascertain the veracity of the reported figures and the resultant AT&C losses.
* In Maharashtra, the metered units compiled from the computerized billing
system did not exclude the assessed, door locked, and provisional billing units.
To that extent, the metering efficiency reported was incorrect.
* In Kerala, the billed energy included the consumption by High Tension (HT)
consumers, but the revenue billed and realized did not include the energy
consumed by the HT consumers. Further, in the absence of 100 per cent metering
of feeders and DTs and large number of un-metered LT domestic and agricultural
consumers, the authenticity of the reported A T&C losses could not be vertified
in audit. Also, the quantum of energy transmitted from 11 KV feeders outside
the jurisdiction of a circle/division into its distribution system could not be
ascertained. The input energy in all the circles/divisions covered by APDRP
was accordingly worked out, based on a pre-fixed load sharing proportion.
6.1.2.2 Billing/Metering done on assessment basis
Despite the stated objectives of 100 per cent system metering as well as consumer
metering, a significant number of installations remained unmetered, and the computation
of energy consumed was made on "assessment'' basis, consequently adversely affecting
the veracity of the source data for computation of A T & C loss.
Audit examination at the State level revealed the following:—
* In Kerala, the energy metered and billed included the unmetered energy
consumption under 'Kutir Jyothi Scheme' and public lighting taken on assessment
basis.

83
* In Jharkhand, unmetered supply, in four sampled circles, ranged between 67.8
per cent and 39.93 per cent of total energy, as stated by the SEB. However, the
basis of claculation of unmetered supply was not made available and thus the
estimation of unmetered energy was purely a hypothetical excercise.
* In Uttaranchal, test check of records revealed that in four implementing units in
Haldwani, Roorkee, Ranikhet and Srinagar Circles, billing continued to be made
for 'Public Lamps' and 'Public Water Works' on assessment basis in the absence
of metering details.
* In Karnataka, even after four years of signing of MoA, large numbers of
installations were yet to be metered (March 2006). As against 10,59,366 Irrigation
Pumpsets (IP sets), 4,41,843 Bhagya Jyothi (BJ)/ Kutir Jyothi (KJ) installations,
and 26,570 street lights where meters were to be fixed as on 31 March 2005, only
98,892 IP sets (9.3 per cent), 2,14,067 BJ/KJ installations (48 per cent) and 11,918
street lights (44 per cent) could be metered.
* In Tripura, a fair amount of supplied energy was not metered but accounted for
on the basis of assessment. During 2005-06 about 10-14 per cent of the energy
billed was unmetered and was being accounted for on the basis of assessment.
There were no prescribed norms for assessment of unmetered consumers. The
criteria for assessment was not uniform among various billing authorities
(average for last three months, connective load, minimum charge or even lump
sum), which was bound to be deficient in correct and accurate assessment of
losses.
6.1.2.3 Incorrect reporting of losses
Audit examination revealed significant instances of incorrect reporting of AT &
C losses by the States/Utilities, which were not detected by MoP due to lack of
verification and validation of compiled data as detailed below:—
* In Kerala, the A T& C losses reported to MoP for the year 2005-06 were less
than the actual AT&C losses, with the difference in the figures ranging between
2 to 24 per cent in respect of 9 projects.
* In Chhattisgarh, the details of AT&C loss of the State reported to AcCs/Ministry
by the SEB, and those furnished to the State Electricity Regulatory Commission
(SERC) were inconsistent for the period 2001-02 to 2004-05.
* In Arunachal Pradesh, the figures of AT&C losses for the eyar 2002-06 with
the State Electricity Department (SED) and Power Grid were not in agreement,
and the figures reported by the SED were higher by 2 to 9 per cent.
* The collection efficiency is to be worked out as a percentage of the amount
realized against amount billed. However, it was observed in Kerala (10 divisions),
Maharashtra (one division) and Meghalaya that the amount billed as generated
by the computerized billing system did not include arrears, while the amount
realized included the arrears. The above inaccuracy in calculating the collection
efficiency results in lowering the A T&C loss percentage.

84
* In West Bengal, the SEB (eight selected circles/towns) had not disclosed AT&C
losses aggregating to Rs. 25 crore to the GoI during 2005-06. Against the actual
A T&C losses of 552.87 million Kilowatt Hours (Kwh), it had reported only
474.18 million Kwh to the GoI.
* Due to incorrect reporting of energy billed in respect of 5 sampled circles in
Himachal Pradesh, the AT&C losses as reported by the Circles to the SEB and
as reported by the SEB to the MoP for the years 2002-03 to 2005-06 were not in
agreement, with the differences ranging between 6 and 33 per cent.
* In Madhya Pradesh, the figures relating to Energy Input, Energy Metered,
Energy Billed, Revenue Billed and Revenue Collected furnished to NTPC (AcC)
by the SEB varied from those received from the field offices in respect of
3 towns (Chhatarpur, Damoh and Balaghat).
6.1.3 Poor Metering and Collection Efficiency
Audit examination at the State level revealed that the metering and collection
efficiencies were also poor, as detailed below:—
* In Manipur, collection efficiency varied from 46 to 76 per cent during 2001-02 to
2005-06 and consequently A T & C losses were higher, ranging from 13 to 18 per
cent over the corresponding T&D losses.
* In West Bengal, the AT&C losses (in respect of 8 selected projects) were
higher by 19 per cent over the corresponding T&D losses, indicating a low
Collection Efficiency.
* In Chhattisgarh, the LT arrears of the SEB increased to Rs. 192.13 crore by the
end of March 2006 as against Rs. 131.43 crore at the end of March 2005,
registering an increase of 46 per cent and the LT arrears in respect of all the four
APDRP circle/town schemes test checked in audit registered abnormal increase
ranging from 53 per cent to 368 per cent, thereby indicating poor collection
efficiency.
* In Haryana, collection efficiency in Tohana, Hissar-II and Fatehabad towns
decreased to 88 per cent, 91.82 per cent and 87.27 per cent during 2005-06
against the collection efficiency of 97.52 per cent, 94.98 per cent and 94.59 per
cent respectively in the base year i.e. 2001-02.
* In Jharkhand, in the 4 sampled divisions, the collection efficiency ranged
between 56.77 and 79.90 per cent during 2005-06.
* In Punjab, out of 11 test-checked projects, the targeted metering efficiency of
100 per cent was not achieved in any of the projects. Actual metering efficiency
ranged between 36.73 and 91.15 per cent and, in fact, decreased from the base
year in seven projects. Similarly, the targeted collection efficiency was not
achieved in six projects during 2005-06, and actual collection efficiency had
decreased from the base year in four projects.
* In Karnataka, the average metering efficiency and average collection efficiency
during 2005-06 in the 11 test checked projects were 74.46 per cent and 89.17 per
cent against the targeted 89.91 per cent and 100 per cent respectively.

85
* In Andhra Pradesh, Warangal, Tirupati and Eluru circles could achieve only
33.37 per cent, 46 per cent and 60.50 per cent metering efficiency against the
targets of 90 per cent, 78 per cent and 70 per cent respectively.
* In Madhya Pradesh, in 19 towns the metering efficiency ranged from 40 per cent
(Rewa) to 82 per cent (Mandla). In 15 towns, metering efficiency declined from
60 per cent in 2001-02 to 58 per cent in 2005-06 after the implementation of
APDRP schemes. In Katni and Satna towns, the billing efficiency deteriorated
from 80 per cent and 95 per cent respectively during 2002-03 to 55 per cent and
44 per cent respectively during 2005-06.
* In Jammu & Kashmir, test check of the records revealed that despite substantial
increase in the infrastructure
4
, revenue realisation during 2002-03 to 2005-06
continued to fall short of the amount recoverable and the arrears on this account
increased to Rs. 899.88 crore in 2005-06 from Rs. 540.88 crore in 2002-03 due to
a poor collection efficiency of 33 per cent.
Reply of MoP
In its reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that:—
* Reduction in losses could be expected in such areas where APDRP work had
been taken up and sufficient work completed; APDRP should not expected to
reduce the AT&C loss by the same amount at the State or national level.
* The APDRP Task Force mentioned that the reduction of AT&C loss at the
national level from 38.86 per cent in 2001-02 to 33.82 per cent in 2004-05 could
not be considered as small, as the actual implementation of programme started
quite late due to delay in preparation of projects by the Utilities and then in the
implementation of the sanctioned schemes.
* The independent evaluators observed that reduction in A T&C loss was
significant at the majority of the places where sufficient work was completed.
* The Ministry and AcCs had issued clear guidelines/methodology for calculating
A T&C loss and they were regularly monitoring the progress on reduction of
loss at the project and utility level.
* Ministry had also felt the need for better maintenance and authenticity of base-
line data and was proposing to establish authenticated baseline data as one of
the objectives of the restructured APDRP during the 11th Plan.
* As regards incorrect reporting of losses, the Ministry was proposing to appoint
independent validators during the 11th Plan.
The reply of the MoP is not tenable for the following reasons:—
* Ministry's contention that a reduction of A T&C loss of 5 per cent in 5 years
could not be considered small is not justified as the APDRP envisaged a
reduction of 45 per cent in 5 years. The gap is too wide for any satisfaction.
* The MoP and AcCs should have ensured the timely completion of work in the
APDRP projects, especially those which were sanctioned upto 2003. The
Ministry did not yet have a mechanism to ensure that the stated objectives of
the APDRP are met even after the completion of five years of the programme.
4
Out of Rs. 408.50 crore released, Rs. 321.92 crore was utilized.

86
* The guidelines/methodology for calculation of A T&C Loss specified by
MoP/AcCs may be considered in the context of the incorrect reporting of
A T&C Losses by the SEBs/ Utilities to the MoP.
Recommendations
Ministry may take steps to (a) ensure that States re-orient their efforts under APDRP
towards reduction of AT&C Loss; (b) independently verify the authenticity of reported
AT&C Losses; and (c) minimise the extent of billing/metering done on assessment
basis.
6.2 System and Consumer Metering
6.2.1 Status of Feeder, Distribution Transformer (DT) and Consumer Metering
At the time of formulation of APDRP, implementation of 100 per cent system
metering and consumer metering was envisaged with a view to ensure proper energy
accounting and auditing. In particular, metering of feeders and DTs were prioritised as
Category-A items, as these were points of bulk deliveries.
Table 4: Status of feeder, consumer and DT metering as of March 2006
5
Percentage Feeder Metering Consumer Metering Distribution
of Metering Transformer Metering
Number  of States Number of States Number of States
2001-02 2005-06 2001-02 2005-06 2004-05 2005-06
100-80 18 25 14 20 4 3
80-60 - 1 7 5 - -
60-40 3 1 7 4 2 2
40-20 6 1 - - 4 5
Below 20 1 - - - 6 9
No data available 1 1 1 - 13 10
It can be seen from the above table that while there was considerable
improvement in terms of reported feeder and consumer metering, as regards DT
metering, only 3 States had shown 80 to 100 per cent metering and there was no
information in respect of 10 States, with consequent lack of control on AT & C losses
and inadequate energy accounting and auditing.
Details of State-wise metering status in respect of 11 KV Feeders, Distribution
Transformer and Consumers, compiled from the status report supplied by the Ministry,
are given in Annexure-V (a&b).
An examination of the status of metering in the States indicated significant
deficiencies, which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
6.2.2  DT Metering
* The installation of DT meters vis-a-vis target was low in Maharashtra (71 per
cent), Uttaranchal (61 per cent), Uttar Pradesh (40 per cent), and Madhya
Pradesh (12 per cent).
5.
As compiled on the basis of information made available by the MoP.

87
* The DPRs did not cover requirement of meters for achieving 100 per cent
metering. In Chhattisgarh, though there were about 19547 DTs in the APDRP
Circles and Towns during 2002-03, DPRs covered only 6957 DTs for metering,
indicating deficient estimation.
* In Kerala, against the requirement of 6789 DT meters, only 5506 meters had
been installed in the three short closed circle schemes.
* In South Goa, the DPR envisaged 1436 system trivector meters to be installed on
DTs by October 2005; however, as of October 2006, these were under the process
of tendering by the SED.
6.2.3 Feeder Metering
Despite the Ministry's reports showing a high percentage of feeder metering in
most States, examination of the records at the State level revealed significant deficiencies
in feeder metering, as summarised below:
* In Rajasthan, out of 10,594 feeders under the three Discoms, only 9,254 feeders
were metered as on March, 2006. However, as per the MoP, the State had 100 per
cent feeder metering.
* In Bihar, though 1140 feeder meters were required for eight circles and orders
had been placed in advance, only 752 meters had been supplied as of
February 2007, of which only 428 meters had been installed. In respect of 33 KV
feeders alone, out of 237 meters required in respect of seven circles, only 105
meters had been installed as of February 2007.
* In Jharkhand, against 121 feeders in the four sampled circles which were required
to be metered, 112 feeders were metered as of March 2006.
* In Jammu and Kashmir, out of 1558 CT operated trivector meters procured at a
cost of Rs. 2.14 crore for metering 1524 feeders, only 711 meters (46 per cent)
were commissioned.
6.2.4 Consumer Metering
Despite the Ministry's records showing a relatively satisfactory position in terms
of consumer metering, audit examination at the State level revealed several deficiencies:
* Audit noticed that the DPRs did not cover requirement of meters for achieving
100 per cent consumer metering, defeating  the APDRP objective of 100 per cent
metering of consumers. In Chhattisgarh, the DPRs provided for only replacement
of existing electro-mechanical meters with Static Electronic meters. Consequently,
the un-metered free domestic consumers and agricultural consumers remained
un-metered.
* As per MoA, no new connections were to be provided without meters. However,
connections were released in Chhattisgarh and Assam without meters, even
after the MoA.
* In Assam, out of 12,09,900 consumers, 66,567 consumers remained unmetered
as of 31 March 2006. Further, the tariff issued by the Board with regard to
unmetered consumers, were also not fully implemented by the Circle authorities,
as a result of which unmetered consumers were short billed to the extent of
Rs. 7.55 crore for the period from June 2005 to March 2006.

88
* In Maharashtra, against the requirement of 7.99 lakh single/three phase meters
in Nashik town, Nashik rural, Malegaon, Nagpur rural Nagpur urban and Jalgaon
projects, only 3.84 lakh meters were received. Further, 1.18 lakh meters received
under the programme were diverted to other schemes or utilised for new
connections (which is not permitted under APDRP). It was further observed
that as against metering target fixed for agricultural consumers in Pune town
(3302 meters), Pimpri-Chinchwad (3423 meters) and Nagpur rural (33077 meters),
the achievement was nil as of September 2006.
* In Orissa, the physical achievement varied from 1.02 per cent to 18.83 per cent
in respect of three phase meters (in three Discoms). As a result, the actual
consumption of HT consumers had not been metered. Further, 22 per cent of all
consumers of two Discoms were without meters, or had defective meters as of
March 2006.
* In Bihar, out of 16 circles.
* in four circles where metering is being done by the SEB itself, 90 per cent
of the ordered meters were installed as of September 2006;
* in eight circles (the work being executed by Power Grid), only 5 per cent
of the ordered quantity had been installed as of September 2006;
* in remaining four circles, no consumer meters had been installed as of
September 2006.
> In Jharkhand, no consumer meter was actually installed as of August 2006 in
respect of two circles (Dumka and Hazaribagh) out of 4 test checked circles
against the targeted 15344, 458 and 13 numbers of single phase, three phase
and HT trivector meters.
> In Punjab, though meters were to be provided to all the customers by
December 2001 and computerized billing of all the consumers was to be done by
March 2002, as many as 8.32 lakh agricultural power consumers were still
unmetered and their billing was not computerized (March 2006).
> In Uttar Pradesh, against the projected quantity of 5,20,929 single phase
electronic energy meters, agreement for procurement of only 2,63,000 meters
were executed of these, only 1,64,000 meters were supplied by the firms (upto
June 2006), of which Management could install only 84,003 meters (only 16 per
cent of projected quantity) upto June 2006.
> In Gujarat, the original DPR computed an aggregate requirement of 24,23,021
static meters, which was later reduced to 13,63,834 meters without any recorded
justification. Further, test check in five selected projects revealed that there
were abnormal delays, ranging between 1 to 37 months, in installation of static
meters.
> In Jammu and Kashmir, against the target of metering 9,70,386 domestic and
17,487 industrial/commercial consumer installations under the programme, only
59,452 domestic (6 per cent) and 4803 industrial/commercial (27 per cent)
installation were metered (March 2006) due to inadequate purchase of meters.

89
> In Karnataka, though MoP intimated (July 2003) KPTCL that only static/
electronic meters should be procured from the funds under the APDRP/PFC/
REC, only 3.80 per cent and 0.36 per cent electronic meters (out of total meters
installed) were installed by BESCOM and HESCOM.
> In West Bengal, contrary to programme guidelines and despite the availability
of superior static meters at cheaper rates, the SEB procured electro-mechanical
energy meters at an extra expenditure of Rs. 0.82 crore.
6.2.5 Periodical checking of metering
The purpose of installation of meters would be served only if the SEB/Utility
conducted checks as per the prescribed periodicity to verify that the installed meters
were not being tampered with and were working efficiently. Audit examination, however,
revealed that in Jharkhand, Punjab, Assam, West Bengal, Karnataka, Haryana and
Manipur, periodical checking of meters was not a regular features and the shortfall in
checking of meters in these States ranged between 13 and 96 per cent during 2005-06.
6.2.6 Misreporting of data on installation of meters
Audit examination at the State level revealed several instances where the SEBs/
Utilities reported incorrect data in respect of meter installation to the MoP:
> In Tamil Nadu, in 4 test checked distribution circles of Chennai Metro, though
843 DT meters remained to be installed as on 31st March 2006, the SEB, in its
monthly report to MoP, reported that all DT meters contemplated in the DPR
had been installed.
> In Jharkhand, 95 per cent consumer metering, 86 per cent 11 KV feeder metering
and 91 per cent DT metering was reported by the SEB. However, test check of
four circles revealed that the physical progress of metering was virtually nil.
> In Assam, there was no co-ordination between the Board's headquarters office
and field offices. Progress of metering actually achieved under different sub-
divisional offices did not tally with the progress reports furnished by the Circle
CEOs to headquarters office.
> In Andhra Pradesh, CPDCL actually procured 8,02,950 meters but reported
procurement of 10,45,896 meters to the DRC. Similarly, SPDCL reported
procurement of 278 feeder meters against the actual quantity of 30 and reported
installation of 1,820 DT meters against the actual installation of only 478.
Reply of MoP
In its reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that:
> The national figure for feeder metering and consumer metering rose from
81 per cent and 87 per cent in 2001-02 to 96 per cent and 93 per cent respectively
in 2005-06. When close monitoring started under APDRP, various States reduced
their figures for feeder metering.
> Consumer metering did not reach the desired level due to State policies on free/
flat electricity supply to agriculture and other categories of consumer without
installing meters. However, APDRP focus was on towns, where unmetered
categories of consumers were very minimal.

90
> Earlier, metering of DTs was not targeted, as energy accounting and audit was
envisaged at 11 KV feeder level, and hence DPRs prepared earlier were not
covering DT metering. However, subsequently, it was felt that energy auditing
at DT level would be better for fixing accountability at the lowest level, and
hence monitoring of DT metering was started in 2004-05.
> The Ministry planned to implement a restructured APDRP in two stages during
the XI Plan. In the first stage, (a) all feeders, DTs and consumers in the APDRP
towns would be metered; (b) all assets and consumers would be indexed;
(c) feeder, DT and bulk consumer meters would be read remotely, and baseline
data established and validated through independent auditors; and (d) based on
baseline data, loss reduction targets would be fixed. Upgradation and
strengthening of electricity network would be taken up only in the second stage.
The response of the MoP is to be considered in the context of the deficiencies
noticed in audit examination at the State level.
Recommendation
Ministry may ensure that (a) SEBs/Utilities complete 100 per cent feeder, DT and
consumer metering in all ongoing and completed ARDRP projects within a clearly
defined time frame; (b) such metering data is fully validated in an independent
fashion; and (c) further funds for APDRP projects are released only after 100 per
cent metering is validated.
6.3 Reliability and Quality of Power Supply
One of the expected benefits of APDRP was improved quality and reliability of
power supply, which would encourage usage of energy efficient equipment/appliances,
which would further lead to improvement in availability of energy. The key performance
parameters for quality and reliability were:
> Frequency of feeder tripping (number of trippings per feeder per month), and
average duration of feeder outages
6
 (average outage duration per feeder per
month);
> Failure rate of DTs;
> Average Power Factor; and
> Consumer Complaints and Disposal Time
> Audit scrutiny, however, revealed significant deficiencies in this area, which
are described in the succeeding paragraphs.
6.3.1 Feeder Tripping and Outages
While the MoP had prescribed that feeder outage should be less than one per
feeder per month, audit examination at the State level revealed that the actual outage
was much higher than the prescribed level, as summarised below:
> In Punjab, trippings per feeder per month during 2005-06 were more than one in
four out of seven test checked schemes, and trippings per feeder per month
ranged between 1.81 and 32.50.
> In Jharkhand, the number of trippings per feeder per month and average feeder
6
Feeder outages do not include shutdowns due to loadshedding.

91
outage duration in four test checked circles was much more than the prescribed level as shown below:—
Table 5 (a): Number of trippings per feeder per month and average feeder outage duration in test checked circles of Jharkhand
Circle 2001-02 2002-03 2003--04 2004-05 2005-06
Trippings A verage Trippings A verage Trippings A verage Trippings A verage Trippings A verage
per feeder feeder per feeder feeder per feeder feeder per feeder feeder per feeder feeder
per month outage per outage per month outage per outage per month outage
duration month duration in duration month duration duration
in hours hours per in hours in hours in hours
per month per per per
month month month month
Dumka 16 26 16 25 15 24 56 32 54 29
Dhanbad 101 4 0 9 6 3 9 9 4 3 9 9 2 3 7 8 3 3 9
Daltonganj 152 142 183 153 183 133 176 104 167 135
Hazaribagh 11 1 11 1 11 0 19 0 23 3

92
>I n  Kerala, even in the completed projects, the target set for the number of
feeder trippings was not achieved and was as high as 13,173 against the set
limit of 300 trippings.
> In respect of 6 projects in Kerala, 8,365 number of feeder trippings were reported
to the MoP as against the actual 11,226 trippings reported by circles/division,
during 2005-06. Similarly, the duration of feeder trippings, of 19 projects for
2005-06 was reported  to MoP as 1,18,838 minutes as against 6,60,298 minutes
reported by the circles/division.
> In Andhra Pradesh,  though the target envisaged was to reduce the feeder
trippings to 21 and 50 in Tirupati and Warangal Circles respectively, the actual
numbers of trippings were 97,163 and 3,179 in 2005-06 respectively. Similarly, in
all the 22 towns of SPDCL (TBP), feeder trippings ranged from 48 to 3,660 as
against the target of 12 to 420.
> In West Bengal, feeder outages during 2005-06 ranged between 2946 and 110
against the targeted 2000 and 115 in 8 selected projects. In six projects, it had, in
fact, increased in comparison to the existing level at the start of the project and
exceeded the targets by 47 to 970 per cent.
> In Sikkim, outage duration per feeder per month increased from 11 hours in
2003-04 to 33 hours in 2005-06.
> In Gujarat, the feeder outages in Surat Town exceeded the target by 63 percent
in 2005-06.
> In Goa, though a register was maintained at Sub-Division level to record details
of outages and power factor, the data collected was not being processed or
sent to Division/Circle or CEE Office for monitoring and analysis. Further, the
details of duration of outages etc.,were not being sent/reported to the GoI as
required.
> In Tripura, outage duration per feeder per month worked out for Agartala Town
projects for the period from September 2005 onwards ranged from 36 to 80
hours.
> In Haryana (UHBVNL), average outage duration per feeder per month increased
from 1.7 hours in 2002-03 to 3.6 hours in 2005-06.
> In Chhattisgarh, trippings per feeder per month during 2005-06 were more than 1
in all the four schemes test checked and ranged between 2 and 41.
6.3.2 High DT Failure Rate
The Distribution Transformer is a key component of the distribution network,
and its failure not only results in financial loss to the utility but also adversely affects
consumer satisfaction due to interruption in supply. The high failure rate of DTs is
caused by a combination of factors viz. over loading of DTs, improper earthing and
protection, improper fuses, inadequate preventive maintenance etc. For proper reliability,
DT failure rate of less than 1.5 per cent per annum was indicated by MoP. Audit

93
examination, however, revealed that most States had DT failure rates which were much
higher than this benchmark, as described below:—
> In respect of Chhattisgarh and Goa, there was lack of substantial improvement
in the DT failure rate between 2001-02 and 2005-06, as shown below:
Table 6: DT failure rates in respect of Goa and Chhattisgarh
Name of the State 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06
Chhattisgarh 15.30 16.33 16.34 18.38 16.47
Goa 6.73 6.27 5.7 6.14 5.30
> In Chhattisgarh, the DT failure rate was 16.47 per cent during 2005-06, despite
installation of 1120 new DTs at a cost of Rs. 10.62 crore in the APDRP circles
and towns till end of March 2006.
> In Rajasthan, the DT failure rates ranged between 7 and 30 per cent. Further,
even the targets were fixed between 4 and 18 per cent, which were much higher
than the 1.5 per cent target fixed by MoP .
> In Uttaranchal, the DT failure rate was 16.2 per cent during 2005-06.
> In Punjab, the target of failure rate of DTs was not achieved in eight projects
and it had increased during 2005-06 from 2001-02 in five projects. Audit noticed
that failure rate of DTs was more than the prescribed limit of 1.5 per cent in all
seven schemes and ranged between 2.73 and 27.10 per cent during 2002-06.
> In Karnataka, the DT failure rate in respect of Mangalore and Raichur showed
an increasing trend to 7.95 per cent and 7.52 per cent in 2005-06 against 4.96 per
cent and 6.50 per cent in 2003-04 respectively.
In West Bengal, the DT failure rate ranged from 5 to 22 per cent against the
targeted 5 to 14 per cent during 2005-06.
> In Gujarat, the DT failure rates in five selected projects exceeded the targets
set by 1.20 to 38 per cent during 2005-06, despite the fact that the targets were
fixed upto 20 per cent higher than the stipulated norm.
> In Himachal Pradesh, the overall failure rate of the Board was 4.04 per cent in
2005-06 as against the bench mark of 1.5 per cent.
6.3.3 Lack of improvement in respect of Consumer Complaints
Reduction in the number of consumer complaints is one of the benchmarks for
improved quality and reliability of power supply. This, coupled with effective redressal
of complaints, would reflect better customer satisfaction.
> Audit examination however revealed significant deficiencies in this area, as
summarised below:
> In Chhattisgarh, the DPRs provided for establishment of 26 consumer complaint
centres at a cost of Rs. 0.59 crore in all the APDRP circles and towns. However,

94
it was observed in audit that the SEB had not taken up this work as of
September 2006.
> In Tamil Nadu, there was a significant increase in the number of consumer
complaints in 2005-06 as compared as pre-APDRP levels in 2001-02, in respect
of Chennai Metro circle and in increased from 44,798 (2001-02) to 99,807 (2005-
06).
> A system for recording consumer complaints, and recording of corrective and
preventive actions was not developed in Assam.
> In West Bengal, the number of consumer complaints in 8 selected projects was
3,181 against the target of 2,349 during 2005-06.
> In Gujarat, in three projects (Baroda, Himmatnagar and Surat) out of the selected
five projects, the number of consumer complaints received ruring 2002-06 was
81,254, 30,000 and 1,12,130 against the target of 70,000, 45,000 and 1,25,000
respectively.
> In Andhra Pradesh, there was only 13 percent and 70 percent reduction in
consumer complaints as against the targets of 50 percent and 85 percent in
Tirupati and Warangal Circles respectively.
Reply of MoP
In reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that:
> Quality and reliability of supply had improved in general in the areas where
sufficient work had been completed, and this should have reduced the consumer
complaints also. The monitoring of tripping and outages had resulted in
improvement of reliability of supply in areas where sufficient work had been
completed. In some utilities, reliability had suffered badly due to non-availability
of power from the grid. For better consumer care, Consumer Sewa kendras were
envisaged in all district headquarters during the XI Plan.
> In the majority of towns where suf ficient work had been completed under APDRP,
DT failure rate had come down significantly, though the degree of improvement
varied from place to place. Reducing the DT failure rate to the desired level of
1.5 per cent would take a lot of work and efforts by the utilities over a long
period.
The reply of the MoP is general and does not address the specific issue identified
during audit examination at the State level. Further, it was the MoP's responsibility to
ensure timely completion of APDRP projects, with consequential impact on reliability
of supply.
6.4 Energy Accounting and Audit
6.4.1 Introduction
One of the most important measures to ensure reduction of commercial losses,
with relatively lower capital investment, is comprehensive energy accounting and

95
audit, which would enable quantification of losses in different segments of the system
and their segregation into commercial and technical losses.
Energy accounting involves preparation of accounts of the energy flow to various
segments and various categories of consumers and how it has been consumed out of
the total available quantum over a specified time period. Energy audit involves analysis
of energy accounting data in a meaningful manner to evolve measures to introduce
checks and balances in the system to reduce leakages and losses and also to improve
technical performance. In order to achieve effective energy accounting and audit, it is
imperative that meters are installed at all levels i.e. feeder, distribution transformers
and consumers, meter readings are taken regularly and reconciled, and proper consumer
indexing is done through GIS mapping and linked to the billing system so that loss
pockets are identified and corrective measures taken.
Energy accounting is not a one time exercise but is to be done on a continuous
basis.
6.4.2 Effective Energy Accounting and Auditing not carried out
Logically, with 100 per cent system metering at the feeder and DT levels, energy
accounting at the feeder and DT levels should be feasible, provided meter readings are
being taken at the prescribed intervals. Audit, however, observed that effective energy
accounting and auditing was not being carried out in the States.
The main reasons for lack of an effective energy accounting and auditing were
as follows:
* Lack of system metering —for proper energy accounting and auditing,
installation of tamper proof meters at all levels of transformation (including DT
metering) was required. However, audit observed that the utilities failed to
bring in a high level of DT metering. Only 10 per cent of the States had reported
DT metering between 80 and 100 per cent as of 2005-06 as brought out in
para 6.2.1. Even where feeder and DT meters had been installed, the lack of
energy accounting at the feeder/DT levels is indicative of lack of regular readings
of such meters. Test check of records and physical verification of one power
sub station of test checked Supply Division in Jharkhand, revealed that though
some 11 KV feeders and the connected distribution transformers were metered,
neither were regular recording of feeder meters taken, nor were the feeder meter
readings reconciled with meter readings of distribution transformers and meter
readings of consumer meters. Thus, the whole purpose of metering at 11 KV
feeder level was defeated in the absence of linkages between feeder, DT and
consumer metering.
* Lack of accountability at the circle and feeder level— as brought out in
para 9.1, the administrative intervention under APDRP of designating
Distribution Circles as independent profit centres and feeders as business
units, and ensuring accountability through a chain of MOUs from the circle
level down to the feeder level, has not been successful.

96
* Computerization— as brought out in para 11, low progress in respect of
IT enabling activities such as consumer indexing, digital mapping, Automated
Meter Reading instruments, Data Loggers etc. contributed to
non-implementation of effective and meaningful energy audit and accounting.
Deficiencies in energy accounting and audit in 19 States are summarised below.
Table 7: Status of Energy Accounting and Audit as observed in Audit
S.No. State Audit Findings on Energy Accounting and Audit (EAA)
12 3
1. Assam Feeder metering was not yet completed and a large number
of meters remained non-functional; hence, effective EAA
was not possible.
2. Bihar EAA was not being done, due to inadequate feeder
metering.
3. Chhattisgarh Though the SEB had achieved up to 90 per cent metering
of 33 Kv and 11 Kv feeders by March 2006, the progress in
respect of DT and consumer metering was far from
satisfactory, and hence effective energy audit was not
possible.
4. Gujarat Consumer indexing had not yet started.
5. Himachal Pradesh Though energy audit was being conducted, energy audit
data was not being prepared strictly as per the billing cycle
and compared with the consumption of the DT for the
same period (March 2006).
6. Jharkhand Neither were regular recording of feeder meters being taken
nor were the feeder meter readings reconciled with meters
reading of distribution transformers and meter  readings of
consumer meters,  thus ruling out EAA.
7. Karnataka Though feeder-wise energy audit was being done, no
commercial accounting (to segregate commercial and
technical losses) had been initiated.
8. Madhya Pradesh Installation of DT meters was as low as 12 per cent.
9. Maharashtra Out of 55,080 DT meters, energy audit was done in respect
of only 50,880 meters as of August 2006.
10. Manipur Twenty three per cent of the total consumers were without
meters or had defective meters.
11. Meghalaya Three phase consumer meters and wedge type UDC
connectors were not installed due to non-availability of
fronts, with consequential impact on EAA.
12. Orissa In respect of three phase consumer meters, the physical
achievement ranged from 1.03 per cent to 37.09 per cent.
hence, EAA was not effective.

97
13. Punjab The SEB had not evolved any system for EAA at
distribution level.
14. Rajasthan There was significant shortfall in the installation of
DT meters, with consequential impact on EAA
15. Sikkim In 18 out of 24 Sub-divisions, no consumer indexing had
been done. Even in 6 sub-divisions where consumer
indexing had been done, EAA had not been initiated as of
September 2006.
16. Tamil Nadu There was a shortfall in achievement of 100 per cent
metering of consumer.
17. Tripura EAA was initiated only in January 2005, but there were no
prescribed norms for assessment of unmetered consumers.
Different billing authorities applied different criteria in such
assessment.
18. Uttar Pradesh Neither at DT level nor at the Consumer level was 100
per- cent metering done. Therefore, position of DT wise
loss of energy could not be ascertained in Audit.
19. Uttaranchal Against a target of 14,777 DTs, only 9,080 meters were
installed. Further a sum of Rs. 139.66 lakh was spent towards
consumer indexing. However, EAA could not be taken up
at any DT so far.
Further, CRISIL and ICRA, which had been mandated by PFC at the instance of
MoP to carry out a performance rating of the State power sector across all States, in
their report in June 2006 pointed out ineffectiveness of energy audit in all States
(except Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Madhya Pradesh and Mizoram where no
comments were made in respect of energy audit).
Reply of MoP
In reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that:
* Energy accounting in APDRP towns had been started by most of the utilities.
However, for effective energy audits, it had been felt that consumer indexing
and DT metering would be required, and this work had been taken up
subsequently by some utilities.
* In view of the poor progress by utilities, the MoP was proposing the highest
importance to energy auditing during the XI Plan, and the investment under
APDRP during the XI Plan (Except works required for effective energy audit)
would not be allowed before establishment of energy audit procedures and
validation of baseline data in APDRP covered towns.
The reply of MoP is general and does not address the specific deficiencies
highlighted by audit.
12 3

98
In their reply (January, 2007), NTPC stated that for energy accounting and audit,
APDRP guidelines provided consumer indexing and system metering as a mandatory
component for offline/online auditing on a continuous basis. This involved (a) regular
reading of meters and the downloaded data through Meter Reading Instruments (MRI)
to be brought to a central location with the help of software to bring out exception
reports without human intervention; and (b) correlation with revenue data to identify
loss pockets, besides identification of overloaded feeders and DTs.
The deficiencies identified through audit examination only serve to confirm
non-adherence with the procedures indicated by NTPC.
Recommendation
Ministry may take steps to ensure that all States carry out effective energy accounting
and audit at the feeder and DT levels, and necessary pre-requisites for such auditing
and accounting e.g. 100 per cent system and consumer metering, regular/automated
system meter reading and reconciliation and consumer indexing and other IT enabling
activities are implemented immediately.
6.5 Gap between Average Revenue Realisation (ARR) and Average Cost of Supply
(ACS) Not Eliminated
One of the objectives of APDRP was the ‘narrowing and ultimate elimination of
the gap between unit cost of supply and revenue realization within a specified time
frame’. Further, as per the instruction of MoP, the ARR should be rupee one above the
per unit ACS.
An analysis of the information provided by the MoP revealed that this objective
was far from being achieved, as of March 2006. Only 3 out of 29 States (Chhattisgarh,
Goa and Delhi) had achieved the target of elimination of the gap between ARR and
ACS. Further in Bihar, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Assam,
Uttar Pradesh, Mizoram and Nagaland, the gap between ARR and ACS had shown
a deteriorating trend. State-wise details of the gap between ARR and ACS are enclosed
in Annexure-VI.
Deficiencies noticed during audit examination in individual States are
summarised below:—
* In Tamil Nadu, the revenue gap had been determined by adoption of a uniform
rate for the ACS for all the circles, which is not an appropriate method as the
cost structure of various circles would vary depending on the assets and other
infrastructure in the respective circles. In the absence of determination of
circle-wise actual ACS, the correctness of the revenue gap could not be verified.
Further, in eight out of 25 circle schemes where APDRP was being implemented,
the revenue gap had increased between 2001-02 and 2005-06.
* In Haryana, ARR (in rupees per unit) was 2.83 on billed energy and 1.89 on
input energy (on the basis of test checked 7 circles/towns) against the targeted
ARR of 3.70 and 3.14 respectively.

99
* In Jharkhand, despite implementation of APDRP since 2003, the cash losses of
JSEB have been increasing every year and the increase in cash losses in
2005-06 was 204 per cent of cash losses in 2001-02.
* In Uttaranchal, the ARR was Rs. 0.43 below the ACS during 2005-06.
* In Punjab, the targeted ARR was not achieved in any of the 11 test-checked
schemes and in four schemes the ARR had decreased from the base year instead
of increasing. The average ARR for the 11 schemes was Rs. 2.57 against the
ACS of Rs. 3.29 for the year 2005-06. Further, despite the tariff orders of PSERC
to continue the levy of surcharge for large supply consumers, test check in
audit revealed six cases where surcharge was not levied, resulting in a loss of
revenue of Rs. 7.74 crore during July 2003-December 2005.
Higher A T&C losses at 44.1 per cent in the Himmatnagar project in Gujarat
resulted in realization of average selling price at Rs. 2.02 (with a billing efficiency
of just 30.82 per cent) as against the average cost of the energy at Rs. 2.92.
* In Andhra Pradesh, as against a target of bringing the gap between ARR and
ACS to 'Nil', the gap was 9 paise and 18 paise in Warangal and Tirupati Circles
respectively.
* In Sikkim, despite four years of implementation of APDRP , the gap marginally
improved from Rs. 1.25 unit to Rs. 1.16 per unit but the percentage cost recovery
decreased from 60.97 per cent in 2001-02 to 56.39 per cent in 2005-06.
* In Himachal Pradesh, the average gap in 5 test check circles was Rs. 1.10
during 2005-06.
* In Nagaland, the gap between ARR and ACS was high and increased from
Rs. 2.82 during 2001-02 to Rs. 3.27 during 2005-06.
Reply of MoP
In reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that as many of the utilities had increased
the subsidy over the years, monitoring of ARR on subsidy and revenue realised basis
would show the correct status. As per PFC data, the gap between ARR and ACS on a
subsidy and revenue realised basis had come down from Rs. 0.56 in 2001-02 to Rs. 0.19
in 2005-06. Also, the gap had narrowed in the majority of APDRP towns where sufficient
work had been completed.
The reply of the MoP is not tenable, since the reduction of subsidies to SEBs/
Utilities is one of the key objectives of APDRP and using ARR on subsidy realised
basis would not be appropriate. Further, APDRP emphasises exclusion of subsidy for
calculating the incentive component.
7. Release and Utilisation of APDRP Funds
7.1 Funds Released
7.1.1 Funds not released and monitored project-wise
The APDRP guidelines stipulated that funds should be released in separate
tranches individually for each project, linked to the release of counter part funds and

100
project spending. However, the MoP did not recommend release of funds project-wise,
but recommended lump sum releases for each State as a whole on the basis of the total
projects approved by the Steering Committee.
Further, there was no system for monitoring utilisation of APDRP funds on a
project-wise basis; the monitoring reports on utilisation showed project cost and total
reported expenditure (APDRP and counter part funds put together). Hence, there was
also no mechanism for detecting cases of diversion of funds between different APDRP
projects.
Reply of MoP
In its reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that the Ministry of Finance restricted
the release depending on availability of allocation to the State and availability of
budget. Hence, it was not possible to allocate restricted released funds to all or limited
projects eligible for the next tranche. Some flexibility was required during execution;
otherwise projects would suffer for want of funds. Further, there had been no report of
diversion of funds between different APDRP  projects, and the monitoring of such
diversions would be cumbersome and would not serve much purpose.
Recommendation
In order to have a comprehensive monitoring of the programme, the MoP should
monitor together the release of funds and progress on a project-by-project basis.
7.1.2 Non-opening of separate accounts for APDRP Funds
In terms of the APDP/APDRP guidelines, States receiving APDP/APDRP
assistance would have to open a separate account/sub account head immediately for
separate accounting classification. A separate account in a Scheduled Bank/Nationalized
Bank was also required to be opened. Funds required to implement projects under
APDP/APDRP schemes were to be released by the MoF, on the recommendation of
the MoP , directly to this separate account. States which did not open a separate
account for this purpose were not entitled to receive any funds under APDRP.
However, the MoP continued to recommend release of funds without the
stipulated certificates from the State Governments regarding opening of a separate
account head and expenditure statements prepared from the State monthly accounts.
Even the MoF did not object to such recommendations and released funds in the
absence of the stipulated requirements.
Audit examination of the records of the State Governments and SEB/Utilities
confirmed non-compliance with these conditions as summarised below:
* No separate bank account was opened in Arunachal Pradesh,
Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Kerala, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Rajasthan (Jodhpur and Ajmer Discoms), Sikkim and Tripura.
* In Assam and Chhattisgarh,  although a bank account was opened in a
nationalized bank, the APDRP funds were not transferred/credited to this
account, rendering the bank accounts inoperative.

101
* In Haryana and Tamil Nadu, a separate bank account was opened only for
receipt of APDRP funds. Thereafter, the funds were transferred to a general/
common account. Similarly, in Karnataka, though a separate bank account was
opened by the utility, funds were utilised for making payments to parties and
contractors not connected with implementation of APDRP and huge amounts
were transferred to different bank accounts.
* In Himachal Pradesh, the funds were kept in the existing current account of the
SEB, instead of a separate savings bank account.
Reply of MoP
In its reply (February 2007), the Ministry confirmed that many of the utilities
either did not open separate accounts or did not operate these accounts due to various
problems in their accounting procedures. APDRP funds were nevertheless released so
that implementation of the sanctioned projects did not suffer. Keeping in view the
accounting problems of the State utilities, the Ministry felt that the opening of separate
accounts would not be feasible.
The reply is tenable, since maintenance of separate head of account would help
in keeping accurate accounts of the expenditure under a particular programme. Further,
the detailed nature of the accounting problems which would inhibit separate accounting
for APDRP was not specified. In any case, the release of funds in full knowledge of
non-adherence to stipulated procedures is not justified.
Recommendation
Ministry should ensure that the separate identity of APDRP funds is maintained, and
that separate accounts are opened not only by the State Government but also the
SEB/utility concerned.
7.2 Utilisation of funds
7.2.1 No requirement for Statements of Expenditure (SOEs) and Utilisation
Certificates (UCs)
In respect of APDP, the States/Utilities were required to submit audited SOEs in
respect of each project within 9 months of completion of the financial year. But the
APDP guidelines stipulated submission of UCs within 9 months from the completion
of the scheme or the financial year, whichever was earlier.
However, in respect of APDRP, no conditions regarding either UCs or SOEs were
incorporated in the Guidelines, despite requirement of UCs in the prescribed proforma
specified in the GFR.
Audit examination further revealed that:
* SEBs/Utilities/SEDs did not submit UCs regularly, nor were they furnishing the
status of funds utilisation in a consistent format. Further, these were being
intimated only while requesting release of the next instalment of funds.
* The MoP did not maintain any consolidated record of UCs received against
each sanction/release, and consquently, was not in a position to verify the
actual quantum of funds utilised for implementation of APDRP.

102
* Though the Ministry had released Rs. 6131.70 crore up to 31st March 2006, UCs
in the format prescribed in the GFR for only Rs. 103.52 crore (1.7 per cent) were
found in the records of the MoP ( Mizoram—Rs. 28.96 crore—10.8.2006,
Bihar—Rs. 50 crore—17.3.2004, Nagaland—Rs. 21.89 crore—28.9.2006 and
Sikkim—Rs. 2.67 crore—11.12.2002).
7.2.2 Incorrect Reporting of Expenditure
Audit examination revealed that the expenditure reported by SEBs/Utilities to
the Ministry/AcCs was not correct, mainly due to the following reasons:
* Expenditure was booked at DPR rates, even though actual procurement cost
was lower.
* The reported expenditure was inflated by inclusion of works not in DPR,
quantities in excess of DPR provision, incomplete works, works done under
normal development schemes, works done with old/repaired equipment, and
centage/consultancy charges.
Audit examination of 294 projects in 29 States with a total project cost of
Rs. 10255.21 crore, in respect of which the reported utilisation of funds (as of
March 2006) was Rs. 5617.64 crore, revealed instances of incorrect financial reporting,
amounting to Rs. 676.09 crore, which constituted 12 per cent of the reported utilisation.
A State-wise summary of incorrect financial reporting is given below:
Table 8: Incorrect  Financial Reporting
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.No. State Amount of Incorrect Financial Reporting
1. Chhattisgarh 87.49
2. Maharashtra 37.56
3. Kerala 39.64
4. Haryana 76.53
5. Rajasthan 21.66
6. Karnataka 68.06
7. Tamil Nadu 274.89
8. Mizoram 24.58
9. Sikkim 10.56
10. Uttaranchal 35.12
Total 676.09
Details of the instances of incorrect reporting noticed during audit examination
are given below:
> For  Chhattisgarh, GoI released Rs. 53.07 crore towards 25 per cent of APDRP
funds between April 2002 and October 2003. For claiming further release of
50 per cent of APDRP funds, the SEB had to complete works valued at

103
Rs. 106.15 crore (i.e. 25 per cent of the total project cost). Audit observed that,
based on  a SEB report of February 2005 to MoP that as of December 2004, it had
incurred an expenditure of Rs. 160.28 crore in identified APDRP schemes, GoI
released Rs. 106.14 crore in March 2005. Subsequently, the SEB prepared a
revised progress report in May/June 2006, in which the progress of expenditure
up to March 2005 was reported as Rs. 72.79 crore. Thus, the actual expenditure
on APDRP up to March 2005 works out to only 17 per  cent of the project cost
against required achievement of 25 per cent for release of the second instalment.
>I n  Maharashtra, the utilisation certificate furnished by MSEDCL to GoI through
NTPC showed the expenditure on purchase of meters under the programme as
Rs. 77.97 crore but the actual  expenditure made was Rs. 40.41 crore as of
March 2006, as the APDRP cell in the Head office, while calculating the cost of
meters purchased based on the details furnished by the Accounts section,
wrongly considered the cumulative figures in the calculation of cost of meters
purchased.
>I n  Kerala, in respect of consumer meters, the expenditure reported to MoP was
Rs. 85.61 crore against the actual expenditure, as indicated in purchase orders
of meters, of Rs. 45.97 crore i.e. higher by Rs. 39.64 crore.
>I n  Haryana, excess expenditure of Rs. 56.35 crore was reported to GoI by utilities
showing the procurement of meters at higher rates instead of actual cost
incurred. Further, against the reported expenditure of Rs. 1.09 crore as on
31 March 2006 on 33 KV sub-station Barwala Road, Hansi, the actual expenditure
as per records of Hansi Operation Division was Rs. 0.76 crore. Scrutiny of
records of sub-divisions/divisions revealed that the actual progress of
replacement of consumer meters in respect of selected circles/towns (Hissar-II,
Tohana, Fatehabad, Hansi) was only 15,684 meters valued at Rs. 1.36 crore as
per the Divisional Records against the reported figure of 87,722 meters of
Rs. 8.29 crore, indicating overstatement of fund utilisation by Rs. 6.93 crore.
Also, utilisation had been inflated by Rs. 12.92 crore by inclusion of interest
during the years 2003-06.
>I n  Rajasthan, expenditure reported under APDRP to MoP was Rs. 831.06 crore
up to 31 March 2006 on all the schemes sanctioned under APDRP whereas the
acutal expenditure as per records maintained at circle level, was only Rs. 809.40
crore up to 31 March 2006, indicating over reporting of Rs. 21.66 crore. This
over reporting pertained to Bhilwara (Rs. 17.48 crore), Jhunjhu (Rs. 3.96 crore)
and Sikar (Rs. 0.06 crore) in Ajmer Discom, and Rs. 0.16 crore to Jodhpur Discom.
>I n  Karnataka, a review of the records of expenditure disclosed that BESCOM
included the cost of 5,72,611 consumer meters valued at Rs. 56.83 crore pertaining
to new installations which were fixed with meters purchased by the customers;
this inflated the financial progress and the claims preferred under APDRP.
Similarly, in Hubli circle, 86,576 new connections were provided against deposits
from customers or purchased by the customers themselves which inflated the
financial progress by Rs.11.23 crore.

104
> In Tamil Nadu, the instances of the work reported as completed but not actually completed and financial achievement as reported but
not actually incurred are shown under:
Table 9: Instances of Incorrect Reporting in Tamil Nadu
(Rs. In Crore)
Name of Circle CEDC V irudhachalam Chennai Metro Circles
North South West North South West C entral
Name of items DT Distribution L T Single Three Sub-stations
Meters transformer Capacitors Phase phase
meters meters
Quantity as per DPR 226 218 936 4435 1901 8 10 4 7
(Numbers)
Quantity reported to MoP 226 218 936 4435 1901 6 6 4 3
as completed as on 31.3.06 (Numbers)
Quantity actually 126 362 907 4435 1901 3 6 1 2
completed as on 31.03.06 (Numbers)
Cost estimate as per DPR 44.09 791.09 74.88 32.553 34.788 31.04 79.88 39.01 66.03
(Rs. in crore)
Cost incurred as per return 36.13 576.34 74.88 32.553 34.788 19.80 64.24 32.75 14.59
sent to MoP (Rs. in crore)
Expenditure actually 32.56 384.13 60.26 *32.553 *34.788 10.03 33.91 18.17 07.78
incurred as on 31.03.06 (Rs. in crore)
Expenditure reported in 03.57 192.21 44.62 - - 09.77 30.33 14.58 06.81
excess (Rs. in cr.)
*Actuals yet to be finalized in Accounts.
•

105
> Coimbatore Metro Circle in Tamil Nadu, reported installation of Digital Interface
Data Loggers in sub-stations at a cost of Rs. 3 crore though the same had not
been installed.
>I n  Mizoram, seven divisions were allotted Rs. 27.16 crore for executing APDRP
works under 4 selected circles. Though the entire amount was debited towards
execution of APDRP works, payment vouchers for only Rs. 2.58 crore were
available.
> In Sikkim, the project cost was inflated by Rs. 10.56 crore by irregular inclusion
of  various extraneous components not related to APDRP—on account of
establishment  charges (Rs. 8.47 crore), audit and accounts and losses on stock
(Rs. 1.36 crore) and tools and plant charges (Rs. 0.73 crore).
> In Uttaranchal, the value of completed projects were worked out after including
centage charges of Rs. 21.34 crore and consultancy charges of Rs.  0.38 crore,
contrary to the accounting principles and decision taken in the 9th Meeting of
the Steering Committee (3 August 2005). Similarly, though the materials were to
be charged at landed cost, they were issued at issue rates which included cost
towards carriage, godown maintenance, handling and wastage etc. resulting in
overcharging of the projects by Rs. 13.40 crore.
Further, audit examination revealed numerous discrepancies in the expenditure
reported by the States, as detailed below:
> Rajasthan—Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Prasaram Nigam Limited (RRVPNL) had
not furnished any UC as of October 2006 for the expenditure incurred upto
31st March 2006. Secretary Energy, Government of Rajasthan reported in March
2006 the expenditure upto January 2006 as Rs. 896.38 crore (including counter
part funds). However, the Chairman & Managing Director of RRVPNL, in
September 2006 reported an expenditure of only Rs. 831.06 crore including
counter part fund upto March 2006.
> Jharkhand—As per the SEB's records, a sum of Rs 161.97 crore had been utilised
up to 31 March 2006 whereas the figure reported to GoI for the same period was
Rs 146.26 crore. Further, as per letter dated 11th October 2004 of the Joint
Secretary (Distribution), MoP to Secretary Jharkhand State Electricity Board
(JSEB), the State of Jharkhand had spent only Rs. 12.77 crore during 2004-05.
However, on 14th February 2005 Joint Secretary (Distribution), MoP , while
recommending for further release of APDRP funds to JSEB, informed Ministry
of Finance that the State had utilised Rs. 104.73 crore. Further, on 16th February
2005, Chairman JSEB, informed the lead ACC i.e. NTPC, that the State had
utilised Rs. 102.41 crore as of November 2004.
> Chhattisgarh—Utilisation of funds since inception of the scheme up to March
2005 was furnished to the NTPC only in March/April 2006, which was still
under scrutiny. UC for the expenditure incurred up to end of March 2006 was
not submitted completely. In the absence of complete entries in the work register,
UCs could not be vouchsafed by audit.

106
>I n  Punjab, there was a difference of Rs. 35.38 crore in reported expenditure
between figures of two sets of records maintained by the Accounts Wing and
the APDRP Cell of the SEB during 2001-06.
7.2.3 Improper maintenance/non-availability of accounting records at State level
Audit examination revealed that proper accounting and related records in respect
of APDRP projects were not maintained in almost all the States, which affected the
authenticity of the reported expenditure. A State-wise summary of deficiencies notices
in audit examination is as follows:
> In Chhattisgarh, a test check of records of 8 divisions revealed that separate
work registers were not maintained in 4 divisions, and the entries in the work
register, wherever maintained, were incomplete. There were discrepancies in
entries relating to quantity and value of material, between work register and
utilisation certificate furnished  to NTPC. Further, while works valued Rs 21.34
crore relating to other schemes were transferred to APDRP , the expenditure
incurred on these works were not included in the reported APDRP expenditure,
due to failure to change scheme codes. Also, there were discrepancies in the
details of progress of APDRP works as reported by APDRP cell of the SEB and
corresponding expenditure booked by the concerned Regional Accounts
Offices.
>I n  Uttaranchal,  non-maintenance of separate basic records viz. cash book,
stores records for APDRP projects resulted in the project funds being mixed up
with general funds, and an amount of Rs. 3.52 crore remained unreconciled.
Lack of proper stores records resulted in absence of authentic data regarding
materials received/issued for the project.
> In Jammu and Kashmir, five Nodal Officers for APDRP  advanced  (2003-06)
Rs. 63.39 crore to the Procurement and material Management (PMM) wing for
supply of material. However, the quantity of material received there against and
the balance to be supplied by the PMM wing was not on record, as no separate
stock accounts in respect of APDRP were maintained either by the PMM Wing
or by the utilities.
>I n  Rajasthan, the purchases of equipments and material for regular and APDRP
schemes were combined without any specific mention at any level about the
quantity being purchased for various APDRP schemes.
Recommendation
Ministry should ensure that annual Utilisation Certificates, duly supported by
detailed  Statements of Expenditure, are submitted by the concerned State
Governments in the prescribed formats in respect of each APDRP project.

107
7.2.4 Surplus funds
Audit examination revealed the following instances of surplus funds amounting
to Rs. 51.07 crore not returned by the States to the GoI:
> Due to decline in the procurement price, the project cost of single phase meters
decreased by Rs. 20.10 crore (UHBVNL) and Rs. 32.23 crore (DHBVNL) in
Haryana. Thus, GoI had released excess funds (loan and grant) of Rs. 20.50
crore on inflated project cost. The companies had neither refunded the surplus
funds to GoI nor taken steps to revise the DPRs downward or formulate any
other project to utilise the differential cost.
> In Andhra Pradesh, CPDCL received an amount of Rs. 58.63 crore from GoI
towards 25 per cent grant for High V oltage Distribution Scheme which was in
excess of the eligible amount of grant by Rs. 28.63 crore as the scheme had
already been short closed (September 2004) with an expenditure of Rs. 106.38
crore (January 2006). The excess grant was not returned.
> In Karnataka, the  works amounting to Rs. 10.34 crore relating to Hubli Town
under Hubli Circle project in respect of which funds amounting to Rs. 3.88 crore
(Rs. 1.94 crore grant and Rs. 1.94 crore loan)  had been released in March 2003
and June 2004 by GoI were not taken up as of October 2006 due to non availability
of land, upgrading of sub station to 110/11 KV and establishment of additional
sub station of 220 KV . However, the grant of Rs. 1.94 crore had not been  refunded
by Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited (KPTCL)/Hubli
Electricity Supply Company Limited (HESCOM).
7.2.5 Diversion and Parking of Funds
Audit examination revealed numerous instances of diversion of funds, amounting
to Rs. 181.78 crore in ten States, for various unauthorised purposes such as payment
of salaries for work charged employees, clearing past liabilities of the SEBs/Utilities,
expenditure on items not related to APDRP, renovation of guest house etc. as detailed
below:
Table 10: Instances of diversion of the funds for purposes other than prescribed in
APDRP
(Rs. in crore)
S. Name of the Amount Purpose for which funds diverted
No. State
1. Arunachal 0.35 Purchase of Vehicles, fax machine and for meeting committed
Pradesh liabilities
2. Haryana 32.09 > Purchase of Power
31.25 >  Repayment of loans
9.76 > Advance payment of loan instalment to Bank
3. Himachal 0.47 Sub-maintenance service overheads, purchase of vehicles and
Pradesh fax machines
4. Jammu and 4.04 Cleaning of equipments, painting, repair of fencing, bush
Kashmir cleaning etc.

108
5. Karnataka 38.42 > Payment to parties/contractors not connected with
APDRP implementation
1.59 > Interest earned by investing APDRP funds in short term
deposits not treated as APDRP funds.
6. Nagaland 0.63 > Salaries of work charges employees
0.89 > Past liabilities of Likhimro Hydro Electric Project
0.40 > Renovation of Guest House & construction of dormitory
7. Orissa 3.95 > SOUTHCO-Repairing and maintenance, non-APDRP
metering, PMU projects and other expenses
1.43 > WESCO-O & M work not related to APDRP
6.07 > NESCO-Material not utilised for APDRP purposes and
material less received and utilised in APDRP .
3.67 > CESCO-Material diverted to other works
8. Sikkim 0.28 > Cost of templates for erection of towers already included
in the erection charges
0.29 > Contingency Expenditure for electricity  bill forms etc.
9. Uttar Pradesh 11.89 > Payment of interest to PFC
10. Uttaranchal 13.93 > Interest earned on unutilised project funds and not
transferred to project funds
20.38 > Procurement of materials for works other than APDRP.
TOTAL 181.78
Further, the State Governments diverted a total of Rs. 432.23 crore by adjustment
against various dues of the utilities, which was effectively equivalent to short release
of funds for  APDRP projects. Details of such diversion are summarised below:
> A sum of Rs. 39.36 crore was sanctioned by the Government of Kerala (without
corresponding sanction from GoI) in March 2006 as loan (at 9 per cent interest)
under APDRP by adjustment against the guarantee commission (Rs. 20 crore)
and taxes on consumption and sale of electricity (Rs. 19.36 crore) payable by
the SEB to the State Government.
> Government of Chhattisgarh released only Rs. 128.48 crore to the SEB against
Rs. 169.47 crore received under APDP/APDRP, after adjusting Rs. 40.99 crore
towards dues payable by the SEB to various Central PSUs (Rs. 34.58 crore) and
principal and interest on APDRP loan of 2001-02 & 2002-03 (Rs. 6.41 crore)
> In Maharashtra funds amounting to Rs. 110.79 crore was released by the State
Government to MSEDCL by way of adjustment against other dues payable by
the company to the State Government.
> The Andhra Pradesh Government  released (March 2004) a grant of Rs. 186.17
crore to four Discoms and APTRANSCO as equity. This amount was utilised by
the Discoms for payment of dues to APTRANSCO against bulk supply of
power to these distribution companies, thus diverting the scheme funds for
other purposes.
S. Name of the Amount Purpose for which funds diverted
No. State
7
Four circles-Solan, Nahan, Rampur and Bilaspur

109
> In Meghalaya, while releasing the grant portion in August 2004 received from
GoI, the State Government deducted Rs. 15.29 lakh on account of interest on
the loan portion. Though the loan released by GoI in October 2003 was further
released by State Government in February 2004, it deducted interest with effect
from October 2003 to August 2004.
> In Madhya Pradesh, the State Government released the loan portion received
from the GoI at a higher rate of interest by 0.50 to 1.00 per cent per annum.
> In Delhi, DPCL deducted Rs. 39.63 crore on account of outstanding dues while
releasing the grant  to the Discoms.
7.2.6 Non-Release/Delayed release of funds by States to SEBs/Utilities and Non-
levy of consequent Penalty
The APDRP Guidelines stipulate that:
> The State Government shall release the funds provided under APDRP to the
State Power Utilities within a week of its credit to the State Government account
and send a confirmation to the GoI; otherwise, it would be treated as diversion
of funds.
> If any State Government/Utility diverts or is deemed to have diverted such
funds, the equivalent amount would be adjusted with 10 per cent penal interest
against the next instalment of Central Plan Assistance to be released to that
State Government in that year or in the subsequent year.
A review of various reports of the MoP confirmed that one of the reasons for
delayed implementation of APDRP projects was delay in release of APDRP funds by
the State Governments to the State Power Utilities/SEBs. However, audit examination
revealed that:
> The Ministry was not monitoring the details of delay in transfer of funds by the
State Government to the SEBs/Utilities in respect of each release by the Central
Government.
> The Ministry did not levy penal interest in even a single case of delayed release
of APDRP funds.
> In the absence of any deterrent action, the State Governments continued to
delay the transfer of APDRP funds to the implementing agencies, adversely
affecting the progress of APDRP projects.
Further, during the test check of records relating to release of funds to SEBs/
Utilities by the State Governments, it was observed that in many cases the State
Government did not release the entire funds released by Gol, thereby defeating the
purpose for which APDRP was introduced.
As of March 2006, a total of Rs. 412.03 crore were yet to be released by various
State Governments: Maharashtra (Rs. 75.97 crore), Nagaland (Rs. 15.99 crore),
Arunachal Pradesh (Rs. 15.13 crore),  Karnataka (Rs. 12.52 crore), Assam (Rs. 15.00
crore), Mizoram (Rs. 7.10 crore), Andhra Pradesh (Rs. 265.10 crore), and Sikkim
(Rs. 5.22 crore).

110
Further, audit examination revealed significant delays in release of APDRP
funds ranging from 7 days to 1095 days, by the State Governments, as shown in
Annexure-VII.
Reply of MoP
In its reply (February 2007), the Ministry statd that:
* They considered the utilisation certificates issud by the CEOs of the utilities as
reliable. So far, utilisation reports for Rs. 10,139 crore had been received from
the utilities so far.
* The expenditure under APDRP was auditable by the statutory auditors of the
utilities, were having their own audit procedures and practices of internal and
Government audits. The Ministry did not have the resources to audit each and
every item of expenditure made by the utilities under the programme. However,
ACCs did randomly check the booking and point out discrepancies found in
the utilities
Excess amounts released from projects which has been short closed by the
Steering Committee in November 2006 would be utilised for balance projects.
* Instances of diversion of APDRP funds had not come to their notice.
* There were reports of delay in transfer of APDRP funds by the State Governments
to the utilities. However, under the provisions of Additional Central Assistance,
APDRP funds could not be directly released to the utilities in the absence of
specific requests by the State Governments. Also, longer delays in transfer
were noticed in the beginning of the programme, but due to close monitoring,
the situation improved later on. Further, in view of these delays, the MoP was
proposing taking up of APDRP under Central Scheme during the XI Plan.
The reply of the MoP is not tenable for the following reasons:
* As indicated in para 7.2.1, audit examination showed that out of Rs. 10,139 crore
reported as utilised by SEBs/Utilities as indicated in the Ministry's reply,
utilisation certificates in the format prescribed in the GFRs had been received
only for Rs. 103.92 crore. This format includes a formal certification by the State
Government of the amount of funds utilised for the specified projects, a
confirmation that the conditions associated with the sanction had been fulfilled
and also a certification that certain checks (typically verification with vouchers
and books of accounts, measurement books, expenditure registers etc.) had
been exercised to see that the money was actually utilised for the purpose for
which it was sanctioned.
* The incorrect financial reporting of Rs. 676.09 crore noticed by audit confirm
that the MoP's stand of considering the SEBs/Utility's utilisation report (as
opposed to utilisation certificate) as reliable is incorrect and inappropriate.
* The statutory auditors of the SEBs/Utilities are responsible for expressing an
audit opinion on the financial statements as a whole, not on the correctness (or
otherwise) of the APDRP utilisation reports submitted to the MoP . The MoP

111
and its agencies are responsible for putting in place an adequate and effective
mechanism for verification of APDRP expenditure claims and compliance with
stipulated procedures. It need not be done by MoP along. Lack of adequacy of
manpower is an area of concern, in view of the huge amounts released under
APDRP.
* In view of the absence of any mechanism for verification of reported APDRP
expenditure, instances of diversion of funds would obviously not come to the
notice of MoP .
Recommendations
Ministry may insist on immediate onward release of the funds retained by the State
Governments, ensuring, that in the process, the State Governments make no
adjustments or deductions from APDRP releases. Ministry may also ensure immediate
calculation and recovery of penal interest from the State Government for delay in
release of funds. Fur ther, the Ministry may also institute a formal mechanism for
monitoring the delay in release of funds by the State Governments.
8. Incentive Mechanism
8.1 Background
The older Accelerated Power Development Programme (APDP) was project based
and input focused rather than performance/output oriented. The 'Expert Committee on
State-specific Reforms-Structuring of APDRP, Reform Framework and Principles of
Financial Restructuring of SEBs' headed by Deepak S. Parekh felt that unless incentive
was given towards achieving lasting improvements, the results were not likely to be
sustainable in the long run.
The incentive scheme was conceived to make MoAs more successful and
conducive for effective implementation. Under the scheme, the State Government
would be incentivised upto 50 per cent of the actual total loss reduction by SEBs/
Utilities.
8.2 Incentive Mechanism has not taken off
Against the provision of Rs. 20,000 crore for the 10th Plan Period 2002-07, only
Rs. 1575.02 crore (less than 8 per cent of the total outlay) had been released to eight
States as of January 2007, as detailed below:
Table 11: Incentive Released as of January 2007
Sl. No. State Claim Years T otal amount released
(Rs. in Crore)
12 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 2002-03 265.11
2. Gujarat 20 01-02 and 2002-03 384.46
3. Haryana 2001-02 105.49

112
4. Kerala 20 02-03 and 2004-05 84.94
5. Maharashtra 2001-02 137.89
6. Punjab 2003-04 77.78
7. Rajasthan 2001-02 137.71
8. West Bengal 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05 381.64
Total 1575.02
8.3 Inadmissible Incentive Claims—Rajasthan
Government of Rajasthan (GoR) had loged a claim for incentive of Rs. 144.45
crore in February 2003 being 50 per cent of losses reduced (Rs. 288.90 crore) during
2001-02 from the base year of 2000-01. The Ministry of Finance had sanctioned an
incentive claim of Rs. 137.71 crore in December 2003 on the recommendation of the
MoP.
However, audit examination revealed that there was no loss reduction during
2001-02 as compared to the base year of 2000-01, as the cash loss of  Rs. 1055.39 crore
of the base year i.e. 2000-01 had increased to Rs. 1179.91 crore during 2001-02. The loss
of base year was inflated due to inclusion of expenditure of more than Rs. 284 crore
pertaining to a period prior to the base year in respect of the SEB. Further, revenue was
not considered on net realization basis and the figures furnished in respect of sundry
debtors were also not in accordance with the above provision and hence not correct
for the purpose of incentive claim. The cash losses had not decreased, even when the
working of individual Discoms was considered separately. Also, the impact of auditor's
qualification on the accounts of 2001-02, which resulted in further increase in cash
loss, has also not been considered. Thus, an irregular and inadmissible incentive of
Rs. 137.71 crore had been paid by the MoF on the basis of inappropriate claims of
Rajasthan, which were not adequately verified by the MoP.
8.4 Not Allowing Incentive Claims
Incentive claims of Goa, Tripura, Punjab and Maharashtra were disallowed/
partly allowed on grounds which were not reflected in the guidelines, as summarised
below:
* Goa Electricity Department (GED) submitted its incentive claim for the years
2001-02 and 2002-03 in February 2004. After examination of claim by M/s CARE,
APDRP Cell and Internal Finance Wing of MoP, the Ministry recommended
release of Rs. 8.95 crore incentive to the State. However, the MoF decided not
to release the claim on the ground that the GED had not been corporatised, and
it was not possible to know whether the losses in the case of elecricity business
had decreased or not. It may be noted that corporatisation was not indicated as
a pre-condition for release of incentive in the guidelines.
* Tripura State Electricity Corporation Limited (TSECL) submitted its incentive
claim of Rs. 33.80 crore for FY 2003-04 in January 2006. The claim was examined
12 3 4

113
and approved by the CARE and the APDRP Cell in the MoP. Though the
TSECL had been corporatised in January 2005 and it was found to be eligible for
an incentive of Rs. 33.22 crore, the same was not agreed to in the MoP on the
grounds that the claim pertained to the year 2003-04, when the distribution of
power was being handled by Tripura State Electricity Department, and it has
not been corporatised at that time and a similar claim of Goa, where
corporatisation had not taken place, had been rejected by the Ministry of
Finance.
* Punjab State Electricity Board submitted (March 2005) a claim of Rs. 243.10
crore under the  incentive scheme for the year 2003-04, which was increased to
Rs. 251.94 crore by the MoP . The MoF returned (August 2005) the claim to the
MoP as the Punjab Government intended to give free power to the farmers,
which was against the spirit of APDRP. However, after persuasion by the Punjab
Government, GoI released Rs. 77.78 crore as of January 2007.
* The MoP received annual acccounts from Maharashtra State Electricity Board
(MSEB) for the years 2000-01 and 2001-02 audited and certified by Comptroller
and Auditor General of India. The Ministry calculated the total loss reduction
amounting to Rs. 578.55 crore in the year 2001-02 and hence found Maharashtra
eligible for an incentive claim of Rs. 289.27 crore. However, the MoF released
incentive amounting to Rs. 137.89 crore only and desired to get the accounts
scrutinised by a professional Chartered Accountant for release of incentive.
The reasons for release of part incentive were not on record.
8.5 No mechanism for ensuring utilisation of incentives for improvement of
power sector
The APDRP Guidelines stipulated that the grant under incentive component
was to be utilised in the improvement of the power sector only. However, the MoP had
not system to verify or confirm that this grant was being utilised for the improvement
of the power sector. In fact, audit examination at the State level revealed utilisation of
the incentive for other purposes, as summarised below:
*I n  Rajasthan, the incentive component of Rs. 137.71 crore was accounted as
revenue grant in the Profit and Loss account of the Discoms, thus reducing the
revenue gap and consequently subsidy receivable from the State Government.
* In Kerala, out of the incentive received, a sum of Rs. 1.05 crore was paid to the
employees of the Board as a gift and Rs. 1 crore was donated to the Malabar
Cancer Society. The balance was utilised for meeting working capital
requirements.
* GoI provided Haryana Government Rs. 105.49 crore as incentive. The same was
released to the companies after delay ranging from 1 to 15 months. The utilities
also did not formulate any scheme for utilisation of the incentive for improvement
of the power sector and appropriated this money towards their revenue
expenditure.

114
* In West Bengal, out of Rs. 375.76 crore received as incentive, the SEB utilised
(March, October 2005) Rs. 133 crore to pay interest accrued on State Government
loans.
Reply of MoP
In reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that :—
* Incentive claims of Gujarat (2004-05), Kerala  (2004-05), Punjab (2003-04), and
Madhya Pradesh (2002-03), amounting to Rs. 898.46 crore are pending release,
while claims of Andhra Pradesh (2005-06), Himachal Pradesh (2004-05),
Madhya Pradesh (2004-05) and West Bengal (2005-06), are under examination.
* The incentive claim of Rajasthan was scrutinized and discussed at various
levels in the MoP and MoF, before establishing eligibility and releasing the
incentive.
* Claims of Goa and Tripura were not accepted, as it was not possible to verify
reduction of losses from the non-corporatised accounts.
* The incentive component in its present form was proposed to be discontinued
during the XI Plan.
The reply of the Ministry shows that the larger objectives of the incentive
scheme have not been achieved.
9. Reform Measures
9.1 No accountability of Circles and Feeders
A Key administrative intervention under APDRP was ensuring accountability at
the circle and the feeder level by:
* Redesignating Distribution Circles as independent profit centres (with adequate
delegation of powers) and the Superintending Engineer as the CEO.
* 11 KV feeders to be operated as business units, with the Junior Engineer
designated as the feeder manager.
* Ensuring accountability by having MOUs, setting out specific targets to be
achieved, executed by the SEBs/Utilities with the CEOs of the Circles, who, in
turn were to execute MOUs with their subordinate officials, who would ultimately
execute MOUs with the Feeder Manager.
Audit examination, however, revealed that this intervention was not successful.
In Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Jharkhand, Kerala,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh,  and West Bengal, though the SEBs
designated the Superintending Engineer of the Circle as Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
and issued orders appointing JEs as Feeder Managers, in some States no administrative
measures were taken to operate the distribution circle  as independent profit centre/
complete business unit. In Arunachal Pradesh, Punjab, Meghalaya, Nagaland,
Rajasthan (partly done), and Uttar Pradesh, even the designation of the JEs as Feeder
Manager has not been done.

115
Recommendation
Ministry may ensure that States comply with the letter and spirit of the MOA and
ensure target-based accountability at the Distribution circle and feeder level.
9.2 Unbundling of SEBs
Reorganization of SEBs involving unbundling into separate entities for
Generation, Transmission and Distribution and corporatisation of unbundled entities,
had not taken place as of March 2006 in Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Goa, Jharkhand, Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab and Sikkim.
Further, in Kerala and Tamil Nadu, although the State Electricity Boards were
functionally segregated into three profit centres namely Generation, Transmission and
Distribution, the annual accounts had, however, not been prepared separately for each
profit centre. In the absence of separate profit centres for Generation, Distribution and
Transmission and determination of transfer pricing etc., the separate Profit and Loss
accounts prepared at the circles of Distribution wing merely represented ad hoc
management information, and the purpose of distinct profit centres has not largely
been achieved.
9.3 Formation of State Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC)
SERC was constituted in 23 out of 29 States. In Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim, SERC/JERC
8
  was not constituted. Further,
in Jammu and Kashmir and Goa, though the SERCs had been constituted, they were
not functional as no Tariff Orders had been issued as of March 2006.
9.4 Formation of State Level Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC)
 The Memorandum of Agreement stipulated constitution of state level Distribution
Reforms Committee (DRC) within a stipulated time period. The DRCs were, however,
constituted in various States with delays ranging up to 731 days, as detailed in
Annexure-VIII.
9.5 Ineffective vigilance and legal measures to prevent theft of energy
Theft of electricity, in the form of unauthorized connections from the electricity
supply system, tampering, by-passing of meters by the consumers etc. constitutes a
substantial part of commercial loss. Hence, vigilance and legal measure to prevent
theft are critical to reduce non technical losses/commercial losses. The "Guidelines for
reduction of Transmission and Distribution Losses" issued by the CEA and the MOAs
prescribe various measures for reducing commercial/non-technical losses, e.g. setting
up of vigilance squads, framing suitable policies and mechanisms for detection and
follow-up of cases involving theft of energy, making full use of legal provisions for
launching prosecution against offenders and conducting periodic review of cases,
and imposing severe penalties for tampering with meter seals.
However, audit scrutiny revealed that the MoP's monitoring was confined to
setting up of special courts and special police stations by the States. The Ministry did
not have a mechanism for periodically monitoring of the details of cases registered,
8
State Electricity Regulatory Commission/Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission.

116
convictions, penalty recovered etc. in different States. The limited data collected and
provided by one of the AcCs (NTPC) showing details of theft cases detected, cases
registered/convicted, penalty recoverably/recovered etc. is given in Annexure-IX; the
gaps in data are purportedly on account of non-availability of complete details even
with the utilities. On the other hand, the other AcC (Power Grid) did not maintain any
such data and stated that such information might be available with the Utilities/Discoms.
The data presented in the Annexure shows that though utilities were detecting
theft cases, the percentage of registration of cases was very low in Haryana (5.79 per
cent for DHBVN), Chhattisgarh  (0.28 per cent) and Kerala (14.08 per cent). Further,
the percentage of conviction was low, ranging from zero per cent to 10.61 per cent
(except CESE Kernataka—84 per cent and Jodhpur-Rajasthan 47 per cent). Also, the
utilities did not accord due cognizance to the financial implications involved, as they
were not having such details. In Jharkhand, the SEB could realize only Rs. 1.38 crore
out of Rs. 13.32 crore recoverable as penalty, for theft cases during 2005-06, which was
also a reason for the high AT&C losses of 62.3 per cent in 2005-06.
Audit examination at the State level revealed ineffective vigilance and legal
measures to prevent theft of energy, as detailed below:—
* Though envisaged under the Electricity Act, 2003, special police stations were
set up only in seven States (Gujarat, Karnataka, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tripura,
West Bengal and Delhi ). Also, special courts were not established in
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Kerala, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura
and Tamil Nadu.
* Vigilance squads were not strengthened/set up in Assam, Rajasthan and
Sikkim.
* In Chhattisgarh, only 39 FIRs were lodged during three years ending 2004-05.
During 2005-06, 694 FIRs were lodged. However, not a single conviction has
taken place so far.
Reply of  MoP
In its reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that :
> Only a few States took effective measures resulting in significant reduction of
theft. MoP was monitoring action taken by States for constituting Special Courts
and Special Police Stations to handle cases related to theft of electricity, and
this was proposed to be made as a condition for eligibility for APDRP funds
during the 11th Plan.
The reply is general, and does not address the specific audit findings.
Recommendation
Ministry may set up a mechanism for monitoring the effectiveness of legal and vigilance
measures adopted by SEBs/Utilities for preventing theft of energy.

117
10. Project Planning Management and Implementation
10.1 Pr oject  Planning and Approval
10.1.1 Inadequate examination of DPRs by Steering Committee
Audit examination revealed that in 9 meetings
9
 between July 2002 and November
2006, the APDP/APDRP Steering Monitoring Co mmittee approved as many as
641 Projects, which work out to an average of 71 projects per meeting in addition to
other items like review and monitoring of project progress. Details of the projects
sanctioned during each meeting are available in Annexure-X. Clearly this would not
have allowed the Committee to exercise detailed scrutiny of the project, before according
approval.
Audit examination revealed that the AcCs were providing brief snapshots of the
projects to the Steering Committee, However it is doubtful if even the snapshots of
71 projects on an average were subjected to detailed scrutiny by the Steering Committee.
10.1.2 Revision of costs without Steering Committee approval
Audit examination of work execution at the State level revealed that frequent
modifications were made in the scope of work under the approved DPRs, without
obtaining prior or post-facto approval from the GoI.
> In Bihar, Power Grid unilaterally modified and reduced the scope work and
quantity materials against those originally sanctioned by the Ministry, ranging
between 6 to 64 per cent, (despite the fact that the original DPRs were vetted by
Power Grid itself). The SEB, however, was doubtful as to whether the reduced
scope would fulfil the objectives of the programme.
> In Uttar Pradesh, the works were being executed by the  contractors without
finalizing the bills of quantities jointly with the management and these had to be
revised several times, even beyond the scheduled completion date.
> In Maharashtra (Jalgaon town), due to discrepancies in activity  schedule,
activities amounting to Rs. 3.82 crore were deleted from the scope of tender
after receipt of snap bid relating to the work of supply, erection, testing and
commission of HT/LT line work etc. Similarly, in Pune town, the 68KM, 22KV/
11KV reconductoring work was revised to 46.5 KM and the actual work executed
was 32.30 KM.
In Sikkim, there were cost overrun of Rs. 20.32 crore in 19 work over and above
the projected cost of Rs. 68.78 crore as per DPRs and sanctioned by the  GoI, primarily
owing to higher rates quoted by the contractors and also due to subsequent increase
in scope of works.
Reply of MoP
In reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that positive variations were limited to
the sanctioned value by AcCs during reconciliations, while in the case of negative
variations, the projects were short closed. Further in November 2006, it was decided by
the APDRP Steering Committee that any escalation in the cost of the sanctioned
projects would be borne by the utilities.
9
This excludes two meetings, where no projects were approved.

118
The reply does not address the fact that variations (whether positive or negative)
are indicative of deficient estimation. Further, the lack of adequate systems for validation
and reconciliation of reported expenditure have been highlighted in paragraph 7 of this
report.
10.1.3 Deficiencies in Individual DPRs
Audit scrutiny revealed significant deficiencies in DPRs in Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tripura and Sikkim
covering issue such as incorrect cost estimation, excess use of material, unrealistic
setting of targets etc. as summarised in Annexure XI.
10.2 Project Implementation
10.2.1 Implementation by AcCs
Audit observed that instead of providing guidance and assisting the SEBs/
Utilities in executing the APDRP works on their own and thus ensuring capacity
building, Power Grid (one of the Lead AcCs) took up the implementation work in Bihar
(11Circles), Goa (North Goa, South Goa), Meghalaya (Western Circle, Jowai Town and
Shillong), Uttar Pradesh (Raibareli and Sultanpur Town), Tripura and Gujarat (work
of SCADA in Baroda). As per the Agreements between Power Grid and the respective
State Governments Power Grid charged implementation/Execution charges @ 13.5 per
cent to 15 per cent of the Project Cost.
 This led to a serious conflict of interest, as on the one hand, the  MoP was
relying almost exclusively on the AcCs for vetting of DPRs and independent review of
projects before approval, as also monitoring and review of progress of implementation,
while on the other hand,  Power Grid was executing the work as in implementing
agency in several States.
Reply of MoP
In reply (February 2007), the MoP stated  that Power Grid had informed  them
that they had   taken up execution work of APDRP  only on specific requests  from
some States,  in view of their difficulties. Further, Power Grid  had a separate  AcC Cell
in their Corporate Centre, which was in no way connected  with site execution  of their
work.
They reply is not tenable, since in s such States, the MoP should have arranged
for a different AcC.
10.2.2 Non-adoption of Turnkey contracting/Distorted  Turnkey Packaging
As per the GoI Guidelines of February 2001  and the MOA,  SEBs  had to invite
tenders  for turnkey implementation  of the APDRP projects with a view to maintain a
rigid completion  schedule and for identification of  single point responsibility  for
execution. The project  execution  mechanism  should  have been finalized  by the
SEBs/ Utilities  and informed to the Ministry  within six months of signing  the MoA.
However, audit  observed  that most SEBs/Utilities  executed the work departmentally
or on semi-turnkey basis. Even  where  turnkey contracting  was adopted, the projects

119
were split into separate  packages, which negated the purpose  of turnkey contracting
viz. identification of single point responsibility  for adherence to a  rigid time schedule.
A State-wise summary of  deficiencies noticed  during audit examination  is  given in
Annexure XII.
Non-adoption of turnkey contracting  was also highlighted in the  'Report for
Restructuring  of ADPDRP' as one of the reasons for slow progress of work.
10.2.3 Instances of Delay
V arious  cases of abnormal   delays ranging,  between  10-36 months,  after
approval of the DPRs, resulting  in consequential  delay in completion of the projects
were noticed  in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,  and  Uttar Pradesh as detailed  in
Annexure XIII.
10.2.4 Execution of items outside  APDRP scope
Audit  scrutiny revealed  that works valuing  Rs. 324.92 crore were executed  in
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa,
Punjab, and Tamil Nadu  and which were  not  covered under the scope of APDRP e.g.
replacement  of  functioning  meters, underground cable system for power supply,
works  related to the transmission network etc., detailed  in Annexure XIV.
10.2.5 Execution of items outside DPRs
Audit also  showed that various works/items of works. valuing Rs. 43.10 crore,
which were not covered/included  in the approved DPRs, were executed by the
SEBs,Utilities  in Assam, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Orissa,
Punjab, Mizoram,  and  Uttar Pradesh  as detailed  in Annexure XV.
10.2.6 Economy in procurement and execution
Cases  of lack of economy  in procurement and execution  in Assam, Andhra
Pradesh ,  Maharashtra and Sikkim were  observed, as a result of  which the
SEBs/Utilities incurred  an avoidable expenditure of Rs. 11.19 crore, as indicated in
Annexure XVI.
10.2.7 Excess payments  to contractor
Audit  scrutiny   revealed cases of excess payments, amounting  to Rs. 13 crore,
to contractors  in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh,
Mizoram, Orissa, Sikkim, Tripura and West Bengal  as detailed in Annexure XVII.
10.2.8 Other cases of inefficient /ineffective  execution
V arious  others cases  of ineffective  and inefficient  execution  of works/items of
work  viz. non-utilisation  of material  due to non completion of related works,  installation
of old/repaired equipments, irregular award of work, improper reporting of completion
of works, extension of scheduled  completion period  for reasons  attributable  to
inefficiencies  of the management  etc. were observed during  test check   of records in
Audit  in Assam, Andhra  Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizroam  and
Uttar Pradesh as detailed   in Annexure  XVIII.

120
11. Information Technology (IT) enabling
According  to the APDRP  guidelines , IT and  Computer  Aided Tools  for
revenue  increase, outage  reduction, monitoring  and control played  a vital  role in
distribution  management  IT applications  would be used  in such processes  in the
distribution sector  to ensure   higher revenues as a result of segregation   of T&D
losses,  and controlling  commercial losses,  especially for metering,  meter  reading,
billing, collection and outage  reduction. However, audit examination  revealed  poor
progress  in IT works, in particular  those relating  to customer  indexing, digital
mapping, and Supervisory  Control and Data  Acquisition  (SCADA),  as detailed
below:—
> In Rajasthan, out of a proposed   expenditure on IT interventions of  Rs. 5.81
crore constituting 5.87 per cent of total  expenditure  of Rs.  967.85 crore  of
selected  schemes, actual expenditure during the period from 2003-04 to 2005-06
was only Rs. 0.81 crore which was less  than 2 per cent  to the planned
expenditure.
> In Haryana, the utilities  had not formulated  and implemented an integrated
programme for execution of works  relating  to computerization and IT, though
Rs. 18.11 crore  where to  be spent  on consumer indexing, GIS  mapping, call
centres, and data logging  of 33 KV sub stations.
> In Kerala, audit scrutiny  revealed  that the LT Billing system  lacked the
provision  to capture the parameters relating  to energy Audit, the data relating
to installation of capacitors  by industrial  consumers, meter  reading exception
report, consumption  comparison report, invoice comparison report in respect
of spot bill etc. as also  the facility to generate reports of revenue such as
Monthly Report of Revenue required  to be forwarded to the Division.
> In Tamil Nadu,  the progress of LT computerized  billing and IT enabling  including
data loggers, was only 23.76 per cent  and 24.13 per cent  in physical terms  and
42.22 per cent and  27.58 per cent in financial  terms respectively.
> In Jharkhand, GIS mapping and setting  up of online MIS for decision making
covering technical  commercial  and management functions had not  been
done as no provisions for computerization  was made  in the work order issued
by the Board. Even  though the billing  process was  computerized, it  would
have limited  utility until  consumer  indexing  and GIS  mapping was taken up,
and linked  with billing data.
> In Uttaranchal, though UPCL  spent Rs. 1.40 crore  on consumer  indexing, it
could  not take   up energy  audit  at any DT  in the absence  of any consumer
mapping details.
> In Punjab, implementation was very slow as only Rs. 6.82 crore  out of Rs. 64.31
crore  were incurred  on IT upto March 2006.
> In Assam, though  online billing through computerization was to be  done, the
same had not been implemented, and linking  consumer  index to the computerized
billing  database was done in one circle, out of 14 circles.

121
> In Karnataka, financial  progress in respect of IT related works was a meagre
39.14 per cent.
> In Gujarat  (test checked  Himmatnagar Project), though an expenditure  of
Rs. 53.35 crore  was incurred on the project  till 31 March 2006, no expenditure
had been incurred  on consumer indexing work.
> In Tripura and Sikkim, IT systems for addressing customer complaints/
grievances as trouble call management  centres, computer  cell etc. were not yet
developed.
> In Sikkim, though the entire  provision of Rs. 0.72 crore was exhausted,
computerized billing could be implemented in only two out of 24 revenue sub-
divisions. Further, computer indexing  was complete in only 6 out of 24 revenue
sub-divisions.
> In Jammu and Kashmir , against a project  outlay  of Rs. 21.18 crore for
modernization works such as computerized  billing, communication facilities,
and SCADA, a meagre amount of Rs. 82.75 lakh (4 percent) had been spent  as
of March 2006, which was  mainly on installation of computer systems  in Nodal
Offices and Chief  Engineers offices at Jammu and Srinagar.
Reply of MoP
In reply (February 2007), the MoP stated that:
> They  had constituted an IT  task force, which  recommended a clear cut road
map for distribution utilities for adoption of IT, based  on their present  status
and had laid  emphasis on the implementation of  computerized billing, data
logging, MIS, SCADA etc.
> The utilities  felt  that modernization activities  could be taken up  only after  the
existing distribution network  was  brought  to a certain level, and also that the
payback  period for  such investments  was higher. Consequently, they accorded
secondary treatment to IT enabling. Utilities  had now started adopting IT and
other technology  options in selected areas. However, the grant under APDRP
covered ony 25 per cent of the cost, with the rest to be arranged as loan,  and
the utilities already had a  high loan burden.
> They (the MoP) proposed  to give higher importance  to IT, especially  in the
context of energy accounting  and audit, during the XI Plan.
> The reply confirms  lack of adequate  and effective  efforts by the MoP in
ensuring the actual implementation of IT tools,  and consequently,  the lack
of effective  energy  accounting  and auditing, which is critically dependent
on IT.
12. Monitoring, Evaluation  and Reporting
12.1 Summary of reported  financial progress
While  the APDRP guidelines  stipulated   that the projects were  to be completed

122
within at most 36 months of the date  of sanction , the financial  progress of APDRP
projects, as reported  by the Ministry
10
 was why  behind  schedule, as depicted below:
An analysis  of delays in completion reveals the following  position:
Table 12 : Details of completion against targeted dates
Sl. Date of Projects Number of Scheduled Number Percentage
No. Sanctioned Projects Completion Date of Projects of completed
Sanctioned (assuming a completed as of projects
maximum of 36 October, 2006
months)
11
1. 16.07.2002 57 7/05 05 9
2. 25.09.2002 72 9/05 03 4
3. 20.11.2002 203 11/05 21 10
4. 20.05.2003 66 5/06 04 6
5. 28.11.2003 08 11/06 NIL 0
6.  20.09.2004 93 9/07 NIL NA
12
7. 23.03.2005 69 3/08 NIL NA
11
8 03.08.2005 15 8/08 NIL NA
11
State-wise details of financial progress are enclosed in Annexure-XIX, which is
summarised below:
* Of the 33 completed projects, 16 projects were in Andhra Pradesh, and 3 each in
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal.
33
238
98
98
39
78
Completed
Above 50%, but not complete
Between 30% and 50%
Between 10% and 30%
Below 10%
Yet to start
Progress of APDRP  Projects
Status
No. of Projects
0 50 100 150 200 250
10
Based  on reported  utilisation  of funds (and not physical progress).
11
While individual  APDRP projects  have  separate  schedules  for completion, these are  not
tracked by the MoP. Hence, the maximum  timeframe of 36 months has been used for computing
delay.
12
Completion date not yet over.

123
* In respect of all projects, Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,
Karnataka, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, and Uttaranchal report a relatively high
utilisation of funds, while Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Jammu and Kashmir,
Orissa and Tripura reported very poor utilisation of funds.
The delay in progress of works and failure to complete works in time would
result in non-achievement or partial achievement of the desired objectives, and further
time and cost over-runs. Analysis of the reasons for slow progress revealed that there
was no shortage of funds for implementation, as nearly 54 per cent of the 10th Five
Year Plan provision of Rs. 20,000 crore was still available for sanction. Instead, as
discussed elsewhere in the report, the delays were mainly due to poor planning and
execution, and lack of commitment and involvement of the implementing agencies.
Reply of MoP
The MoP replied (February 2007) that:
* The execution of projects was delayed due to various reasons on the part of the
State Governments not transferring the APDRP funds in timely fashion to the
utilities, and delayed action on the part of the implementing utilities. The low
allocation of budget by the Government during 2005-06 and 2006-07 also affected
the implementation to some extent.
* Some of the projects where implementation had not started long after sanction
had been closed by the Steering Committee in its meeting in November 2006,
and some other projects had been short closed due to various reasons.
* Many of the projects showed 90 per cent completion on the basis of financial
progress even after completion of the project on physical term for want of final
reconciliation and non-payment of final bills for want of completion of
performance guarantee period.
This reply is not tenable, as majority of projects were sanctioned between 2002
and 2003, and in case these projects had indeed been completed in all respects, issues
like final reconciliation and performance guarantee should have been resolved well in
time.
12.2 Lack of direct linkage between physical and financial progress
The MoP's monitoring and reporting of progress of APDRP projects in terms of
percentage completion was based on the reports of utilisation of funds from the State
Governments vis-a-vis the project outlay, rather than on actual physical progress.
While the MPRs (Monthly Progress Reports) from the State Governments did give
details of physical progress, the Ministry's status reports did not involve compilation
of the data on physical progress, but was restricted to financial utilisation. This gives
a misleading picture of the status of implementation of APDRP.
Reply of MoP
The MoP replied (February 2007) that the reports were being compiled by the
AcCs, both on financial and physical basis, and being examined by them, while the

124
physical data, being voluminous, was being examined by the Ministry and the Steering
Committee from time to time. NTPC stated (January 2007) that the condition for release
of funds was based on financial, and not physical progress.
The response is not satisfactory, since there needs to be clear and direct linkage
between physical and financial progress at the Ministry level.
Recommendation
Ministry's monitoring and reporting mechanism should capture both physical and
financial progress, facilitating direct linkage and comparison, and corrective action
in case of wide variations between physical and financial progress.
12.3 Inspection of APDRP Projects
The APDRP Steering Committee, in its sixth meeting in April 2004, showed
concern about the quality of equipments being procured and execution of the projects
under APDRP and desired that the lead AcCs should closely monitor the progress of
implementation of APDRP.
On enquiry by audit regarding inspection by the AcCs of the APDRP projects,
one AcC (NTPC) intimated that the inspection reports were handed over to the Head of
concerned utility for corrective action, and, as such, these could not be provided to
Audit (except a few sample reports without name of the project and utility). In its
further response (January 2007), NTPC requested audit to collect the inspection reports
from the respective utilities Records relating to inspections, if any, carried out by the
other Lead AcC (Power Grid)—were not provided to Audit.
The MoP did not have a consolidated record of all such inspections by the
AcCs, and audit could not ascertain whether any corrective action was taken on the
findings/recommendations of such inspection reports by the Ministry and SEBs/
utilities. In response to an audit memo, the MoP stated that the inspection reports were
flagged only during the Review Meetings at the Ministry level. However, a review of
the minutes of such meeting indicated only one reference by NTPC to the lack of
turnkey approach in Madhya Pradesh and a dispute between NTPC and the SEB in
Chhattisgarh on issue and finalisation of NITs and no reference to any inspection
reports by the AcCs.
12.4 V ery few projects evaluated
Evaluation of the APDRP projects by an independent agency was an integral
part of the scheme. Initially, projects which were at least 50 per cent complete were to
be selected for evaluation and the work of evaluation was assigned to five consultants
namely TERI, SBI CAPs, TCS, IIM-Ahmedabad and ASCI. However, the evaluation
covered ony 67 APDRP projects in 11 States (Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Gujarat,
Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and
Uttaranchal) out of the total 583 approved projects in 29 States, of which 271 projects
were reportedly more than 50 per cent financially complete as of March 2006.

125
12.5 Monitoring by State Level Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC)
A State Level Distribution Reforms Committee was required to be constituted
within one month of signing of the Memorandum of Agreement with the MoP. The
Committee was to meet once in two months and review the progress of project
implementation, compliance of MoU/MoA conditions, performance against targets
and Benchmarks. Audit scrutiny by the State Level further revealed that the required
number of meetings of DRC to review the progress of project implementation etc. was
not held, with the shortfall in holding the specified number of meetings ranging up to
80 per cent in various States. Details are given in Annexure VIII. The CEO of the Circle,
along with AcCs, was to monitor and review the achievements on technical, commercial
and benchmarks every month. The record of such reviews along with reasons and
action proposed for overcoming shortfall were to be intimated to the MoP, but the
same was not done and the MoP did not have any such records.
Recommendation
Ministry may take steps to ensure (a) that all DPRs are subjected to critical
examination by the Steering Committee for technical and financial feasibility before
approval, (b) the independent, advisory role of AcCs is clearly demarcated as opposed
to implementation responsibilities, and (c) there is a well-defined mechanism for
inspection of APDRP projects by AcCs and review of corrective action thereon.
13. Conclusion
APDRP was launched in 2002-03 with a total provision of Rs. 40,000 crore—
Rs. 20,000 crore each for the investment and incentive components-for the 10th Five
Year Plan Period. As of March 2006, only about 30 per cent and 8 per cent of the
provisions on the investment and incentive components have been released. Financial
management under the programme has been poor and the expenditure reported by the
States is unreliable, in the absence of Utilisation Certificates and Statements of
Expenditure. Audit examination detected several cases of incorrect financial reporting,
short release/diversion of funds by the State Governments, with the Ministry of Power
taking no corrective action in this regard.
The main objectives of APDRP are far from being achieved. Against the targeted
reduction of 9 per cent per annum in A T&C loss, a reduction of only 1.68 per cent per
annum, between 2001-02 and 2004-05, has been achieved, as indicated in a recent
report of MoP Task Force. Audit scrutiny further revealed serious deficiencies in the
authenticity of data regarding AT&C Loss being reported to the MoP. Energy auditing
and accounting has not taken off, primarily on account of lack of system metering (in
particular Distribution Transformer metering) and inadequate computerisation efforts.
The efforts to improve accountability at the circle and feeder levels through a chain of
target-based MoUs have not been successful. The incentive mechanism has not been
successful, and most of the claims pertain to the year 2001-02 to 2003-04, indicating
that actual cash loss reduction in most States has been poor.
Progress in implementation of APDRP projects was poor, with only 33 out of 583
projects reported as financially completed as to March, 2006. There were significant

126
deficiencies in the project approval and monitoring processes at the MoP. Audit
examination also threw up numerous cases of deficient DPRs, project execution and
implementation, and lack of economy and efficiency in procurement and contracting.
The Ministry needs to take major and effective steps to exercise stricter monitoring
and control over implementation of APDRP, in particular on implementation of 100 per
cent metering, energy accounting and audit and IT enabling to ensure that the envisaged
objective to distribution reform is achieved.
Sd/-
(K. R. SRIRAM)
New Delhi Principal Director of Audit,
Dated: 12th March, 2007 Economic and Service Ministries.
Counter  signed
Sd/-
New Delhi (VIJAYENDRA  N. KAUL)
Dated: 13th March, 2007 Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

ANNEXURE I
(refer to para 2.3)
Statement showing the funding pattern for release of APDRP funds as per the
Guidelines issued by Ministry of Power
As per guidelines issued on 11th June 2003
Sl.No.                     Conditionality Percentage of APDRP funds
to be released by GoI
Non-Special Special
Category Category
States States
1. Up front on approval of project under APDRP 25 per cent 50 per cent
and on tie up of Central Plan Fund from financial
institutions.
2. Release of matching fund by financial institutions (FIs) —    —
3. After spending 25% of the project cost* (i.e. 25% 50 per cent 50 per cent
APDRP+25% of counterpart fund from FIs)
4. Progressive release of 50 per cent of the project —
cost by FIs/own resources
5. After spending 75% of the project cost (i.e. 75% 25 per cent —
APDRP+75% of counterpart fund from FIs)
6. Progressive release of the balance 25% of the
counterpart fund by FIs — —
As per guidelines issued on 7th November 2005 (effective from 2005-06)
1. Up front on approval of Project under APDRP 10 per cent 30 per cent
2. Release of 30% Project cost by Financial Institutions
(FIs)/own resources — —
3. After spending 40% of the project cost
13
10 per cent 40 per cent
 
(i.e. 10% of the project cost as APDRP grant+30%
of loan component from FIs/own resources)
4. Progressive release of the 30%
14 
of the Project cost — —
by FIs/own resources.
*50 per cent in case of Special Category States.
13
30 per cent for Special Category States.
14
10 per cent for Special Category States.
127

128
5. After spending 80% of the Project Cost
15
5 per cent 20 per cent
 (i.e. 20% of the project cost as APDRP grant +60%
of loan component from FIs/own resources) balance
APDRP amount i.e. 5% of the project cost would be
released.
6. Progressive release of the balance 15% of the Project — —
cost by FIs/own resources
15
 70 per cent + 10 per cent of GoI share for Special Category States.
S.No.Conditionality Percentage of APDRP funds
to be released by GoI
Non-Special Special
Category Category
States States

129
*Source-Ministry of Finance.
#Funds to Delhi are released by Ministry of Home Affairs.
ANNEXURE II
(refer to para 2.6)
Statement showing State-wise Project Outlay, Releases by Government of India, Counterpart Funds Sanctioned/Drawn and Percentage
of Utilisation vis-a-vis Project outlay as of 31st March 2006*
Rs. in Crore
Sl. No. State Project Revised APDRP Release C/Part Fund
Utilisation
outlay Component
Grant Loan Total Grant Loan Total Sanctioned Drawn T otal %
1 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 1458.49 364.62 283.38 648.00 283.38 283.38 566.76 744.78 436.53 967.52 66.34
2. Bihar 854.05 213.51 156.59 370.10 156.59 156.59 313.18 377.75 121.48 309.72 36.26
3. Chhattisgarh 407.70 101.93 79.61 181.53 79.61 79.61 159.21 65.99 65.99 133.28 32.69
4. Delhi# 922.61 230.65 52.76 283.41 52.76 52.76 105.51 767.72 767.72 863.23 93.56
5. Goa 294.01 73.50 56.70 130.20 56.70 56.70 113.40 62.70 44.87 129.09 43.91
6. Gujarat 1083.22 270.81 200.13 470.94 200.13 200.13 400.26 480.54 372.44 818.12 75.53
7. Haryana 431.95 107.99 84.50 192.48 84.50 84.50 168.99 225.34 104.56 210.79 48.80
8. Jharkhand 423.65 105.91 76.94 182.85 76.94 76.94 153.87 222.42 65.54 146.26 34.52
9. Karnataka 1186.31 296.58 217.73 514.30 230.25 217.73 447.97 668.97 496.41 798.69 67.33
10. Kerala 863.63 215.91 115.28 331.18 115.28 115.28 230.55 175.18 142.55 294.03 34.05
11. Madhya Pradesh 663.20 165.80 64.94 230.74 64.94 64.94 129.87 339.54 127.37 184.90 27.88

130
1 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3
12. Maharashtra 2231.58 557.90 134.12 692.01 214.90 134.12 349.01 713.64 265.37 891.32 39.94
13. Orissa 592.22 148.06 37.01 185.07 37.01 37.01 74.02 296.11 35.52 59.47 10.04
14. Punjab 715.57 178.89 89.37 268.26 89.37 89.37 178.74 353.19 148.73 278.43 38.91
15. Rajasthan 1193.25 298.31 192.92 491.23 192.92 192.92 385.83 417.92 188.13 710.79 59.57
16. Tamil Nadu 948.12 237.03 220.91 457.94 220.91 220.91 441.82 484.09 392.77 724.14 76.38
17. Uttar Pradesh 1091.30 272.83 67.26 340.09 106.75 67.26 174.01 438.17 245.91 491.99 45.08
18. West Bengal 442.20 110.55 20.09 130.64 72.84 20.09 92.92 210.29 65.15 225.63 51.02
Sub Total 15803.06 3950.77 2150.19 6100.96 2335.73 2150.19 4485.92 7044.34 4087.04 8237.40 52.13
19. Arunachal Pradesh 82.69 74.42 3.67 78.09 33.01 3.67 36.68 NIL NIL 12.49 15.10
20. Assam 650.73 585.66 15.89 601.54 262.63 15.89 278.51 NIL NIL 237.91 36.56
21. Himachal Pradesh 322.78 290.50 16.39 306.89 225.94 16.39 242.33 NIL NIL 214.71 66.52
22. Jammu & Kashmir 1100.13 990.12 31.50 1021.61 377.00 31.50 408.50 NIL NIL 308.88 28.08
23. Manipur 141.62 127.46 0.27 127.73 2.40 0.27 2.67 NIL NIL 2.67 1.89
24. Meghalaya 227.43 204.69 5.84 210.52 52.54 5.84 58.38 NIL NIL 41.46 18.23
25. Mizoram 108.74 97.87 2.90 100.76 75.11 2.90 78.01 NIL NIL 28.96 26.63
26. Nagaland 122.27 110.04 4.28 114.33 64.30 4.28 68.58 NIL NIL 42.84 35.04
27. Sikkim 164.19 147.77 15.47 163.24 139.26 15.47 154.73 NIl NIL 134.83 82.12
28. Tripura 146.74 132.07 3.76 135.83 33.88 3.76 37.64 NIL NIL 24.58 16.75
29. Uttaranchal 310.08 279.07 24.08 303.15 255.68 24.08 279.76 NIL NIL 220.47 71.10
Sub Total 3377.40 3039.66 124.04 3163.7 1521.74 124.04 1645.78 N I L N I L 1269.80 37.60
Total 19180.46 6990.43 2274.23 9264.65 3857.47 2274.23 6130.70 7044.34 4087.04 9507.20 49.57

ANNEXURE III
(refer to para 5.1)
Details of sampling procedure
Selection of Units
(a) All the relevant records of the MoP/MoF and SEBs/Utilities/SEDs, Distribution
Companies (Discoms), at the Centre and State level were audited.
(b) In every State, 25% of the Circles were to be selected on the basis of Probability
Proportion to Size with Replacement (PPSWR) method of statistical sampling with size
measure as total number of projects in each Circle. However, in case of those States
where the total number of projects required to be selected were not covered in the
25 per cent selected circles, then the number of circles selected was to be increased to
cover the sufficient number of projects, even if the percentage of thus selected circles
crossed 25 per cent.
Selection of Projects
583 numbers of projects were being implemented in 29 States. Out of which a
sample size of 236 numbers of projects was found to be reasonable with 5 per cent
margin of error, 95 per cent confidence level and 50 per cent occurrence rate of
non-completion of Projects in the population. This sample size had been allocated
proportionately over the States.
Once the projects had been selected from the circles selected by the State AsG,
these projects were divided into two categories/strata namely (a) projects which have
been evaluated by external agencies like ASCI, TCS, TERI etc., and (b) projects which
had not been evaluated by such external agencies. 25 per cent of the projects were to
be selected from stratum (a) and the remaining 75 per cent of the projects, subject to a
minimum of 2, from stratum (b).
Selection of Towns
In addition to selection of Circles and Projects, Best/Worst Performing Towns
were also to be selected, for detailed examination, as under:
• Best performing towns—Out of 15 numbers of town indicated by Ministry of
Power as best towns in respect of A T&C losses, during 2003-04, which ranged
between 7.52 to 10.68 per cent, towns namely Chennai in Tamil Nadu and Uppal,
Malkajigiri and Nizamabad in Andhra Pradesh, were selected using Simple
Random Sampling without Replacement Technique for detailed examination.
• Worst performing towns—All the 15 worst performing towns, where AT&C
loss ranged between 59.85 per cent to 80.35 per cent during 2003-04 as indicated
in the records of Ministry, namely Jamtara, Garwha, Latehar, Daltonganj,
Sahibganj, Dumka and Pakur in Jharkhand, Naharlagun in Arunachal Pradesh,
Osmanabad in Maharashtra, Darbhanga, Pesu (West) and Gaya in Bihar,
Chhatarpur in Madhya Pradesh, Roorkee in Uttaranchal and Aizawl in Mizoram,
were selected for examination in detail.
131

132
Statement showing the details of Sampling
S.No. Name of State Total Reasonable Number of Number of
Number sample size projects to be projects
of projects of projects taken up for actually taken
detailed up for detailed
examination examination
1. Andhra Pradesh 101 40.88 15 101
2. Arunachal Pradesh 4 1.62 4 4
3. Assam 1 5 6.07 6 6
4. Bihar 15 6.07 6 6
5. Chhattisgarh 7 2.83 4 4
6. Delhi 6 2.42 4 4
7. Goa 7 2.83 4 4
8. Gujarat 13 5.26 5 5
9. Haryana 18 7.28 7 7
10. Himachal Pradesh 12 4.86 5 5
11. Jammu & Kashmir 6 2.43 4 4
12. Jharkhand 8 3.23 4 4
13. Karnataka 35 14.17 14 14
14. Kerala 52 21.05 15 13
15. Madhya Pradesh 48 19.43 15 16
16. Maharashtra 3 5 14.17 14 14
17. Manipur 5 2.02 4 4
18. Meghalaya 9 3.64 4 4
19. Mizoram 7 2.83 4 4
20. Nagaland 3 1.21 3 2
21. Orissa 7 2.83 4 4
22. Punjab 26 10.52 11 13
23. Rajasthan 29 11.74 11 11
24. Sikkim 4 1.62 4 4
25. Tamil Nadu 41 16.60 15 7
26. Tripura 7 2.83 4 4
27. Uttar Pradesh 36 14.57 14 14
28. Uttaranchal 6 2.43 4 4
29. West Bengal 21 8.50 8 8
Total 583 235.94 216 294

ANNEXURE IV
(refer to para 6.1.1)
Statement showing AT&C Losses for the year 2001-02 and 2005-06
Sl. Name of the State AT&C Losses Basis of Average in case of
No. (in percentage)$ P ercentage of AT&C losses
calculated on the basis of
average of circle/towns
2001-02 2005-06
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh 22.74# 18.06# A verage of 3 Model Circles
# T&D Losses
2. Arunachal Pradesh* 68 54.76 State as a whole
3. Assam* 41.48 (2002-03) 42.10 A verage of total 14 Projects
4. Bihar 65.74* 55.68** *A verage of 4 Circles
**Average of 6 Circles
5. Chhattisgarh 34.07 34.87 A verage of 6 test checked
Circles
6. Delhi DNA 59* A verage of 8 districts under
BYPL & BRPL
7. Goa 29.41 15.86 State as a whole
8. Gujarat 17.63(2002-03)* 21.21* A verage of 3 Circles and 2
cities (test checked)
9. Haryana 38.35(2002-03) 40.52 *A verage of 2 companies
10. Himachal Pradesh* 48.46(2002-03) 30.98 State as a whole
11. Jammu & Kashmir* 46(2002-03)# 45# #T&D Losses AT&C
Losses in 7 circles ranged
between 47% & 72% in
2005-06
12. Jharkhand 63.24 62.39 State as a whole
13. Karnataka 42.39 37.81 State as a whole
14. Kerala NA 32.79* *A verage of 9 Projects
15. Madhya Pradesh 45.49 (2003- 43.77* *A verage of 36 towns
04)* under APDRP
16. Maharashtra 44.11(2003-04) 35.70 State as a whole
$Figures based on audit scrutiny at the State Level, except Assam where the figures have been
taken from the Monthly Progress Report of Powergrid as of March 2006.
133

134
17. Manipur* 80.69 85.41 State as a whole
18. Meghalaya* 35.37 42.96 State as a whole
19. Mizoram* 84.94 72.74 State as a whole
20. Nagaland* 61 59 State as a whole
21. Orissa 55.50 (2000-01) 44-75 State as a whole
22. Punjab 26.86 24.02 State as a whole
23. Rajasthan 42.27 41.56 A verage of 3 Discoms
(2003-04)
24. Sikkim* 63.93 41.19 State as a whole
25. Tamil Nadu 18.87 16.33 A verage of 25 circles
26. Tripura* 40.63 (2002-03) 32.40 State as a whole
27. Uttar Pradesh 44.50* 43.38** * A verage of 3 Circles
(2003-04) ** A verage of 11 Circles
28. Uttaranchal* 45.07 38.80 State as a whole
29. West Bengal 45.41 35.28** **A verage of 2 Circles and
6 towns test checked
12 3 4 5
*Special category States.

ANNEXURE V (A)
(refer to para 6.2.1)
Status of Consumer Metering for the Y ears 2001-02 and 2005-06*
Consumer Metering (In Lakhs)
Sl.No. State 2001-02 2005-06
Numbers Metered Percen- NumberMetered Percen-
tage tage
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Andhra Pradesh 113.20 90.50 80 157.46 150.47 96
2. Arunachal Pradesh 1.30 0.70 54 1.13 0.52 46
3. Assam 9.50 6.50 68 11.77 10.56 90
4. Bihar 23.76 17.16 72 12.50 6.23 50
5. Chhattisgarh 18.70 11.20 60 22.91 15.81 69
6. Delhi 27.10 26.26 97 26.65 26.65 100
7. Goa 4.00 3.80 95 3.96 3.86 97
8. Gujarat(GEB) 69.21 63.55 92 74.77 69.57 93
9. Haryana 35.11 32.65 93 39.17 36.12 92
10. Himachal Pradesh 16.50 15.10 92 16.97 16.97 100
11. Jammu & Kashmir 10.00 4.00 40 10.00 4.00 40
12. Jharkhand 6.53 4.90 75
13. Karnataka 85.00 48.40 57 128.89 105.68 82
14. Kerala 62.50 58.00 93 77.99 77.99 100
15. Madhya Pradesh 63.29 35.46 56 64.92 46.50 72
16. Maharashtra (MSEB) 129.00 109.00 84 135.32 118.12 87
17. Manipur 1.70 1.40 82 1.70 1.40 82
18. Meghalaya 1.40 0.90 64 1.68 0.84 50
19. Mizoram 1.04 0.48 46 1.28 1.27 99
20. Nagaland 1.50 1.10 73 1.88 1.14 61
21. Orissa 14.50 11.50 79 21.49 17.45 81
22. Punjab 52.71 44.68 85 58.94 50.39 85
23. Rajasthan 53.05 43.25 82 58.45 54.78 94
24. Sikkim 0.70 0.30 43 0.65 0.60 92
25. Tamil Nadu 147.68 117.42 80 170.33 148.13 87
26. Tripura 1.80 1.20 67 2.28 1.84 81
27. Uttar Pradesh 78.10 46.03 59 88.06 80.38 91
28. Uttaranchal 8.54 7.09 83 9.87 7.73 78
29. West Bengal 38.00 32.00 84 47.27 45.89 97
Total 1068.89 829.63 78 1254.82 1105.79 88
* Source—Ministry of Power Status Report for March 2006.
135

136
ANNEXURE V (B)
(refer to para 6.2.1)
Statement showing status of Feeder and Distribution Transformer Metering for the years 2001-02 and 2005-06*
Sl. State 11kV Feeders Distribution Transformer
No. 2001-02 2005-06 2004-05 2005-06
Numbers Metered %age Numbers Metered %age Numbers Metered %age Numbers Metered %age
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 4907 4907 100 9239 8674 94 262,000 55,000 21 351,751 38,729 11
2. Arunachal Pradesh 168 33 20 201 1 0 DNA DNA DNA DNA DNA DNA
3. Assam 777 777 100 708 708 100 18,288 DNA DNA 18,288 DNA DNA
4. Bihar 1517 600 40 1125 465 41 15,000 DNA DNA 15,000 DNA DNA
5. Chhattisgarh 767 100 13 1574 1511 96 38,424 DNA DNA 38,424 DNA DNA
6. Delhi 1400 1400 100 1850 1850 100 8,000 3,500 44 8,000 3,500 44
7. Goa 170 170 100 179 179 100 3,562 1,781 50 3,562 1,781 50
8. Gujarat (GEB) 5939 5939 100 5307 5307 100 236,362 1,500 1 236,362 1,500 1
9. Haryana 2557 2557 100 3888 3888 100 133,364 DNA DNA 133,364 DNA DNA
10. Himachal Pradesh 375 350 93 762 727 95 15,802 14,099 89 15,802 14,099 89
11. Jammu & Kashmir 1214 1214 100 1558 1480 95 30,015 DNA DNA 30,015 DNA DNA
12. Jharkhand 461 396 86 16,500 15,000 91 16,500 15,000 91
13. Karnataka 3518 3518 100 4570 4570 100 144,000 34,500 24 144,000 34,500 24
14. Kerala 1047 1047 100 1334 1334 100 80,000 5,000 6 35,442 5,506 1
>

137
15. Madhya Pradesh 5498 2943 54 5660 5660 100 160,000 3,000 2 160,000 3,000 2
16. Maharashtra 7558 7558 100 6148 6148 100 186,000 50,000 27 215,241 52,923 25
(MSEB)
17. Manipur 193 40 21 193 40 21 DNA DNA DNA DNA DNA DNA
18. Meghalaya 314 96 31 175 175 100 2,515 650 DNA 2,515 650 26
19. Mizoram 106 98 92 129 93 72 DNA DNA DNA 916 20 2
20. Nagaland 93 32 34 164 140 85 DNA DNA DNA DNA DNA DNA
21. Orissa 1858 500 27 1792 1699 95 22,000 20,500 93 22,000 20,500 93
22. Punjab 4563 4360 96 5928 5928 100 280,000 30,000 11 217,000 11,660 5
23. Rajasthan 7321 3321 45 8411 8411 100 188,170 DNA DNA 188,170 DNA DNA
24. Sikkim 124 124 100 113 113 100 DNA DNA DNA 1357 531 39
25. Tamil Nadu 3684 3684 100 3777 3777 100 210,000 40,000 19 161,092 4,703 3
26. Tripura 118 118 100 197 197 100 DNA DNA DNA DNA DNA DNA
27. Uttar Pradesh 8124 8124 100 8507 8507 100 330,000 6,652 2 330,000 6,652 2
28. Uttaranchal 348 330 95 1008 1008 100 15,000 15,000 100 24,412 989 4
29. West Bengal 2800 615 22 2347 2347 100 53,420 13,500 25 53,420 13,500 25
Total 67058 54555 81 77305 75333 97 2448422 309682 13 2422633 229743 9
DNA-Data Not Available
Source: Ministry of Power Status report for March 2006.

138
ANNEXURE VI
(refer to para 6.5)
Statement showing Average Cost of Sales (ACS), Average Revenue Realisation (ARR) and Revenue Gap (ACS-ARR)
for the years 2001-02 to 2004-05
Sl. Name of State 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
 No. ACS ARR GAP ACS ARR GAP ACS ARR GAP ACS ARR GAP
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
   1. Andhra Pradesh 2.29 1.64 0.65 2.37 1.99 0.38 2.37 1.99 0.38 2.30 2.01 0.29
  2 . Arunachal Pradesh 6.78 0.75 6.03 5.97 0.76 5.21 4.40 0.91 3.49 2.49 1.21 1.28
  3. Assam 4.25 2.05 2.20 4.76 2.35 2.41 4.68 2.69 1.99 6.13 2.86 3.27
  4. Bihar 3.57 2.13 1.44 3.21 1.64 1.57 3.40 1.77 1.63 3.44 1.73 1.71
  5. Chhattisgarh 2.12 2.35 0.23S 1.72 2.38 0.66S 1.91 2.43 0.52S 1.99 2.41 0.42S
  6. Delhi — — — 1.58 1.87 0.29S 2.05 2.03 0.02 2.34 2.49 0.15S
  7. Goa 2.12 2.08 0.03 1.57 2.06 0.49S 1.51 2.04 0.53S 1.61 2.15 0.54S
  8. Gujarat 2.60 1.82 0.77 2.38 1.87 0.51 2.76 2.06 0.69 2.49 2.03 0.46
  9. Haryana 2.47 1.89 0.58 2.26 1.82 0.44 2.31 1.82 0.49 2.58 1.86 0.72
10. Himachal Pradesh 2.08 1.79 0.29 2.10 1.97 0.13 2.08 1.99 0.09 2.36 2.29 0.07
11. Jammu & Kashmir — — — 2.48 0.71 1.76 2.24 0.77 1.47 2.29 0.75 1.54
12. Jharkhand 3.40 2.81 0.58 3.72 2.79 0.91 4.02 2.68 1.33 4.52 2.58 1.94
13. Karnataka 2.32 1.59 0.73 2.51 1.84 0.67 2.60 1.95 0.65 2.65 1.98 0.67
14. Kerala 2.58 1.60 0.98 2.86 2.12 0.73 3.19 2.46 0.73 2.75 2.56 0.19
15. Madhya Pradesh 2.33 1.81 0.52 2.08 1.77 0.31 2.23 2.00 0.23 2.21 1.96 0.25

139
16. Maharashtra 2.07 1.98 0.08 2.08 2.04 0.04 2.18 2.10 0.08 2.27 2.06 0.12
17. Manipur 3.33 0.46 2.87 3.30 0.72 2.59 3.22 0.64 2.58 2.86 0.89 1.97
18. Meghalaya 1.99 1.51 0.48 2.25 1.71 0.55 1.24 1.83 0.59S 1.84 1.78 0.06
19. Mizoram 2.11 0.92 1.19 2.38 0.75 1.63 3.01 0.90 2.11 2.64 1.41 1.23
20. Nagaland 3.18 1.08 2.10 3.34 1.16 2.18 7.15 1.29 5.86 3.87 1.29 2.58
21. Orissa 2.06 1.59 0.47 2.17 1.73 0.44 2.05 1.69 0.36 2.03 1.75 0.28
22. Punjab 2.44 1.77 0.68 2.41 1.92 0.49 2.25 2.04 0.22 2.52 2.03 0.49
23. Rajasthan 2.61 2.04 0.57 2.64 1.97 0.67 2.63 1.95 0.68 2.50 1.82 0.68
24. Sikkim 1.47 0.79 0.68 2.69 0.83 1.86 0.48 1.40 0.92S 0.61 1.67 1.06S
25. Tamil Nadu 3.18 1.95 1.23 2.62 2.15 0.47 2.73 2.44 0.29 2.76 2.36 0.40
26. Tripura 2.44 0.81 1.63 2.26 0.88 1.38 1.92 1.81 0.10 3.56 3.13 0.43
27. Uttar Pradesh 2.17 1.63 0.54 2.41 1.81 0.59 1.54 1.17 0.37 2.72 1.84 0.88
28. Uttaranchal — — — 2.72 2.75 0.03S 2.77 2.64 0.13 1.82 1.50 0.33
29. West Bengal 2.78 1.62 1.15 2.54 1.90 0.64 2.45 2.29 0.16 2.43 2.28 0.15
S-Surplus
Figures taken upto two decimal places.

ANNEXURE VII
(refer to para 7.2.6)
Details of delay by State Governments in release of funds released by Government
of India during the peirod 2002-03 to 2005-06
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name of the Total Delay in release of Total Amount
No. State amount funds  by State Amount held
released by Government to SEB/ released by by State
Government Utility against various State Government
of India till releases (In days) Government as on 31st
31st March till 31st March 2006
2006 Minimum Maximum  March 2006
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Andhra Pradesh 265.10 30 month NIL 265.10
(Incentive)
2. Arunachal Pradesh 36.68 5 month 21.55 15.13
3. Assam 278.51 15 374 263.51 15.00
4. Bihar 313.18 24 346 313.18 NIL
5. Chhattisgarh 169.47 45 365 128.48 40.99^
6. Delhi 105.51 - 5 month 105.51 NIL
7. Gujarat 519.08  - 21 504 519.08 NIL
incentive  +
loan
8. Haryana 168.99 17 71 168.99 NIL
9. Himachal Pradesh 242.32 51 637 242.32 NIL
10. Jammu and Kashmir 408.50* - 12 month 408.50 NIL
11. Jharkhand 175.84 92 1095 175.84 NIL
12. Karnataka 447.97 21 258 435.45 12.52
13. Kerala 295.49 20 295 295.49 0.00
14. Madhya 129.87 16 516 129.87 NIL
Pradesh
15. Maharashtra 349.01 (as per 90 450 273.04 75.97
release orders
in the MoP)
^Chhattisgarh: Amount adjusted by State Government, while releasing the funds, towards dues
payable by the SEB.
* Delay was in respect of Rs. 168.58 crore.
140

141
16. Meghalaya 58.37 4 month 10 month 58.37 —
17. Mizoram 78.01 6 month 70.91 7.10
18. Nagaland 68.58 2 month 14 month 52.59 15.99*
19. Punjab 244.02 33 342 244.02 NIL
20. Rajasthan 430.83 7 300 430.83 NIL
21. Sikkim 154.72 1 month 10 month 149.50 5.22
22. Tamil Nadu 441.82 31 178 441.82 NIL
23. Tripura 37.64 43 138 37.64 NIL
24. Uttar Pradesh 174.01 21 283 174.01 NIL
25. Uttaranchal 279.76 1 month 9 month 279.76 NIL
26. West Bengal 502.18 28 833 502.18 NIL
* Nagaland: This amount includes Rs. 15.75 crore not released by State Government and Rs. 0.24
crore deducted as departmental charges while releasing the APDRP funds.
12 3 4 5 6 7

142
ANNEXURE VIII
(refer to paras 9.4 & 12.5)
Statement showing details of constitution of State level Distribution Reforms Committee (DRC) and
the number of review meetings held
Sl. Name of the Date of Stipulated Actual Date Delay in Number of Number Shortfall in
No. State Memorandum date of of days/ meetings of number of
of Agreement constitution constitution month required to Meetings meetings
of DRC of DRC be held till actually actually held
the Month held (Percentage)
1. Arunachal Pradesh 07/2002 08/2002 06/2003 10 month 17-3/2006 4 13 (76)
2. Assam 07/2002 08/2002 08/2002 — 22-3/2006 4 18 (82)
3. Chhattisgarh 10/2002 12/2002 06/2003 210 days 17-3/2006 1 16 (94)
4. Goa 10/2001 11/2001 07/2003 19 month 16-3/2006 3 13 (81)
5. Haryana 4/12/2003 04.01.2003 29.9.2003 209 days 15-3/2006 1 14 (93)
6. Himachal Pradesh 07.12.2002 07.1.2003 02/2003 1 month 13-9/2006 4 09 (69)
7. Jammu and Kashmir 04/2002 05/2002 Not yet 54 month 27 Nil 27 (100)
constituted
8. Karnataka 22.05.2002 22.03.2002 05/2003 13 month 20-08/2006 7 13 (65)
9. Kerala 25.10.2002 25.11.2002 17.03.2003 112 days 20-8/2006 4 16 (80)
10. Maharashtra 05/2002 06/2002 02/2003 240 days 19-3/2006 Nil 19 (100)
11. Punjab 08/2002 09/2002 06/2003 9 month 17-03/2006 1 16 (94)
12. Rajasthan 06/2002 07/2002 15.01.2003 5 month 19-03/2006 7 12 (63)
13. Sikkim 12/2002 01/2003 10/2003 9 month 15-3/2006 Not Available Not Available
14. Tripura 28/8/2003 28/9/2003 09/2003 — 15-3/2006 2 13 (87)
15. Uttar Pradesh 09/2002 10/2002 10/2002 — 24-9/2006 7 17 (71)
16. Uttaranchal 12.12.2002 12.01.2003 01.01.2005 731 days 07-03/2006 1 06 (86)
17. West Bengal 09/2002 10/2002 12/2002 2 month 13-3/2006 2 11(85)

ANNEXURE IX
(refer to para 9.5)
Statement showing details regarding Theft Cases during the period 2000-01 to
2005-06
Sl. Name of the  Number of Theft Cases Number Percentage Amount Amount
No. State Detected Rgistered of cases of involved realized
(percentage) convicted conviction (Rs. in (Rs. in
 crore)  crore)
1. Andhra Pradesh
APEPDCL 11225 N/A 41 0.37 N/A 6.41
APCPDCL 262024 N/A 106 0.04 N/A 37.16
APSPDCL 125511 N/A 121 0.10 N/A 28.98
APNPDCL 147856 147856 143 0.09 N/A 9.88
(100%)
2. Assam* — 3696 123 3.33 — —
3. Chhattisgarh 317485 889(0.28%) Nil 0.00 N/A 52.06
4. Haryana
UHBVN 114190 23148(20%) N/A N/A N/A 48.72
DHBVN 123724 7165(5.79%) N/A N/A N/A 50.69
5. Jharkhand 5113 3301 N/A N/A 17.66 1.38
(64.56%)
6. Karnataka
BESCOM 27788 N/A 2 0.017 N/A 5.55
CSES 2341 N/A 1959 83.68 N/A 5.79
MESCOM 1741 N/A 2 0.17 N/A 1.80
HESCOM 9619 N/A 27 0.28 N/A 13.11
7. Kerala 1854 261(14.08%) Nil 0.00 N/A 32.95
8. Madhya Pradesh 26735 N/A 1254 4.70 N/A 674.57
(Bhopal region)
9. Maharashtra 7878 4599 31 0.67 N/A 68.12
(58.38%)
10. Punjab 1658073 N/A N/A N/A N/A 756.52
11. Rajasthan
Jaipur DISCOM 123542 2503 N/A N/A 93.09 49.45
Ajmer DISCOM 147368 N/A N/A N/A 117.41 58.49
Jodhpur DISCOM 343 343(100%) 167 46.68 91.71 54.13
12. Tamil Nadu 12501 N/A 1.63 1.70 73.41 36.22
(1.70%)
13. Tripura* 33197 558 45 8.06 N/A 82.05
(1.68)
14. Uttaranchal 147 132 N/A 10.61 N/A 191.22
*For the years 2004-05 and 2005-06.
143

ANNEXURE X
(refer to para 10.1.1)
Details of the projects sanctioned during various Monitoring/
Steering Committee meetings
Sl.No. Name of the Date of No. of Total cost Total cost of T otal
Committee Meeting Projects  of the Projects the Projects Project
Sanctioned Sanctioned Sanctioned Cost as
 (Rs. in Crore) (Rs. in Crore) per
(including 5% (excluding Status
consultancy 5% consultancy Report
charges) charges) (Rs.in
Crore)
1. Monitoring 16.07.2002 63 Circles 4214.20 4013.52 4214.39
Committee
2. Ist Steering 25.09.2002 69 3983.90 3784.71 4064.35
Committee
3. 2nd Steering 20.11.2002 204 5209.14 4948.68 4780.38
Committee
4. 3rd Steering 20.05.2003 63 1938.55 1841.57 2003.44
Committee
5. 4th Steering 19.09.2003 NIL NIL NIL NIL
Committee
6. 5th Steering 28.11.2003 15 968.47 788.10 767.40
Committee
7. 6th Steering 13.04.2004 NIL NIL NIL NIL
Committee
8. 7th Steering 20.09.2004 99 1437.22 1365.56 1365.59
Committee
9. 8th Steering 23.03.2005 72 1876.50 1782.68 1688.04
Committee
10. 9th Steering 03.08.2005 15 296.87 N/A 296.87
Committee
11. 10th Steering 21.11.2006 90 1587.20 N/A
Committee
144

ANNEXURE XI
(refer to para 10.1.3)
Cases of deficiencies noticed in individual DPRs
Sl.No.  Name of State Deficiencies noticed during Audit
12 3
1. Haryana In the DPR of Faridabad Circle the financial benefit
from the investment of Rs. 30.83 crore earmarked for
'balance works', was not envisaged. Further, the
envisaged financial benefits of Rs. 37.93 crore for
works worth Rs. 87.63 crore were inflated by Rs. 2.83
crore.
2. Himachal Pradesh * In three test checked circles, the Board awarded 12
contracts for construction of sub-stations, lines and
express feeders at a cost of Rs. 16.68 crore against
the provision of Rs. 9.26 crore in the DPR.
* In Kullu, Bilaspur and Rohru circles, excess
replacement of 4042 LT and 178 HT Poles resulted in
excess expenditure of Rs. 3.73 crore.
* In Hamirpur circle, the Board purchased 477 three /
single phase transformers against provision of 405
transformers at a cost of Rs. 4.88 crore against the
provision of Rs. 3.69 crore.
3. Madhya Pradesh Against the requirement of 237 feeder meters, the
SEB made provision of 1085 feeder meters in 9 towns
in the DPRs approved during 2002-03.
4. Maharashtra The cost of replacing the three phase electronic
meters, considered in Amravati, Latur, Malegaon,
Sindhudurg projects was Rs. 4000 per meter, while in
Nashik, the cost of single phase electronic meter was
taken at Rs. 2500 per meter as against Rs. 2250 for
three phase meter and Rs. 1000 for single phase
electronic meter, considered in projects for other
circles.
5. Punjab Excess material over and above the provisions made
in the approved DPRs (12 projects) was used,
resulting in unauthorized expenditure of Rs. 16.77
crore (March 2006), which was indicative of defective
DPR.
6. Punjab * In Mohali, the targets fixed for T&D losses in DPRs
were higher than the prevailing level of T&D losses.
145

146
* The minimum target of T&D losses to be achieved
was five per cent in DPRs, which meant that in no
case could the metering efficiency be more than
95 per cent. However, the targets of metering
efficiency in the DPRs of Amritsar City, Bathinda,
Tarn Taran, Muktsar, Barnala & Melerkotla were fixed
at 100 per cent, which cannot be achieved even if the
minimum targets of T&D losses were achieved.
7. Rajasthan For the work of reactive compensation, the actual
quantity was 11768 numbers costing Rs. 194.55 lakh
as against the projected quantity of 1500 numbers
costing Rs. 752 lakh, indicating that the per unit cost
indicated in the DPRs was more than 30 times the
actual cost.
8. Rajasthan * The cost of new 33 KV line included in various DPR
ranged between Rs. 1.58 lakh per KM in case of
Jhunjhunu to Rs. 8.90 lakh in case of Sri Ganganager.
* The cost of new 11 KV lines ranged between Rs. 0.72
lakh per KM in case of Jodhpur district to Rs. 8.51
lakh per KM in case of Ajmer city.
* The cost of 11 KV , 1.2 MVAR capacitor Bank ranged
between Rs. 4.47 lakh in case of Bikaner city to
Rs. 15.87 lakh in case of Jaipur District.
9. Sikkim The Energy and Research Institute (TERI)—an
independent evaluator—observed (July 2005) that
the project reports were prepared in a hurry, without
making any system studies to avoid changes in the
scope of works.
10. Tripura The requirement projected as per the approved DPRs
and the actual procurement made on re-assessment
revealed that the DPR estimates, of 79930 meters were
grossly inadequate; only 2,45,994 electronic meters
(68.68 per cent of the requirement) were procured as
of July 2006, leaving a gap of 1,12,199 consumer
connections without electornic tamper proof meters.
1          2 3

ANNEXURE XII
(refer to para 10.2.2)
Cases of Non-adoption of Turnkey Contracting/Distorted Packaging
Sl.No  Name of State Cases noticed in Audit
1. Assam 14 projects were split into 23 packages compromises of
system improvement, consumer meeting, computerization
of billing, new-sub-station, feeder augmentation etc. For
every package, two separate contracts were entered into,
one for supply of equipments and the other for erection,
which negated the purpose of turnkey contracting—
identification of single point responsibility for adherence
to a rigid time schedule.
2. Chhattisgarh The value of total turnkey contracts out of the completed
works up to end of March 2006 was a meagre 17 per cent.
Total turnkey contracts were adopted for laying 33 KV
lines only.
3. Gujarat Non of the 10 projects were awarded on turnkey basis.
4. Jammu and Kashmir Barring a few works, most of the programmes were being
executed deparmentally.
5. Meghalaya Nine out of 20 packages in five circles valuing Rs. 14.22
crore were not being executed on turnkey basis.
6. Orissa Non of the projects were implemented on turnkey basis.
7. Uttar Pradesh Out of 14 projects, UPPCL/Discoms finalised only three
projects on turnkey basis.
8. Uttar Pradesh 11 projects were split into five packages for each project
and awarded to individual contractor. However, as all the
packages were interconnecting nature, the delay in one
work resulted in delay of other works. Further, in five towns,
the agreements for carrying out civil works for construction
of Sub-stations were executed after the scheduled date of
completion of works relating to erection/installation of the
Sub-station.
147

ANNEXURE XIII
(refer to para 10.2.3)
Cases of abnormal delays in award and execution of works after approval of DPRs
Sl.No. Name of State Deficiencies noticed during Audit
1. Madhya Pradesh * There were delays ranging between 10 and 17 months
in the award of turnkey contracts, and works valuing
Rs. 272.12 crore were not awarded as of 31 March
2006.
* Laying of 33/11 KV lines in 11 towns, with scheduled
dates of completion between January 2005 and
August 2005, did not commence even afer a lapse of
23 to 24 months from the date of award.
* The renovation and modernization work of 16167 DTs
pertaining to 29 towns did not commence even after
the expiry of 17 months from the date of award of
work.
2. Maharashtra The works of DT renovation and modernization,
tower ladder mobile vehicle, energy accounting and
computerized billing centre etc. valuing Rs. 22.04
crore included in the DPRs of Jalgoan, Pune town,
Pimpri-Chinchwad, Nashik town and Nashik rural
sanctioned in 2002-03 and 2003-04, had not been taken
up by MSEDCL (Maharashtra State Electricity
Distribution Company Limited) as of March 2006.
3. Uttar Pradesh Out of 14 projects test checked in 11 towns, delay in
award of contracts ranged between 5 and 36 months.
148

ANNEXURE XIV
(refer to para 10.2.4)
Cases of Execution of Works/items of Works outside the scope of APDRP
Sl.No. Name of State Execution of works not under the ambit of APDRP
12 3
1. Himachal Two sets of overhead transmission line fault
Pradesh locating analysers were purchased at a cost of
Rs. 0.36 crore and installed at 220 KV sub-station
at Hamirpur, though there was no provision in the
scheme for their installation at this sub-station.
2. Jammu and Kashmir * Key material valued at Rs.1.25 crore procured for
execution of the APDRP works was diverted for
restoration of system damages caused to
distribution system due to heavy snowfall during
2004-05 and 2005-06 and was not recouped to the
programme from the State plan.
* Sub-Transmission Division No.-I, Jammu
advanced (December 2004) Rs. 13 lakh to Jammu
Development Authority for acquiring land neither
covered in the programme guidelines nor in the
individual project reports.
3. Jharkhand A sum of Rs. 19.93 crore was spent during 2005-
06 toward projects of underground cable system,
erection, testing and commission for power
supply in Ranchi.
4. Kerala The SEB replaced all the electromechanical meters
of consumers with electro-static meters in three
circles and seven towns at a cost of Rs. 45.96
crore. However, APDRP does not envisage
replacement of functioning consumer meters.
5. Maharashtra 11 project reports submitted by Maharashtra State
Electricity Distribution Company Limited
(MSECL), which were sanctioned by the GoI,
provided for replacement of 14,68,014 meters with
static meters valuing Rs. 161.65 crore, though the
APDRP does not provide for replacement of
existing functional meters.
6. Orissa Rs. 0.52 crore were spent on repair of spot billing
machines and mobile phone charges.
149

150
7. Punjab An expenditure of Rs. 5.27 crore was incurred on
works of 132 KV and 220 KV sub-stations (instead
of 33/66 KV sub-stations), which did not form
part of the sub-transmission and distribution
network.
8. Tamil Nadu The Board had included new/improvement works
of 10 Sub-stations of 110/33 KV and 110/11 KV at
a total value of Rs. 89.85 crore in Chennai Metro
Projects for the stated reason of improving the
upstream network. The AcC (NTPC) had failed to
properly scrutinize and eliminate these works as
any improvement work in the upstream network
was a part of the Board's own works.
12 3

ANNEXURE XV
(refer to para 10.2.5)
Cases of Execution of Works/Items of Works not covered/included in approved
DPRs
Sl.No. Name of State Deficiencies noticed during Audit
1. Assam Rs. 3.26 crore was incurred on works/items of work which
were not covered under the projects approved by GoI.
2. Haryana In Karnal circle, Rs. 8.89 crore was spent on items not
covered under approved DPRs.
3. Himachal Pradesh In Hamirpur Circle, one HT shunt capacitor at 33 KV sub
station at Jawalamukhi was installed at the cost of Rs. 12.30
lakh and LT switched capacitors to be installed on the
distribution transformers, at a cost of Rs. 41.57 lakh as per
DPR, were not installed; consequently, the achievement of
the desired improvement in the power factor remains
doubtful.
The scope of the scheme of construction of sub-station at
Tahliwala in Una circle was changed due to increase in
load demand at extra cost of Rs. 0.93 crore, which was to be
recovered from the industrial consumers but was charged
to APDRP instead.
4. Jammu and In 6 utility divisions, Rs. 22.19 crore was spent on items of
Kashmir work not covered in DPRs viz. laying of new 33/11 KV
lines, laying of LT lines for pump sets, electrification of
villages etc.
5. Mizoram The Thermal Power Division spent Rs. 0.61 crore on labour
payments, repair of vehicles, purchase of battery bank etc.
which were not covered in the DPRs.
6. Orissa Works amounting to Rs. 3.12 crore were executed over and
above the scope of approved DPR.
7. Punjab An expenditure of Rs. 2.27 crore was incurred on providing
general service connections (GSC), deposit works, meter
cup boxes and pillar boxes, which were not included in the
approved DPRs.
8. Uttar Pradesh The UPPCL/Discoms used APDRPfunds amounting to
Rs. 1.83 crore for procurement of four movable trailer
mounted cable fault locating systems, construction of
committee room etc. which were not included in the DPRs.
151

ANNEXURE XVI
(refer to para 10.2.6)
Instances where Economy in Procurement and Execution was not exercised,
resulting in avoidable Expenditure
Sl.No.  Name of State Instances noticed during Audit
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh Execution of three works was awarded to the lowest
contractor, on overall comparison, on semi turnkey basis,
at a cost of Rs. 2.76 crore. During the execution, additional
quantities were included and certain items of works deleted
altogether  and the total cost of the three works was revised
to Rs. 4.04 crore, showing that the contract was finalized
without proper field survey as certain items of work were
increased in quantum by more than 20 times. As the lowest
quoted items of work were cancelled and highest quoted
items of work were increased abnormally, the additional
expenditure in all the three contracts worked out to
Rs. 64.42 lakh being the difference in rates on additional
quantities compared with the rates offered by other
contractors.
2. Assam In order to undertake the work in 14 circles under APDRP,
the Board entered into contracts with different parties for
supply of electrical materials, which included inter alia
PSC Poles of different specifications. In eight test checked
circles the Board procured PSC poles of different
specifications at rates much higher than the Government
approved rates from suppliers outside the State, thereby
incurring an avoidable expenditure of Rs. 3.10 crore on
purchase of poles.
3. Maharashtra The lowest offer of Rs. 17.43 crore, which was 28.3 per cent
above the estimated cost of Rs. 13.59 crore, was received
in Nasik town for supply, erection, testing and
commissioning of HT/LT lines, establishment and
augmentation of transformer etc. for which tenders were
invited in June 2004. However, as the same was not accepted
without any justification, and on re tendering the lowest
offer was higher by 39.8 per cent over the estimated cost,
the work could not be commenced till September 2006, when
it was decided to be carried out departmentally at an
estimated cost of Rs. 21.62 crore  i.e. higher by Rs. 4.19
crore over the originally lowest offer.
152

153
4. Sikkim * Procurement of materials and calling of tenders for the
works through the STCS led to avoidable payment of
commission amounting to Rs. 34.21 lakh out of APDRP
funds.
*  Against the requirement of 63,917 consumer meters,
70230 meters were purchased resulting in excess
purchase of 6313 meters of Rs. 1.14 crore.
* 7232 meters valuing Rs. 1.31 crore were found defective
after their installation, which were not replaced/repaired
till September 2006, although they were guaranteed for
5/10 years.
* In departure from the established practice, the
department in one case incorporated the item 'supply,
bending and binding of steel' totalling 35.65 metric tones
valued Rs. 17.32 lakh in construction of the base of the
towers, over and above the cement concrete works
(ratio 1:2:4 & 1:3:6) and protective works (1:4:8 mix),
resulting in unnecessary excess expenditure to that
extent.
* In 3 works involving 24.1 km of transmission lines, the
requirement of towers as per the norm was 73 against
which the Department used 84 towers, resulting in
excess expenditure of Rs. 30.14 lakh.
12 3

ANNEXURE XVII
(refer to para 10.2.7)
Cases of Excess Payment to Contractors
Sl.No. Name of State Deficiencies noticed during Audit
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh * SPDCL accepted 100 defective DTs worth Rs. 31.16
lakh despite rejection by the authorised inspection
agency (RITES).
* NPDCL awarded (12 March 2004) two separate works
for conversion of low voltage distribution system
(LVDS) to high voltage distribution system (HVDS) in
two divisions of Warangal Model circle to a contractor.
Though the works involved were of similar nature the
contractor quoted different rates with the difference
ranging between Rs.2 and Rs.2520. Acceptance of the
quoted rates, without making negotiations for
acceptance of the lower rates of other contractors,
resulted in extra expenditure of Rs. 53 lakh.
2. Arunachal Pradesh * Liquidated damages of Rs. 1.21 crore were not
recovered for delay in completion of work.
* Defective meters valued at Rs. 29.11 lakh could not be
got replaced.
3. Assam Defective consumer meters valued at Rs. 0.99 crore were
not got replaced.
4. Bihar The SEB paid Rs. 12 crore to Power Grid, as initial advance,
to execute APDRP works in eight circles in March 2003,
even before it entered into an agreement with Power Grid,
which was done in December 2003.
5. Goa The SED paid 50 percent of the estimated cost amounting
to Rs.87.75 crore as interest-free advance without any
security, in violation of CVC guidelines, to Power Grid.
6. Himachal * Substandard cables valuing Rs. 0.33 crore was not got
Pradesh replaced.
* Out of the total penalty of Rs. 81.83 lakh for delayed
completion of work ranging between 2 to 44 weeks,
HPSEB could recover only Rs. 9.45 lakh resulting in
short recovery of Rs. 72.38 lakh.
7. Mizoram * Defective meters valued at Rs. 12.53 lakh could not be
got replaced.
154

155
* Champhai Power Diversion (CPD) paid Rs. 47.71 lakh
to Power Stores Division for material like conductor,
transformer etc., however evidence of receipt of these
materials was not on record.
8. Orissa * Neither did CESCO claim Rs. 23.06 lakh for defective
supply of material, not did the supplier firm refund the
amount.
* SOUTHCO & NESCO incurred an extra expenditure of
Rs. 0.38 crore due to purchase of AB cable instead of
ACL cable, which was recommended by the central
procurement group and was available at a lower rate.
9. Sikkim * Rs. 1.75 crore was transferred to State Trading
Corporation of Sikkim on the last day of the financial
year 2002-03, though orders to the STCS to release
payments to the supplier were made in May 2003/June
2003.
* Interest free mobilization advances of Rs. 16.74 crore
were paid to 30 contractors in 30 works without any
specific authorization.
* Excess quantities of 14323 bags of cement consumption
ranging from 5 to 12 per cent (2 works) and 33 to 40 per
cent (7 works) of the quantities actually prescribed by
the Schedule of Rates (SOR) resulted in excess payment
of Rs. 35.81 lakh.
* In 3 works, the contractors used less cement than the
requirement  as per the SOR, which rendered works of
value Rs. 99.05 lakh sub-standard.
* Extra charges @ 25 per cent of the cost of items of
works over and above the contractual rates was allowed
to two contractors in two works towards erection,
commissioning, testing and transportation, resulting
in undue extra payment of Rs. 2.07 crore to the
contractors.
10. Tripura * In two test checked sub division in Agartala, 21005
meters were purchased/installed during 2003-04 to 2005-
06, out of which 3832 meters became defective within
12 months of installation, indicating purchase of
substandard meters.
* Rs. 6.82 crore was paid in advance to Power Grid for
two projects.
12 3

156
11. West Bengal The Tender Evaluation Committee failed to analyse the ex-
work prices of similar materials quoted for three circles
and towns therein. Consequently, the price schedule
issued to the successful contractors were higher for 27
items by 2 to 2910 per cent in comparison to the lowest
price for the same items for other towns, resulting in undue
benefit of Rs. 3.54 crore to the contractors. Similarly, non-
evaluation of the separate bids for Circle vis-a-vis the
aggregate of the lowest bids in respect of each town
covered in that Circle resulted in undue benefit of Rs. 0.44
crore to the contractors.
12 3

ANNEXURE XVIII
(refer to para 10.2.8)
Other cases of Inefficient/ineffective execution
Sl.No. Name of State Instances noticed during Audit
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh Though the works relating to LT line capacitors, meter
calibrations and consumer indexing valuing Rs. 27.22 crore
were not taken up at all by SPDCL, it furnished physical
progress on these works to DRC.
2. Assam * Due to the selection of the highest bidder, in respect of
feeder augmentation for Jorhat, Dibrugarh and
Guwahati Electrical Circle-II work, the Board suffered
an extra liability of  Rs. 42.08 lakh. In two cases
(consumer metering in three cirles* and Consumer
metering in six circles**) though one bidder against
each package was found to be technically disqualified,
their price bids were opened and selected as lowest
bidder on the basis of price bid on the ground that
competition would otherwise be limited to a single bid.
* System Improvement (SI) work of Cachar Electrical
Circle of which the Technical and Commercial
Evaluation Committee selected Techno Electric and
Engineering Company Limited (TEEC) as the only
technically qualified bidder, despite the fact TEEC failed
to fulfil the criterion of past supplies/performance of
transformers of stipulated class and, BHEL and L&T
were disqualified for non-fulfilment of minimum
qualifying requirement and non-submission of type test
reports of equipments respectively. As per documents
furnished by BHEL it had fulfilled all the qualifying
requirements and L&T had committed to furnish type
test report after the award of work and this was in
conformity with clause 1.2 of the bid document.
3. Bihar * The SEB indicated reconductoring of 33KV lines of
47 km between Aurangabad, Uchauli and Daudnagar
as completed. Audit, however, observed that
reconductoring had been done only upto 38.50 km.
* One power sub station—Pachayti Akhara in Gaya was
shown as completed despite the fact that clearance
157
*Jorhat, Dibrugarh and Guwahati Electrical Circle-II.
**Nagaon, Bongaigaon, Tezpur, Rangia, Sibsagar and Guwahati Electrical Circle-I.

158
report of the Electrical Inspector and completion
certificate were yet to be submitted.
* 10 PSS were shown as completed by POWERGRID in
their progress report though no work was found to be
completed by Audit.
4. Chhattisgarh The SEB installed 1605 old/repaired transformers
(1583 DTs and 22 Power Transformers) initially and had
taken up replacement of these old DTs/PTs subsequently,
which is still under progress. This resulted in additional
commitment of Rs. 0.91 crore towards labour and
transportation and delayed the completion of works.
5. Himachal Pradesh Three dismantled transformers and one old HT Shunt
capacitor valuing Rs. 38.77 lakh against sanctioned amount
of Rs. 48.50 lakh for new equipments were installed at
three substations.
6. Jammu & Kashmir Supply order for purchase of an automatic meter reading
system (AMR) comprising of ten components at a cost of
Rs. 1.50 crore was placed (October 2001)  with a firm.
However, only six components of the system, costing
Rs. 1.07 crore were supplied by the firm in 2002-03.
Remaining four components were awaited as of March 2006.
Further, the system could not be installed as permission for
construction of towers for the same was not granted by
SACFA* which rendered the expenditure of Rs. 1.07 crore
unfruitful. The utilities were required to execute APDRP
projects according to the unit rate fixed for each component
of the programme. Cross check of Physical and financial
progress achieved (March 2006), revealed that actual
expenditure far exceeded the expenditure at unit rates
approved for each item of work and Rs. 29.84 crore was
spent in excess in seven EM&RE circles.
7. Jharkhand Material supplied for erection work in 4 sampled projects,
to the tune of Rs. 38.38 crore remained unutilised due to
non execution of erection work.
8. Madhya Pradesh In Indore City Circle though a three member committee
was constituted in July 2005 and entrusted with the task
of assuring the quality control, no report had been
submitted by them.
9. Maharashtra * The contract for 8.25 crore for supply, erection, testing
and commissioning of 11KV and LT lines, establishment
*Standing Advisory Committee for Radio Frequency Allocation.
12 3

159
and augmentation of transformers in Malegaon town,
which was to be completed by November 2004 remained
incomplete even after a time overrun of 21 months till
August 2006 due to late survey and site identification
by MSEDCL, delay in issue of vendor list etc.
* Work of laying new overhead and underground lines,
etc. in Pune town was delayed by 15 months due to
delayed issue of requisite form for labour license,
delayed finalization of vendor list, and belated
preparation of estimates for various works.
* There was a time over run of 21 months in the work of
replacement of single/three phase mechanical meters
with electronic meters in Pune town and Pimpri-
Chinchwad town (awarded in November-2003) and was
completed to the extent of 40.51 per cent and 38.14 per
cent in Pune town and Pimpri-Chinchwad respectively,
till August 2006. It was observed that at against the
installation of 3.85 lakh meters in Pune town within a
period of one year only 2800 meters were provided by
MSEDCL, whereas in Pimpri-Chinchwad no meters were
supplied till six months after award of work due to non-
availability of meters in stock. The inordinate delay in
supply of meters hampered the progress of work.
10. Mizoram * The Kha wzawl Power Division (KDP) under Champhai
Circle stated the work of upgradation of 33KV bay as
completed at a cost of Rs. 0.93 crore. But KDP executed
sub-standard work by installing 2.5 MV A transformer
(Rs. 7.32 lakh) instead of 6 MV A transformer (Rs. 10
lakh) and had purchased 21 sets of lighting arrestors
instead of 4 sets and also had not executed the Civil
works.
* Though the Material at Site Account (MAS) for March
2006 of the Revenue Division indicated that the Division
had utilised 1982 consumer meters out of 3770 meters
received, audit scrutiny, however, revealed that only
352 meters were actually issued to consumers.
11. Uttar Pradesh In three works, the management had to extend the
scheduled completion period by 14 months due to delay
in finalization of BoQ, approval of Guaranteed Technical
Parameters (GTPs), non-availability of Form 31, delay in
purchase of land, delay in completion of civil works at the
site and non-availability of shut downs etc.
12 3

ANNEXURE  XIX A
(refer to para 12.1)
Financial Performance in respect of Projects sanctioned during 2002-03
Sl. Name of the Project Cost Total Funds utilised Percentage
No. State (Rs. in upto March 2006 of utilised
crore) (including funds with
counterpart funds) respect of
(Rs. in crore) project cost
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh 1423.59 957.90 67.29
2. Arunachal Pradesh 63.99 9.67 15.11
3. Assam 481.56 200.78 41.70
4. Bihar 770.21 306 39.73
5. Chhattisgarh 404.37 133.23 32.96
6. Delhi 922.61 863.23 93.56
7. Goa 236.21 118.62 50.22
8. Gujarat 1052.84 813.66 77.28
9. Haryana 429.20 208.04 48.47
10. Himachal Pradesh 68.00 52.11 76.63
11. Jammu & Kashmir — — —
12. Jharkhand 423.65 146.26 34.52
13. Karnataka 1114.03 797.61 71.60
14. Kerala 308.97 256.22 82.93
15. Madhya Pradesh 570.44 176.98 31.03
16. Maharashtra 1038.41 556.05 53.55
17. Manipur 10.13 2.67 26.36
18. Meghalaya 24.99 16.81 67.27
19. Mizoram 9.77 8.48 86.80
20. Nagaland 45.39 42.84 94.38
21. Orissa — — —
22. Punjab 635.66 257.76 40.55
23. Rajasthan 1115.39 684.49 61.37
24. Sikkim 144.03 126.77 88.02
25. Tamil Nadu 929.21 724.14 77.93
26. Tripura 13.27 7.51 56.60
27. Uttar Pradesh 386.71 238.09 61.57
28. Uttaranchal 310.08 220.47 71.10
29. West Bengal 126.41 124.12 98.20
Total 13059.12 8050.56 61.65
160

ANNEXURE XIX B
(refer to para 12.1)
Financial Performance in respect of Projects sanctioned during 2003-04
Sl. Name of the Project Cost Total Funds utilised Percentage
No. State (Rs. in upto March 2006 of utilised
crore) (including funds with
counterpart funds) respect of
(Rs. in crore) project cost
12 3 4 5
1. Andhra Pradesh 34.90 9.62 27.56
2. Arunachal Pradesh 18.70 2.82 15.08
3. Assam 65.79 28.82 43.81
4. Bihar 20.40 3.72 18.24
5. Haryana 2.57 2.57 100
6. Himachal Pradesh 254.78 163.96 64.35
7. Jammu & Kashmir 401.10 178.91 44.60
8. Madhya Pradesh 80.10 7.85 9.80
9. Maharashtra 790.74 253.93 32.11
10. Meghalaya 15.97 7.24 45.34
11. Mizoram 48.14 20.48 42.54
12. Nagaland 76.88 0.00 0
13. Orissa 592.22 59.47 10.04
14. Punjab 38.92 16.57 42.57
15. Sikkim 8.06 8.06 100
16. Tripura 14.27 8.43 59.07
17. Uttar Pradesh 95.79 66.44 69.36
18. West Bengal 288.21 104.26 36.18
Total 2847.54 943.15 33.12
161

ANNEXURE XIX  C
(refer to para 12.1)
Financial Performance in respect of Projects sanctioned during 2004-05
Sl. Name of the Project Cost Total Funds utilised Percentage
No. State (Rs. in upto March 2006 of utilised
crore) (including funds with
counterpart funds) respect to
(Rs. in crore) project cost
1. Assam 103.38 8.31 8.04
2. Bihar 63.44 0.00 0
3. Goa 57.80 10.47 18.11
4. Gujarat 30.38 11.28 37.13
5. Jammu &  Kashmir 699.03 129.97 18.59
6. Karnataka 46.09 0.00 0
7. Kerala 554.66 37.81 6.82
8. Madhya Pradesh 8.32 0.07 0.84
9. Maharashtra 203.06 81.34 40.06
10. Manipur 131.49 0.00 0
11. Meghalaya 186.47 17.41 9.34
12. Mizoram 50.83 0.00 0
13. Punjab 34.80 4.00 11.49
14. Rajasthan 77.86 26.30 33.78
15. Tamil Nadu 18.91 0.00 0
16. Tripura 119.20 8.64 7.25
17. Uttar Pradesh 563.45 187.46 33.27
18. West Bengal 27.58 0.00 0
Total 2976.75 523.06 17.57
162

ANNEXURE  XIX D
(refer to para 1.2.1)
Financial Performance in respect of Projects sanctioned during 2005-06
Sl. Name of the Project Cost Total Funds utilised Percentage
No. State (Rs. in upto March 2006 of utilised
crore) (including funds with
counterpart funds) respect to
(Rs. in crore) project cost
1. Chhattisgarh 3.33 0.00 0
2. Karnataka 26.19 1.08 4.12
3. Madhya Pradesh 4.34 0.00 0
4. Maharashtra 199.37 0.00 0
5. Punjab 6.19 0.10 1.61
6. Sikkim 12.10 0.00 0
7. Uttar Pradesh 45.35 0.00 0
Total 296.87 1.18 0.40
163

List of Abbreviations
1. AcCs Advisor cum Consultants
2. ACS Average Cost of Supply
3. AMR Automated Meter Reading
4. APDP Accelerated Power Development Programme
5. APDRP Accelerated Power Development Reforms Programme
6. APtRANSCO Andhra Pradesh Transmission Company
7. ARR Average Revenue Realisation
8. ASCI Administrative Staff College of India
9. AT&C Losses Aggregate Technical and Commercial Losses
10. BESCOM Bangalore Electricity Company Ltd.
11. BJ Bhagya Jyothi
12. BOQ Bill of Quantity
13. BRPL BSES Rajdhani Power Ltd.
14. BYPL BSES Yamuna Power Ltd.
15. CARE Credit Analysis and Research
16. CE Collection Efficiency
17. CEA Central Electricity Authority
18. CEDC Chennai Electricity Distribution Circle
19. CEO Chief Executive Officer
20. CPDCL (AP) Central Power Distribution Company of AP Limited
21. CPRI Central Power Research Institute
22. CSEB Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board
23. CRISIL Credit Rating Information Services of India Ltd.
24. DHBVNL Dhakshin Haryana Bijali Vitaran Nigam Ltd.
25. Discoms Distribution Companies
26. DPCL Delhi Power Company Ltd.
27. DPRs Detailed Project Reports
28. DRC Distribution Reforms Committee
29. DT Distribution Transformer
30. EAA Energy Accounts and Audit
164

165
31. GED Goa Electricity Department
32. GFR General Financial Rule
33. GoI Government of  India
34. HESCOM Hubli Electricity Supply Company Ltd.
35. HPSEB Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board
36. HT High Tension
37. HVDS High V oltage Distribution System
38. ICRA Formerly known as Investment Information and Credit
Rating Agency of India Ltd.
39. IIM Indian Institute of Management
40. IP Irrigation Pumpset
41. IT Information Technology
42. JSEB Jharkhand State Electricity Board
43. KDP Khawzawal Power Division, Mizoram
44. KJ Kutir Jyothi
45. KPTCL Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited
46. K V Kilovolt
47. KW Kilowatt
48. L&T Larsen & Turbo
49. L T Low Tension
50. MIS Management Information System
51. MoA Memorandum of Agreement
52. MoF Ministry of Finance
53. MoP Ministry of Power
54. MoU Memorandum of Understanding
55. MRI Meter Reading Instrument
56. MSEDCL Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company
Limited
57. MU Million Units
58. MW Mega Watt
59. NDPL North Delhi Power Limited
60. NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation
61. PFC Power Finance Corporation
62. PGCIL Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.
63. PMM Procurement and Material Management

166
64. PSU Public Sector Undertaking
65. R&M Renovation and Modernisation
66. REC Rural Electrification Corporation
67. RRVPNL Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Ltd.
68. RSEB Rajasthan State Electricity Board
69. SACFA S tanding Advisory Committee for Radio Frequency
Allocation
70. SBI CAP SBI Capital
71. SCADA Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
72. SEB State Eelctricity Board
73. SED State Electricity Department
74. SERC State Electricity Regulatory Commission
75. SOE Statement of Expenditure
76. SOUTHCO/ Southern/Northern/ Western/Central Electricity
NESCO/ Company Ltd. (Orissa)
WESCO/CESCO
77. SPDCL Southern Power Distribution Company of AP Limited
78. T&D Losses Transmission & Distribution Losses
79. TCEC T echnical and Commercial Evaluation Committee
80. TCS Tata Consultancy Service
81. TERI The Energy Research Institute
82. TNEB T amil Nadu Electricity Board
83. TSECL Tripura State Electricity Corporation Ltd.
84. UC Utilisation Certificate
85. UHBVNL Uttari Haryana Bijali Vitaran Nigam Ltd.
86. UPCL Uttaranchal Power Corporation Ltd.
87. WBEB W est Bengal Electricity Board
GMGIPMRND—3990 LS—9.4.2009