26
GANGA  ACTION PLAN
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT  AND
FORESTS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2005-2006
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
GANGA  ACTION  PLAN
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
[Action Taken on the recommendations contained in
Sixty-second Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.3.2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.3.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2006/Phalguna, 1927 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1810
Price: Rs. 145.00
© 2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2005-2006) .................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ...................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been  accepted
 by the Government ................................................................ 15
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government ............................................................................ 105
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations to which replies have    not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration 120
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations to which the Government
have furnished interim replies ................................................ 127
APPENDIX
Conclusions and Recommendations...................................... 128
PART II
Minutes of the Sittings of the Public Accounts  Committee
held on 14.03.2006 ................................................................... 137
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. V acant*
22. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
*Shri Jairam Ramesh, MP ceased to be Member  w.e.f. 29th January, 2006 on his appointment as
Minister in the Union Government.
(iii)

SECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
5. Shri Rajesh Ranjan Kumar — Assistant Director
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this Twenty-sixth Report
on action taken by Government on the recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their  62nd Report (13th Lok Sabha) on "Ganga Action Plan".
2. The Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 14th March, 2006. Minutes of the sitting form Part-II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have also been reproduced
in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
14 March, 2006 Chairman,
23 Phalguna, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report deals with the action taken by Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee (2003-2004) contained in their
62nd Report (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) based on the Report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India for the year ended March, 2000, Union Government (Scientific
Departments), No. 5A of 2000 relating to 'Ganga Action Plan'.
2. The Original Report was based on the Audit Review, which had pointed out that
in order to reduce the enormous pollution load taken by the river Ganga, an action
plan, known as "Ganga Action Plan" (GAP) was prepared by Department of
Environment (now Ministry of Environment & Forests) in December, 1984 on the
basis of a survey on Ganga basin carried out by the Central Pollution Control Board
in 1984. To oversee the Implementation of GAP and lay down policies and programmes.
Government of India constituted the Central Ganga Authority (CGA) under the
Chairmanship of the Prime Minister in February, 1985*.  The GAP was officially
launched in June, 1985 as a 100 per cent Centrally Sponsored Scheme with the
establishment of the Ganga Project Directorate (GPD)**, as a wing of the Ministry of
Environment & Forests to execute the projects under the guidance and supervision
of the NRCA. V arious State agencies like Public Health Engineering Department,
Water and Sewage Boards, Pollution Control Boards, Development Authorities. Local
Bodies etc. were responsible for actual implementation of the scheme.
3. It was further pointed out in the Audit Review that the main objective of GAP
initially was to improve the water quality of the Ganga to acceptable standards by
preventing the pollution load reaching the river. This objective was, however, recast
in June 1987, as restoring the river water quality to the "Bathing class" standard.
Since Ganga Action Plan Phase-I (GAP-I) did not cover the pollution load of Ganga
fully; the Ganga Action Plan Phase-II
(GAP-II) was launched in stages between 1993 and 1996 in other polluting towns left
out in Phase-I and on the tributaries of river Ganga viz Yamuna, Damodar and Gomati.
States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal were to implement GAP-I and States
of Uttaranchal, Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal were to implement
GAP-II.
4. The Committee had dealt comprehensively with various aspects of these
aforesaid issues in their Original 62nd Report and made suitable Observations/
Recommendations.
* Renamed as the National River Conservation Authority (NRCA) in September, 1995.
** Renamed as the National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD).

2
5. The 62nd Report contained 44 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken
Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from
the Government. These have been broadly categorized as follows:—
( i ) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the
Government.
(Paragraph Nos. 15.1, 15.3, 15.5, 15.6, 15.7, 15.8, 15.9, 15.10, 15.11, 15.13, 15.16,
15.17, 15.20, 15.21, 15.22, 15.25, 15.27, 15.29, 15.31, 15.32, 15.33, 15.36, 15.36,
15.37, 15.38, 15.40, 15.42)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
(Paragraph Nos. 15.4, 15.14, 15.15, 15.19, 15.24, 15.26, 15.28, 15.30, 15.39,
15.41, 15.43, 15.44)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations to which replies have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration :
(Paragraph Nos. 15.2, 15.12, 15.18, 15.23, 15.35)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations to which the Government have furnished
interim replies:
—NIL—
6. The action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Environment & Forests
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will
now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the Observations/
Recommendations, which need reiteration or merit comments.
Overall Delay in Completion of Project
(Paragraph 15.2)
7. The Public Accounts Committee, in Paragraph 15.2 of their Original Report, had
observed that the pace of developing infrastructure to control water pollution in
Ganga River was very slow and the money released was either not commensurate
with the requisite facilities or had been diverted for some other purposes and the
work remained standstill or incomplete. Although the GAP-I which was to be completed
by March, 1990 and had been extended till March, 2000; yet it was incomplete even
after delay of over 13 years. Also GAP-II which was to be completed in 2001 was
extended till December 2008. This, in the Committee's view, clearly reflected the extremely
slow knee jerk pace of development work being done for the last 18 years under GAP-
I and II. The Committee had deplored the inefficiency and lack of foresight on the part
of the implementing agencies. viz. Central, State Governments and contracted agencies,
which was responsible for this state of affairs.
8. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Environment & Forests have stated
as under:—
"In Bihar under GAP-I, 45 schemes were sanctioned by the NRCD. However,

3
there was delay in completion of GAP-I, works in the State due to delay in
acquisition of land for pumping stations, Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) and
litigation etc. This resulted in extension of completion. Till March 2000, 43
projects had been completed and the remaining two projects of sewage treatment
plants at Patna and Munger were incomplete since a long time due to contractual
disputes litigation etc. The Central Government has released funds against
sanctioned cost of all the schemes including that for balance works and closed
the scheme as on March 2000. Balance works are to be completed by the
Government of Bihar and any excess in cost due to price escalation on account
of time over-run is to be borne by them. For completing these two projects STP
Patna and STP Munger, the Government of Bihar has released a sum of Rs.
193.50 lakh during the year 2003-2004. As per the commitment of the State
Government, the works are expected to be completed by December, 2004.
The reasons for delay in the implementation of the Ganga Action Plan Phase-I
are:
(i) Lack of experience with the State implementing agencies, delay in land
acquisition, litigations and court cases, contractual disputes and diversion
of funds by the State Governments.
(ii) Poor operation and maintenance of the assets created under the 'Ganga
Action Plan' Phase–I.
(iii) Erratic and poor availability of electricity for operating assets like pumping
stations, sewage treatment plants and electric crematoria.
Under GAP-II, the NRCD has sanctioned 20 schemes till date, on the basis of
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) received from the Government of Bihar. The
State Government has reported that, out of these, 16 schemes have been
completed and the position of remaining four schemes are as follows:
(a) The Scheme of River Front Development (RFD) at Danapur is to be completed
in April 2004.
(b) The scheme of Low Cost Sanitation (LCS) at Sahebganj has been transferred
to the Government of Jharkhand for execution.
(c) The work of electric Crematoria at Danapur will be started after receiving
revised sanction order of NRCD (The State Government is to provide the
commitment to bear O&M cost of the revised cost estimate of the scheme for
consideration and processing the case in the NRCD. The State Government
is being requested for the same since 19.8.2002 along with several reminders.)
(d) The work of one LCS unit at Buxar is stopped due to stay order of Hon'ble
High Court.
The expenditure incurred on these schemes is Rs. 292.68 lakh till March, 2004.
9. In a reply to another recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry have
furnished State-wise and scheme-wise statement of physical progress under GAP
Phase-I and GAP Phase-II. The statement is shown in the Annexure.

4
10. The Committee had adversely commented upon the slow pace of developing
infrastructure to control pollution in Ganga River. GAP-I, to be accomplished by
March, 1990 was yet to be completed. The position regarding GAP-II, was equally
bad as this scheme, which was to be completed in 2001, was extended till December,
2008. Consequently, the Committee had deplored the inefficiency and lack of foresight
on the part of the implementing agencies, viz. Central, State Governments and
contracted agencies. The Committee are not convinced by the arguments put forth
by the Ministry that the delay in GAP-I was due to the lack of experience of the State
implementing agencies, delay in land acquisition, litigations and Court cases,
contractual disputes, diversion of funds by the State Governments besides poor
operation and maintenance of the assets created under the 'Ganga Action Plan'
Phase-I and poor availability of electricity for operating assets like pumping stations,
sewage treatment plants and electric crematoria. The reasons cited by the Ministry
are not such that they could not have been anticipated and tackled promptly & timely.
The committee would also like to point out that instead of intimating the status of
performance of all the concerned State Governments, the Ministry have provided the
figures for Bihar only. This is nothing but casual manner in which the Ministry
have chosen to reply to the specific recommendation of the Committee which is
highly regrettable.
11.  However, from  a reply of the Ministry to another recommendation in the
Original Report, the Committee find that in GAP-II, barring Delhi, 13 out of 90
schemes were incomplete in Haryana, 32 out of 195 schemes were incomplete in
Uttar Pradesh, 75 out of 92 schemes were incomplete in West Bengal, 6 out of 18
schemes were incomplete in Bihar, 19 out of 29 schemes were incomplete in
Uttaranchal and 4 out of 6 schemes were incomplete in Jharkhand as on June
2004. Thus, 149 schemes in total were still incomplete. The Committee are
constrained to point out that the Ministry have furnished the updated position
regarding implementation of schemes in the State of Bihar only. The Committee
had expected the Ministry to  furnish a comprehensive State-wise reply providing
reasons for the overall delay in GAP-II with an objective analysis of the
shortcomings/negligence of the implementing agencies, which was not done. They
have also not cared to apprise the Committee about the reasons for not furnishing
the complete and proper reply. The Committee take a serious view of the matter
and desire that the Ministry should have furnished complete reply to all the specific
points raised in their recommendation. Insofar as speedy completion of the
remaining projects of GAP-II in all the States is concerned, the Committee feel
that the Government must make a study to assess the actual progress of the plan
and take suitable measures in coordination with concerned State Governments
urgently to accelerate the pace of work because the present situation, if left
unattended, would continue to deteriorate further, causing irreparable loss to the
entire Ganga river-system.
Financial Mismanagement
(Paragraph 15.12)
12. The Committee, in paragraph 15.12 of their Original Report, had mentioned

5
about many instances of financial mismanagement by the State level implementing
agencies, such as diversion of funds to the tune of  Rs. 36.07 crore to unauthorized
activities, incorrect reporting of Rs. 6.75 crore, parking of funds by Bihar Rajya Jal
Parishad (BRJP) in its own personal account amounting to Rs. 1.17 crore and
unutilized funds with the  implementing agencies to the tune of Rs. 72.62 crore, etc.
The Committee had felt that there were serious shortcomings in financial management
of the funds earmarked for various schemes under GAP at the level of States as well
as NRCD resulting into laxity in the working of various implementing agencies of
the respective State Governments. The Committee had appreciated the formula to
introduce reasonable user charges in order to make the scheme of GAP financially
viable and had endorsed the proposal to introduce "beneficiaries pay" and "polluters
pay'' principles and other collective fine system to bear the cost of river cleaning
programmes. The Committee had recommended to accept donations from willing
contributors to boost the resources of GAP. To help make ever delicate financial
condition of GAP schemes viable, the Committee had urged the Ministry of
Environment & Forests to streamline the mechanism of earning revenues by utilizing
the manure-rich treated sewage water and other byproducts etc. for irrigation
purposes on payment basis.
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have forwarded the information
received by them from the Government of West Bengal which states that released
funds under GAP have been fully and properly utilized within the stipulated time
schedule. They have also informed that State Government is taking steps to
introduce user's charges for water supply and sewerage system to bear the partial
cost of GAP and revenue is being earned by rearing fish, selling manure and
treated sewage for irrigation purpose. Suggestions of accepting donations from
willing contributors are under consideration of the State Government and they
are also exploring the possibility of leasing out the ponds for pisciculture at
Chandarnagar, Bhatpara and Teetagarh. According to them, scheme is also being
worked out to sell the manure generated at the Howrah, Baranagar and Kamarhati
Sewage Treatment Plants.
14. Regarding diversion of funds by Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad (BRJP), the Ministry
have replied as under:—
"As per the information received from the BRJP, an amount of Rs. 86.08 lakh
was diverted by the BRJP during the year 1986–89 for disbursement of salary to
their staff which were deputed for implementation of Ganga Action Plan schemes.
Receipt of the funds for this purpose from the State Government at the end  of
the financial years and that too being lesser than the required amount
necessitated the BRJP for this diversion of funds for disbursement of salary to
their staff to avoid disruption of the implementation and dissatisfaction of the
staff. As per the BRJP , all of diverted amount has been recouped."
15. On the issue of parking of fund amounting to Rs. 1.17 crore by the BRJP in its
own account, it has been informed in the Action Taken Note that this amount was

6
received by the BRJP from the State Government under its Plan/Non-Plan head on the
following dates:
31.3.96 Rs. 22.00 Lakh
23.7.96 (for Land Acquisition) Rs. 15.00 Lakh
31.3.97 Rs. 71.00 Lakh
31.3.96 Rs. 09.00 Lakh
Total Rs. 117.00 Lakh
It has been further informed that the account of Plan/Non-Plan head is in the State
Bank of India, Sachivalaya Branch, which belongs to the treasury. This amount was
deposited by the BRJP in their account of the State Bank of India so that it could not
be lapsed.
16. Regarding generating additional revenue, the Ministry have submitted, vide
their Action Taken Note, as under:—
"The State Government has intimated that, to generate revenue with the intention
of self-sustainable O&M of the GAP schemes, following steps have been taken
up:
(1) Auction  of fish ponds—Fish ponds at STP Pahari (Southern Zone), Patna
and STP , Bhagalpur have been auctioned for 3 years.
(2) Sale of Sludge—Sale of sludge from Beur and Saidpur STPs, Patna is being
finalised through an open tendering process. Sludge produced from the
digester of activated sludge treatment has very high manure quality. It can
be utilised for gowing crops in place of artificial fertiliser.
(3) User charges—user charges proposal is under serious consideration of the
State Government  for implementation.
(4) Biogas utilisation—A proposal for utilising the gas produced at Beur STP
has been prepared and it will be finalised very soon.
(5) Utilisation of treated sewage water and other by-products etc. for irrigation
purpose on payment basis is being prepared."
17. The Committee, in their Original Report, had brought to the notice of the
Ministry of Environment & Forests the financial mismanagement by the State
level implementing  agencies, such as diversion of funds to unauthorized activities,
incorrect reporting, parking of funds in personal account of Bihar Rajya Jal
Parishad (BRJP) and unutilized funds with the implementing agencies, etc. It was
observed that serious shortcomings in financial management of the funds were
resulting into laxity in the working of various implementing  agencies of the
respective State Governments. In response to these observations the Ministry
have forwarded the replies received from only two States viz. West Bengal and
Bihar in this regard. The Ministry are silent over the financial irregularities in
other States, for example the diversion of funds in Uttar Pradesh, as noticed by the

7
Committee in their Original Report. From the reply furnished by the Bihar Rajya
Jal Parishad (BRJP), the Committe infer that they hav tried to justify the diversion
of funds amounting to Rs. 86.08 lakh for disbursement of salary to their staff on
the plea that it was done to avoid disruption of the implementation and dissatisfaction
of the staff. As regards parking of funds amounting to Rs. 1.17 crore in their
account, the Ministry have taken the stand that this amount was deposited by the
BRJP in their account of the State Bank of India so that it could not be lapsed. The
Committee are distressed to note that instead of furnishing plausible explanation
for financial mismanagement, the Ministry have merely forwarded the State
Government's reply which also seem to be unconvincing as much as that does not
address the issues of diversion of funds, incorrect reporting, parking of fund and
unutilized funds in totality. The Committee feel that instead of simply forwarding
the replies submitted by a couple of States, the Ministry should have accorded
adequate seriousness to an important issue like financial mismanagement by the
implementing agencies and spelt out the measures  taken by them to rectify the
situation. The Committee had expected the Ministry to furnish a critical analysis
of utilization of funds by each concerned State. What is surprising is the fact that
there were serious shortcomings in financial management of the funds earmarked
for various schemes under GAP not only at the level of States but at NRCD also.
They, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take suitable remedial steps and
fix responsibility in order to avoid recurrence of such incidents in future.
18. The Committee had also desired the Ministry to generate additional resources
by way of introducing user charges, 'beneficiaries pay' and 'polluters pay' principle
along with other collective fine system, accepting donations from willing
contributors and earning revenues by utilizing the manure rich treated sewage
water and other by-products etc. for irrigation purposes on payment basis. The
Ministry, in their Action Taken Note, have reproduced the replies received from
West Bengal and Bihar State Governments narrating the efforts made by them in
this regard, for instance, auction of fish ponds, sale of sludge, biogas utilization
etc. The Committee, however, are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as it
does not specify in concrete terms the quantum of  the positive results achieved in
generating additional revenue by virtue of the efforts made by the States. They
would like the Ministry to furnish the details of the amount earned by each State as
additional revenue through the various aforesaid measures and as to how they are
being utilized.
Diseases due to pollution level increase
(Paragraph 15.18)
19. The Committee had not accepted the arugument put forth by the Ministry
that delay in the implementation of Ganga Action Plan (GAP) was experienced due
to its being the first of its kind of project in the country, because delays had been
experienced in GAP-I as well as GAP-II and its components like Yamuna Action Plan
(YAP), Gomati Action Plan (GoAP) & Damodar Action Plans. Rather the Committee
were of the view that with no clear-cut standards or parameters for fixing
responsibilities in GAP provisions, multiple irregularities had cropped  up in the
operation of GAP. In spite of the lacunae and shortcomings being pointed out by

8
expert reviews and the Ministry's own assessment, no significant remedial action
had been initiated even when the Ministry were themselves aware of the solutions.
Further, they had observed that no adequate attention was being given to the
urgency that had been demanded by GAP, thereby compromising the health of
about 40 per cent of population of India living in the Ganga Basin. The Committee
had referred to a World Bank sponsored study which had concluded that in spite of
the massive Rs. 1500 crore plan launched in the 80s to clean up the Ganga, the
pollution levels in the river were continuing to be alarmingly high and were
contributing to about 9 to 12 per cent of the total disease burden in Uttar Pradesh.
The Committee had observed that there was no anticipation of coming events and
planning responses in advance resulting in GAP becoming an uncoordinated and
directionless amalgam of different departments/agencies. They had, therefore, urged
the Ministry to reconstitute NRCA as an autonomous body like National River
Linking Project.
20. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have stated as under:—
"The World Bank Sponsored study on the 'State of Environment Report and
Action Plan for Uttar Pradesh' utilized a 'Water Quality Index' developed by
National Sanitation Foundation of the United States which is not widely accepted
as its subjective, does not provide used based risk and has other limitations.
The study does not attribute the disease burden in Uttar Pradesh to the water
quality of river Ganga alone.
In Contrast to this, an R&D study to evaluate the efficacy of schemes  taken up
under Ganga Action Plan in the towns of Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh) and Nabadwip
(West Bengal) on the health of the people directly dependent on Ganga water
revealed a decreasing trend in the incidence of water borne disease. However,
the prevalence of helminthic infection skin disease and diarrhoea was observed
in case of sewage farm workers handling treated sewage. The study was carried
out by NEERI,  Nagpur and All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health,
Calcutta."
21. While disagreeing with the  argument of the Ministry that delay in the
implementation of GAP was attributed to its being the first of its kind of project in
the country, the Committee in their earlier report had pointed out that delays were
experienced not only in GAP-I, but also in the case of GAP-II and its components
like YAP, GoAP & Damodar Action Plans. Expressing their concern on the
irregularities that had cropped up in the operation of GAP due to absence of clear-
cut criteria for fixing responsibilities in GAP provisions, the Committee had found
that no significant remedial action was initiated by the Ministry in spite of being
made aware of the lacunae and shortcomings by expert reviews. The Committee
are disappointed to note from the Action Taken  Note that the Ministry have not
indicated any steps that have been taken with regard to the observation made by
them with a view to curb overall delays, minimise irregularities and to implement
GAP so as to attain intended goals without further loss of time. The Ministry have
chosen to remain silent which reflect their lackadaisical approach in the entire
matter.

9
22. The Committee had also pointed out that a World bank sponsored study had
concluded that in spite of the massive Rs. 1500 crore plan launched in the 80s to
clean up the Ganga, its pollution levels continued to be alarmingly high and were
contributing to about 9 to 12 per cent of  the total disease burden in Uttar Pradesh.
The Committee had found that there were lack of adequate attention and anticipation
of coming events and advance planning. They had, therefore, observed that the
GAP had become unco-ordinated and directionless amalgam of different
departments/agencies, and had urged the Ministry to reconstitute NRCA as an
autonomous body like the National River Linking Poject. Surprisingly, the
Ministry, in their Action Taken Note, have chosen to  challenge the  findings of the
World Bank sponsored study by calling it 'subjective' and 'gripped by other
limitations'.   According to them the study does not attribute the disease burden in
Uttar Pradesh to water quality of river Ganga alone. On the other had they have
sought to bring forth an R&D study report relating to the schemes taken up under
Ganga Action Plan in the towns of Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh) and Nabadwip (West
Bengal), that has revealed a decreasing trend in the incidence of water borne
diseases there. However, no facts and figures in this regard have been furnished.
The Committee find no sustainable reason for the Ministry's reluctance in
accepting that pollution level in the Ganga River are by far the biggest contributor
in harbouring water borne diseases among the population residing on its banks.
The Committee feel that the Ministry have tried to divert their attention from the
core issue of the need for efficient and co-ordinated working of different
departments/agencies related to the 'Ganga Action Plan'. As GAP seems to have
become un-coordinated and directionless amalgam of different department/
agencies, the Committee would like to reiterate that the Ministry should
immediately take action to constitute the NRCA as an autonomous body like
National River Linking Project.
Dumping of Dead Bodies/Carcasses
(Paragraphs 15.23 & 15.35)
23. The Committee, in paragraph 15.23 of their Original Report, had expressed
grave concern over the issue of dumping of dead bodies/animal carcasses causing
worst pollution in the river. The Committee were of the view that no worthwhile
efforts had been initiated so far for optimum operationalisation of the already
established electric crematoria at Hardwar to prevent such pollution. In this context,
the Committee did not agree with the general view of the Ministry that modern
crematoria set up by the authorities have not been used by the people due to their
faith and belief in the traditional cremation method. They were of the view that
adequate public awareness was required for the use of modern crematoria. The
Committee had also stressed the need for setting up improvised wood crematoria in
Hardwar to prevent this environmentally challenging practice of throwing dead bodies/
carcasses in the holy river.
24. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Note, have stated that necessary action in
this regard is being initiated by the State Government.

10
25. Expressing grave concern over the throwing of dead bodies/carcasses in
Ganga river, which they had witnessed for themselves, the Committee, in their
Original Report, had specifically urged the concerned authorities to make efforts
for optimum operationalisation of the already established electric crematoria at
Hardwar and also for setting up improvised wood crematoria there in order to prevent
the public from cremating bodies on the banks of the River. Further, the Committee
had emphasized the need for enhancing public awareness for the use of modern
crematoria. The Ministry have merely stated vide their Action Taken note that
necessary action in this regard is being initiated by the State Government. The
Committee are disappointed with the reply given by the Ministry which is too vague
and devoid of any details.  The Ministry have avoided providing specific information
on the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Government so far and difficulties, if
any, being faced by them. In view of this, the Committee are doubtful whether any
concrete action has been taken by the State Government at all in this regard. The
Committee, therefore, strongly deplore the casual approach shown by the Ministry
to a very specific recommendation of the Committee relating to a serious issue. The
Committee have been left with no choice but to reiterate their earlier recommendation
made in this regard. They expect a detailed, complete, clear and specific reply from
the Ministry.
26. In paragraph 15.35 of their Original Report,  the Committee had mentioned
that during their study visit in Allahabad, they had seen many non-cremated dead
bodies freely floating in river waters giving a distasteful spectacle to the visitors
coming from far and wide. The Committee were apprised that due to religious
significance of the city, many cremations were taking place on the bank of the river
which was a major cause of pollution. The Committee had observed that this was
because  of ineffective public awareness campaign being initiated by any of the
civic authorities to dissuade people from doing so. The Committee had recommended
that the Ministry should come out with a concrete plan for an awareness campaign,
even with the help of law enforcing agencies and religious seers, if necessary, to
inculcate  a scientific temper in the people, along with religious point of view so that
people did not become compulsive partners in polluting  a river they revere as
'holy'.
27. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have merely forwarded the information
received from Uttar Pradesh State Government that Superintendent of Police has
already been instructed to take necessary action to stop throwing of non-cremated
dead bodies into the rivers.
28. The Committee had, in their Original Report, raised a very pertinent issue of
initiating a public awareness campaign with the help of law enforcing agencies and
religious seers, if necessary, to inculcate a scientific temper in the people, so that
the horrendous practice of throwing non-cremated dead bodies in the river could be
checked. In their reply, the Ministry have furnished the  information received from
U.P. State Government that the Superintendent of Police has already been instructed
to take necessary action to stop this practice. The Committee feel that this is yet
another example of an extremely casual approach on the part of the Government to a

11
very serious matter. They have gathered the impression that the Government have
not only taken their recommendation very lightly, but have also sought to shirk their
responsibility of planning and carrying out a mass awareness campaign to make
public realise the importance of keeping the river clean. The Committee strongly
deplore the careless attitude of the Government for having treated a vexed question
of raising mass awareness campaign against throwing non-cremated dead bodies in
the holy river as a simple law and order problem, which can be handled by a
Superintendent of Police. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should
assign due priority to such an important and far reaching issue concerning certain
conventional and religious beliefs and ensure that the State Government takes it up
at the highest level with utmost seriousness. The Committee also desire that the
action taken in this regard may be intimated to them in due course.

 ANNEXURE
(Chapter 1, Para 9)
State-wise & Scheme-wise Physical Progress Under GAP Phase-1 & GAP Phase-II
(As on June 2004)
States I&D STP LCS CRE RFD OTH TOTAL
SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP.
GANGA ACTION PLAN-I
U . P . 4 04 0 1 31 3 1 4 1 4 3 3 8 8 2 82 8 1 0 6 1 0 6
Bihar 17 17 7 5 7 7 8 8 3 3 3 3 45 43
W .B. 31 31 15 15 22 22 17 17 24 24 1 1 110 110
Total (GAP-I) 88 88 35 33 43 43 28 28 35 35 32 32 261 259
GANGA ACTION PLAN-II
Delhi 0 0 7 7 2 2 2 2 0 0 1 1 12 12
Haryana 30 26 27 23 12 12 7 6 1 1 13 9 90 77
U . P . 8 08 7 4 03 5 2 6 2 1 1 3 1 2 4 3 3 22 5 1 9 5 1 6 3
W . B . 4 2 0 1 8 0 44 74 1 9 92 0 9 21 7
Bihar 0 0 0 0 7 5 1 0 10 7 0 0 18 12
Uttaranchal 9 2 3 1 10 1 0 0 6 6 1 0 29 10
Jharkhand 0 0 0 0 5 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 6 2
Total (GAP-II) 161 95 95 66 66 46 30 24 41 27 49 35 442 293
Grand Total 249 183 130 99 109 89 58 52 76 62 81 67 703 552
SAN–SANCTIONED I&D–Interception & Diversion STP–Sewage Treatment Plant
COMP–COMPLETED LCS–Low Cost Sanitation RFD–River Front Development
CRE–Crematoria (IWC + EC) OTH–Other schemes
IWC–Improved wood Crematoria EC–Electric Crematoria
12

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  THAT  HAVE  BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Ganga River along with its tributaries is the lifeline for 40% of the
population of our counrty. Its waters are used for drinking and irrigation purposes
mainly, in addition to navigation and development of flora and fauna in and around
the river-system. A number of large, medium and small towns have come up on the
river-banks, which release their sewage waste directly into the river system, water
of which over a period of time became unusable, non-drinkable and even unsuitable
for irrigation purposes. Consequentially the aqualife also started becoming extinct
due to pollutants in the water. Many environmental studies proved this effect on
the flora & fauna of the areas which irrigated or otherwise used this water system.
It was the vision of the then Prime Minister, who decided to launch Ganga Action
Plan. Action Plant-I was launched in 1985 to cleanse the River Ganga in first
instance and later on Ganga Action Plan-II was launched in 1993 which included
the tributaries of River Ganga namely Yamuna, Gomati and Damodar. States of
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal were to implement GAP-I and States of
Uttranchal, Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal were to
implement GAP-II. Major task was to tackle pollution from municipal sewage
which accounted for about 75% of the river pollution, by creating facilities like
Sewage Treatment Plants, Industrial Effluent Treatment Plants (ETPs) toilet
complexes, electric crematoria, improvement of bathing ghats, river front
developments etc.
[(Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.1 of 62nd Report of PAC) (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Progress with respect to sewage treatment plants, interception & diversion, toilet
complexes, crematoria, river front development/bathing ghats, industrial effluent
treatment plants etc. achieved under Ganga Action Plan Phase-I and under Ganga
Action Plan Phase-II so far is given below:—
13

State-wise & Scheme-wise Physical Progress Under GAP Phase-1 & GAP Phase-II
(As on June 2004)
States I&D STP LCS CRE RFD OTH TOTAL
SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP. SAN. COMP .
GANGA ACTION PLAN-I
U.P . 40 40 13 13 14 14 3 3 8 8 28 28 106 106
Bihar 17 17 7 5 7 7 8 8 3 3 3 3 45 43
W .B. 31 31 15 15 22 22 17 17 24 24 1 1 110 110
Total (GAP-I) 88 88 35 33 43 43 28 28 35 35 32 32 261 259
GANGA ACTION PLAN-II
Delhi 0 0 7 7 2 2 2 2 0 0 1 1 12 12
Haryana 30 26 27 23 12 12 7 6 1 1 13 9 90 77
U.P . 80 67 40 35 26 21 13 12 4 3 32 25 195 163
W . B . 4 2 0 1 8 0 4474 1 9 9 2 0 9 2 1 7
Bihar 0 0 0 0 7 5 1 0 10 7 0 0 18 12
Uttaranchal 9 2 3 1 10 1 0 0 6 6 1 0 29 10
Jharkhand 0 0 0 0 5 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 6 2
Total (GAP-II) 161 95 95 66 66 46 30 24 41 27 49 35 442 293
Grand Total 249 183 130 99 109 89 58 52 76 62 81 67 703 552
SAN—SANCTIONED I&D-Interception & Diversion STP-Sewage Treatment Plant
COMP—COMPLETED LCS-Low Cost Santation RFD-River Front Development
CRE-Crematoria (IWC + EC) OTH-Other schemes
IWC-Improved wood Crematoria, EC-Electric Crematoria

Summary Status of the 68 Industries identified under the Ganga Action Plan
(Phase-I) (As on June 30, 2004)
Sl.No. Status Number of Industries Total
U.P. Bihar W.B.
1. ETP installed 17 03 20 40
2. Industries closed 1 7 0 2 0 9 2 8
Total 34 05 29 68
State-wise Status of the 119 Grossly Polluting Industries identified along the
river Ganga in Phase-II (As on June 30, 2004)
Sl. No. State Total No. of No. of No. of
Number of Industries Industries Industries
Industries closed which have Defaulting
installed ETP
1. Uttar Pradesh 83 23 60 00
2. Bihar 03 00 03 00
3. West Bengal 33 03 30 00
Total 119 26 93 00
ETP: Effluent Treatment Plant.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Audit in their review covering the period of 1993-2000 had stated in their
Report that Ganga Action Plan has met only 39% of its primary target of sewage
treatment, according to the performance reported by the participating States. There
were heavy shortfalls in the achievement of targets set for creation of assets and
facilities under the Plan. Even the achievements made, were poor indicators of the
extent of success of the Ganga Action Plan schemes, as most of them had not functioned
either fully or functioned only partially for varied reasons.
[(Sl.No. XV Appendix-I  Para 15.3 of 62nd Report of PAC) (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken
The heavy shortfalls in achievement of targets set for creation of assets were
delays in the implementation of GAP-II because of various reasons. Before 1997
GAP-II was started on cost sharing basis between States and the Centre on 50:50
basis which was not palatable to States and ultimately it was made 100% centrally
aided programme from 1997. The conventional technologies proposed earlier did

16
not address to be problem of bacterial pollution. Hence it was decided that ponds
based sewage treatment may be adopted in all places. As ponds require large areas
of land, some of these States Governments could not provide such area of land in
large towns which account for major chunk of capital cost. Also, the transfer of
money from State Governments to implementing agencies was invariably delayed in
almost all States and the quality of DPRs received from States were also not up to
the mark.
Since the achievements made in GAP-II were poor indicators of success, the Ministry
has an action plan to ensure proper operation and maintenance of assets. It has now
been decided that the responsibility of O&M of assets will be borne entirely by the
local body with the assistance from the State Government. A well documented O&M
plan will form part of the detailed Project Reports to be submitted by States Govts. A
firm commitment will be given by the local body that it agrees to bear the entire cost
of O&M after a stipulated period of  3 to 5 years. The State Government shall give an
undertaking that the assets are properly operated and maintained and any shortfall in
resources will be met by them.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30.11.2004]
Recommendation
The Committee also note that the Ministry did not fix any time schedule for
submission of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), the basic document for expenditure
sanction needed from the States for phase-II of the Plan. Even though Supreme
Court has fixed a time frame of 3 months for submission of DPRs by the States to
the Ministry and 30 days for the Ministry to sanction the projects, the Committee
note that no monitoring mechanism was in place in the Ministry which could
ensure the adherence to the time frame fixed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. They
are astonished to note that the monitoring system of such a prestigious and
important plan is the weakest link. There is no detailed record of the outcome of
the field visits, and review meetings with implementing agencies by the National
Rivers Conservation Directorate (NRCD) and also of the follow up action as has
been envisaged in the Plan itself. State Governments of Haryana, Bihar and Delhi
did not not constitute Citizen Monitoring Committees (CMCs) in any of the towns
situated on the banks of the Rivers. West Bengal Government had constituted
these Committees only in 5 of 42 towns selected for implementation of GAP. Even
the constituted CMCs of Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal met only infrequently
and not periodically. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Monitoring Committees should be set up at every level, starting from Citizen
Monitoring Committees to the Apex Monitoring Committees and there should be
periodical monitoring of all the schemes of GAP. These Committees should oversee
the progress of work of all the schemes under GAP and ensure their timely
completion. They should also fix responsibility for any diversion of funds of GAP
or unneccessary delay in execution of its work.
[(Sl.No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.5 of 62nd Report of PAC) (13th Lok Sabha)]

17
Action Taken
The Ministry did fix the time schedule for submission of DPRs for major projects.
However, these could not be adhered to due to delays in submission of DPRs, by
the State Governments. A comprehensive monitoring mechanism at the Centre and
the State level is in place for Ganga Action Plan. The programme is being monitored
by an Apex Committee called National River Conservation Authority(NRCA) which
is Chaired by the Prime Minister. There is a Steering Committee under the
Chairmanship of the Secretary, Environment & Forests which reviews the programme
on a quarterly basis in addition a Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of
a Member, Planning Commission also reviews the progress on a quarterly basis. At
the State level, there is a nodal department and a nodal implementing agency
earmarked for this programme. The Secretary of the Nodal Department reviews the
progress on a regular basis. All these Committees monitor the progress and ensure
adherence of the time schedule. The NRCD is also maintaining records in the form
of Management Information System indicating the progress of work being
implemented.
The Govt. of Haryana constituted Citizen Monitoring Committees in February
2000 to guide and monitor construction work of YAP Phase-I and these have been
quite helpful for the purpose they have been formed.
The Govt. of Bihar has intimated that seven nos. of Citizen Monitoring Committees
have been constituted by Urban Development Department, Govt. of Bihar vide letter
No. 981 dated 10.5.97, No. 976 dated 6.3.97, No. 979 dated 6.3.97, No. 924 dated 4.3.97,
No.923 dated 4.3.97,  No. 921 dated 4.3.97 and No. 922 dated 4.3.97.
The State Government has intimated that the monitoring of GAP works in the State
is being done at the highest administrative level. The progress is reviewed every
month by the Principal Secretary (Urban Development) and quarterly by the Minister-
in-Charge. Regarding constitution of Citizens Monitoring Committee in West Bengal,
the State Government has informed that the Citizens Monitoring Committees in the
left out towns are being constituted shortly.
The estimates of the towns under GAP -II were initially submitted to NRCD in
1995-96 through the PFRs. However, the costs of eleven schemes as per the DPRs
submitted by the Uttaranchal Government are much above the CCEA's approved
cost. State Government has requested to sanction these schemes from the inter-town
savings, which is under consideration.
Although Citizen Monitoring Committees have been constituted for all the towns
in Uttaranchal, sufficient meetings could not be held at desired intervals due to lack
of quorum. The State Government has intimated that necessary action is being taken
to hold the meetings of Citizen Monitoring Committees regularly.
The Delhi Govt. has intimated that the monitoring the Y AP works in the State is
being done at the highest administrative levels. The progress has been reviewed on
regular basis to complete the schemes in time. Regarding constitution of Citizen
Monitoring Committee, the State Govt. has informed that CMC is the left over part of
Y AP. However, the other Committees namely Water Consulatative Committee, Water

18
Quality Assessment Authority have been set up to oversee improvement of river
Yamuna water quality.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No H-11012/1/2004-NRCD, dated 30-
11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee note that out of total target of 1912 mld Treatment of sewage waste
under GAP-II only 13.7% of the capacity could be achieved till December 2001 and
only 780 mld sewage treatment capacity has been created till
October 2003 which is less than 45% of the targeted capacity. Out of approved cost of
GAP-II of Rs. 2285.48 crore excluding establishment charges, an amount of Rs. 792.38
crore has been released till 30 November, 2003. The dates for completion of GAP-II are
being revised again and again. Earlier the revised completion date was fixed as
December 2005 but now the Ministry has informed the Committee that as the second
phase of Gomati Action Plan and Yamuna Action Plan have been approved for
completion by March 2007 and September 2008 respectively, so the GAP-II is now
targeted to be completed by December 2008. The Committee observe that the
considerable time overruns in the execution of schemes in a time bound manner is
indicative  of  failure of the States and the NRCD to work together for implementation
of various schemes of GAP-I and II.
[(SI. No.XV Appendix-1 para 15.6 of 62nd Report of PAC) (13 th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Out of the total target of 2210 mld treatment of sewage waste under GAP-II, a
capacity of 1345 mld has been sanctioned so far. Out of sanctioned 1345 mld STP, 783
mld sewage treatment capacity (59%) has been created till December 2003. Out of the
approved cost of GAP-II of Rs. 2285.48 crore, excluding establishment charges an
amount of Rs. 804.07 crore has been released till  31 March 2004.
The major reason for revising the date of completion of projects under
GAP-II was due to contractual disputes between the Contractor and the State
Government delay in acquisition of land for implementation of schemes, Litigation
problems, Court cases etc. Also, the schemes of Gomati Action Plan Phase-II which is
a part of Ganga Action Plan Phase-II was sanctioned only in March, 2003 and the
target date of completion of GAP-II is in line with that of GoAP-II which is September,
2008.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee find that GAP, as is being implemented, has been more of a piecemeal
solution for tackling a complex problem and fails to treat the river eco-system entirely.
The committee, therefore, feel that there should be a provision of the creation of river

19
regulation zone under an autonomous body with the NGOs and panchyats/local
bodies executing its target based plans and programmes. Another area which the
Committee liked to draw the attention of the Ministry, is the problem of soil erosion
which has been posing a serious threat to the very survivability of the pumping
stations, STPs in areas like Malda, Murshidabad, Hooghly, Howrah and Uluberia in
West Bengal. The Committee therefore, desire that the Ministry should take concrete
measures in this regard in GAP.
[(Sl. No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.7 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The West Bengal State Government has been asked to take suitable protective measures
to save the GAP assets due to the problem of soil erosion in the towns of Malda,
Murshidabad, Hooghly, Howrah and Uluberia. Further, the State Government has decided
to drop 17 schemes of core and non-core under GAP-II in the towns of Dhulian Chakdah
and Jangipur which are also prone to soil erosion.
In West Bengal State a separate technical body namely Kolkata Metropolitan
Development Authority, having qualified stafff has been entrusted to implement the
programme. KMDA has also established a division under a chief engineer especially
dedicated for GAP works.
In Uttaranchal State a separate technical body Uttaranchal Peyjal Sansadhan Vikas
Evam Nirman Nigam having qualified staff has been entrusted to implement the
programme. In State's view it is not possible to handle the problem by the NGOs or the
local bodies.
Towards addressing the complex problem of treating the river eco-systems entirely,
the Ministry is examining the various approaches, one of which pertains to
rehabilitation of degraded upper catchment areas with a view to augment the flow
regimes. Preliminary steps have been taken to device a demonstration project in the
upper degraded micro-catchments of river Tons, a tributary of river Yamuna through
collection of baseline data for which satellite imageries of th area in question are
proposed to be obtained from National Remote Sensing Agency (NRCA). The modalites
of the suggestion of the provision of creation of river regulation zone under an
autonomous body with the NGOs and Panchyats/local bodies are yet to be examined.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to note that Bihar Government could not obtain
any sanction for the core schemes of interception and diversion scheme of sewer
lines in phase II of GAP , because it did not submit Detailed Project Reports as per
NRCD's guidelines. Also, Bihar and West Bengal Government could not obtain saction
for any core schemes of Sewage Treatment Plant in the Phase II of the Plan. The
reasons for Bihar were stated to be because of unsatisfactory operation and
maintenance of assets created during phase-I and for West Begal, because the State
Government did not confirm the availability of land. Many instances have come to the

20
notice of Audit of avoidable delays leading to cost escalation, idling of the plants,
mismatch with interception & divergence of schems, techincal flaws, diversion of
resources etc. which showed lackadaisical approach in the conception and execution
of Plan Schemes by Implementing Agencies. It also speaks volumes of the inefficiency
of the GAP implementing agencies of the State Governments, which gave no importance
to such schemes which is the life-line of majority of Bihar and Bengal population in
terms of drinking water, irrigation facilities, navigational importance and pisciculture
etc. The Committee strongly recommend that such matters should be taken up at the
highest administrative levels of the State Governments to expedite the completion of
GAP-I & II both as per their schedules.
[(Sl. No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.8 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
 Action Taken
The Govt. of Bihar has intimated that 5 Nos. of following STPs under
GAP-I have been functional and operating regularly since 2000:
(1)  STP, Saidpur
(2)  STP , Pahari
(3)  STP , Beur
(4)  STP, Chapra
(5)  STP, Bhagalpur
They have also intimated that inspite of the financing crunch of the State Govt.,
fund to the tune of Rs. 270 lakh for operation and maintenance of these assets is
being regularly released by the State Govt. for the last two years. Additional fund of
Rs. 199 lakh also has been sanctioned and released by the State Govt. for the special
repairs of the different components of projects of STPs/I&Ds created under GAP-I to
the Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad. These special repair works are in progress and are to be
completed by October, 2004. After completion of these works, all projects of STPs/
I&Ds will be functional to their full capacity.
In addition, the State Govt. has intimated that fund has been made available to the
BRJP in the year 2003-04 for completion of 2 Nos. of incomplete STPs under GAP-I
viz., (i)  STP, Patna and (ii)  STP, Munger. Remaining work of the both incomplete
schemes have been started and are in progress and are to be completed by December,
2004.
As per the State Govt., they are regularly monitoring the functioning of the GAP-
I & GAP-II schemes in Bihar at highest level to achieve the goal of the GAP schemes.
Regarding the sanction of DPRs for core & non-core schemes under GAP-II, it is
being submitted that on scrutiny of the DPRs, it came to notice that in
28 DPRs, crucial details and requisite information as well as commitment of the State
Govt. to bear O&M and land cost, wherever applicable, are not furnished, which are
necessary. This proves as a handicap to process the DPRs for necessary sanction.
These DPRs have been sent back to the State to rectify them.

21
With a view to streamline consideration of the DPRs received in the NRCD for
NRCP works from the various State Govt., the NRCP has approved check lists for
DPRs, to facilitate proper preparation of the DPRs by the implementing agenices and
to ensure that all important details and pre-requisite information is furnished by the
proporient at the time of submission of DPRs. These check-lists have been prepared
to serve as a guidance to ensure the availability of all requisite information for purpose
of processing of the DPRs.
Accordingly, these checklists have been provided to the BRJP on 9.2.2004 and
they have been requested to submit new/recasted DPRs to the NRCD through the
State Govt. in future, along with information duly filled in as per checklists and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M and land cost, wherever, applicable.
The State Govt. has also been requested that it should be ensured to send the DPRs of
the core schemes viz., I&D and STP of a town along with that of land acquisition so that
these are sanctioned all together by the NRCD to avoid mismatch.
In case of 2 non-core schemes, the commitment of the State Govt. has not been
furnished and thus consequent inability of the NRCD to process the proposals.
Moreover, the State Govt. is yet to submit 12 core and non-core scheme DPRs under
GAP-II till now.
The status of new DPRs/Recasted DPRs yet to be submitted by the State Govt.
under GAP-II is attached as Annexure-I.
The BRJP/State Govt. are being pursued regularly for submission of balance DPRs
for all the towns of Bihar covered under GAP-II at the earliest.
The West Bengal State Government has informed that all the schemes under GAP-
I have been fully commissioned. All the DPRs under GAP-II have been recently
submitted by the State Government. A total of 52 schemes of I&D and STP for the
treatment of 77.48 mld of sewage have been sanctioned under
GAP-II in West Bengal. 25 of these schemes are in the advance stage of completion
and are expected to be completed by 31st March, 2005. So as to expedite the acquisition
of land for the various schemes the State Government has delegated the power for
land acquisition to the local District Magistrate.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004 -NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]

ANNEXURE I
DPRs/Recasted DPRs yet to be submitted by the State Govt. Under Ganga Action
Plan-II (Main Stem) & Ganga Action Plan-II
(Supreme Court Towns) In Bihar
Interception & Diversion—I&D, Sewage Treatment Plant—STP, Low Cost
Sanitation — LCS, Crematoria — CRE, Land Acquisition — LA, River Front
Development — RFD, Solid Waste Management — SWM, Public Participation — PP
Town Scheme CCEA Status
approved
cost (Rs.
in Lakh)
12 3 4
Ganga Action Plan-II (Main Stem)
1. Arrah I&D 46.65 DPR of Rs. 157.10 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on  29.11.97. On scrutiny of DPR,
it was found that DPR did not contain
checklist of DPR as well as consent of
proposal by the local body, which is
mandatory while submission. These were
sought from the State Govt. on 19.1.98.
Modified DPR of Rs. 191.75 Lakh submitted
by BRJP on 7.8.03. Commitment of the State
Govt. to bear O&M cost not furnished along
with the DPR. On scrutiny of the DPR, it has
come to notice that the DPR is lacking in
crucial details and requisite information,
which are necessary for processing the
proposal. DPR was sent back to BRJP 24.2.04.
with request to rectify it and send through
the State Govt. along with duly filled up
prescribed checklists for ensuring inclusion
of required information in the DPR and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost.
STP 151.20 DPR of Rs. 377.80 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on 2.1.98. On scrutiny of the DPR,
technical clarifications as well as consent of
22

23
proposal by the local body sought by NRCD
on 9.2.98. Modified DPR of Rs. 416.12 Lakh
submitted by BRJP on 7.8.03. Commitment
of the State Govt. to bear O&M cost not
furnished along with the DPR. DPR was
scrutinized and it has come to notice that it
is lacking in crucial details and requisite
information, which are required for
processing the proposal. DPR has been sent
back to BRJP on 24.2.04 to rectify it and send
through the State Govt. along with duly filled
up prescribed checklists for ensuring
inclusion of required information in the DPR
and commitment of the State Govt. to bear
O&M cost.
SWM 24.73 DPR of Rs. 143.21 Lakh submitted by BRJP
on 2.4.03. On scrutiny of  the DPR, it has
come to notice that the DPR is lacking in
crucial details and requisite information,
which are required for processing the
proposal.  DPR has been  sent back to BRJP
on 24.2.2004. Among other deficiencies, it
was also pointed out that proposal for
segregation, processing and disposal of
municipal solid waste has not been taken
care of in the DPR. BRJP has been requested
to rectify the DPR and send it through the
State Govt. along with duly filled up
prescribed checklists for ensuring inclusion
of required information in the DPR and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost.
2. Barh CRE 47.09 DPR For Electric Crematoria of Rs.71.12 Lakh
forwarded by the State Govt. on 27.3.96. The
State Govt. was requested on 13.8.96 to
revise the DPR based on improved wood
crematoria since, by the experience gained
under GAP-I it was felt that provision of
electric crematoria will not be proper for town
like Barh, keeping sustainability of such
assets in mind. Reminder was sent on 26.8.96.
DPR for Diesel Crematoria costing Rs. 50.73
Lakh submitted by BRJP on 25.3.03.
12 3 4

24
Commitment  to bear O&M cost by the State
Govt. not furnished while submitting the
DPR. On scrutiny of the DPR, it has come to
notice that the DPR is lacking in crucial
details and requisite information, which are
required for processing the proposal. DPR
has been returned to BRJP on 4.3.04 and
drawing reference to the letter of NRCD dated
13.8.06 (above referred) addressed to State
Govt. BRJP has been requested to rectify
the DPR and send it through the State Govt.
along with duly filled up prescribed
checklists for ensuring inclusion of required
information in the DPR and commitment of
the State Govt. to bear O&M cost.
3. Bhagalpur LCS 3.56 DPR of Rs. 3.56 Lakh submitted by BRJP on
8.12.03. Processing of the DPR could not be
undertaken due to non-availability of
commitment of State Govt. to bear O&M cost,
which is mandatory. This DPR was forwarded
by the State Govt. on 7.1.04. Commitment to
bear O&M cost still not furnished by them
and thus the consequent inability to process
the proposal.
LA 12.30 DPR of Rs. 288.32 Lakh  submitted by BRJP
on 8.12.03. The State Govt.  forwarded the
DPR on 7.1.04. Commitment of the State Govt.
to bear land cost  has not been furnished
while forwarding the DPR. On scrutiny of
the DPR, it has come to notice that the DPR
is lacking in crucial details and requisite
information, which are required for
processing the proposal. DPR has been
returned to the State Govt. on 6.2.04. and
they have been requested to rectify the DPR
and send it along with duly filled up
prescribed checklists for ensuring inclusion
of required information in the DPR and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear land
cost.
I&D 379.08 DPR of Rs. 636.229 Lakh  submitted by BRJP
on 8.12.03. The State Govt. forwarded the
12 3 4

DPR on 7.1.04. Commitment of the State Govt.
to bear O&M cost  was not furnished while
forwarding the DPR. On scrutiny of the DPR,
it has come to notice that the DPR is lacking
in crucial details and requisite information,
which are required for processing the
proposal. The DPR has been returned to the
State Govt. on 16.2.04. and requested to send
the revised DPR along with duly filled up
prescribed checklists for ensuring inclusion
of required information in the DPR and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost.
STP 34.56 DPR of Rs. 160.50 Lakh  submitted by BRJP
on 8.12.03. DPR forwarded by the State Govt.
on 7.1.04. Commitment of the State Govt., to
bear O&M cost not furnished  by them while
forwarding the DPR. On scrutiny of the DPR,
it has come to notice that the DPR is lacking
in crucial details and requisite information,
which are required for processing the
proposal. DPR returned to the State Govt.
on 16.2.04. and requested to send the revised
DPR along with duly filled up prescribed
checklists for ensuring inclusion of required
information in the DPR and commitment of
the State Govt. to bear O&M cost.
SWM 61.78 DPR of Rs. 153.09 Lakh  submitted by BRJP
on 7.4.03. Commitment of the State Govt.  to
bear O&M cost not furnished while
submitting the DPR. Revised DPR of Rs. 96.28
Lakh forwarded by the State Government.
on 7.1.04. Commitment of the State Govt. to
bear O&M cost still not furnished by them
while forwarding the DPR. On scrutiny of
the DPR, it has come to notice that DPR is
lacking in crucial details and requisite
information, which are required for
processing the proposal.  DPR returned to
the State Govt. on 16.2.04. and requested to
send the revised DPR along with duly filled
up prescribed checklists for ensuring
inclusion of required information in the DPR
12 3 4

26
and commitment of the State Govt. to bear
O&M cost.
4. Buxar CRE 40.50 DPR For Electric Crematoria of  Rs. 67.53
Lakh forwarded by the State Govt. on
17.10.96. NRCD indicated to BRJP on 6.11.96
its view that the electric crematoria would
not be acceptable to people due to (i) power
supply problem, (ii) less use of electric
crematoria because of sentiments attached
with conventional burning & consequently
wood based crematoria well accepted by the
people. It was conveyed that wood based
crematoria would be best solution. Reminder
for submission of the DPR to BRJP was sent
on 28.5.01. BRJP submitted DPR for Diesel
Crematoria of  Rs. 50.73 Lakh on 25.3.03. DPR
returned to BRJP on 4.3.04 intimating that
on scrutiny of the DPR, it has come to notice
that the DPR is lacking in crucial details and
requisite information, which are required for
processing the proposal. BRJP has been
requested to submit revised DPR through
the State Govt. along with duly filled up
prescribed checklists for ensuring inclusion
of required information in the DPR and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost.
STP 16.85 DPR of Rs. 47.72 Lakh forwarded by the State
Govt. on 19.2.02. Since the cost of proposed
scheme was exceeding CCEA approved cost,
BRJP/State Govt. was requested on 12.8.02
to submit the requisite information in formats
of Min. of Finance, scheme-wise for all the
projects under the NRCP in respect of all the
towns of Bihar so that further action can be
taken to get the review conducted for
accommodating the excess cost. DPR
returned to the State Govt. on 4.3.04
intimating that on scrutiny of the DPR, it has
come to notice that the DPR is lacking in
crucial details and requisite information,
which are required for processing the
proposal.  The State Govt. has been
12 3 4

27
requested to submit revised  DPR along with
duly filled up prescribed checklists for
ensuring inclusion of required information
in the DPR and commitment of the State Govt.
to bear O&M cost.
RFD 11.88 DPR of Rs. 19.15 Lakh forwarded by the State
Govt. on 17.10.96. BRJP was requested on
6.11.96 to submit revised DPR with reduced
cost within CCEA approved cost. Reminder
was sent on 18.11.97. Revised DPR of Rs.
12.52 Lakh submitted by BRJP on 16.3.02.
The State Govt. forwarded this DPR on
11.7.02. Commitment to bear O&M cost  was
not furnished by them while forwarding the
DPR. The State Govt. was intimated on 4.3.03
that approved cost of RFD component is Rs.
11.88 Lakh only and the proposed cost is
still exceeding the approved cost.  Moreover,
the commitment to bear O&M cost has also
not been received.  On scrutiny of the DPR,
it was found to be lacking in important details
and requisite information, which are
necessary for processing the proposal.  One
of the major deficiencies has been noticed
wherein the town map showing the location
of proposed works has not been attached
with the DPR.  The DPR has been returned
to the State Govt. on 8.3.04 with request to
submit revised DPR along with duly filled
up prescribed checklists for ensuring
inclusion of required information in the DPR
and commitment of the State Govt. to bear
O&M cost.
5. Chapra I&D 143.21 DPR of Rs. 160.80 Lakh received from BRJP
on 31.3.03.  On scrutiny of the DPR, it has
been found that presently sewage generation
is about 10 mld while STP capacity of 2 mld
has been created under GAP-I.  It is very
necessary that interception & diversion of
additional sewage and provision for its
treatment to achieve designated standards
should be created under GAP-II to ensure
that no further sewage pollutes the river
12 3 4

28
Ganga.  DPR  has been returned to BRJP on
27.5.03 with request to furnish DPRs of I&D,
STP & LA.
SWM 24.41 It has been decided by NRCD to drop this
scheme and utilize the saving of this
component for sanction of core schemes of
the town.  Accordingly, the DPR of SWM
has been returned to BRJP on 27.5.03.
6. Fatwah CRE 47.09 DPR for Electric Crematoria of Rs. 71.40 Lakh
forwarded by the State Govt. on 27.3.96.  The
State Govt. was requested on 14.5.96 to
provide (i) details about population, mortality
rate and existing burning facilities, (ii)
checklist & (iii) reasons for providng electric
crematoria instead of wood based crematoria.
The State Govt. was requested to recast the
DPR on above lines and submit.  DPR for
Diesel Crematoria of Rs. 58.88 Lakh submitted
by BRJP on 7.4.03.  On scrutiny of the DPR,
it was found that, among other deficiencies,
plan of the town and consequently location
of the proposed works & layout plan of the
works have not been attached with the DPR.
Commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost has also not been furnished. The DPR
has been returned to BRJP on 24.2.2004 with
request to submit revised DPR through the
State Govt. along with duly filled up
prescribed checklists for ensuring inclusion
of required information in the DPR and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost.
LA 1.00 Yet to be received from the State Govt.
7. Munger CRE 47.08 Scheme for Electric Crematoria was
sanctioned by NRCD for an amount of Rs.
48.45 Lakh on 12.3.96.  Work was yet to be
started till April, 99 and consequently, based
on the unsatisfactory performance of such
assets created under GAP-I in Bihar, the
State Govt. was intimated on 6.5.99 that the
implementation of this scheme may be
deferred till such time it is established that
12 3 4

29
the scheme would be sustainable.
Subsequently, the State Govt. was intimated
on 3.6.99 about the decision of NRCD to drop
the aforesaid sanctioned project and it was
suggested that the State Govt. may submit a
proposal for improved wood crematoria.
Reminder was sent on 2.7.02.  BRJP submitted
DPR for Diesel Crematoria (DC) of Rs. 51.92
Lakh for Chharrapatti on 25.3.03. Another
revised DPR for DC of Rs. 51.57 Lakh for
Chharrapatti forwarded by the State Govt.
on 7.1.04.  Commitment to bear O&M cost
not provided while forwarding the DPR by
them.  On scrutiny of the DPR, it was found
that proposal in the DPR constitute of
construction of DC at Chharrapatti, which is
a village in the Distt. of Begusarai and is
located on the other bank of river Ganga
almost opposite to Munger town.  The State
Govt. was intimated on 3.3.04 that
Chharrapatti is not covered under GAP-II
(MS) thus rendering the DPR unnecessary
for sanction and requested to furnish the
response of State Govt. on above which is
still awaited.
LA 0.50 Yet to be received from the State Govt.
SWM 31.21 DPR of Rs. 98.49 Lakh forwarded by the State
Govt. on 17.10.97.  After scrutiny of the DPR,
it was found to be lacking in crucial details
and accordingly BRJP was requested on
7.11.96 to revise the DPR as per NRCD
guidelines. Reminder was sent on 28.5.2001.
The State Govt. was requested on 19.2.2002
to drop the project since project cost, taking
into consideration of provision of work as
per the MSW Rules, 2000, shall increase
many times over the CCEA approved cost.
BRJP submitted DPR of Rs. 192.28 Lakh on
25.3.03.  Revised DPR of Rs. 138.00 Lakh
forwarded by the State Govt. on 4.12.03.
Commitment to bear O&M cost was also not
furnished by them while forwarding the DPR.
On scrutiny of the DPR, it was found to be
12 3 4

30
still lacking in crucial details and important
information.  The DPR has been returned to
the State Govt.  on 27.2.04 with request to
submit revised DPR along with duly filled
up prescribed checklists for ensuring
inclusion of required information in the DPR
and commitment of the State Govt. to bear
O&M cost.
8. Patna I&D 519.26 DPR of Rs. 269.72 Lakh submitted by BRJP
on 25.3.03. In the DPR, proposal was made
for conveyance of sewage of Kankarbag
outfall drain through a closed conduit to the
existing STP at Pahari of 25 mld treatment
capacity, constructed under GAP-I. After
scrutiny of the proposal, it has been noted
that existing STP capacity in not sufficient
to treat the additional sewage resulting in its
overflow to the river.  BRJP was conveyed
on 3.3.04 that the approach should be to deal
with the enhancement of treatment capacity
of the STP at Pahari instead of covering the
drain, which does not fall on priority items in
the NRCP works and the work relating to
coverage of drains could be taken up by the
State Govt. out of their own resources.  BRJP
was also conveyed that in the resultant
analysis, above subject proposal does not
merit consideration of NRCD.
Relevant DPR yet to be received.
STP 195.16 DPR yet to be received from the State Govt.
LA 43.50 DPR yet to be received from the State Govt.
SWM 329.40 DPR yet to be received from the State Govt.
9. Sultan CRE 47.08 DPR for Electric Crematoria of Rs. 80.58
Ganj Lakh forwarded by the State Govt. on 3.7.96.
The State Govt. was requested on 12.8.96 to
revise the DPR with diesel operated furnace,
though IWC would have been better choice,
considering the religious importance of the
town and also sought information about No.
of dead bodies cremated in the last 3 years.
DPR for Diesel Crematoria of Rs. 62.70 Lakh
12 3 4

31
submitted by BRJP on 25.3.03.  Commitment
of the State Govt. to bear O&M cost not
furnished while submitting the DPR.  Revised
DPR of Rs. 50.538 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on 4.12.03.  Commitment to bear
O&M cost still not furnished by them.
Aforesaid DPR was scrutinized and it has
come to notice that the DPR is lacking in
crucial details.  On of the major deficiencies
is that index plan of the town showing the
location of site for installation of crematoria
and also layout plan of the project site have
not been annexed with the DPR.  The DPR
has been returned to the State Govt. on
27.2.04 with request to submit revised DPR
along with duly filled up prescribed
checklists for ensuring inclusion of required
information in the DPR and commitment of
the State Govt. to bear O&M cost.
LA 0.50 DPR yet to be received from the State Govt.
Ganga Action Plan-II (Supreme Court Towns)
1. Hajipur I&D 123.09 DPR of Rs. 261.55 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on 30.12.96.  BRJP was requested
on 22.12.97 to recast the DPR on the basis of
various points emerged during discussion
with the officers of BRJP in NRCD.   Reminder
was sent on 17.3.98. The State Govt.
forwarded the revised DPR of
Rs. 151.32 Lakh on 1.7.98.  After scrutiny of
the DPR, observations/comments on the
proposal were conveyed to the State Govt.
on 21.7.98 with request to modify it.  Reminder
was sent on 25.7.2001 to the State Govt.
Recasted DPR of Rs. 156.74 Lakh submitted
by BRJP on 18.3.03.  During scrutiny of the
DPR & discussion with BRJP officers, it was
found that sewage is not outfallling into the
river and, instead, is collecting in ponds away
from the river course.  Letter has been sent
to Bihar on 14.7.03 to send their comments
on the matter.  Further revised DPR of Rs.
169.84 Lakh forwarded by the State Govt. on
12 3 4

32
4.12.2003, which again mentions that sewage
is not outfalling in the river.  The reply of
comments from the State Govt. and their
commitment of O&M cost not furnished by
them while forwarding the DPR.  Meanwhile,
the DPR was scrutinized and it was found to
be lacking in crucial details and requisite
information, which are necessary for
processing the proposal.  The DPR was sent
back to the State Govt. on 25.2.2004 with
request to submit revised DPR along with
duly filled up prescribed checklists for
ensuring inclusion of required information
in the DPR and commitment of the State Govt.
to bear O&M cost.  & reply of the comments
sought by NRCD.
STP 82.56 DPR of Rs. 289.74 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on 30.12.96.  There after, revised
DPR of Rs. 161.20 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on 16.5.97.  Commitment of the
State Govt. to bear O&M cost not furnished
while forwarding the DPR.  After  scrutiny of
the DPR, BRJP was intimated on 11.11.97
about different population figures adopted
in I&D and STP DPRs, apart from other
points.  BRJP was requested on 22.12.97 to
recast the DPR on the basis of various points
emerged during discussion with the officers
of BRJP.  Reminder was sent on 17.3.98.  The
State Govt. forwarded recasted DPR of Rs.
118.50 Lakh on 1.7.98.  After scrutiny of the
DPR, observations/comments on the DPR
were sent to the State Govt. on 24.7.98  State
Govt. forwarded modified DPR of Rs. 78.62
Lakh on 5.7.2000.  After scrutiny of the DPR,
shortcomings in teh proposal were pointed
out of the State Govt. on 22.8.2000 with
request to revise the DPR.   Reminder was
sent on 16.7.01.  Revised DPR of Rs. 244.53
Lakh forwarded by the State Govt. on 4.12.03.
Their commitment to bear O&M cost was
not furnished.  Meanwhile, the DPR was
scrutinized and it was found to be lacking in
crucial details and requisite information,
12 3 4

33
which are necessary for processing the
proposal. The DPR has been sent back to
the State Govt. on 25.2.2004 with request to
submit revised DPR along with duly filled
up prescribed checklists for ensuring
inclusion of required information in the DPR
and commitment of the State Govt. to bear
O&M cost. & reply of the comments sought
by NRCD.
AFF 3.40 DPR yet to be received from the State Govt.
RFD 19.53 DPR of Rs. 29.12 Lakh forwarded by the State
Govt. on 16.5.97. After scrutiny of the DPR,
deficiencies in the DPR were pointed out to
the State Govt. on 6.2.98. Recasted DPR of
Rs. 58.77 Lakh submitted by BRJP on 18.3.03.
Commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost not furnished with the DPR. On scrutiny
of the DPR, it was found to be lacking in
crucial details and requisite information,
which are necessary for processing the
proposal. The DPR has been sent back to
BRJP on 25.2.2004 with request to submit
revised DPR through the State Govt. along
with duly filled up prescribed checklists for
ensuring inclusion of required information
in the DPR and commitment of the State Govt.
to bear O&M cost. & reply of the comments
sought by NRCD.
SWM 61.78 DPR yet to be received from the State Govt.
PP 2.27 DPR yet to be received from the State Govt.
2. Khel I&D 27.79 DPR of Rs. 96.17 Lakh received from
Gaon the State Govt. on 16.5.97. After scrutiny of
the DPR, observations were provided to
BRJP on 17.10.97 with request to revise the
DPR, which should also contain the
information regarding approval of the
proposal, by the local body, O&M agency,
O&M cost, arrangements to meet O&M cost.
Reminder sent by NRCD on 17.3.98. The State
Govt. forwarded revised DPR of Rs. 28.00
Lakh on 24.6.2000. After scrutiny of the DPR,
shortcomings in the proposal were intimated
12 3 4

34
to the State Govt. on 24.8.00. Modified DPR
of Rs. 98.24 Lakh submitted by BRJP on
18.3.2003. Commitment of the State Govt. to
bear O&M cost not furnished with the DPR.
The State Govt. forwarded further modified
DPR of Rs. 202.66 Lakh on 4.12.2003.
Commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost still not furnished by them while
forwarding the DPR. Meanwhile, the DPR
was scrutinized and it was found to be
lacking in crucial details and requisite
information, which are necessary for
processing the proposal. The DPR has been
returned to BRJP on 24.2.04 with request to
submit revised DPR through the State Govt.
along with duly filled up prescribed
checklists for ensuring inclusion of required
information in the DPR and commitment of
the State Govt. to bear O&M cost.
STP 33.97 DPR of Rs. 186.46 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on 24.12.96. Thereafter, the State
Govt. sent a revised DPR of Rs. 75.80 Lakh
on 16.5.97. The proposal of the DPR was
discussed with the officers of BRJP on 29 to
31.5.97 and BRJP was requested on 26.6.97
to provide cost variance analysis since
project cost was exceeding the CCEA cost.
Reminder was sent to BRJP on 23.7.97. In
continuation, observations on the DPR, after
scrutiny, were sent to the State Govt. on
31.7.97. Reminders were sent to the State
Govt. on 17.10.97, 21.1.98 and 17.3.98. The
State Govt. forwarded modified DPR of Rs.
37.00 Lakh on 24.6.00. After scrutiny of the
DPR, clarifications on the proposal of the
DPR were sought from BRJP on 22.8.00.
Recasted DPR of Rs. 58.40 Lakh submitted
by BRJP on 18.3.03. Commitment of the State
Govt. to bear O&M cost not furnished with
the DPR. Another revised DPR of Rs. 35.22
Lakh forwarded by the State Govt. on 7.1.04.
Commitment to bear O&M cost still not
furnished by them while forwarding the DPR.
12 3 4

35
Meanwhile, the DPR was scrutinized and it
was found to be lacking in crucial details
and requisite information, which are
necessary for processing the proposal. DPR
has been returned to BRJP on 25.2.04 with
request to submit revised DPR through the
State Govt. along with duly filled up
prescribed checklists for ensuring inclusion
of required information in the DPR and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost.
RFD 34.02 DPR of Rs. 35.377 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on 19.12.96. After scrutiny of the
DPR, clarifications on the proposal sought
from BRJP on 15.1.96. Reminder sent on
14.9.99. Recasted DPR of Rs. 30.40 Lakh
submitted by BRJP on 25.3.03. Commitment
of the State Govt. to bear O&M  cost not
furnished while submitting of DPR. Further
recasted DPR of Rs. 31.09 Lakh forwarded
by the State Govt. on 4.12.03. Commitment
to bear O&M cost not furnished by them
while forwarding the DPR. The DPR was
scrutinized and it was found to be lacking in
crucial details and requisite information,
which are necessary for processing the
proposal. One of the major deficiencies is
that the town map showing the location of
the proposed works has not been attached
with the DPR. Also, drawings of RFD works
proposed at 2 places are lacking in details.
DPR has been returned to the State Govt. on
27.2.04 with request to submit revised DPR
along with duly filled up prescribed
checklists for ensuring inclusion of required
information in the DPR and commitment of
the State Govt. to bear O&M cost.
CRE 62.94 DPR for Electric Crematoria of Rs. 68.39 Lakh
forwarded by the State Govt. on 19.12.96.
Information was sought from State Govt. on
15.1.96 regarding  (i) maintenance body for
the scheme (since the experience indicated
12 3 4

36
that the local bodies have been unsuccessful
to maintain such assets created under GAP-
I) & (ii) clear methodolgy of O&M with firm
commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost. The State Govt. was also suggested, in
the letter, that wood based crematoria should
be proposed in place of electric crematoria
for such small town. BRJP submitted a DPR
for Diesel Crematoria of Rs. 64.86 Lakh on
25.3.03. Commitment of the State Govt. to
bear O&M cost not furnished while
submitting the DPR. Thereafter, revised DPR
of Rs. 62.821 Lakh forwarded by the State
Govt. on 7.1.04. Commitment to bear O&M
cost still not furnished by them while
forwarding the DPR. The DPR was
scrutinized and it was found to be lacking in
crucial details and requisite information,
which are necessary for processing the
proposal. One of the major deficiencies is
that the index plan of the town showing the
location of site for installation of crematoria
has not been annexed with DPR. Moreover,
the justification for proposing diesel based
crematoria in place of electric crematoria
(approved by the CCEA) has also not been
provided in the DPR. DPR has been returned
to the State Govt. on 25.2.04 with request to
submit revised DPR along with duly filled
up prescribed checklists for ensuring
inclusion of required information in the DPR
and commitment of the State Govt. to bear
O&M cost.
SWM 9.07 The State Govt. forwarded DPR of
Rs. 9.70 Lakh on 24.12.96. Commitment to bear
O&M cost not furnished by them while
forwarding the DPR. The State Govt. was
intimated on 19.2.02 that the DPR may be
dropped since its cost shall increase many
times, taking into consideration the
provisions to be made as per Gazette
Notification dated 25.9.2000 for Municipal
Solid Wastes (Management and handling)
12 3 4

37
Rules, 2000. The State Govt. forwarded
another DPR of  Rs. 27.76 Lakh on 7.4.03.
Commitment to bear O&M cost still not
furnished by them while forwarding the DPR.
Thereafter, the State Govt. forwarded another
revised DPR of Rs. 24.27 Lakh on 7.1.04.
Commitment to bear O&M cost still not
furnished by them while forwarding the DPR.
The DPR was scrutinized and it was found to
be lacking in crucial details and requisite
information, which are necessary for
processing the proposal. DPR has been
returned to the State Govt. on 25.2.04 with
request to submit revised DPR along with duly
filled up prescribed checklists for ensuring
inclusion of required information in the DPR
and commitment of the state Government to
bear O&M cost.
LCS 39.13 The State Govt. forwarded DPR of
Rs. 40.00 Lakh on 19.12.96. Commitment to
bear  O&M cost not furnished by them while
forwarding the DPR. Information was sought
from the State Govt. on 15.1.96 regarding
(i) maintenance body for the scheme (since
the experience indicated that the local bodies
have been unsuccessful to maintain such
assets created under GAP-I ) & (ii) clear
methodology of O&M with firm commitment
of the State Govt. to bear O&M cost. BRJP
submitted recasted DPR of Rs. 40.62 Lakh
on 7.4.03. Commitment of the State Govt. to
bear O&M cost not furnished while
submitting the DPR. Fruther revised DPR
costing Rs. 39.075 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on 7.1.04. Commitment of the
State Govt. to bear the O&M cost of project
has still not been furnished, which is
mandatory and thus the consequent inability
to process the proposal.
LA Nil DPR of Rs. 53.45 Lakh forwarded by the State
Govt. on 7.1.04. Commitment to bear land
cost not furnished by them while forwarding
the DPR. The DPR was scrutinized and it
12 3 4

38
was found to be lacking in crucial details
and requiste information, which are
necessary for processing the proposal. Even
drawings of the proposed land sites are not
attached. The DPR has been returned to the
State Govt. on 25.2.04 with request to submit
revised DPR along with duly filled up
prescribed checklists for ensuring inclusion
of required information in the DPR and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear land
cost.
3. Mokamah LA 12.60 DPR yet to be received from the State Govt.
I&D 79.97 DPR of Rs. 187.57 Lakh forwarded by the
State Govt. on 21.12.96. Commitment to bear
O&M cost not furnished while forwarding
the DPR. after scrutiny of the DPR.
Comments on the proposal were conveyed
to BRJP on 22.12.97 with request to submit
modified DPR. Reminder sent on 17.3.98. The
State Govt. forwarded modified DPR of Rs.
89.44 Lakh on 25.5.98. Clarifications on the
proposal made in the DPR were sought from
the State Govt. on 9.6.98. The State Govt.
forwarded further modified DPR of Rs. 76.16
Lakh on 5.7.00, on which clarifications on
this proposal were sought from the State
Govt. on 22.8.00. BRJP submitted revised
DPR costing Rs. 81.76 Lakh on 18.3.03.
During visit of officers of BRJP to NRCD,
the deficiencies were pointed out to them
and BRJP asked to modify the DPR. BRJP
submitted the recasted DPR of Rs. 122.60
Lakh on 27.1.04. Commitment of the State
Govt. to bear O&M not furnished while
submitting the DPR. The DPR was
scrutinized and it was found to be lacking in
crucial details and requisite information,
which are necessary for processing the
proposal. DPR has been returned to BRJP
on 25.2.04 with request to submit revised
DPR through the State Govt. along with duly
filed up prescribed checklists for ensuring
inclusion of required information in the DPR
12 3 4

39
and commitment of the State Govt. to bear
O&M cost. State Govt. forwarded the same
DPR on 22.4.04, which was returned to them
on 13.5.04 for compliance of NRCD letter.
STP 66.60 The State Govt. forwarded DPR of
Rs. 186.46 Lakh on 24.12.96. V arious points
on the proposal, after discussion with BRJP,
were sent to BRJP on 22.12.97 with request
to modify the DPR. Reminder sent on 17.3.98.
The State Govt. forwarded modified DPR of
Rs.81.78 Lakh on 25.5.98. Observations/
comments on the proposal of the DPR were
sent to the State Govt. on15.6.98 to revise
the DPR. The State Govt. forwarded revised
DPR of Rs. 63.43 lakh on 10.7.2000.
Commitment to bear O&M cost not furnished
by them while forwarding the DPR.
Clarifications on the proposal made in the
revised DPR were sought from the State
Govt. on 23.8.2000. BRJP submitted recasted
DPR of Rs. 193.54 lakh on 7.4.03. Thereafter,
further recasted DPR of Rs. 197.59 Lakh
forwarded by the State Govt. on 7.1.04
commitment to bear O&M cost still not
furnished by them while forwarding the DPR.
The DPR was scrutinized and it was found
to be lacking in crucial details and requsite
information, which are necessary for
processing the proposal. DPR has been
returned to the State Govt. on 24.2.04 with
request to submit revised DPR along with
duly filled up prescribed checklists for
ensuring inclusion of required information
in the DPR and commitment of the State Govt.
to bear O&M cost.
PP 2.27 DPR yet to be received from the State Govt.
SWM  15.24 BRJP submitted DPR of Rs. 32.13 Lakh on
25.3.03. Commitment of the State Govt. to
bear O&M not furnished while submitting
the DPR. Meanwhile, DPR was scrutinized
and it was found to be lacking in crucial
details and requisite information, which are
12 3 4

40
necessary for processing the proposal. The
DPR has been returned to BRJP on 24.2.04
with request to submit revised DPR through
the State Govt. along with duly filled up
prescribed checklists for ensuring inclusion
of required information in the DPR and
commitment of the State Govt. to bear O&M
cost.
Recommendation
The non-core schemes, such as river front development, setting up of electric
crematoria, public toilets etc, are to cater to the peripheral environmental concerns of
river pollution, instances have come to notice regarding impairment of assets created at
much public expense because of neglect and lact of maintenance, besides delays in
their setting up. Even in Delhi, Yamuna River Front is yet to take any shape. The
Committee suggest that the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the respective
State Governments should take up the non-core schemes also on priority basis, as over
a period of time, these schemes are becoming very important, as human excreta, Gaushala,
cow drugs, half burnt bodies being thrown into the river system are becoming the major
causes of water pollution.
[(Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.9 of 62nd Report of PAC) (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Under Phase-I the target of non-core schemes were fully achieved in Uttranchal.
Under Phase-II also most of the schemes in the non-core have been completed. It has
been intimated by the State Government that the assets thus created are being properly
maintained except one electric crematorium at Haridwar, due to lack of funds to pay
electricity charges and another improved wood crematoria at Uttarkashi, because of
religious believes of the people. The State Government is considering providing
required funds to the local bodies for the O/M of electric crematoria at Haridwar.
Under Phase-I the target of non-core schemes were fully achieved in West Bengal
Under Phase-II also most of the schemes of River  Front Development and Electric
Crematoria in the non-core have been completed/are in the advance stage of completion.
The Govt. of Bihar has intimated that all the non-core schemes under GAP-I and
almost all the sanctioned schemes under GAP-II have been completed and are
functional. The schemes of LCS at Buxar is behind schedule due to stay order of the
Hon'ble Patna High Court and shall be completed soon.
Under the Yamuna Action Plan-I, the targets of non-core scheme  have been
achieved in Delhi. The following non-core works have been undertaken in Delhi.
* Two number of Electric Crematoria.
* Total 959 Community Toilet Complexes (CTCs) have been constructed at
various locations to improve overall sanitary condition in the slums situated
12 3 4

41
on the bank of river and at the areas where no sewerage facilities are provided.
The Forests Department of Govt. of NCT of delhi has been allotted about 805 acres
of land at Garhi Mandu along the Yamuna River by the Delhi Development Authority
for development of greenery. Out of 805 acres of land, the plantation has been carried
out in 585 acres till 2003. For the year 2004, it is proposed to carry out the plantation
on the 152 acres of land at Garhi Mandu area. Delhi Govt. has informed that studies
are being conducted for environmental management rejuvenation of River Y amuna.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee observe that only about 45% of the grossly polluting industrial
units installed Effluent Treatment Plants. Out of these, over 18% did not function
properly and also did not meet the technical standards. The NRCD also have no
mechanism to ensure that the installed Effluent Treatment Plants function properly.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that NRCD should be vested with powers
to take punitive action against the violators of norms in this regard and defaulting
industrial units should either be closed down or allowed to function only after
they install ETPs and ensure their proper functioning. The Committee observe
that the contribution to the pollution load by various sources was estimated at
75% and 25% each for domestic effluent and industrial wastewater by the CPCB
survey in 1984. The CPCB identified a grossly polluting industry as one which
handled hazardous substances or industries discharging effluent having BOD
load of 100 kg. Per day or more. The Committee find that the CPCB pollution
studies assessed the health of the river mainly on the basis of one parameter i.e.
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) leading to the assumption that officials tend
to under-report levels of toxic waste in the river by focusing more on the parameters
of dissolved oxygen and biological oxygen demand that say nothing about heavy
metals and other toxins in the river. BOD is a measure of the quality of oxygen
depleted by decaying organic matter in the water. The Committee are of the view
that while BOD is an important indicator of health of water systems, it is inadequate
as an index to total pollution in the river, as it only accounts for decaying organic
matter, it also tells us little about the presence and effects of persistent toxins
including metals  which do not degrade in the environment and are long lived
organic poisons. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that this
questionable assessment led to the development of Ganga Action Plan as an
action plan that focused mainly on domestic effluents and does precious little to
prevent industries from polluting and thus not solving the potential & long term
problem of toxic chemical build up in the river. Even the few steps that are being
taken to address industrial pollution such as effluent treatment plants rely on
end-of-pipe treatment technologies that are not fool proof which at best relocates
metals from the liquid medium to the bottom sludge of the effluent treatment
plants and at worst escape the treatment and end up polluting the river as in the
case of protests of Sadhus in Allahabad on the occasion of 'Makar Sankranti'

42
(14.1.2003) and 'Mauni Amavashya' (01.2.2003) against coloured discharged of
effluents from agro-based industries and distilleries up stream of Kanpur side at
Sangam. As a matter of fact, the sludge studied by A Markandey and M.N. Murthy
in their research  project "Cost Benefit Analysis of Ganga Action Plan" funded by
Overseas Development Administration (ODA), UK through the Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Government of India, had neurotoxic cadmium, chromium
and nickel levels above tolerable levels as per prescribed norms for agricultural
land application at places like Kanpur, and Varanasi. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the Ministry of Environment & Forests should conduct a
comprehensive study into the pollution of Ganga  and its tributaries by metals,
pesticides and organic pollutants to ensure that all potentially polluting industries
do not discharge polluted waste into the river. Further, the Committee desire that
end-of-pipe pollution control methods as is being currently used in ETPs, should
be replaced by pollution elimination-at source technologies. The Committee would
also like the Ministry of Environment & Forests to co-ordinate with other
Ministries/Departments with a view to mandating zerotoxic discharge into water
ways, guaranteeing communities right-to-know and emphasizing clean production
and pollution prevention by the industrial units.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.10 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Monitoring and control of Industrial Pollution is carried out through the Central
Pollution control Board (CPCB) and State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs). These
agencies are monitoring the grossly polluting industries under the GAP area on
regular basis. According to the report as on August 31,2003 of CPCB, out of 306
defaulting industries as on August 1997, 226 industries have provided requisite
treatment facilities, 79 units have been closed, one unit is defaulting and facing legal
aciton.
National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD) through CPCB is taking
appropriate measure including issuing of directions to the SPCBs, who are responsible
for implementation of pollution control regulations under Water (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 & EPA 1986. The CPCB issues directions to the SPCBs
and the defaulting industries.
The criteria for grossly polluting industries identified are based on two criteria i.e.
(i) handling of hazardous waste/chemical; (ii) BOD load of 100 kg per day or more.
These criteria will take care of organic as well as toxic pollution, as toxic wastes come
under hazardous category.
Regarding monitoring of toxic substances like metals and pesticides, it is
submitted that monitoring of such substances is an expensive exercise and requires
sophisticated laboratory facilities and skilled man-power. MOEF carried out
monitoring of toxic pollution through ITRC for 5 years at 27 locations in the Ganga
River during 1985-90 and concluded taht toxic pollutants are not significant in the
river. Such measurements on routine basis cost lot of effort and money without

43
adding much to water quality information. Thus, it was decided to focus water
quality monitoring only on organic and microbial pollution. However, CPCB has
once again initiated measurement of toxic pollutions in the river.
Regarding technologies being adopted for industrial pollution, it is true that the
toxic pollutants removed through treatment are transferred to sludge. Therefore,
the sludge has to be disposed off in a manner that it does not pollute the river.
Necessary measures are taken through UP PCB to ensure proper disposal of sludge.
The levels of toxic metals as reported (by A Markandey and M.N. Murthey) at
Kanpur and Varanasi are being further studied by CPCB.
Regarding, a comprehensive study on pollution of Ganga and its tributaries with
erspect to metals and pesticides, CPCB has already initiated measurements of toxic
pollutants in the Ganga River and its tributaries. The MOEF through it Pollution
Abatement Policy 1992 has been emphasizing on preventive measures. Recently,
through an extensive  discussion with industrial associations, CPCB has finalized
an agreement on time targeted action plan for preventive and control measures with
respect to 17 categories of hihgly polluting industries under Corporate  Responsibility
for Environment Protection (CREP). The CREP Programme mentioned above was
finalized in collaboration with other Ministries/Departments. For communities right
to know information, MOEF has initiated many activities through NGO, web-sites,
meetings, discussions, seminars, symposiums and other mass awareness
programmes.
The objective of Ganga Action Plan was to prevent the pollution of the river
from the sewage discharging through various drains into the river. Since the 75%
contribution of pollution is due to discharge of organic matter from the domestic
sewage, DO and BOD which are the pollution indicating parameters are measured
along with bacterial quality of river to find the status of health of the river. In
constrast to this, presence of heavy metals in river water and sediments is
indicative of pollution from industrial sources, control of which is carried out
through legal provisions under the Action Plan. The monitoring of heavy metals
under WQM, however, is carried out once a year during critical period  of summer
to assess the status of the river.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee observe that for such a mass oriented programme as Ganga
Action Plan, a crucial aspect like  public participation which could have been a
deciding factor in the successful implementation GAP has not been given adequate
attention despite this being mentioned from the very sitting of NRCA (then CGA).
From the Ministry’s submissions and their first hand experience during study
visits to different sites of Ganga Action Plan, the Committee are of the firm opinion
that at present the general people at large are either ignorant of or totally alienated
from objectives of Ganga Action Plan thereby creating a gulf between public and

44
the schemes/projects. This ignorance also prevents them from playing an active
rule in assisting regulatory authorities in the implementation of GAP schemes, As
is evident from the submission of States like Bihar that they have been waiting
NRCD's guidelines for launching public awareness campaigns, the Committee
observed that even after 18 years of its operation, Ministry of Environment &
forests have failed to come out with a concrete vision plan to make people aware
of the consequences of living in a hazardous polluted river eco-system. The
Committee, in order to ensure effective public participation in GAP, urge the
Ministry of Environment and Forests to make energetic mass awareness efforts to
establish a pattern of co-operative relationship between the Government, NGOs,
VOs and associations. Further the Committee observe that the Ganga and its
bigger tributaries like Yamuna possess moer than enough scope for contributing
a major chunk towards self-financing their action plans by way of fisheries, water
sports, recreational zones, amusement park, pilgrimage etc. on its river line are but
what requires is a co-ordinated vision plan amongst such Ministries as the
Ministry of Environment & Forests, the Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of
Water Resources etc. The Committee therefore would like the NRCA to look into
the feasibility of such a project, and if necessary, open such  schemes to private
sector. The Committee therefore would like the NRCA to look into the feasibility
of such a project, and if necessary, open such schemes to private sector. The
Committee also emphasize the need for devising a methodology wherein setting
up and holding of regular meetings, of Citizen Monitoring Committees in all the
cities  covered under the Ganga Action Plan becomes a permanent feature in the
implementation of GAP.
[S. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.11 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Public Awareness & Public Participation have been made part of the River and
Lake Conservation Plans in the X Plan. The Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for river
and lake cleaning works are now conceived & formulated by the State Governments
in close consultation with the stake holding communities following the approach of
participatory appraisal. The States have been advised through the guidelines for
preparation of DPRs to launch awareness campaigns through a programme of
volunteers called National Green V olunterrs. The State Governments are taking steps
in this regard by involving local bodies, social organizations and NGOs.
The NRCD has endeavoured to bring about awareness by participating in the
India International Trade Fair at Pragati Maidan by setting up pavilions at three
occasions. Exhibitions have been set up at Teen Murti Bhavan and Ashok Hotel apart
from setting up exhibition stalls in the Kumbh Mela and Magh Mela at Allahabad
regularly till the closure of the Directorate Regional Office at Allahabad w.e.f. 12.12.2001.
In the past programmes have been telecast on the Door Darshan also, Fifty nine
episodes of a popular programme named 'Kinare Kinare' were broadcast on the FM
Radio Delhi during the period 2001-2003. Printing of handbills, pamphlets and
broachures on the programmes of the NRCD has also been done.

45
The NRCD has assisted and given grants to various NGOs and V oluntary
Organizations for programmes as indicated below of creating public awareness.
* Organization of padyatras/green rallies using tableaus etc.
* Display of banners by students at prominent places.
* Holding street plays.
* Screening of documentary films on awareness followed by feature films at
community level.
* Airing of aquickies and messages on television and radio at prime hours.
* Organization of cultural programme at community/city level involving famous
stars.
* Installation of hoardings  at prominent locations.
* Exhibitions
* Publication and dissemination of reference material.
* Training of watch dog groups/beneficiary groups.
* Shramdaan.
An amount of Rs. 6.25 crores (including the advertisements in the news
papers regarding achievements of the Ministry in February, 2004) has been
spent towards publicity and propaganda during the period 1990-91 to 2003-2004
through State Governments Locial bodies, NGOs Societies and VOs.
Besides the above and with a view to involving people from different walks of life
for generating awareness and giving a sense of belonging to the people it was decided
in 1995 to constitute Citizens Monitoring Committees comprising social workers,
representatives of implementaing agencies and academicians for each town where
works of pollution abatement of rivers have been initiated or would be initiated. The
Constitution of the Citizen's Monitoring Committees is as follows:—
 (a) Mayor/President of Municipality—Chairman.
(b) Colletor/SDM—Convenor.
(c) 2 Prominent citizens (to be nominated by State Government).
(d) 2 NGOs working in the area (to be nominated by State Government).
(e) 2 Technical experts (Professors from IITs/Colleges or other academicians/
experts—to be nominated by State Govt.)
(f) 1 Representative of State Pollution Control Board.
(g) 1 Representative of National River Conservation Directorate/Ministry of
Environment  & Forests.
(h) Executive Engineer of nodal agency — Member Secretary

46
The functions of the Citizens' Monitoring Committee are as follows:-
* Promote awreness of problem of pollution of rivers and of the importance of
clean rivers for aquatic life, human  health and recreation;
* Disseminate information about the measures/initiatives taken towards the
cleaning of rivers and peoples' role in keeping the rivers free from pollution;
* Enhance motivation and performance level of those engaged in the river
pollution abatement programmes;
* Promote awareness of related issues such as siltation of rivers, soil erosion,
afforestation, industrial pollution and conservation of water resources etc.;
* Secure public cooperation and participation on the implementation of the
programme;
* Ensuer optimum utilization of assets created under the programme such as
crematoria, community toilets, river front facilities etc.;
* Extend help for promoting measures required for proper operation and
maintenance of the facilities creted under the programme;
* Help the local bodies/State Governments popularize the use of sludge as
manure, of treated effluents for land application and of sludge/effluents for
biogas generation;
* Provide requisite inputs to the concerned agencies in formulating appropriate
strategies to enhance the overall efficiency of the schemes; and
* To Monitor the progress of execution and timely completion of facilities and
its proper operation and maintenance thereafter.
The constitution setting up the Citizens Monitoring Committees provides for
holding of meetings of the committees at least once every month.
The feasibility of opening schemes for self financing the action plans by way of
fisheries, water sports, recreational zones, amusement parks, pilgrimage etc. on the
river lines in coordination with the Ministries of Water Resources, Ministry of Tourism
etc. will be placed in the next meeting of the National River Conservation Authority
(NRCA) to be presided by the Hon'ble Prime Minister for appropriate policy directions.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004/NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
While going through the operational profile of implementation of core schemes of
GAP-II upto March 2000, the Committee find that in Uttar Pradesh out of the targeted
sewage treatment of 1098.14 mld, only 13.00 mld could be achieved. In West Bengal
out of 4 schemes of interception and diversion of sewer lines, not a single scheme has
been implemented and against an STP target of 373.63 mld, there is no progress at all.
As far as Bihar is concerned, not a single scheme for interception and diversion of

47
sewer lines was proposed and against the target of 92.18 mld of sewage treatment, the
achievement shown was nil. In Haryana, out of 19 schemes of interception and
diversion of sewer lines, only 9 schemes have been completed and  out of 12 schemes
of Sewage Treatment Plant only 8 were completed. The Committee after observing
delays in completion of core-schemes, feel that river water pollution in not being
taken seriously by the respective State Government and their implementing agencies.
The Government spend huge amount of money on the treatment of water-borne
diseases and other communicable diseases caused by polluted water, but water
pollution is not taken seriously by various States and their implementing agencies
which at times, causes lot of human loss. The Committee, therefore, recommend, that
the State Governments and their implementing agencies should recognize the
importance and seriousness of various schemes being implemented under GAP and
complete them in a time frame for the benefit of the people at large.
[Sl.No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.13 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
There was a general delay in starting of execution of works under GAP-II due to
various factors like decision of sharing of cost of works on 50:50 basis between
Central and State Governments, delay in land acquisition for works due to court
cases, etc.However, this issue has been taken up with all the State Governments and
they have been requested to expedite the completion of works. The State wise current
position is explained below.
The issue of expeditious implementation of GAP Phase-II schemes is being
constantly and rigorously pursued with the UP State Government by the Ministry at
all levels. Under GAP Phase-II in UP, 181out of 228 sanctioned schemes (core and
non-core schemes) have been completed and treatment capacity of 443.25 mld has
been created so far. In addition, works for creating treatment capacity of 462.07 mld
are in various stages of implementation.
The West Bengal State Government had initially identified 191 schemes of I&D,
STP and non-core sector. However, due to the sever erosion problem the State
Government has decided to drop 17 schemes of core and non-core in the towns of
Dhulian, Jangipur and Chakda. The latest position of scheme under GAP - II  is given
below:
Total number of schemes (revised) 174
DPRs sanctioned 117
The State Government has recently submitted the pending DPRs of core and non-
core which are being processed. Out of these 13 DPRs are such where the cost of
schemes is much above the cost earlier approved by the CCEA. The possibility to
meet this access cost form the intra/inter town saving is under examination. It may be
mentioned that so far 52 schemes of I&D and STP to treat 77.48 mld of sewage have
been sanctioned. Many of the schemes are in the advance stage of completion.

48
Against the target of treating 29.72 mld domestic sewage under GAP-II,
Uttaranchal State Government has intimated that 0.18 mld has been achieved. The
works of 8 mld and 2.44 mld STPs at Ranipur and Uttarkashi are in progress. For
the rest 19.10 mld STPs the cost schemes as per the DPR submitted by the
Uttaranchal Government is much above th CCEA's approved cost. State
Government has requested to sanction these schemes from the inter town savings,
which is under consideration. Against the allocation of Rs. 3848.00 lakh so far 30
schemes costing about Rs. 2028.00 lakhs have been sanctioned. So far State
Government has been released about Rs. 1076.00 lakhs. Almost all that amount
released has been utilized by the implementing Agency.
In case of Haryana, 15 out of 19 schemes of interception and diversion of sewer
lines and all the 12 schemes of Sewage Treatment Plant have been completed.
In case of Bihar, DPRs of 12 core schemes of interception & diversion and sewage
treatment under GAP-II, submitted by the BRJP, lacked in important  details and
requisite information and also commitment of the State Government to bear O&M
cost, not furnished therewith, which are necessary. This proves as a handicap to
process the DPRs for necessary sanction. These DPRs have been sent back to the
State to rectify them.
With a view to streamline consideration of the DPRs received in the NRCD for
NRCP works from the various State Govts., the NRCD has approved check lists for
DPRs, to faciliate proper preparation of the DPRs by the implementing agencies and
to ensure that all important details and pre-requisite information is furnished by the
proponent at the time of submission of DPRs. These checklists have been prepared to
serve as a guidance to ensure the availability of all requisite information for purpose
of processing of the DPRs.
Accordingly, these checklists have been provided to the BRJP on 9.2.2004 and
they have been requested to submit new/recasted DPRs to the NRCD through the
State Government in future along with duly filled up checklists and commitment of the
State Government to bear O&M cost.
The State Government has also been requested that it should be ensured to send
the DPRs of the core schemes viz, I&D and STP of a town along with that of land
acquisition so that these are sanctioned all together by the NRCD to avoid mismatch.
The status of the recasted DPRs yet to be submitted by the State Government has
been shown in the  Annexure-I.
The NRCD is constantly pursuing the matter with the State Government for
expeditious completion of works under GAP-II for the benefit of the people at large.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No 11012/1/2004 - NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to observe that GAP even after more than 18 years
of its operation, is still in its trial and error exercise which invaribly suggest that the

49
GAP has been formulated without proper assessment of actual ground realities. Not
only the parameters have not been fixed for selection of towns under GAP-II, the
estimation of sewage generated along the towns has also been done based on an
inaccurate methodology leading to many cases of overloading and under loading of
sewages in the STPs. Even the estimations that ;might have been accurate at the time
of initiating the scheme run the risk of being obsolete in view of time overruns which
in some cases stretches up to ten years as in the case of East Zone STP, Patna and
Munger STP in Bihar. Taking note of this fact, the Committee further express their
concern over designing of schemes under GAP especially the reported overflowing
of sewers in Bihar which according to State Government are not due to defective
designing as the Audit has pointed out, but due to Ministry of Environment & Forests'
instructions to prepare the DPRs considering 5 years only. The Committee feel that
such time overruns would ultimately render the STPs created under the scheme
incapable of containing the sewages when they are operationalised in view of growth
in population and town structure. The Committee also express their displeasure over
the submission of the Ministry of Environment & Forests that GAP compares
favourably in comparison with Rhine, Thames and Danube Action Plans. The
Committee view that the Ministry, instead of evolving a methodology for realistic
planning of schemes and proper utilization of funds have let themselves to set
complacency in their implementation of GAP.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.16 of 62 nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Ganga Action Plan was formulated based on the ground realities and survey
conducted by CPCB. Only those towns with population of one lakh and above were
selected. First survey to ascertain the towns polluting rivers was conducted in 1984.
The last survey was conducted in 1993. Though considerable delay has taken place
in completion of pollution abatement works as the programme was new to its kind.
The personnel involved at Policy and implementing stage took time to understand the
problems. The untreated sewage of GAP-I is being taken up in GAP-II and in NRCP .
The State Government have been advised to take up works for treatment of additional
sewage (if any) from their resources after the completion of ongoing GAP-II and
NRCP works. The Ministry in future proposes to take a holistic approach of pollution
abatement to improve the water quality of rivers and lakes. This approach will include
Sewerage System (Conveyance and its Disposal), Municipal Solid Waste (Collection
and Disposal), Low Cost Sanitation, Crematoria, Other non-point sources of pollution
and River Front Developments.
The time overrun in case of implementation of schemes of Bihar under GAP-I
namely; STP Eastern Zone, Patan and STP , Munger is due to contractual disputes,
litigation etc. These schemes are to be completed by December, 2004. The Ministry of
Environment & Forests has amended the guidelines for preparation of DPRs, wherein
design period for STP has been increased to 10 years.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004- NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]

50
Recommendation
The Committee deplore the actions of the Ministry and participating State
Governments for having failed to work in tandem as per the mutual agreement. While
the State Governments, especially Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal could not
provide matching share for schemes, prominent being failure to acquire land, non-
supply of power etc.the Ministry of Environment & Forests have no effective
mechanism to deal with such situations putting a serious challenge to the success of
the plan. In the absence of an effective control mechanism, the States took full
advantage to divert and misutilise funds. Thus, by solely relaying on the goodwill of
the States and their implementing agencies, the Ministry have treated on an uncertain
path for guaranteed failure. Putting on hold funds released to the States like Bihar for
GAP-II, in view of State Government’s lacka daisical attitude, even though a necessity
is a remedy worse than disease so far as achieving the targets of GAP is concerned.
During their study visits, the Committee noticed that the implementing agencies were
more concerned in the creation of the pumping stations and Sewage Treatment Plants
(STPs) rather than ensuring optimum  utilization of these assets. The Committee
observe that such a mammoth scheme like GAP should have been on the basis of a
system that would leave no room for the States take an un-cooperative stance. As per
the current scheme, the responsibility of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
seems to have ended at approving DPRs, sanctioning money and  issuing direction
with non follow-up action being taken. The Committee thereby urge the Ministry to
devise a suitable mechanism whereby States become a willing partner in the
implementation of the scheme.
[Sl.No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.17 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
West Bengal Government has intimated that all efforts are being made to implement
the GAP Projects sincerely. No funds are diverted. All cooperation is being given by
the State for implementing the programme. Assets created under GAP are being utilized
optimally.
The year-wise expenditure on O/M of assets created under GAP for the last 5 years
is given below:
(Rupees in crore)
Sl. No. Year Fund R eceived Expenditure incurred
(i) 1998-1999 5.00 5.52
(ii) 1999-2000 5.00 5.76
(iii) 2000-2001 6.00 6.93
(iv) 2001-2002 6.30 7.19
(v) 2002-2003 1.64 7.49

51
Excess expenditure has been incurred from other available funds. According to the
State Government there is no financial constrain in implementation of GAP schemes.
To sort out the inter departmental issues, so as to take care of delays in land
acquisition, the State Government was advised to set up an institutional frame work
under the Chairmanship of Chief Minister/Minister-in-charge. Recently to expedite
the acquisition of land for the various schemes the State Government has delegated
the power for land acquisition to local District Magistrate.
Uttaranchal Government have intimated that all efforts being made to implement
the GAP Projects sincerely. No funds are diverted. All cooperation is being given by
the State for implementing the programme. Assets created under GAP are being utilized
optimally.
The Government of Bihar has intimated that 5 Nos. of following STPs under GAP
I have been functional and operating  regularly since 2000:
(1) STP , Saidpur
(2) STP, Pahari
(3)  STP , Beur
(4) STP, Chapra
(5) STP, Bhagalpur
They have also intimated that inspite of financing crunch of the State
Government, fund to the tune of Rs. 270 lakh for operation and maintenance of
these assets is being regularly released by the State Government since last two
years. All STPs have been made functional. Additional fund of Rs. 199 Lakh also
has been sanctioned and released by the State Government for the special repairs
of the different components of projects of STPs/I&Ds created under GAP I to the
Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad. These special repair works are in progress and are to be
completed by October 2004. After completion of these works, all projects of STPs/
I&Ds will be functional to their full capacity.
The State Government has also mentioned that fund had been made available to
the BRJP in the year 2003-2004 for completion of 2 Nos. of incomplete STPs viz., (i)
STP, Karmali Chak (East Zone), Patna and (ii) STP, Munger. Remaining work of the
both incomplete schemes have been started and are in progress, which are to be
completed by August 2004.
Uttaranchal Government have intimated that all efforts are being made to implement
the GAP Projects sincerly. No funds are diverted. All cooperation is being given by
the State for implementing the programme. Assests created under GAP are being
utilized optimally.
In order to ensure that the State Governments become a willing partner to ensure
smooth operation & maintenance of assests created under river action plans, it is
proposed to enter into an agreement (MOU) between the Central and State Govts.

52
where the responsibilities of both the agencies is clearly demarcated and they are
made accountable for any lapes.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee, during their study visit found that not only the Sewage Treatment
Plant (STP) at Hardwar was not functioning properly, the condition of the pumping
stations at Aryanagar, Kankhal and Jagjitpur was also far from satisfactory. Pollutants
like plastic bags & night solid was seen freely floating in the nalas, which was being
directly discharged into the River. The Committee express serious concern over the
plastic waste being thrown into nalas thereby choking sewer lines as well as enormous
quantities of cow dung swept out into the river from various Gaushalas situated on
the banks of the river. Having, thus, noticed the total absence of coordination
among multiple State and local agencies responsible for implementing the GAP, the
Committee observe that there is hardly any mechanism to monitor effectively the
implementation of GAP works. During their study visit, the Committee were informed
that before GAP works were undertaken, the City's functioning sewerage system
was the one introduced in the year 1936 with 72 km long sewer lines and 5 pumping
stations to divert part of the sewage polluting river Ganga. The Committee also
observe that in Rishikesh, no sewage treatment facility was available earlier at
Laxman Jhula, Swarga-Ashram and Muni-ki-Reti. The Committee are also informed
that under GAP Phase-I, 11 drains were intercepted and diverted in Hardwar and
around, 18 drains were intercepted and diverted in Hardwar and around, 18 drains
were diverted in Rishikesh to the 3 STPs constructed under GAP-I having total
capacity of 24.33 mld (million liter per day). The Committee are, however, informed
that due to limited resources, the works under GAP-I could only partially abate the
pollution of river Ganga. The Committee further observe that the old sewage system
of Hardwar was incapable of handling the total sewage discharge of the city as the
population of the city had increased manifold since 1938. The Committee are of
clear and unmistakable impression that the civic authorities were unable to treat the
total sewage discharge of the two cities as Hardwar-Rishikesh, being cities of prime
religious significance, had lakhs of pilgrims coming from all over the country. Further,
the Committe desire that the Ganga Pollution Control Unit should have proper
coordination with the Irrigation Department to enable and to encourage the farmers
of that area to make good the use of the treated sewage water for irrigation purposes
and fertilizing the agricultural fields with the treated solid waste as manure. The
Committee are of the view that such a usage, would in due course, not only provide
revenue to the Government but would also help the farmers to get manure-rich
water for cultivation.
[Sl. No. XV, Appendix-1, Para 15.20 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Uttaranchal Government have intimated that the functioning of STPs at Jagjitpur,
Haridwar and Lakarghat Rishikesh, is satisfactory except that these STPs are over

53
loaded and need up-gradation. The Ministry is well aware that the sewerage system
and sewage treatment facilities at Haridwar-Rishikesh are very old and need up-
gradation. In this regard keeping in mind the religious importance of the place the
State Government have been advised to submit the proposals for I&D and STP
works along with 30% commitment for cost sharing, so as to achieve zero discharge
of domestic effluent at Haridwar-Rishikesh.
State Government has informed that it is also taking steps to introduce user's
charges for water supply and sewerage system to bear the partial cost of Ganga
River Action Plan. Revenue is being earned by rearing fish, selling manure and
treated sewage for irrigation purpose. Suggestions of accepting donations from
willing contributors are also under consideration of the State Government.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
Taking note of the fact that the old sewer line was unable to take the sewage load
of 1 lakh 18 thousand population (which becomes manifold during Kumbh season),
the Committee suggest that its capacity should be enhanced and new sewer lines be
laid. The Committee would also like to take proactive initiatives to ensure that Citizens'
Monitoring Committees' should be set up and made to meet regularly at these places
so that the general public could also be involved in abating further pollution of the
river.
[Sl. No. XV , Appendix-1, Para 15.21 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It has been informed by the Uttaranchal Government that an estimate is being
prepared to enhance the capacity of sewerage system of the town. Further, the State
Government has intimated that Citizen Monitoring Committees are already functioning
in the various towns and all out efforts are being made to hold meetings at regular
intervals.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
On Haridwar-Rishikesh road stretch, big hoardings should be put up drawing the
attention of the pilgrims and local population to keep the Holy Ganga clean. Some
kind of warnings should be written down on these hoardings and other prominent
places that violators would be punished with fine if they pollute the river-waters.
Public participation will be an asset for this purpose. Local bodies, social organizations
and non-governmental organizations should also be involved in this publicity
campaign.
[Sl. No. XV , Appendix-1, Para 15.22 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]

54
Action Taken
It has been informed by the State Government that big hoardings have been put at
suitable places on the Haridwar-Rishikesh road urging the pilgrims and local population
to keep the Holy Ganga clean. In Uttaranchal one scheme of Public Participation and
Awareness (PPA) has been sanctioned for the four towns of Uttarkashi, Dev Paryag,
Rudraprayag and Srinagar. The schemes of PPA includes components such as
Sharamdan, Padyatra, Awareness and Training Camps, Exhibitions and Quiz
Programmes on Ganga Pollution for school children. All these components would be
carried with the help of local bodies, social organizations and non-governmental
organizations by the State Government.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee are, however, concerned to note that no appreciable vigil was
taken by the PHD (Public Health Division) in one case of Interception and Diversion
Scheme at Gurgaon canal wherein laying of RCC (Reinforced cement concrete) pipe
sewer in place of brick circular sewer due to failure to obtain permission for cutting
trees from Ministry of Environment and Forests, Haryana in times cost on extra
expenditure of Rs. 1.99 crore that was much higher than the originally envisaged cost
for brick circular sewer. The Ministry's reply of August 1999 to audit justified
Haryana's action to time constraint arising out of the Court orders. According to
Audit, this should be viewed in the light of the facts that there were avoidable
delays prior to the Court orders because of which the work could not be completed
as contemplated and in time at the first place.
[Sl. No. XV, Appendix-1, Para 15.25 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
This para relates to Faridabad town. The Govt. of Haryana, for future guidance has
noted the recommendations of the Committee.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
In yet another case, the Committee are concerned to note that Faridabad
(Zone II) STP processed only 15 to 20 MLD Sewage against the installed capacity
of 45 MLD as of December 1999 as the anticipated quantity of sewage from
areas developed by the HUDA (Housing and Urban Development Authority)
did not reach the STP. The Committee deplore the action of Housing and Urban
Development Authority, Haryana and the Municipal Corporation, Faridabad for
not completing ancillary works meant for transporting the sewage which has
still not been completed in spite of repeated efforts by holding meetings at the
level of Financial Commissioner, Public Health on 19.3.1999, 17.9.1999, 5.7.2003,
28.11.2000, 13.4.2001 and 15.7.2002. The Committee are concerned to note that

55
Haryana Government had not got the defective mechanical screen bars of 30
MLD MPS at Sonepat and in the STP at 10.58 crore respectively repaired or
replaced as of March 2000, thereby impairing the functioning of the MPS and
the STP even after the detection of the defects in September 1998. Because of
this defect, bulk material and polythenes got easily passed into pumping stations
choking the pumps and the STP . The Committee are informed that the agency
attended to the defects by deputing their staff many times but the screen did
not work up to the mark. Going by this trend, the Committee are doubtful of the
selection of contractors for schemes implemented in the State.
[Sl. No. XV, Appendix-1, Para 15.27 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The matter is being pursued by Govt. of Haryana with HUDA and Municipal
Commissioner, Faridabad to ensure that the installed capacity is fully utilized. The
selection of contractors was done (by PHD) meticulously by pre-qualifying them.
However, the mechanical screens developed some defects, which were got rectified
from the Agencies.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD dated 30-
11-2004]
Recommendation
During their study visit the Committee had noticed that in spite of the existence
of Ghasiyar Mandi and Wazirganj Sewage Pumping Stations under the Gomti Action
Plan (GoAP) in Lucknow, which comes under Phase-II of Ganga Action Plan, the
pollution level in the river further increased due to direct discharge of sewage in the
river from the partial sewerage system of the city. The GoAP was approved in the
year 1993 for three towns, namely, Lucknow, Sultanpur and Jaunpur situated along
the banks of river Gomti. The main cause of pollution of river Gomti at Lucknow, was
untreated sewage of 26 drains discharged directly into the river Gomti that flow
right in the heart of Lucknow. The Committee had learnt that presently the quantity
of sewage effluents being discharged in the river was about 345 mld. The Gomti
Action Plan was started with British assistance in the year 1995, during the first
phase of the plan, diversion of one nala, cleaning of a few trunk sewers along with
some survey had nala improvement works at the cost of Rs. 7 crores was done and
a Master Plan for the sewage treatment & disposal of solid waste management was
prepared. After the British Assistance was withdrawn in the year 1997, the project
was converted into a 100% Centrally funded scheme. Pollution abatement works
under Gomti Action Phase-I amounting to  Rs. 26.94 crore were under different
stages of implementation which included diversion of sewage of five nalas and
construction of a 42 mld capacity Sewage Treatment Plant at Daulatganj. After
completion of Phase-I works, about 10% of the total pollution reaching the river
would be prevented. The Committee noticed that alongwith the wastewater flow to
the STP during peak hours touched 105 mld, the STP at Daulatganj could only treat
sewage up to 42 mld. The Committee express serious concern over the submission
of MD, UPJN that the STP plant could however tackle the peak flow of 105 mld,

56
which lasts for a few hours every day which nevertheless is a mammoth task for an
STP installed to treat sewage up to 42 mld. For remaining works of pollution control
in the Lucknow City, as the Committee were informed, a comprehensive project
report for Phase-II of GoAP for creating additional treatment capacity of 375 mld
was awaiting approval from the Government of India which was reported to have
been sanctioned only on 30.06.2003. The Committee, express serious concern over
the fact that the Ministry of Environment & Forests have inordinately delayed a
project that would mitigate the sufferings of the people affected by the one of the
worst polluted river. The Committee also observe that as the supply of power in the
STPs was generally disrupted for around  2½ hours and due to non-availability of
back up generator sets, the untreated sewage water was going straight into the
river during those hours. The Committee therefore urge Ministry of Environment &
Forests to prevail upon Uttar Pradesh Government and their implementing agency,
UPJN to take up concrete and altenative measures to ensure adequate power supply
to the STPs and Ecs and other assets created under GAP.
[Sl. No. XV , Appendix-1, Para 15.29 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th  Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Against the present approved cost of Rs. 47.75 crore for Gomti Action Plan (GoAP)
Phase-I at Lucknow, 18 schemes amounting to Rs. 47.55 crore have been sanctioned
and 15 schemes have been completed till date. This includes 9 schemes taken up with
financial assistance from DFID (Department for International Development), UK at a
sancioned cost of Rs. 6.97 crore, which were completed by March, 1999. In addition to
the above, 9 schemes have been taken up from budgetary resources at a sanctioned
cost of Rs. 40.58 crore. Till date, 6 schemes (including the 42 mld capacity Daulatganj
STP) have been completed and the balance 3 are in various stages of implementation.
The total expenditure incurred till 30.4.2004 on all the sanctioned schemes of GoAP
Phase-I at Lucknow is Rs. 32.49 crore.
The UP State Govt. has informed that the Daulatganj STP at Lucknow was designed
for average flow as per the guidelines of CPHEEO Manual of Government of India. It
can treat 42 mld wastewater (average flow). It also has the capacity of its units to
handle the peak flow of 105 mld during peak hours. The sizes of units are designed in
such a manner that it can allow to pass and treat through it, 105 mld during peak
hours. The UP State Govt. has also informed that the plant is performing satisfactorily
and its results as per the test reports of ITRC, Lucknow are enclosed as Annexure-II.
Under the 1st Phase of GoAP, interception and diversion of 6 nalas and treatment
of 42 mld of sewage is envisaged. To tackle the balance inflow of sewage generated in
Lucknow into the river Gomti, the 2nd phase of GoAP has been approved by the
Government of India. Advance copy of the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for the
2nd phase of GoAP were received in the Ministry from UP State Govt. in October, 2002
while the project proposal was formally received from the UP Government in January,
2003 for an amount of Rs. 291.58 crore. Based on detailed discussions with the UP
State Govt. officials and after internal appraisal within the Ministry, the project was
first put up to the EFC and then the CCEA for approval. The project was approved by
the Govt. for  Rs. 263.26 crore. Subsequently, another detailed review of the DPRs for

57
the project was carried out on the basis of which the financial sanction was issued for
Rs. 263.04 crore on 30.6.2003.
Under the 2nd phase of GoAP, all the remaining 20 nalas of Lucknow which pollute
the river Gomti will be intercepted, diverted and ultimately treated at 370 mld STP at
Kakraha village. At the STP, 345 mld of sewage will be treated by Upflow Anaerobic
Sludge Blanket (UASB) technology and 25 mld by Waste stabilization pond system.
In addition, the capacity of the Daulatganj STP will also be augmented by 5 mld (from
42 mld to 47 mld). The target date of completion of the Phase-II works for Lucknow
town is March, 2007.
As per information received from UP State Govt., the tenders for various components
of the 2nd phase of GoAP have been invited, received and processing is being done.
Work of interception and diversion of few nalas is likely to start soon. The tender for
STP at Kakraha is also in processing stage. In the mean time, the land for 2nd phase
works is under acquisition.
The DPR for construction of diesel generator (DG) Set rooms and installation of
DG Sets at pumping stations constructed on the all the 5 nalas under GoAP Phase-I
stands approved for Rs. 148.86 lakhs. The construction of DG Set rooms and installation
of DG Sets at all the 5 pumping stations is under progress by UP State Govt. The DG
sets have already been installed by UP State Govt. at the 42 mld Daulatganj STP for
alternative power supply during the break down in electric supply. DG sets have also
been proposed at all the GoAP Phase-II works in Lucknow in order to overcome the
power failure problems.
The issue of providing continuous and adequate power supply to STPs, pumping
stations, electric crematoria and other assets created under Ganga Action Plan,
including GoAP, is being constantly and rigorously pursued with the State Govt. by
the Ministry at all levels.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD dated 30-
11-2004]

ANNEXURE II
INDUSTRIAL TOXICOLOGY RESEARCH CENTRE
MAHATMA GANDHI MARG, POST BOX NO. 80
LUCKNOW-226 001 (U.P.) INDIA
SEWAGE/INDUSTRIAL W ASTE ANALYSIS REPORT
1. Sample Registry No. : TS-360 (I & II)
2. Nature of Sample & : STP Sample, Inlet (I) Date: August 25, 2004
Location & Outlet (II)
3. Sample Collected by : ITRC Staff
4. Sample Collected on : July 23 & 24, 2003
5. Methods of Analysis : As per APHA/AWW A; 20th Ed. (1998)
Sl. Result
No. Parameters/Tests
II I
A — Physico-Chemical
1. Suspended Solids (Gravimetric) mg/l 286.0 28.0
2. BOD (Winkler's method) mg/l 190.0 25.0
B — MPN/100 ml
1. Confirmative MPN/100 ml 7000000 900
Telephone EPABX Main Campus 220107, 220207, 214118, 227586, 213786, 216191,
227332 Fax No. 0522-228227, 228471 Telephone Gheru Campus: 436144, 436077 Fax:
436151
Telegram "INTOXI" E-mail: 
itrc@sancharnet.in
NS — Not Specified.
1. The report pertains to the sample tested only.
2. This report shall not be used or produced in fragments.
3. This report shall not be used for any other purpose than declared by the sponsor.
Name, Designation & Signature of the Analyst with Date
Sd/-
(Dr. Kunwar P. Singh)
Scientist & Head
Water & Wastewater Lab.
58

ANNEXURE-II-2
INDUSTRIAL TOXICOLOGY RESEARCH CENTRE
MAHATMA GANDHI MARG, POST BOX NO. 80
LUCKNOW-226 001 (U.P.) INDIA
SEW AGE/INDUSTRIAL  W ASTE  ANALYSIS  REPORT
1. Sample Registry No. : TS-363 (I & II)
2. Nature of Sample & : STP Sample Inlet (I) & Date: August 25, 2004
Location Outlet (II)
3. Sample Collected by : ITRC Staff
4. Sample Collected on : Aug 4 & 5, 2003
5. Methods of Analysis : As per APHA/AWWA; 20th Ed. (1998)
Sl. Result
No. Parameters/Tests
II I
A — Physico-Chemical
1. Suspended Solids (Gravimetric) mg/l 276.0 26.0
2. BOD (Winkler's method) mg/l 180.0 22.5
B — MPN/100 ml
3. Confirmative MPN/100 ml 24,00000000 700
Telephone EPABX Main Campus 220107, 220207, 214118, 227586, 213786, 216191,
227332 Fax No. 0522-228227, 228471 Telephone Gheru Campus: 436144, 436077 Fax:
436151
Telegram "INTOXI" E-mail: 
itrc@sancharnet.in
NS — Not Specified.
1. The report pertains to the sample tested only.
2. This report shall not be used or produced in fragments.
3. This report shall not be used for any other purpose than declared by the sponsor.
Name, Designation & Signature of the Analyst with Date
Sd/-
(Dr. Kunwar P. Singh)
Scientist & Head
Water & Wastewater Lab.
59

ANNEXURE-II-3
INDUSTRIAL TOXICOLOGY RESEARCH CENTRE
MAHATMA GANDHI MARG, POST BOX NO. 80
LUCKNOW-226 001 (U.P.) INDIA
SEWAGE/INDUSTRIAL W ASTE ANALYSIS REPORT
1. Sample Registry No. : TS-391 (A & B)
2. Nature of Sample : Effluent STP Sample Date: Dec. 19, 2003
3. Sample Collected by : ITRC Staff
4. Sample Collected on : Nov. 29 & 30, 2003
5. Methods of Analysis : As per APHA/AWWA; 20th Ed. (1998)
Sl. Result
No. Parameters/Tests
A B Standard
Inlet Outlet Uncertainty ±
A — Physico-Chemical
1. Suspended Solids (Gravimetric) mg/l 162.0 26.0 —
2. BOD (Winkler's method) mg/l 130.0 21.0 1.239
B — MPN/100 ml
3. Confirmative MPN/100 ml 900000000 110 —
NS — Not Specified.
1. The report pertains to the sample tested only.
2. This report shall not be used or produced in fragments.
3. This report shall not be used for any other purpose than declared by the sponsor.
Name, Designation & Signature of the Analyst with Date
Sd/-
(Dr. Kunwar P. Singh)
Scientist & Head
Water & Wastewater Lab.
Telephone EPABX Main Campus 220107, 220207, 214118, 227586, 213786, 21691,
227332 Fax No. 0522-228227, 228471 Telephone Gheru Campus: 436144, 436077 Fax:
436151
Telegram "INTOXI" E-mail: 
itrc@sancharnet.in
60

ANNEXURE-II-4
INDUSTRIAL TOXICOLOGY RESEARCH CENTRE
MAHATMA GANDHI MARG, POST BOX NO. 80
LUCKNOW-226 001 (U.P.) INDIA
SEWAGE/INDUSTRIAL W ASTE  ANALYSIS REPORT
1. Sample Registry No. : TS-404 (I & II)
2. Nature of Sample : Effluent STP Sample Date: Feb. 19, 2004
3. Sample Collected by : ITRC Staff
4. Sample Collected on : Jan. 28 & 29, 2004
5. Methods of Analysis : As per APHA/AWWA; 20th Ed. (1998)
Sl. Result
No. Parameters/Tests
I II Standard
Inlet Outlet Uncertainty ±
A — Physico-Chemical
1. Suspended Solids (Gravimetric) mg/l 138.0 28.0 —
2. BOD (Winkler's method) mg/l 125.0 24.0 1.232
3. Phosphate as P (Stannous Chloride) mg/l 3.79 1.66 0.00
4. Total Nitrogen (Kjeldahl) mg/l 25.76 15.68 0.00
B — MPN/100 ml
5. Confirmative MPN/100 ml500000000 270 —
NS — Not Specified.
1. The report pertains to the sample tested only.
2. This report shall not be used or produced in fragments.
3. This report shall not be used for any other purpose than declared by the sponsor.
Name, Designation & Signature of the Analyst with Date
Sd/-
(Dr. Kunwar P. Singh)
Scientist & Head
Water & Wastewater Lab.
Telephone EPABX Main Campus 220107, 220207, 214118, 227586, 213786, 21691,
227332 Fax No. 0522-228227, 228471 Telephone Gheru Campus: 436144, 436077 Fax:
436151
Telegram "INTOXI" E-mail: 
itrc@sancharnet.in
61

62
Recommendation
The Committee express their serious concern over the amount of caustic soda
flowing directly into the river Gomati from 30 dhobi ghats along the river in Lucknow
and directed that the matter should be studied seriously to prevent flowing of chemical
pollution into the river. The Committee do not agree with the submission of the Uttar
Pradesh Government that caustic soda affects the pH value of river water which do
not have direct effect on pollution load especially when the very purpose of GAP is to
maintain the Ganga waters at bathing class the pH value of which must be in between
6.5 to 8.5. The Committee would therefore urge the Ministry of Environment & Forests
to take up this issue with the implementing agencies concerned and devise appropriate
measures to contain effluents being discharged into the river from numerous dhobi
ghats. The Committee further observe that as STPs are not designed to treat plastic
waste, adequate facilities should be devised to prevent plastic waste from polluting
the river water.
[(Sl. No. XV, Appendix-1, Para 15.31 of 62nd Report of PAC) (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The UP State Govt. has informed that according to the 'Water Quality Monitoring
Bulletin for the period January to June 2003' issued by NRCD, Ministry of Environment
and Forests, the pH values at different locations within the area of Lucknow city at 1/
2 width of river are tabulated below:
Sl.No. Month pH measured at different locations
Gaughat Mohan Meakin d/s Pipraghat
1. January, 2003 8.91 8.81 8.47
2. February, 2003 8.22 7.79 7.79
3. March, 2003 8.58 7.97 8.22
4. April, 2003 8.57 8.19 8.15
5. May, 2003 8.69 8.50 8.25
6. June, 2003 8.69 8.50 8.25
The river Gomati enters Lucknow near Gaughat, where pH of river water is generally
more than the prescribed limit of 8.50. But as the river flows through the city limits, the
value pH is generally within the prescribed limit of 6.5 to 8.5. Thus, as per UP State
Govt., it is clear that the use of caustic soda by 'dhobis' is not adversely effecting the
river water quality in Lucknow city.
However, the Ministry has taken up the matter with UP Government
and UP Pollution Control Board, who have been asked to devise appropriate measures
to contain effluents being discharged into the river from dhobi
ghats.
In this context, it is also submitted that the Japan International Cooperation Agency

63
(JICA) is providing technical assistance for a Development Study relating to "Water
Quality Management Plan for Ganga river" with focus on
4 major towns of Kanpur, Allahabad, Varanasi and Lucknow. The Consultants selected
by JICA for carrying out the study started their work from March, 2003 and are
scheduled to complete it by March, 2005. Under the study, Master Plans and Feasibility
Studies (basically Detailed Project Reports) are being prepared for sewerage and non-
sewerage components for the 4 towns. In the meantime, we have already initiated the
process of trying to procure external funding through the Japan Bank for International
Cooperation for the projects being prepared by the JICA Study Team under the Study.
Relocation of traditional dhobi ghats to inland areas of the town and construction of
proper dhobi ghats with appropriate wastewater treatment facilities is one of the
proposed  non-sewerage component of the Master Plans and Feasibility Studies
being prepared under the Study. It is proposed to implement a pilot project
to develop a right process to adopt a sustainable 'constructed dhobi  ghat' followed
by implementation of full scale project, if the pilot project succeeds.
The UP State Govt. have also informed that the plastic waste in the sewage is
retained at screens at sewage pumping stations and as well as at the STP, which is
collected by Lucknow Nagar Nigam and suitably disposed of as a part of their solid
waste management.
(Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004)
KANPUR
Recommendation
The  Committee have noted that though around 360 mld sewage water was
flowing in to the river Ganga in Kanpur city, the existing arrangement could tap only
171 mld waste water including 9 mld of (tannery waste water) in Jajmau under GAP-
I. The Committee during their study visit learnt that due to various operational
problems in the 130 mld Jajmau STP, only 55 mld was being treated at the moment
due to various operational problems like choked sewer, erratic power supply and
O&M problems of STPs. Having seen the site position and quality of effluent being
treated there, the Committee desire that the sample of the treated water from Jajmau
STP may be got tested again in an independent competent laboratory to check
authenticity of the claims by the UPJN. The Committee express grave apprehension
that with 354 tannery units in Kanpur, there is danger of the wastewater in the city
having alarming levels of heavy metals like chromium. Out of these as per the latest
information given by Uttar Pradesh Government, while the 210 chrome tanning
tanneries are required to install chromium recovery plants to save them from closure,
only 57 tanneries had installed such plants and in 12 tanneries, the chromium recovery
plants were since under construction. The Committee took serious view of the fact
that though 93 tanneries were ordered to be closed by the UPPCB but none had
been closed so far. The Committee are concerned to note that even the existing
STPs in the city, have been facing problems of chemical erosion of mechanical parts
due to untreated tannery waste mixing into domestic sewer lines. What has perturbed

64
the Commtitee is that a project for resolving this problem amounting to Rs. 1.34
crore for Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) for group of small tannery units
devised by Central Leather Research Institute has not yet been approved by the
Government of India. The Committee therefore reiterate that the Ministry of
Environment & Forests, the Central Pollution Control Board, the UPPCB and as well
as District Administration must act fast to prevent deadly chemicals from further
polluting the river and the surrounding areas the severity of which has reached
such alarming proportions that due to presence of chromium in the irrigation water,
the crops grown in Kanpur area were not getting good renumeration in the market.
The Committee express gave concern over the fact that the tannery-owners were
not complying with the directive to set up chromium recovery plants and the orders
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court for bearing 50 per cent operation and maintenance
cost of the 36 mld CETPs, causing unabated pollution in the river.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.32 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Presently about 360 mld municipal sewage and 9 mld tannery wastewater is being
generated in Kanpur city. Under GAP Phase-I, facilities has been created to treat 171
mld of wastewater, including 9 mld tannery wastewater in 3 STPs
(5 mld UASB STP, 36 mld UASB CETP and 130 mld STP). For the balance about 200
mld municipal sewage, a 200 mld capacity STP has been proposed under GAP Phase-
II.
The performance monitoring of the various STPs constructed under Ganga Action
Plan in various States is being carried out once a month by independent organizations
appointed by NRCD. In Kanpur, the performance monitoring is being carried out by
IIT, Kanpur. The performance monitoring reports of IIT, Kanpur for the 130 mld STP at
Jajmau for the period January to May, 2004 are enclosed at Annexure-III.
UP State Govt. have informed that as per latest situation, 84 chrome recovery
plants have been installed and 5 chrome recovery plants are under construction. 28
tanneries have also been closed as per Hon'ble Supreme Court and High Court
directives.
The scheme for installation of Common Chrome Recivery Plant for small tanneries
in Jajmau has been sanctioned by the Ministry on 28th June, 2004 at an estimated cost
of Rs. 105.27 lakhs. Under the Scheme, after installation the CCRP will recover chrome
from the chrome liquor generated in around 90 small tanneries in Jajmau. The Central
Govt. shall bear Rs. 73.69 lakhs or 70% of the capital cost of the scheme, while the
remaining 30% cost (Rs. 31.58 lakhs) shall be equally between the Kanpur Nagar
Nigam and the tanners. The scheme is to be completed by 30th June, 2005.
The 36 mld CETP for treatment of combined (domestic and tannery waste)
wastewater constructed under GAP Phase-I is being maintained by UP State Govt. As
per the Hon'ble Supreme Court instructions the O&M cost of the CETP is to be borne
by Kanpur Nagar Nigam and tannery owners in ratio 50:50. As per information provided
by UP State Govt., the total expenditure incurred up to March, 2004 on O&M of the

65
CETP is Rs. 1853.928 lakhs, out of which only Rs. 303.599 lakhs have been reimbursed
by Kanpur Nagar Nigam and tanneries to State Govt.. The details of expenditure,
receipt and balance are given as under:
(Rs. in lakhs)
Beneficiary Share in expenditure Expenditure Amount Balance to
to be borne upto 3/2004 received be received
Kanpur 50% 926.964 8.015 918.949
Nagar Nigam
Tanneries 50% 926.964 295.584 631.380
Total 1853.928 303.599 1550.329
The UP State Govt. have informed that for realization of the dues (O&M expenses)
from tanneries, 102 RCs were issued to the different tannery owners, against which
Jajmau Tanners Association filed a writ in Hon'ble High Court, Allahabad challenging
the issue of RCs for realization of dues. Hon'ble High Court, Allahabad has ordered
that no coercive action shall be taken by the Respondent. The matter is being pursued
by the UP Government and its implementing agencies in the Hon'ble High Court.
Under these circumstances the recovery of dues from tannery owners is affected
adversely.
(Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004)

66
ANNEXURE-III
Month: January, 2004 STP Location: Jajmau, Kanpur Treatment Process: ASP Process
Capacity: 130 mld Sampling Dates: 19—22 January, 2004
Date Flow, Filtered BOD, Total BOD, Filtered COD, Total COD, TSS, VSS, TDS, T otal Coliform, Faecal Coliform,
mld mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 MPN/100ml MPN/100ml
Inf Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff
Primary 19,20 28.00 132 105 210 174 245 235 1152 735 998 164 614 142 1988 1720 1.60E+09 2.40E+07 1.60E+08 7.00E+06
Settling 20,21 32.00 156 123 340 216 336 278 1152 672 524 224 404 101 2252 1926 8.00E+07 3.00E+07 3.50E+07 1.10E+07
Tank 21,22 32.00 136 101 380 198 341 291 1318 941 1660 222 684 198 1686 1382 1.40E+08 5.00E+07 8.00E+07 3.40E+06
Activated 19,20 28.00 105 20 174 63 235 59 735 147 164 105 142 84 1720 1465 2.40E+07 1.60E+06 7.00E+06 1.60E+05
Sludge 20,21 32.00 123 44 216 47 278 67 672 221 224 127 101 59 1926 1502 3.00E+07 5.00E+06 1.10E+07 3.00E+06
Process 21,22 32.00 101 25 198 53 291 85 941 282 222 132 198 89 1382 1106 5.00E+78 9.00E+06 3.40E+06 5.00E+05
Month: February, 2004 STP Location: Jajmau, Kanpur Treatment Process: ASP Process
Capacity: 130 mld Sampling Dates: 17—20 February, 2004
Date Flow, Filtered BOD, Total BOD, Filtered COD, Total COD, TSS, VSS, TDS, T otal Coliform, Faecal Coliform,
mld mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 MPN/100ml MPN/100ml
Inf Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff
Primary 17,18 25.00 162 132 470 282 487 263 1703 1239 488 246 278 86 2200 1804 2.30E+07 8.00E+07 1.10E+07 2.40E+06
Settling 18,19 35.00 156 120 444 192 469 225 2941 1006 2022 506 1196 338 1546 1376 4.00E+07 1.30E+07 1.10E+07 5.00E+06
Tank 19,20 30.00 156 72 300 165 354 157 1259 748 566 262 294 105 2068 1737 1.10E+08 1.60E+07 1.70E+07 9.00E+06
Activated 17,18 25.00 132 12 282 33 263 69 1239 147 246 65 86 47 1804 1687 8.00E+06 4.00E+06 2.40E+06 1.60E+06
Sludge 18,19 35.00 120 17 192 36 225 92 1006 65 506 65 338 44 1376 1238 1.30E+07 2.40E+06 5.00E+06 1.60E+06
Process 19,20 30.00 72 12 165 21 157 70 748 181 262 63 105 56 1737 1494 1.60E+07 5.00E+06 9.00E+06 3.00E+06

67
Month: March, 2004 STP Location: Jajmau, Kanpur Treatment Process: ASP Process
Capacity: 130 mld Sampling Dates: 17—20 March, 2004
Date Flow, Filtered BOD, Total BOD, Filtered COD, Total COD, TSS, VSS, TDS, T otal Coliform, Faecal Coliform,
mld mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 MPN/100ml MPN/100ml
Inf Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff
rimary 17,18 35.00 162 75 260 168 360 200 800 1280 328 660 118 232 1962 2192 9.00E+08 8.00E+08 1.60E+08 3.50E+07
Settling 18,19 30.00 336 138 500 300 288 184 960 1440 257 383 181 232 932 1213 2.30E+07 1.30E+07 3.00E+06 2.40E+06
T ank 19,20 35.00 156 102 430 276 280 136 1040 1520 934 962 532 566 1590 2436 2.80E+09 3.00E+08 3.00E+08 3.00E+07
Activated 17,18 35.00 75 15 168 45 200 80 1280 144 660 99 232 44 2192 1860 8.00E+08 1.60E+06 3.50E+07 9.00E+05
Sludge 18,19 30.00 138 20 300 45 184 64 1440 96 383 58 232 42 1213 844 1.30E+07 9.00E+05 2.40E+06 2.20E+05
Process 19,20 35.00 102 19 276 39 136 57 1520 136 962 110 566 84 2436 1498 3.00E+08 2.20E+05 3.00E+07 3.30E+04
Month: April, 2004 STP Location: Jajmau, Kanpur Treatment Process: ASP Process
Capacity: 130 mld Sampling Dates: 20—23 April, 2004
Date Flow, Filtered BOD, Total BOD, Filtered COD, Total COD, TSS, VSS, TDS, T otal Coliform, Faecal Coliform,
mld mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 MPN/100ml MPN/100ml
Inf Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff
Primary 20,21 35.00 180 129 280 192 248 208 640 360 388 152 340 118 1904 1676 5.00E+07 1.30E+07 1.70E+07 1.70E+06
Settling 22,22 28.00 180 123 300 228 240 230 1006 310 381 162 288 104 2046 1776 2.30E+07 8.00E+06 1.30E+07 5.00E+06
T ank 22,23 30.00 156 108 350 198 228 197 551 350 304 116 212 88 1840 1744 1.60E+08 5.00E+07 9.00E+07 2.80E+06
Activated 20,21 35.00 129 16 192 42 208 80 360 136 152 50 118 42 1676 1494 1.30E+07 5.00E+05 1.70E+06 3.00E+05
Sludge 21,22 28.00 123 14 228 27 230 70 310 108 162 74 104 47 1776 1598 8.00E+06 3.00E+05 5.00E+06 2.40E+05
Process 22,23 30.00 108 27 198 63 197 118 350 212 116 47 88 36 1774 1654 5.00E+07 3.00E+05 2.80E+06 1.40E+05
Month: May, 2004 STP Location: Jajmau, Kanpur Treatment Process: ASP Process
Capacity: 130 mld Sampling Dates: 25—28 May, 2004
Date Flow, Filtered BOD, Total BOD, Filtered COD, Total COD, TSS, VSS, TDS, T otal Coliform, Faecal Coliform,
mld mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 mg/1 MPN/100ml MPN/100ml
Inf Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff Inf Eff
rimary 25,26 56.00 132 72 300 138 215 104 704 345 746 250 366 110 1338 1004 2.20E+08 9.00E+07 1.40E+08 1.60E+07
Settling 26,27 28.00 192 108 370 216 210 130 484 282 328 99 167 80 1598 1374 1.60E+09 1.60E+08 2.40E+08 9.00E+07
T ank 27,28 38.00 186 108 300 156 201 122 453 249 264 100 140 84 1402 1093 1.60E+09 5.00E+08 4.00E+08 3.30E+07
Activated 25,26 56.00 72 14 138 18 104 54 345 50 250 104 110 27 1004 903 9.00E+07 1.60E+07 1.60E+07 1.60E+06
Sludge 26,27 28.00 108 15 216 42 130 61 282 77 99 26 80 22 1374 1275 1.60E+08 1.60E+07 9.00E+07 1.20E+06
Process 27,28 38.00 108 18 156 30 122 42 2489 41 100 28 84 24 1093 1023 5.00E+08 9.00E+07 3.30E+07 1.10E+06

68
Recommendation
On the issue of electric crematoria, the Committee noticed that though Kanpur city
had two such crematoria, only one crematorium was functioning right now. The other
was said to be non-functional due to non-payment of electricity bills worth Rs. 52
lakh. The Committee express their dissatisfaction over the idling of assets created
under GAP in the city and are of the view that Uttar Pradesh Government have failed
to keep their commitments of contributing matching share to GAP.  Another issue
which the Committee would like to highlight is the plight of working conditions of the
manual labourers who were seen working in the sludge without protective gear. The
Committee have also come to know that some the workers were not paid salaries for
the last 3-4 months and desired that responsibility should be fixed for such lapses.
[SI.No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.33 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The UP State Govt. have informed that presently both the electric crematoria at
Bhaironghat and Bhagwat Das Ghat in Kanpur town are in operation and bills for
power supply are being paid regularly. However, the electric crematorium constructed
at Shuklaganj on the opposite bank of river Ganga (and which does not fall within the
municipal limit of Kanpur town) is non-operational due to non-availability of power
supply. The matter is being constantly pursued with the UP Government to make the
electric crematorium operational at an early date.
The UP State Govt. have also informed the following:
(i) All necessary safety equipments are regularly being made available to
the manual labour who are working in the plant sludge area.
(ii) The salaries of workers have been paid and now payment is being made to
the workers regularly.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004 -NCRD
dated 30-11-2004]
ALLAHABAD
Recommendation
The committee are informed that in Allahabad against 210 mld (2002) total domestic
sewage being generated, treatment capacity of only 60 mld had been created under
GAP-1 with the completion of all the 19 schemes costing
Rs. 30.12 crore that had been started in the year 1986 in the city. The Committee,
however, have taken a serious view for the Ministry of Environment & Forests' inapt
handling of Naini STP issue which had not only Rs. 1.20 extra but also resulted in time

69
overrun of five years though one of the reason was that the contractors, M/s Driplex,
New Delhi could not complete the work as per agreement. The Committee take a
strong view of the fact that Ministry of Environment & Forests' policies have not
been strong and convincing enough to ensure timely completion of schemes and
would like them to be very strict while dealing with such matters in future and fix
responsibility for the delay in implementation of various schemes under GAP-I & II.
Further, the Committee observe that at the STPs at Allahabad, the full flow of waste
water was not coming in due to long hours of powers cuts as well as worn-out
condition of sewer lines which nontheless lead to nonfunctioning of STPs thereby
nullifying the very objectives of installing them. The Committee, therefore, urge the
Ministry of Environment & Forests and Uttar Pradesh State Government, implementing
agencies and local bodies to assess the gravity of such a situation and take remedial
action on priority basis in a time bound manner.
[SI.No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.34 of  62nd Report of PAC
 (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The total sewage generated in Allahabad as per UP State Govt.'s estimates for the
year 2002 is 210 mld. Arrangements for treatment of 60 mld sewage has been made
under GAP-I,while a STP of 29 mld capacity has been sanctioned under GAP-II from
the present available allocation for Allahabad town. To tackle the balance pollution of
the river from Allahabad, the Master Plan and Feasibility Study for sewerage and non-
sewerage components in the town is under preparation by the JICA Study Team in
close collaboration with UP Governments and its concerned agencies under the
ongoing JICA assisted Development Study on Water Quality Management Plan for
Ganga river. The process of trying to procure external funding through the Japan
Bank for International Cooperation for the projects being prepared by the JICA Study
Team under the Study has already been initiated.
With regards to the Naine STP, the UP State Govt. have informed the following:
The work for the construction of 60 mld STP at Naini including imported power
package amounting to Rs. 798.50 lakhs was awarded to M/s Driplex Water Engineer
Limited, New Delhi after a global tender. The date of start of work was 25.8.90 and the
date of completion was 24.2.93. The contract bond of the said work consists of five
volumes in which one complete volume is full of conditions. The firm totally failed to
fulfill their obligation as per the contract. The firm could complete only 47% of the
work in stipulated period as mentioned above. For failure on the part of the contractor
to complete the work in time there is penalty clause in the bond and according the firm
was asked vide GM, Allahabad letter No. 505/449-Driplex/32 dated 21.4.94 (copy
enclosed as Annexure-IV) to discontinue the work under clause 7.20.2 of vol. II of
the contract bond and the firm was intimated that remaining work will be got completed
at their risk and cost through what ever means and agencies that may be found
expedient in accordance with the provision of the contract bond. In the meantime, the
firm put their representation to Ministry of Environment & Forests, Govt. of India to
reconsider the case. The Ministry constituted a Committee under the convenership
of Dr. Biswas, Chairman, CPCB to look into the matter. Based on the recommendations

70
of the Biswas Committee, the decision taken in the steering Committee of  NRCA and
the advice of Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Environment &Forests was of the
view that further disputes and litigation which would cause further delays must be
avoided at all costs and accordingly directed UP State Govt. that the balance work be
completed by the same contractor after excluding the power package (copy of Ministry
of Environment & Forests letter No. J-13012/3/-GPD (V ol.IV) dated 22.5.1995 is enclosed
as Annexure-V). Thus, the contract bond was revived and after deducting the cost of
the imported power package the work for the construction of 60 mld STP , excluding
imported power package amounting to Rs. 558.50 lakhs (Rs. 798.50 lakhs-Rs. 240.00),
was carried out by the firm M/s Driplex Water Engineering Limited, New Delhi.
Moreover, it is submitted that in the year 1987 when the tender for the construction
of 60 mld STP (including power package) was invited, at that time indigenous power
engines were not being manufactured in India. Therefore, at that time there was no
option but to purchase imported Engines. But when the manufacture of the same
started in India only then it was advised to delete the imported power from the scope
of work of the contractor to save foreign currency.
It is to mention here as per NRCD's sanction order dated 24.9.96 for the 60 mld
Naini STP,  the estimated cost of indigenous power package was Rs. 360.00 lakhs
whereas the deduction for imported power package from original contract bond has
been done for an amount of Rs. 240.00 lakhs. Thus, an expenditure of Rs. 120.00 lakhs
(Rs. 360.00 lakhs-Rs. 240.00 lakhs) was involved in the above items, but the overall
expenditure incurred till date is within the sanctioned estimate. However, it is submitted
that originally there was provision of imported power package in the estimate. As per
conditions of the agreement, State Govt. had to provide protection to the contractor
to cover the currency risk. For protection purposes, the contractor quoted the maximum
amount of foreign currency as 12,00,000 pound sterling as on the date of tender i.e.
date of quoting the prices by contractor which is 29.9.1987. If imported power package
would have been purchased, then apart from the cost of power package an additional
amount to protect the selling exchange rate would have also be given to the firm.
Considering this, the comparison of the cost of imported power package
v/s indigenous is shown as below:
Sl. Items Imported power package Indigenous
No. (Rs. lakhs) power package
(Rs. lakhs)
1. Cost 240.00 360.00
2. Additional amount to 1200000x (52.98*-21.565**) —
protect the selling = 376.98
exchange rate
Total (1+2) 616.98 360.00
Say 617.00 360.00
* Conversion value of pound sterling to Rs. on date of administrative approval and expenditure
sanction i.e. 24.9.1996.
** Conversion value of pound sterling to Rs. as 29.9.1997.

71
Thus, as can be seen there is eventually a saving of Rs. 257.00 lakhs (Rs.617.00
lakhs -Rs.360.00 lakhs) by purchasing the indigenous power package.
The issue of delay in implementation of GAP schemes is being constantly taken up
with the UP Government and its implementing agencies through regular review meetings
at various levels and they have been asked to ensure timely completion of all sanctioned
schemes.
The UP state Govt. have informed that there is average 4 hours per day power cut
in Allahabad town. Due to power cut there water production from tubewells in the
area from which the wastewater reaches Naini STP. The average production of waste
water in the area is around 51 mld, which reaches Naini STP . UP state Govt. have also
informed that DG sets have been installed and are functional at all the sewage pumping
stations feeding wastewater to Naini STP , so that there is no over flow of sewage from
sewage pumping stations in the river, during the period of breakdown in power supply.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004 -NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]

ANNEXURE-IV
No. 505/449-Driplax/32 date: 21.4.97
To,
M/s Driplex Water Engineering (Int'l) Ltd,
Driplex House,
9-Panchseel Community Centre,
New Delhi-110017.
Sub:— C.B. No. 4/G.N./90-91 for construction of 60 mld sewage Treatment  Plant at
Naini, Allahabad.
Dear Sir,
Whereas the aforesaid contract was awarded to you vide undersigned's letter No.
1487/449/64 dated 22.8.90 and operation there of started w.e.f. 25.8.90 and the date of
completion was 24.2.93.
Whereas the progress of the work was invariably found much below the
performance stipulated in the contract as will be seen from the succeeding paragraph.
Whereas you were constantly reminded vide the following letters to expedite
progress, fulfull your committments as per contractual provisions and agreed
programme.
1  Letter No. 496/486-STP Naini/98 dt. 12.4.91
2. " 768/449-Driplex/dt. 3.6.91
3. " 1013/449/23 dt. 19.7.91
4. " 1114/449-Driplex/40 dt. 5.8.91
5. " 35/449-Driplex/1 dt. 4.1.92
6. " 56/449-Driplex/20 dt. 23.1.92
7. " 165/449-Driplex/42 dt. 12.2.92
8. " 173/449-Driplex/44 dt. 15.2.92
9. " 132/449-Driplex/95 dt. 6.4.92
10. " Comp-VNS/449-Driplex dt. 8.10.1992
11. " 870/449-Driplex/263 dt. 2.11.92
12. " 941/449-Driplex/283 dt. 18.11.92
13. " 168/449-Driplex/38 dt. 27.2.93
14. " 214/449-Driplex/44 dt. 22.3.93
72

15. " 338/449-Driplex/87 dt.13.5.93
16. " 418/449-Driplex/136 dt. 25.6.93
17. " 493/449-Driplex/145 dt. 13.7.93
18. " 603/449-Driplex/158 dt. 7.8.93
19. " 774/449-Driplex/177 dt. 28.9.93
20. " 1018/449-Driplex/190 dt. 12.11.93
21. " 435/449-Driplex/31 dt. 7.4.94
Whereas, time being the essence of the contract, you have totally failed to fulfill
your obligations as per contract and the progress is only about 47% against a time
lapse of more than 100% till 20th April '94 and a number of items e.g. control rooms for
Aeration tank, Digester, Thickened sludge pump house, Rising main for Treated
Effluent Pumps, Interconnection of Rising mains, Aerators moters for Aerator, sludge
pumps, motor for pumps, screw pumps, motors for screw pumps flow measuring
device, flow meter, flow indicator have not even been started at all or the progress is
virtually negligible.
Y ou are hereby directed to discontinue work under clause 7.20.2 of volume II of the
contract bond. Please note that the remaining work will hence forth be get completed
at your risk and cost provisions contained in clause 7.20.2 read with clause 7.19.2 and
other relevant clauses of the contract bond, through whatever means and agencies
that may be found expedient. You are further advised to depute your authorised
representative at site on 6th May 1994 to get up-to-date measurments recorded and
materials at site verified failing which this will be done in your absence and will be
binding on you.
Your's faithfully,
Sd/-
(Sharad Kumar Singh)
General Manager
73

ANNEXURE-V
Hkkjr ljdkj
Government of India BY SPPED POST nwjHkk"k@Telephone:
i;kZoj.k ,oa ou ea=ky; rkj% 'kq)ty
Ministry of Environment & Forests Telegram: SHUDHJAL
jk"Vªh; unh laj{k.k funs'kky; QSDl /Fax: 4360009
National River Conservation Directorate VsysDl/ Telex: 31-74065 GPD IN
i;kZoj.k Hkou] dsUnzh; dk;kZy; ifjlj]
Paryavaran Bhawan, C.G.O. Complex
yksnh jksM] ubZ fnYyh&110003
Lodi Road, New Delhi-110003
No.J-13012/3/87-GPD (Vol. IV) Dated the 22nd May, 1995.
To
The Secretary, Urban Development,
Government of Uttar Pradesh
Lucknow.
Subject: STP contracts at Kanpur & Allahabad—Balance works to be completed
by M/s Driplex—orders issued.
Sir,
The delay in the completion of the STP contracts at Kanpur & Allahabad, the
largest under the Ganga Action Plan, has been a matter of great concern to this
Ministry. During the execution of these Contracts a number of disputes arose between
UPJN & the Contractor M/s Driplex which led to their frustration. UP Government in
their letter of 4.5.94 informed that the UPJN had issued notice for determining these
contracts, and getting the work completed through debitable agency at the risk and
the cost of the Contractor.
2. To avoid the likely litigations leading to further indefinite delays and with a view
to finding a feasible solution for early completion of these works, the Ministry of
Environment and Forests. Government of India (MOEF) after examining the matter in
it's entirety, appointed a Committee (Biswas Committee) under the Convenership of
Dr. Biswas, Chairman, CPCB; and Joint Secretary, Union Ministry of Urban
Development, Secretary, Urban Development, U.P., Secretary, Environment, U.P and
Director, NTPC as it's members. This Committee was to advise the Steering Committee
of the CGA which is competent to accord approval to the projects under Ganga
Action Plan. In view of the Appointment of the above said Committee, the UP Govt.
were advised in GPDs letter of  April 18, 1994 not to determine the Contract or to
encash the Bank guarantees until a decision is taken in the matter and the present
Contractor should be allowed to continue the work.
74

75
3.  The Biswas Committee, among others, recommended that the balance work in
both the contracts be completed through the present Contractor  viz    M/s Driplex
Water Engineering Co. Ltd. and to exclude the power package from the scope of the
present Contract besides substituting other imported components with indigenous
ones. World  Bank, the funding agency of these projects have also concurred with the
above suggestions subject to some stipulations.
4. The report of Biswas Committee was discussed in the 29th Steering Committee
which referred it to a sub-committee for further examination. The  representative of
U.P. Government, while opposing in principle the compensation proposed by Biswas
Committee, has agreed to go along the decision taken by the Steering Committee.
5. The Sub Committee, keeping in view the Biswas Committee's report, recommended
a package, inter alia, comprising of compensation for lost deemed export incentive
and escalations on E&M and civil works.
6. The 30th Steering Committee took note of Sub Committee's as well as Biswas
Committee's report and authorised the Chairman to get the matter examined by JS&FA
of MOEF and submit final proposals to the Ministry of Finance. The observations of
Ministry of Finance have since been received.
7.1 The Ministry of Environment & Forests has carefully considered the proposal
in the light of the advice given by the Ministry of Finance and agree with their
observation that any course of action should be within the framework of the Contract.
The delay in completion of these important projects has already attracted a great deal
of criticism. The Ministry is of the view that further disputes and litigation which
would only cause further indefinite delays, must be avoided at all cost, and accordingly
direct that the balance work be completed through the present Contractor after
excluding the power package as advised by the Committee set up by MOEF. The
aspect relating to compensation may be referred to arbitration as per the provision of
the Contract and parties to cooperate to avoid undue delay in finalising the award.
7.2 The  other issues having no financial implication and which had been deliberated
by the Committee, should also be settled for work to progress unhindered. Y ou may
like to seek necessary extension for the guarantee from the Contractor.
7.3 You are requested to take necessary further action to start the work immediately.
Contractual aspects in this regard may be finalised at your end in consultation with
competent legal authority.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(J.C. Kala)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India
Copy to:
1. Chairperson, UPJN, Lucknow.
2. Managing Director, UPJN, Lucknow.
75

76
Recommendation
The Committee have also noted that there was direct discharge from a drain coming
from the Army establishment carrying polluted water directly into the Sangam area.
They, therefore, urge the officials to take up this matter with the Defence Ministry on
priority basis so that they could install a STP to treat their wastewater prior to its
release into the river. Furthermore, the Committee desire that elaborate arrangements
should be made for compulsory and effective sewage water treatment in the new and
upcoming residential colonies by means of formulating plans to set up more STPs,
Oxidation ponds and fishponds to keep the rive pollution under control. The Committee
also observe that the Ministry of Environment & Forests and the State Government
officials had erred in not having taken enough cautious steps in installing a
pumping station at Lukarganj whose inadequately installed outgoing sewer has been
causing over flow from manholes. The Committee would like the Ministry of
Environment & Forests to be more careful while approving DPRs in future.
[Sl.No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.36 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It has been informed by UP State Govt. that the concerned Army officials have
been requested to install a STP to treat the wastewater of the drain which emerges out
from the army establishment and directly discharges into the Sangam area. The Army
officials have assured to give highest priority to this issue.
UP State Govt. has also informed that the Allahabad Development Authority has
been asked for setting up necessary STPs in new and upcoming residential colonies.
The Lukarganj SPS is nearly 45 years old. Its renovation works were carried out in
the year 1989 under GAP-I. UP State Govt. have informed that the pumping capacity
of Lukarganj SPS and carrying capacity of its rising main is sufficient to meet present
sewage  discharge. But due to limited carrying capacity of outgoing  22"x33" sewer
line, there is overflow from its manholes and sewage accumulates in the nearby
drains. The SPS is maintained by UP State Govt., where as the outgoing sewer line is
maintained by Jal Sansthan, Allahabad. At present no rectification work is needed in
SPS at Lukarganj, where as for rectification in carrying capacity of outgoing sewer,
the provision for extension of existing rising main to another existing 54" brick sewer
which is running parallel to 22"x33" sewer and has sufficient carrying capacity has
been made in revised PFR costing Rs. 234.80 crore prepared by UP Government/UP
State Govt. however, during a recent meeting with the JICA Study Team in Allahabad,
the General Manager, Allahabad Jal Sansthan informed them that the existing 54"
brick sewer has recently been collapsed and is not in a good condition. Therefore, in

77
view of above the possibility of another proposal is being explored by UP State Govt.
and Allahabad Jal Sansthan.
In this context, it is also submitted that the Japan International Cooperation agency
(JICA) is providing technical assistance for a Development Study relating to "Water
Quality Management Plan for Ganga river" with focus on 4 major towns of Kanpur,
Allahabad, V aranasi and Lucknow. The Consultants selected by JICA for carrying out
the study started their work from March, 2003 and are scheduled to complete it by
March, 2005. Under the study, Master Plans and Feasibility Studies (basically Detailed
Project Reports) are being prepared for sewerage and non-sewerage components for
the 4 towns in order to tackle the balance pollution of river Ganga/Gomati in these
towns in a comprehensive and holistic manner. We have also initiated the process
of trying to procure external funding through the Japan Bank for International
Cooperation for the projects being prepared by the JICA Study Team under the Study.
The recommendation of the Committee about the Ministry being more careful in
future in approving DPRs has been noted. The UP State Govt. have also been asked
to ensure that all DPRs prepared by their field units are properly appraised and vetted
in the Appraisal Cell at UP State Govt. Headquarters before being sent to NRCD in
future.
[Ministry of Environment &Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
 dated 30-11-2004]
V ARANASI
Recommendation
The Committee notice that the cause of the pollution of river Ganga act V aranasi is
due to different activities along the ghats such as bathing, washing of clothes, open
defecation, cattle wallowing, disposal of dead bodies, dust and garbage and disposal
of flowers and leaves and other "pooja Samagree" from various temples, which is
estimated to be nearly 10 tonnes per day. The Committee have been informed that
under GAP-I, pollution abatement efforts were taken in V aranasi with the objective to
intercept and divert 122 mld domestic wastewater and set up treatment capacity of 102
mld. Accordingly 34 schemes were devised which covered interception, diversion
and treatment of sewage, low cost sanitation, river from development, water quality
monitoring etc. Under GAP Phase-I, the UPJN undertook renovation of existing 5
SPS, rehabilitation of Assi and Konia MPS, construction of Sulabh Complexes at the
sanctioned cost of Rs. 45.11 crore. The Committee are of the view that a realistic study
of the actual ground situation was not undertaken at the time of drafting of the Ganga
Action Plan which led to escalation of costs in all the cities in UP where the works
under GAP were implemented. The Committee observe that the GAP schemes should
have been formulated anticipating the sewerage conditions prevailing in the cities at

78
least 25 years later. Even though the representatives of the Ministry of Environment
informed that the existing sewerage manual, pertaining to GAP, directed that the
sewer lines, once laid, should be able to handle wastewater up to next 30 years. Dut to
time and cost overruns, the implementation of GAP as a measure to keep water of river
Ganga at bathing standards is going to be a never ending exercise. The Committee
observe that the cost of maintaining STPs in V aranasi at Rs. 7.5 crore per annum is
quite high and without devising a mechanism for making STPs and other assets as a
source of revenue by way of "users pay" and "beneficiaries pay" principles and also
by way of selling its useful by-products, there is no other way for the States to bear
such huge operating cost of assets. As in the case of V aranasi, the Committee urge
that sewer tax may be levied in other cities as well, under a sound mechanism. Taking
note of inadequate monitoring of GAP works in almost every place, the Committee
desire that at the State level, Governments should find out the snags that have been
hampering constitution and effective functioning of Citizens Monitoring Committees
(CMCs) for each town, as per the direction of the NRCD issued in March, 1995, which
could monitor the execution and timely completion of the schemes and also generate
public awareness and participation.
[Sl.No. XV Appendix-1, Para 15.37 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The pollution of the river from different activities along the ghats such as bathing,
washing of clothes, open defecation, cattle wallowing, disposal of dead bodies, dust
and garbage including disposal of flowers, leaves and other 'puja samgree' is matter
of great concern. While pollution of the river from certain activities like open defecation,
disposal of dead bodies and washing of clothes can be reduced to a certain extent by
implementation of schemes relating to low cost sanitation, crematoria and relocation
of dhobi ghats, control of non-point sources of pollution is a municipal function to be
carried out by the local body. The Ministry is rigorously pursuing with the UP State
Government and its local bodies for taking necessary action to control the pollution
of the river from non-point sources. Public awareness and participation is an important
step in ensuring that pollution from non-point sources is controlled.
It is submitted that as per the present Guidelines issued by NRCD for preparation
of DPRs, all the civil works such as sewerlines, pumping station etc. are to be
constructed for a design period of 30 years except that for STP which is to be
constructed for a design period of 10 years, with a provision for adding on additional
modules in future as and when required. The electrical and mechanical works are to be
designed for a period of 15 years, because the pumping plants usually have a life of 15
years.
The implementation of GAP-II at V aranasi got delayed due to non-settlement of
the issue relating to the selection of one of the two alternative proposals for V aranasi
(one proposal was from the UP State Govt./Government of UP and the other proposal
from Sankat Mochan Foundation, an NGO of V aranasi) and the continued litigation

79
with Sankat Mochan Foundation. The delay in the implementation of GAP-II has
aggravated the problems of pollution of the river at V aranasi. Against the present
approved cost of Rs. 45.05 crore,  4 schemes amounting to Rs. 41.61 crore have been
sanctioned for Varanasi. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its hearing on 10.4.2003 disposed
of the Court case in the matter and vacated all the stays granted earlier on
implementation of works. Thus, subsequently work on two schemes have been started
by UP State Govt. and tendering process for the remaining two sanctioned schemes
is ongoing.
To tackle the balance pollution of the river from V aranasi, the Master Plan and
Feasibility Study for sewerage and non-sewerage components in the town is under
preparation by the JICA Study Team in close collaboration with UP Government and
its concerned agencies under the ongoing JICA assisted Development Study on
Water Quality Management Plan for Ganga river. The process of trying to procure
external funding through the Japan Bank for International Cooperation for the projects
being prepared by the JICA Study Team under the Study  for V aranasi town has
already been initiated.
The issue of sustainability of the project and proper O&M of the assets created
under various river action plans is being repeatedly taken up with the various State
Governments, including UP Government during different meetings held with them at
different levels, including the NRCA meetings chaired by the Hon'ble Prime Minister.
The State Governments have been asked to take steps for augmentation of resources
for maintaining assets through amalgam of strategies like taxation, sale of treated
water, deployment of assets for revenue raising, privatization of maintenance of
facilities, etc. The States may also approach their State Finance Commission to earmark
funds for O&M of assets through devolution process. The States have also been
informed that innovative ways of raising resources for O&M will be supported by
Government of India.
The UP State Govt. have informed that as far as sewer tax is concerned, this is
already levied at the rate of 3% of annual rental value and is collected by the respective
Jal Sansthans in various towns. However, the State Government is trying to strengthen
the financial condition of local bodies, so that they are able to bear O&M cost of
pollution control works. State Government is also exploring the possibility to increase
the revenue from sale of useful bye-products and by way of imposing other revenue
charges using the 'users pay' and 'beneficiary pay' principles.
As a part of the JBIC assisted Yamuna Action Plan, the Ministry is supporting the
Agra Nagar Nigam Municipal Reform Project, under which efforts are being made by
the Agra Nagar Nigam in close collaboration with consultants appointed for the
project to increase the revenue generation in the town and make some institutional
changes in the structure of the Nagar Nigam to improve its efficiency. The project is
under implementation and it is hoped that its results could be of use in replication in
other towns.
The JICA Study Team while preparing the Master Plan and Feasibility Study in the
four towns of UP are also looking critically into the sustainability aspects related to
the project. An institutional development and capacity building plan for proper O&M

80
of the assets already created/to be created in V aranasi under the GAP project is under
preparation in collaboration with UP Government and its concerned agencies under
the Study.
 In compliance to the report of PAC and as per direction of NRCD issued in March
1995, the UP State Govt. have informed that the meeting of Citizens Monitoring
Committee is now being held for generating public awareness and participation,
including monitoring for timely completion of the schemes related with Ganga Action
Plan.
[Ministry of Environment &Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
 dated 30-11-2004]
E. BIHAR
    PA TNA
Recommendation
Despite claims and counter claims regarding Bihar government's inability to ensure
optimum utilization of assets created under GAP, the Committee are concerned to
note that Bihar government have not been able to complete two schemes under GAP-
I. STPs at East Zone Patna and Munger, though financed 100 per cent by the Central
Government till date, after a lapse of more than  13 years of its scheduled date of
completion ostensibly due to land acquisition, disputes, even though GAP-I was
officially declared closed on 31.03.2000. The Committee are shocked to know that Rs.
1.17 crore out of the GAP funds had been deposited in a personal account of the
Managing Director, Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad between the period 1986-2000 despite
the fact that Bihar Government have a suitable mechanism to ensure effective utilization
of funds released to the implementing agencies.  The Committee, therefore, observe
that by claiming  that no financial irregularity exists in the expenses incurred  by
implementing agencies, Bihar government, unfortunately though, are tyring to conceal
glaring financial irregularities committed by its implementing agencies instead of
bringing the offender to book. The Committee, therefore, desire that repsonsibility be
fixed for such a lapse and the Committee be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
The Committee also desired that a detailed report on the reasons for non-functioning
of GAP schemes and those responsible  for the same as well as other financial
irregularities may be sent to them along with the provisions made or contemplated for
the proper O&M of the STPs, Ecs and other assets created in the State. What has
caused more concern to the Committee is that no sewage treatment scheme has been
sanctioned to the State under GAP-II as yet particularly when GAP-II was originally
scheduled for completion by December 2001. In this context the Committee are
perturbed to have the contradictory statements made by Ministry of Environment &
Forests and Bihar government. While Ministry of Environment & Forests are insisting
that State governments are very slow in the preparation of DPRs and very often that
too, not as per the norms prescribed  by them; Bihar government have submitted that
they were able to submit DPRs within the time limit without any major problem but
schemes could not be sanctioned due to frequent observations made by NRCD from
time to time. This is almost the same  in the case of Uttar Pradesh also. The Committee
therefore, while urging Ministry of Environment & Forests to issue clear cut parameters

81
and guidelines for ensuring proper preparation of DPRs by  States at one go, would
like to be apprised of the comprehensive details as to what has gone wrong in the
case of DPRs submitted by  Bihar Government.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-I, Para 15.38 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Govt. of Bihar has intimated that the amount of Rs. 1.17 crore, out of the GAP
funds, was actually kept in the SBI Account of the BRJP , which is linked with Treasury.
This is not a personal account  of the Managing Director,  Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad
and there is no question to keep the said amount in personal account of the Managing
Director, Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad between the period of 1986-2000. They have
mentioned that fund in the head of  State Plan  was released during that period, which
was also kept in that account.
They have also mentioned that proper O&M of the assets under GAP-I in the State
was affected and the assets were non-functional for some time due to financial crunch
and resource of the State Govt.
They have intimated  that 5 Nos. of following STP under GAP-I have been functional
and operate regularly since 2000.
(1) STP, Saidpur
(2) STP, Pahari
(3) STP, Beur
(4) STP, Chapra
(5) STP, Bhagalpur
The State Govt. has intimated that fund has been made available to the BRJP in the
year 2003-04 for completion of 2 Nos. of  in complete STPs viz., (i) STP, Karmali Chak
(East Zone), Patna and (ii) STP, Munger. Remaining work of the both incomplete
schemes have been started and are in progress,  which are to be completed by August
2004.
They  have also intimated that inspite of the financing crunch of the State Govt.
fund to the tune of  Rs. 270 lakh for operation and maintenance of these assets  is
being regularly  released by the State Govt. since last two years. All STPs have been
made functional. Additional fund of Rs. 199 Lakh also has been sanctioned  and
released by the State Govt. for  the special repairs of the different components of
projects of STPs/I&Ds created  under GAP-I to the Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad. These
special repair  works  are in progress and  are to be completed by October 2004. After
completion of these works, all  projects of STPs/I&Ds will be functional to their  full
capacity.
In case of Bihar, DPRs of 12 sewage schemes under GAP-II, submitted by the
BRJP, lacked in important details and requisite information and also commitment of
the State Govt. to bear O&M and land cost, wherever applicable, not furnished
therewith,which are necessary for processing the proposals. These DPRs have been
sent back to the State to rectify them.

82
While processing the DPRs submitted by the State of Bihar, it has been observed
that the DPRs, as submitted, lack in vital details and information including certification
and procedural requirements by the concerned implementing agencies. This proves
as a handicap to process the DPRs for necessary sanction.
With a view to streamline consideration of the DPRs received in the NRCD for
NRCP works from the various State Govts., the NRCD has approved check lists
for DPRs, to facilitate proper preparation of the DPRs by the implementing agencies
and to ensure that all important details and  pre-requisite information is furnished
by the proponent at the time of submission of DPRs. These checklists have been
prepared to serve as a guidance to ensure the availability of all requisite information
for purpose of processing of the DPRs.
Accordingly, these checklists have been provided to the BRJP on 9.2.2004 and
they have been requested to submit new/recasted DPRs to this Directorate through
the State Govt. in future, along with duly filled up checklists and commitment of the
State Govt. to bear O&M and land cost, wherever applicable.
The State Govt. has also been requested that it should be ensured to send the
DPRs of the sewerage schemes viz., I&D and STP of a town along with that of land
acquisition so that these are sanctioned all together by the NRCD to avoid mismatch.
The status of the new/recasted DPRs for sewage scheme is yet to be submitted by
the State Govt. has been shown in the Annexure I.
The NRCD is constantly pursuing the matter with the BRJP/State Govt. for
submission of remaining DPRs under GAP-II at the earliest for all the towns of Bihar.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD, dated
30.11.2004]
F. WEST BENGAL
Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that as of March 2000, against a target of
treating 373.63 mld sewage, no achievement had been made by West Bengal
government, the total achievement under GAP in the State is in treated 341.06 mld
against a target of 750.23 mld. The Committee are informed that in GAP-II, the State
government had identified 191 schemes out of which NRCD had sanctioned 93 schemes
so far and 27 schemes are yet to be sanctioned. Another 62 more schemes are yet to
be formulated and sent to NRCD. Out of these  62 more schemes, 50 schemes relate to
public participation for which the Ministry of Environment & Forests are supposed to
give the State Governments the guidelines. The Committee, therefore, once again,
attribute the responsibility for delay in achieving targets in the State to the Ministry
of Environment & Forests who have so far failed to process the DPRs and formulating/
forwarding the guidelines for public participation in the implementation of GAP
schemes.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.40 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]

83
Action Taken
The State Government had initially identified 191 scheems of I&D, STP and non-
core sector. However, due to the severe erosion problems the State Government has
decided to drop 17 schemes of core and non-core in the towns of Dhulian, Jangipur
and Chakda. The latest of scheme under GAP-II is given below:
Total number of schemes (revised) — 174
DPRs sanctioned — 117
The State Government has recently submitted the pending DPRs of core and non-
core, which are being processed. Out of these 17 DPRs are such where the cost of
schemes is much above the cost earlier approved by the CCEA. The possibility to
meet this access cost from the intra/inter town saving is under examination. Most of
the other DPRs are of afforestation & public participation. It may be mentioned that
so far 52 schemes of I&D and STP to treat 77.48 mld of sewage have been sanctioned.
Many of the schemes are in the advance stage of completion.
The guidelines for public participation have been communicated to the State
Government and consequent to that scheme of public participation and awareness in
10 towns of West Bengal have also been sanctioned. Through the schemes of PPA,
seminars, workshops, training and awareness camp for the target group, shramdan,
exhibition and quiz programmes for students on river pollution control will be organized.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD, dated
30.11.2004]
Recommendation
The Committee are perturbed to find that execution of GAP schemes in the State had
been carried out in a very arbitrary manner. Out of the 4 schemes of interception &
diversion sanctioned by NRCD under the GAP-II, the implementing agencies could
complete none till March-2000. The stipulated dates for 3 schemes were already over.
The Committee are also concerned to note that Calcutta Metropolitan Development
Authority (CMDA), now known as Kolkata Metropolitan Development Authority, did
not furnish the details of targeted and  laid sewer lines under the GAP-II, to Audit in the
absence of which no proper evaluation of works under taken in this sector could be
done. KMDA had indulged in a series of avoidable financial losses in the construction
pumping stations at Cossipore-Chitpur, laying of sewer line at Nabadwip in 1989 without
undertaking solid investigations even though the sub soil of Nabadwip town was
sandy in nature and in approving of a defective design, the construction of lifting
station at Howrah. Further, the Committee find that in the case of laying of sewer lines
of interception & diversion and STP schemes at Behrampore for treatment of 4 mld
sewage at the total cost of Rs. 2.32 crore, no necessary spadework such as proper soil
investigation were carried out which has resulted in wasteful expenditure of Rs. 2.32
crore. In another case of substandard execution of an interception & diversion schemes
at Hooghly-Chinsurah at a cost of Rs. 4.91 crore in June 1994, the Committee noticed
that the CMDA did not cast bed concrete before laying the sewer lines. The CMDA
noticed similar road subsidence during 1998-99 along different alignments of sewer

84
lines in Bhatpara. Though CMDA took up repairing of damaged sewer lines as well as
surface roads, the work remained incomplete as of March 200. The Committee report
had concluded that the lapses were on account of negligence and failure on the part of
supervisory staff engaged in execution of these works.  The Committee while
admonishing West bengal government to strictly adhere to the financila norm's and
other guidelines of the scheme, desire them to be fully accountable for the schemes
implemented in the State.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.42 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The State Government has informed the present position as on 31st May, 2004 of
the 4(four) schemes of inter-section and diversion under GAP-II as follows:
(i) I&D scheme for Garulia Present progress is 95% and is likely to be
completed by September, 2004.
(ii) I&D scheme for Circular Canal Present progress is 96% and is likely to be
completed by December, 2004.
(iii) I&D scheme for Tolly's Nullah Present progress is 75% and is likely to be
completed by March, 2005.
(iv) I&D scheme at Naihati Though sanction for I&D scheme was
received earlier, the work could not be started
since the DPRs for the related components
viz. MPs & LS were under revision and after
receipt of revised DPRs sanction has been
issued in March, 2004. The work is likely to be
completed by December, 2005.
The scheme relating to construction of 3(three) pumping station at Cossipore-
Chitpore has already been commissioned. As submitted earlier by the State Govt., the
matter relating to realization of financial loss from the contractor is still sub-judice.
As far as the Enquiry Committee is concerned, the Committee constituted for fixing
up the responsibility has recently submitted its report in April, 2004. The report is
being examined for taking up further action.
The circumstances under which the schemes viz. laying of sewer lines at Nabadwip,
Howrah, Beharampore, Hooghly-Chinsurah and Bhatpara were executed have been
submitted earlier. To stop recurrence of similar phenomenon, necessary guidelines
have been issued to all executing departments/wings for taking up soil investigation
alongwith the alignment of the proposed sewer line. The said guidelines are being
strictly followed by all concerned.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee noted that the Ministry of Environment and Forests left to the
State Governments, the crucial determinants of sewage characteristic and
downstream water quality for selection of towns for phase-II of the GAP, which
led to non-uniformity in slection of towns by the States.  The Ministry also lacked
a mechanism to evaluate the estimations of sewage by the States, which in the
opinion of the Committee, is rather strange and highly deplorable in terms of
controlling water pollution of the river system in the country.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1  Para 15.4 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
At the time of launching of GAP-I, NRCD relied upon the report prepared by
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) on Ganga Basin published in 1984. Similarly,
at the time of launching schemes under GAP-II, data submitted by State Governments
on the sewage generation under different towns was used to select towns for the
river cleaning programmes. These data are being continuously updated based on
the latest report submitted by the State Governments and CPCB. NRCD on its own
does not have any mechanism of its own to evaluate and check the estimation of
sewage in different towns. The data given by State Governments and CPCB are
considered authentic, as they have got their own mechanism of generating this
data on a realistic basis.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
 dated 30-11-2004.]
Recommendation
The Committee have  observed that for GAP-II, the NRCD did not fix any clear
parameters in terms of  sewage characteristics or downstream water quality for selection
of town and had left this work to State Governments. The Expenditure Finance
Committee however, later on recommended that States might not include towns with
BOD (Bio-Chemical Oxygen Demand) less than   3 miligram per litre downstream of the
river. The Committee note that Uttar Pradesh Government excluded Kannauj where
BOD levels was always above 3 mg/I during 1994-99 and even touched 4.8 mg/I in
85

86
1999. In Bihar, Danapur city which discharged 8 drains with 0.6 mld of raw sewage
direct into Ganga, also was not selected. Likewise, Uluberia in West Bengal with a
BOD of 43.07 mg/I also remained excluded. The respective State Governments did not
send their names in their proposals. In this connection, the Committee are happy to
note that these towns have been included in GAP-II on the directions of Supreme
Court in its order dated 01 November 1995. The Committee feel that it was erroneous
on the part of the State Governments not to have included these towns in the first
place and advised NRCD accordingly on their own instead of intervention by the
Supreme Court in this regard.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1, Para 15.14 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It may be mentioned that generaly the BOD levels in the river Ganga at Uluberia are
below 3 mg/I due to the tidal effect in this stretch. Thus it does not violate the criteria
recommended by the Expenditure Committee that States might not include towns with
BOD (Bio-Chemical Oxygen Demand) less than  3 miligram per litre downstream of the
river.
Towns having population more than 1 lakh were identified for inclusion under
GAP-II. Population of Kannauj, U.P. & Danapur, Bihar being less than
1 lakh was not selected for the purpose. Also, the BOD of river Ganga in the stretch of
the State of Bihar is less than 3 mg/I.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee note that as per guidelines circulated by NRCD to all the State
Governments, four actual samples of water were to be taken in a month, with 3
samples on week days and the 4th sample on a 0/6 day (i.e. Sunday). The measured
sewage flow of a towns should also be cross-checked with the water supply rate,
population and interception factor to ensure that the assessment is as realistic as
possible. It was noticed  by Audit that the Ministry discontinued the water quality
monitoring due to constraints of funds. Collateral findings revealed further
deterioration of water quality in all its parameters. The coliform level exceeded in
17 out of 60 stations sampled  during 1999. The Committee wonder as to how
without water quality test checks, the schemes can be declared successfully
implemented. The main task of GAP was to reduce the pollution load on the Ganga
water but, if the samples for checking the quality of water at different stations are
stopped then the NRCD will not be able to monitor the quality of water. In the
opinion of the Committee this will, in turn, further deteriorate the quality of water
and the pollutants will not be measured to the safety level and hence, will defeat

87
the very purpose of implementing the Ganga Action Plan. Apart from ensuring
proper operationalisation of assets created under the scheme, the Committee feel
the need to strengthen mechanism and the capacity of institutions for effective
control of water pollution and waste from point source by emphasizing socio-
economic measures at the same time as using law enforcement measures. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Environment & Forests to monitor,
check and evaluate water quality of water sources and management of water
pollution continuously and systematically by  collaboration and co-operation
amongst concerned agencies.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1, Para 15.15 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The water quality monitoring of river Ganga was discontinued for the period from
October, 99 to August, 2000 and restarted from Sept./October, 2000 with a view to
utilize the data generated under the ongoing GEMS/MINARS programme of CPCB.
However, it was later observed that the WQM under CPCB's programmes do not meet
the objectives of WQM under GAP and there was delay in submission of data. The
WQM under GAP was thereafter restored from Sept./Oct. 2000.
The water quality monitoring of river Ganga is presently monitored through 5
agencies as per following details.
Sl.No. Agency/Institute Stretch Monitored
1. PCRI (BHEL), Hardwar Rishikesh-Garhmukteshwar
2. IIT, Kanpur Kannauj U/S-Kanpur D/S
3. CPCB, ZO Kanpur Allahabad U/S-Tarighat
4. Patna University, Patna Buxar-Rajmahal
The WQM is carried out once a month for all other stretches except in stretches
from Kannauj to Kanpur and Allahabad to Tarighat wherein  it has been made
intermittent twice a month. Survey of river for review of monitoring locations has also
been carried out. The performance of sewage treatment plants is an integral part of
water quality monitoring.
The water quality data along with performance data of STP is compiled and
published/periodicity of bulletin as water quality bulletin biannually.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
STATE GOVERNMENTS
A. UTTARANCHAL (RISHIKESH-HARDWAR)

88
Recommendation
The Committee in their examination of the delay in implementation of the GAP,
have noticed the failure of Uttaranchal Government in achieving targets under
GAP-II schemes. While acknowledging the fact that the creation of new
Uttaranchal State and consequential shortage of Engineers in Uttaranchal  Peyjal
Nigam. was one of the hindrances in their activities, the Committee are of the view
that much responsibility for this failure lies on Ministry of Environment & Forests'
action of approving the PFRS of the towns included in GAP-II in the year 1996-97
based on the rates of the year 1993-94  and change of norms for treated effluent
parameters in view of latest faecal coliform design parameter of the treated effluent
fixed by the NRCD. The Committee deplore the insensitive reaction of the Ministry
of Environment & Forests to the genuine problems faced by a newly created
State. The Committee are displeased to find that even if the State Government has
been putting up efforts in ensuring optimum utilization of the 3 STPs constructed
under GAP-I  & II at Hardwar, Rishikesh and Swargashram holy pilgrim centers
frequently by lakhs of people, these STPs are being overloaded due to excess
generation of sewage and therefore need to be upgraded. The Committee are
particularly anguished to note the fact that the Union Government had let lakhs of
devotees dip in highly polluted waters of the Ganga at Rishikesh by not releasing
funds for schemes submitted under special assistance from the Government of
India for pollution abatement works required to be done for on going "Ardh
Kumbh".
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1, Para 15.19 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Every effort is being made to sanction the DPRs of core schemes in Uttaranchal.
The costs of DPRS of eleven schemes submitted by the Uttaranchal Government
are much above the CCEA's approved cost. For speedy sanction of these schemes
the State Government was advised to bear the excess project cost i.e. above the
CCEA's approved cost. State Government has not submitted any commitment in
this regard and instead  requested to sanction the schemes by utilizing the intra and
inter town savings which is under consideration of the Ministry. As per the guidelines
of Ministry of Finance, such savings can only be utilized once the firm savings of
a project have been established, when the project is completed or is nearing
completion.
Further as per the decision of NRCS in March 2001, new schemes can be considered
on 70:30 funding pattern. Accordingly, State Government has been asked to provide
commitment to bear 30% of project cost for the new schemes of Hardwar-Rishikesh.
The commitment of Uttranchal Government is awaited.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]

89
B. HARYANA
Recommendation
The Committee observe that overall, the implementation of GAP is far more
satisfactory in Haryana than any other States. The Committee find that, against the
target of treating 323 MLD of sewage under GAP, YAP under GAP-II to be precise,
the achievement as of March 2000 and March 2003 were 293 and 306.50 MLD
respectively. The Committee observe that better result might have been achieved in
the State had the Government of India not accord approval of DPRs of STPs in six
additional towns as late as 10/2000. Furthermore, the Committee find that Government
of India have held up the work of construction of balance 50% of sewer at Palwal for
want of approval of revised DPR. The delay of approval of DPRs by Ministry of
Environment & Forests has become such a chronic feature that although the State
Government had submitted all the DPRs complete in all respects within the time,
NRCD delayed in approving them, with some of them pending since
September, 1999.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.24 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The DPR submitted for I&D Palwal was approved by NRCD in August 1997 and
work started immediately thereafter. However, Govt. of Haryana submitted revised
DPR in September 1999 on the ground that the scope of work enlarged by including
one more sector of HUDA (Haryana Urban Development Authority) in the proposal.
This indicated poor foresight on the part of Govt. of Haryana. The ground water
table was found at much higher level than anticipated afterwards. It was due to poor
analysis of available data on the part of Govt. of Haryana. The last reason for
submitting revised DPR was increase in cost of material. The Government of Haryana
has explained the reason for increase in cost of material. The revised DPR submitted
by Govt. of Haryana has been pending with NRCD due to lack of information. First,
the Govt. of Haryana was requested to reduce the revised cost estimates, which
they did. Second, the design of civil structure was got checked from Roorkee.
Third, the rise in ground water table was also verified by NRCD. Besides saving
from one town was not allowed to be used in other town as per NRCD rules. Due to
above mentioned reasons the revised DPR approval got delayed. All the information
has since been received and the revised DPR is under process in NRCD for approval
of competent authority. There was no delay by NRCD for processing other DPRs of
Haryana.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee find that out of target of constructing 12 STPs for treated 306.5
MLD capacity in between May 1996 to November 1997, Haryana Government could

90
complete only 8 STPs of 226 MLD by March 2000, the delay of which according to
NRCD in August, 1999, was due to non-release of  matching share during the year
1997-98 by the State. The Committee however find this reply untenable as the
implementing agency had surplus unspent funds ranging between Rs. 20.17 crore
and Rs. 27 crore during 1997-98 to  1999-2000 and also in view of the submission of the
State Government that in 1997-98 they spent Rs. 46.10 crore which was the earlier
year's balance, much more than combined amount of the Central Government releases
i.e. Rs. 25.85 crore. The Committee observe that most of the delay in implementation
of the scheme in the State was on account of non-availability of funds following
Government of India's practice of releasing funds towards the end.
[Sl.No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.26 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The funds are provided to the State Govt./implementing agencies as per the
requirement of the State Govts. during a particular quarter of the year. These
requirements against each scheme are examined in the Ministry and after taking
financial and administrative approval, the funds are released to the State Govt./
implementing agencies. The release of funds is based on examination of the utilization
certificates/demands submitted by the State Govt./implementing agencies. In case, if
the funds were not fully utilized, then the future release of funds from the Ministry is
adjusted in further release. Some amount is always required with the implementing
agencies for smooth implementation of the project.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M.No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
C. DELHI
Recommendation
The Committee have been informed that sewage estimates are based on population
and water supply rates, with the sewage generation taken as 80% of the water
supplied. Though NRCD found the criterion flawed and fixed its own criterion of
actual flow of drains at the outfalls to estimates the generation of sewage in the
town in the GAP-II. But Committee have noted that the NRCD had no mechanism to
evaluate and check the estimations of sewage by the States. It was found that the
sewage estimation of 70 mld in NOIDA Town of Uttar Pradesh was incorrect as it did
not include the sewage of Shahdara drain, which discharges 404 mld sewage in the
river Yamuna at Okhla Barrage in Uttar Pradesh. The Committee were informed that
Shahdara drain was not included in the proposals of NOIDA because, its sewage
discharges generated from Delhi. The Committee desire that Delhi Government
should take up the treating of Shahdara drain sewage waste and other drainage
systems falling in Yamuna River at different places in and around Delhi on top
priority basis so that the waters of Yamuna could be treated to the bathing level as
has been envisaged in GAP-II. Delhi being a fastest growing city in terms of

91
population, new STPs should be set up keeping in view the next 30 years demand of
sewage disposal in respective areas of Delhi.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.28 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
According to the Master Plan of Delhi for the year 2011, the demand for water
supply in 2011 will be 919 MGD, against which 806 MGD of sewage is expected to
generate. With this sewage projection, STPs treatment capacity of 806 MGD will be
required.
Presently, Delhi has an installed treatment capacity of 512.4 MGD. Out of which
actual utilization/treatment of sewage is 340.7 MGD, Delhi Govt./DJB is planning to
increase the installed capacity up to 805.4 MGD in the year 2011 which serves the
purpose up to the year 2021. It includes the projects under Y AP-II which is to be
launched by the NRCD, MoEF.
In order to reduce the pollution load through Shahdara drain entering into the
River Yamuna, the following steps have been taken by the DJB/Govt. of NCT of
Delhi.
• Sewage treatment plant installed for treating 20 MGD waste water at Yamuna
Vihar.
• Installation of a regulator at Chilla, with Sewage Pumping Station and a
Sewage Treatment Plant of 45 MGD capacity at Kondli is proposed.
• To enhance the treatment capacity, desilting of Trunk Sewer No. 4 & 5 in
Shahdara has been completed. With completion of this work, an additional
treatment capacity of 14 MGD can be achieved at Kondli STP.
With regard to the Najafgarh drain, 3 STPs on the tributaries of Najafgarh drain
namely Palam Drain, Ring Road Drain and Daryai Nalla are proposed to construct.
As informed by the DBJ, these drains have been identified on basis of availability
of land to set up STPs. According to DJB, in rest of the tributaries either the flow
is too less or there is no availability of land on the mouth of these drains to put up
STP.
Three numbers of additional sewage treatment plants are also proposed to tackle
the pollution load, discharging directly into the river Yamuna are as follows:—
STP at Barapulla Drain, 20 MGD capacity
STP at Delhi Gate, 15 MGD capacity
STP at Civil Mill Drain, 5 MGD capacity
The details of expansion of capacities at various location in Delhi is indicated in
Table-I

92
TABLE-I
LOCATION-WISE  EXISTING  AND  PROPOSED  TREATMENT CAPACITIES OF
STPs—DELHI
Sl.No. Location Existing Proposed
Installed Treatment
Treatment Capacity (MGD) by
Capacity in MGD 2011**
12 3 4
1. Okhla 140 30
2. Keshopur 7 2 -
3. Coronation Pillar 40 10
4. Rithala 80 -
5. Kondli 45 45*
6. Vasant Kunj 5 -
7. Yamuna Vihar 20 25
8. Ghotorni 5 -
9. Pappan Kala 20 20
10. Narela 10 40
11. Najafgarh 5 -
12. Mehrauli 5 -
13. Timarpur 6 -
14. Delhi Gate 2.2 15
15. Sen Nursing Home 2.2 -
16. Rohini 15 40
17. Nilothi 40 30
18. Barapulla Nallah - 20
19. Delhi Contonment Area - 8
Total 512.4 293
* Tenders are under evaluation.
** The proposed treatment capacity will be sufficient to meet the requirement in the year 2021
as there is no plan to augment the water supply after 2011.
Also, about 91 Kms of truck sewers are proposed to rehabilitate/desilting so as to
increase the utilization capacity of the existing STPs. With the desilting and
rehabilitation of these sewers, an additional treatment capacity of 115 MGD is targeted
to be achieved by 2011 as follows:
Drainage area Capacities
Coronation pillar drainage area (5 MGD)
Shadhara drainage area (14 MGD)
Rithala drainage area (35 MGD)
Okhla drainage area (11 MGD)
Keshopur drainage area (35 MGD)
Outer Delhi drainage area (15 MGD)
Total 115 MGD

93
As per the Central Public Health & Environmental Engineering Organization
(CPHEEO) Manual by the Ministry of Urban Development, the capacities for treatment
plant should be optimally designed and should follow the modular approach to ensure
full utilization of assets and to avoid additional expenditure. The thirty year designed
period may however be modified in regard to certain components of the project
depending on their useful life or the facility for carrying out extensions when required
and rate of interest, so that expenditure ahead of its utilization is avoided.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee are dismayed to note that even though Uttar Pradesh Government
had agreed to send a detailed report on the reasons for irregular diversion of funds of
Rs. 36 crore to the PAC, no such report had been submitted to the Committee so far.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.30 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
UP State Govt. has informed that there has been no diversion of Government of
India funds in Ganga Action Plan, as can be seen from the table below giving the year-
wise funds released by Government of India and the expenditure incurred:
(Rs. in crores)
Y ear Funds released by Expenditure incurred Available
GoI balance funds
at  the end of
During year Cumulative During year Cumulative year (3-5)
1993-94 10.69 10.69 0.00 0.00 10.69
1994-95 2.35 13.04 5.63 5.63 7.41
1995-96 6.27 19.31 4.61 10.24 9.07
1996-97 18.30 37.61 16.60 26.84 10.77
1997-98 53.10 90.71 32.80 59.64 31.07
1998-99 53.50 144.21 74.03 133.67 10.54
1999-00 67.28 211.49 67.23 200.90 10.59
2000-01 36.91 * 248.00 25.68 226.58 21.42
2001-02 49.73 297.73 61.36 287.94 9.79
2002-03 36.79 334.52 35.77 323.71 10.81
Total 334.52 334.52 323.71 323.71 10.81
* Total funds released by NRCD in the year 2000-01 were Rs. 40.65 crore, of which
Rs. 4.14 crore were transferred for towns of the newly created Uttaranchal State.

94
However, as per UP State Govt. State share of Rs. 35.611 crore under GAP-II was
utilized for O&M of assets created under GAP-I due to unavoidable reasons, which
has been recouped by the State Government vide following GOs:
1. 704/9-5-03/79 Sa/2002-TC-1, dated 28.3.2003 Rs. 1187.00 lakhs
2. 2908/9-5-03/79 Sa/2002-TC dated 9.1.2004 Rs. 1187.05 lakhs
3. 1432/9-5-2004/79 Sa/2002-TC dated 24.6.2004 Rs. 1187.05 lakhs
Total: Rs. 3561.10 lakhs
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee have taken a very serious view of the fact that Bihar Government
has violated the NRCD guidelines on construction of community toilets in 9 towns
namely Chhapra, Patna, Hazipur, Soneput, Mokama Barauni, Buxar, Munger,
Bhagalpur and Sultanganj built with a cost of Rs. 1.09 crore. The toilets were built in
the campuses of Government/semi-Government/Private institutions instead of at
places which, contribute sewage pollution to the river. The reply of the Government
is that in the absence of toilets facilities, people go for open defecation and the
wastes so generated ultimately reach River Ganga through open drains. The argument
is not at all tenable and the State Government cannot allow the open drainage
directly leading to the River Ganga, more so when the guidelines are clear that the
STPs should  be set up at major drainge systems and no untreated sewage-waste
should be allowed to polute the Gange directly. It is a clear violation of GAP guidlines
and the funds should not be allowed to be misused any more and the funds already
spent, should be adjusted against sanctions that may be made for other schemes in
future.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.39 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Govt. of Bihar has stated that the NRCD guideline on construction of
Community Toilets in 9 towns have not been violated since it was done as per
availability of land and funds. LCS schemes were completed in those towns. Monthly
Progress reports were sent to NRCD regularly by the BRJP and officials of NRCD also
visited the constructed LCS sites in each town at that time.
The Govt. of Bihar has also stated that the recommendations of the Committee
have been noted for strict compliance in future.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that selection of towns in the State were

95
carried out in a questionable manner. The Committee are surprised to find the exclusion
of Uluberia with BOD of 43.07 mg/l of waste water when 8 towns with BOD levels
below 3 mg/l, the only parameter for selecting towns, were approved by the NRCD in
West Bengal. The Committee find that the State Government's had even violated their
own adapted parameters for selection of towns with 30 mg/l BOD of waste water.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.41 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It may be mentioned that generally the BOD levels in the river Ganga at Uluberia
are below 3 mg/l due to the tidal effect in this stretch, thus it does not violate the
criteria recommended by the Expenditure Finance Committee, that State might not
include towns with BOD (Bio-Chemical Oxygen Demand) less than 3 milligram per litre
downstream of the river.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that the NRCD had not sanctioned any STP
under the GAP-II as West Bengal Government did not confirm the availability of land.
The Committee observe that the State Government had not taken a serious approach
to address this issue as a result of which the construction of 30 mld STP at South
Suburban East in Calcutta work remained incomplete till March 2000. The Committee
also take a serious note of the construction of the Metkal and Bangur  STPs, which
are not originally included under GAP schemes. Taking a cue from the Ministry of
Environment & Forests and as well as State Government's submission, the Committee
are of the view that since the treated effluents from the STPs have been taken to a
nearby canal, that is Bagjola Canal, the same untreated sewage could have been
discharged into that canal and hence there was no need for diverting GAP funds.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.43 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
NRCD has so far sanctioned 15 schemes of STP for the treatment of
77.48 mld of sewage under GAP-II in West Bengal. However, the schemes could not
be initiated in time in some towns of West Bengal due to the problems faced in the
acquisition of land. The State Government has been asked to expedite the acquisition
of land in the problem towns through a better institutional arrangement.
The construction of 30 mld STP at South suburban East in Kolkata has since been
completed and is working satisfactorily.

96
Regarding the construction of Metkal and Bangur STPs it may be mentioned that
KMDA constructed Metkal and Bangur STPs in towns Baranagar- Kamarhati and
Cossipur-Chitpur at total cost of Rs. 26.46 crore in March, 1994 and December, 1998
respectively. It may be mentioned that before setting up STPs of 40 mld and 45 mld
capacity respectively in these towns, the waste water of these areas flowed into the
River Ganga.
However, the respective land on which the STPs are constructed, are located far
away from Ganga, as no other suitable land was available nearby. Transportation of
treated effluent back to Ganga would have resulted in huge expenditure. Considering
this it was decided to discharge the treated sewage of Baranagar-Kamarhati town into
the adjoining water channel of Udaipur Canal, which is connected with Bagjola Canal.
Similarly, treated sewage from Cossipore- Chitpore is discharged into the adjoining
Bagjola Canal. The Bagjola Canal then joins river Bidyadhari and flows into Bay of
Bengal. The overall effect of these two STPs has been to reduce pollution load on
Ganga. Therefore, the use of GAP funds for the construction of two STPs at Baranagar-
Kamarhati and Cossipur-Chitpur may not be considered inappropriate.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
GENERAL OBSERV A TIONS
Recommendation
The Committee called for evidence of Chief Secretaries of State Governments of
Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal to have an appraisal of the GAP-
I & II scheme's implementation, with due permission of Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha.
However, to the astonishment of Committee none of the Chief Secretaries turned up
and only the Secretaries of concerned department attended the sitting of the Committee.
But in case of Bihar, neither Chief Secretary nor any State Government representative
turned up and nor  any difficulty explained to the Committee.The  Chief Secretary of
Bihar did not even respond to the queries raised by the Committee.The Committee
strongly deplore the attitude of State Government official and particularly of Bihar
Government and recommend that responsibility should be fixed on the erring officials
of the State Government.
[Sl.No. XV Appendix-1 Para 15.44 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Pertains to respective State Govts. the recommendations of the Committee have
been forwarded to State Govts. for taking necessary action.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012\1\2004-NRCD,
 dated 30-11-2004]

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS TO WHICH REPLIES HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
The Committee made on the spot study visits to a number of places in various
States and found that the pace of developing infrastructure to control river water
pollution was very slow and the money released was either not commensurate with
the requisite facilities or have been diverted for some other purposes and the work
remained standstill or incomplete. The GAP-I which was to be  completed by March
1990 has been extended till March, 2000 when it was declared complete, and GAP-II
which was to be completed in 2001 was extended till December 2008, which clearly
reflects the extremely slow knee jerk pace of development work being done for the
last 18 years under GAP-I and II. Phase I of the Plan is not yet fully complete, even
after delay of over 13 years. It speaks volumes of the inefficiency and lack of
foresight on the part of the implementing agencies, viz. Central, State Governments
and contracted agencies.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-1  Para 15.2 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In Bihar under GAP-I, 45 schemes were sanctioned by the NRCD. However, there
was delay in completion of GAP-I works in the State due to delay in acquisition of
land for pumping stations, STPs and litigation etc. This resulted in extension of
completion. Till March 2000, 43 projects had been completed and the remaining two
projects of sewage treatment plants at Patna and Munger were incomplete since a
long time due to contractual disputes, litigation etc. The Central Government has
released funds against sanctioned cost of all the schemes including that for balance
works and closed the scheme as on March 2000. Balance works are to be completed
by the Govt. of Bihar and any excess in cost due to price escalation on account of time
over-run is to be borne by them. For completing these two projects STP Patna and
STP Munger, the Govt. of Bihar has released a sum of Rs. 193.50 Lakh during the year
2003-2004. As per the commitment of the State Govt. the works are expected to be
completed by December, 2004.
The reasons for delay in the implementation of the Ganga Action Plan
Phase-I are:
(i) Lack of experience with the State implementing agencies, delay in land
acquisition, litigations and Court cases, contractual disputes and diversion
of funds by the State Governments.
97

98
(ii) Poor operation and maintenance of the assets created under the 'Ganga
Action Plan' Phase-I.
(iii) Erratic and poor availability of electricity for operating assets  like pumping
stations, sewage treatment plants and electric  crematoria.
Under GAP-II, the NRCD has sanctioned 20 schemes till date, on the basis of DPRs
received from the Govt. of Bihar. The State Govt. has reported that, out of these, 16
schemes have been completed and the position of remaining four schemes are as
follows:
(a) The scheme of RFD at Danapur is to be completed in April 2004.
(b) The scheme of LCS at Sahebganj has been transferred to the Govt. of
Jharkhand for execution.
(c) The work of Electric Crematoria at Danapur will be started after receiving
revised sanction order of NRCD. (The State Govt. is to provide the
commitment to bear O&M cost of the revised cost estimate of the scheme for
consideration and processing the case in the NRCD. The  State Govt. is
being requested for the same since 19.8.2002 along with several reminders.)
(d) The work of one LCS unit at Buxar is stopped due to stay order of Hon'ble
High Court.
The expenditure incurred on these schemes is Rs. 292.68 Lakh till  March, 2004.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M.No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30/11/2004]
Recommendation
The Committee find that while on one hand, States have complained of lack of
funds being a main reason for delay and failure to achieve the target of schemes, on
the other many of the implementing agencies have failed to even spend the money
and fair amount is left unutilized. The Committee are surprised to note many instances
of financial mismanagement by the State level implementing agencies, such as
diversion of  funds of the tunes of Rs. 36.07 crores to unauthorized activities, incorrect
reporting to the tune of Rs. 6.75 crores, parking of funds by Bihar Rajya Jal Parishad
in its own personal account amounting to Rs. 1.17 crore and unutilized funds with the
implementing agencies to the tune of Rs. 72.62 crore, etc. The Committee feel that
there are serious shortcomings in financial management of funds earmarked for various
schemes under GAP at the level of States as well as NRCD. This has resulted in
development of laxity in the working of various implementing agencies of the
respective State Governments.The Committee are of the view that the apt formula for
success in rectifying the functioning of GAP in the willingness to introduce reasonable
user charges, which male the scheme financially viable. Even then the Committee are
of the firm believe that no amount of additional resources will rejuvenate the GAP
until the system stops tolerating the officials who do not perform. This, nonetheless
entails amelioration in governance through improved performance and accountability
through public participation. The Committee endorse the proposal to introduce

99
"beneficiaries pay" and "polluters pay" principles and other collective fine system to
bear the cost of river cleaning programmes. Further provisions may be made to accept
donations from willing contributors to boost the resources of GAP. To help male ever
delicate financial condition of GAP schemes viable, the Committee urge the Ministry
of Environment & Forests to streamline the mechanism of earning revenues by utilizing
the manure rich treated sewage water and other byproducts etc. for irrigation purposes
on payment basis.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para15.12 of 62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It has been intimated by the State Gov1ernment of West Bengal that released
funds under GAP have been fully and properly utilized within the stipulated time
schedule State Government is also taking steps to introduce user's charges for water
supply and sewerage system to bear the partial cost of Ganga River Action Plan.
Revenue is being earned by rearing fish, selling manure and treated sewage for
irrigation purpose. Suggestions of accepting donations from willing contributors are
also under consideration of the State Government.
State Government of West Bengal has intimated that they are exploring the
possibility of leasing out the ponds for pisci culture at Chandarnagar, Bhatpara and
Teetagarh. Scheme is also being worked out to sell the manure generated at the
Howrah, Baranagar and Kamarhati Sewage Treatment Plants.
As per the information received from the BRJP, an amount of Rs. 86.08 Lakh
was diverted by the BRJP during the year 1986-89 for disbursement of salary to
their staff which were deputed for implementation of Ganga Action Plan schemes.
Receipt of the funds for this purpose from the State Govt. at the end of the
financial years and that too being the lesser than the required amount necessitated
the BRJP for this diversion of funds for disbursement of salary to their staff to
avoid disruption of the implementation & dissatisfaction of the staff. As per the
BRJP , all of diverted amount has been recouped.
Regarding parking of funds by the BRJP in its own personal account amounting to
Rs. 1.17 crore, the BRJP has intimated that they received the amount of Rs. 1.17 crore
from the Government of Bihar on following dates:
31.3.96 Rs. 22.00 Lakh
23.7.96 (for Land Acquisition) Rs. 15.00 Lakh
31.3.97 Rs. 71.00 Lakh
31.3.96 Rs. 09.00 Lakh
Rs. 117.00 Lakh
This amount of Rs. 1.17 crore was received by the BRJP from the State Government
under its Plan/Non-Plan head. The account of Plan/Non-Plan head is in the State
Bank of India, Sachivalaya Branch, which belongs to the treasury. This amount was

100
deposited by the BRJP in their account of the State Bank of India so that it could not
be lapsed.
The State Govt. has intimated that, to generate revenue with the intention of self-
sustainable O&M of the GAP schemes, following steps have been taken up:
(1) Auction of fish ponds—Fish ponds at STP Pahari (Southern Zone), Patna
and STP , Bhagalpur have been auctioned for 3 years.
(2) Sale of Sludge—Sale of sludge from Beur and Saidpur STPs Patna is
being finalized through an open tendering process. Sludge produced
from the digester of activated sludge treatment has very high manure
quality. It can be utilized for growing crops in place of artificial fertilizer.
(3) User charges—User charges proposal is under serious consideration of the
State Govt. for implementation.
(4) Biogas utilization—A proposal for utilizing the gas produced at Beur STP
has been prepared and it will be finalized very soon.
(5) Utilisation of treated sewage water and other by-produced etc. for irrigation
purpose on payment basis is being prepared.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests  O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
Further, the Committee do not buy the argument of the Ministry that delay in the
implementation of GAP has been due to its being the first of its kind of project in the
country,  for not only delays had been experienced in GAP-I but also in the case of
GAP-II and its components like YAP, GOAP & Damodar Action Plans; rather they
are of the view that with no clear-cut standards or basis or yardstick or parameter
for fixing responsibilities in GAP provisions, a multiple of irregularities have cropped
up in the operation of GAP. A  peculiarity the Committee had come across during
their examination of the subject is that in spite of the lacunae and shortcomings
being pointed out by expert reviews and the Ministry's assessment and when the
Ministry themselves were aware of the solutions, no significant remedial action has
been initiated till date. The Committee observe that no adequate attention is being
given to the urgency that has been demanded by GAP, thereby compromising the
health of about 40 per cent of population of India living in the Ganga Basin. As a
matter of fact, a study by a team of environmentalist from the Netherlands, the
United Kingdom and India have, in a World Bank sponsored study, concluded that
in spite of the massive Rs. 1500 crore plan launced in the 80s to clean up the Ganga,
the pollution levels in the mighty river continue to be alarmingly high and are
contributing to about 9 to 12 per cent of the total disease burden in Uttar Pradesh.
The Committee find that provisions/mechanism of the scheme as a system of
anticipating coming events and planning responses in advance have failed which
nevertheless has led the Committee to observe that GAP has become un-coordinated
and directionless amalgam of different department/agencies despite existence of
various Committees like NRCA, Steering Committee, Monitoring Committee etc.

101
The Committee therefore urge the Ministry to reconstitute NRCA as an autonomous
body like National  River Linking Project.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.8 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The World Bank Sponsored study on the 'State of Environment Report and
Action Plan for Uttar Pradesh' utilized a 'Water Quality Index' developed by National
Sanitation Foundation of the United States which is not widely accepted as it is
subjective, does not provide used based risk and has other limitations. The study
does not attribute the disease burden in Uttar Pradesh to the water quality of river
Ganga alone.
In contrast to this, an R&D study to evaluate the efficacy of schemes taken up
under Ganga Action Plan in the towns of Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh) and nabadwip
(West Bengal) on the health of the people directly dependent on Ganga water
revealed a decreasing trend in the incidence of water borne diseases. However, the
prevalence of helminthic infection, skin disease and diahorrea was observed in
case of sewage farm workers handling treated sewage.
The study was carried out by NEERI, Nagpur and All India Institute of Hygiene &
Public Health, Calcutta.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
The Committee also express serious concern over the issue of dumping of dead
bodies/animal carcasses and consequential worst pollution caused by such a practice.
They are of the opinion that no worthwhile efforts have been initiated so far for
optimum operationalisation of the already established electric crematoria at Hardwar
to prevent such pollution. In this context the Committee do not share the view that
modern crematoria set up have not been used by the people due to their faith and
belief in the traditional manner of cremation. In their view, adequate public awareness
was required for the use of modern crematoria and the popular awareness of people
varies from city to city and changes with the passage of time. The Committee, therefore,
also stress the need for setting up improvised wood crematoria in Hardwar to prevent
this environmentally challenging phenomenon of letting dead bodies/carcasses
polluting the holy river.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.23 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]

102
Action Taken
Necessary action in this regard is being initiated by the State Government.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dt. 30-11-2004]
Recommendation
During their study visit, as an unpleasant experience, the Committee caught sight
of many non-cremated dead bodies freely floating in the river waters giving a distasteful,
spectacle to the visitors coming from far and wide. The Committee were apprised that
due to religious significance of the city, many cremations were taking placed on the
bank of the river which was a major cause of pollution. The Committee observe that
this is because of ineffective public awareness campaign being initiated by any of the
civic authorities to dissuade people from doing so. The Committee would like the
Ministry of Environment & Forests and agencies concerned in the State to come out
with a concrete plan for an awareness campaign, even with the help of law enforcing
agencies and religious seers, if necessary, to inculcate a scientific temper in the
people, along with religious point of view so that people do not become a compulsive
partner in polluting a river they were as 'holy'.
[Sl. No. XV Appendix-I Para 15.35 of 62nd Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
UP State Govt. have informed that Superintendent of Police has already been
instructed to take necessary action to stop throwing of non-cremated dead bodies
into the rivers.
[Ministry of Environment & Forests, O.M. No. H-11012/1/2004-NRCD,
dated 30-11-2004]

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  TO  WHICH  THE  GOVERNMENT
HAVE  FURNISHED  INTERIM  REPLIES
-NIL-
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
March, 2006 Chairman,
Phalguna 1927(Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
103

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/Depart- Observations/Recommendations
No. No. ment
12 3 4
1. 10 Environment & The Committee had adversely commented
Forests upon the slow pace of developing infrastructure
to control pollution in Ganga River. GAP-I, to be
accomplished by March, 1990 was yet to be
completed. The position regarding GAP-II was
equally bad as this scheme, which was to be
completed in 2001, was extended till December,
2008. Consequently, the Committee had deplored
the inefficiency and lack of foresight on the part
of the implementing agencies, viz. Central, State
Governments and contracted agencies. The
Committee are not convinced by the arguments
put forth by the Ministry that the delay in GAP-
I was due to the lack of experience of the State
implementing agencies, delay in land
acquisition, litigations and Court cases,
contractual disputes, diversion of funds by the
State Governments besides poor operation and
maintenance of the assets created under the
'Ganga Action Plan' Phase-I and poor availability
of electricity for operating assets like pumping
stations, sewage treatment plants and electric
crematoria. The reasons cited by the Ministry
are not such that they could not have been
anticiplated and tackled promptly & timely. The
Committee would also like to point out that
instead of intimating the status of performance
of all the concerned State Governments, the
Ministry have provided the figures for Bihar
only. This is nothing but casual manner in which
the Ministry have chosen to reply to the specific
recommendation of the Committee which is
highly regrettable.
104

2. 11 Environment & However, from a reply of the Ministry to
Forests another recommendation in the Original Report,
the Committee find that in GAP-II, barring Delhi,
13 out of 90 schemes were incomplete in Haryana,
32 out of 195 schemes were  incomplete in Uttar
Pradesh, 75 out of 92 schemes were incomplete
in West Bengal, 6 out of 18 schemes were
incomplete in Bihar, 19 out of 29 schemes were
incomplete in  Uttaranchal and 4 out of 6 schemes
were incomplete in Jharkhand as on June 2004.
Thus, 149 schemes in total were still incomplete.
The Committee are constrained to point out that
the Ministry have furnished the updated position
regarding implementation of schemes in the State
of Bihar only. The Committee had expected the
Ministry to furnish a comprehensive State-wise
reply providing reasons for the overall delay in
GAP-II with an objective analysis of the
shortcomings/negligence of the implementing
agencies, which was not done. They have also
not cared to apprise the  Committee about the
reasons for not furnishing the complete and
proper reply. The Committee take a serious view
of the matter and desire that the Ministry should
have furnished complete reply to all the specific
points raised in their recommendation. In sofar
as speedy completion of the remaining projects
of GAP-II in all the States is concerned, Committee
feel that the Government must make a study to
assess the actual progress of the plan and take
suitable measures in coordination with concerned
State Governments urgently to accelerate the pace
of work because the present situation, if left
unattended, would continue to deteriorate further,
causing irreparable loss to the entire Ganga river-
system.
3 17 Environment & The Committee, in their Original Report, had
Forests brought to the notice of the Ministry of
Environment & Forests the financial
mismanagement by the State level implementing
agencies, such as diversion of funds to
unauthorized activities, incorrect reporting,
parking of funds in personal account of Bihar
Rajya Jal Parishad (BRJP) and untilized funds
12 3 4

106
with the implementing agencies, etc. It was
observed that serious shortcomings in financial
management of the funds were resulting into
laxity in the working of various implementing
agencies of the respective State Governments.
In response to these  observations the Ministry
have forwarded the replies received from only
two States  viz. West Bengal and Bihar in this
regard. The Ministry are silent over the financial
irregularities in other States, for example the
diversion of funds in Uttar Pradesh, as noticed
by the Committee in their Original Report. From
the reply furnished by the Bihar Rajya Jal
Parishad (BRJP), the Committee infer that they
have tried to justify the diversion of funds
amounting to Rs. 86.08 lakh for disbursement of
salary to their staff on the plea that it was done
to avoid disruption of the implementation and
dissatisfaction of the staff. As regards parking
of funds amounting to Rs. 1.17 crore in their
account, the Ministry have taken the stand that
this amount was  deposited by the BRJP in their
account of the State Bank of India so that it
could not be lapsed. The Committee are
distressed to note that instead of furnishing
plausible explanation for financial
mismanagement, the Ministry have merely
forwarded the State Government's reply which
also seem to be  unconvincing as much as that
does not address the issues of diversion of
funds, incorrect reporting, parking of fund and
unutilized funds in totality. The Committee feel
that Instead of simply forwarding the replies
submitted by a couple of States, the Ministry
should have accorded adequate seriousness to
an important issue like financial mismanagement
by the implementing agencies and spelt out the
measures taken by them to rectify the situation.
The Committee had expected the Ministry to
furnish a critical analysis of utilization of funds
by each concerned State. What is surprising is
the fact that there were serious shortcomings in
financial management of the funds earmarked
12 3 4

107
for various schemes under GAP not only at the
level of States but at NRCD also. They, therefore,
desire that the Ministry should take suitable
remedial steps and fix responsibility in order to
avoid recurrence of such incidents in future.
4. 18 Environment & The Committee had also desired the
Forests Ministry to generate additional resources by way
of introducing user charges, 'beneficiaries pay'
and 'polluters pay' principle along with other
collective fine system, accepting donations from
willing contributors and earning revenues by
utilizing the manure rich treated sewage water
and other byproducts etc. for irrigation purposes
on payment basis. The Ministry, in their Action
Taken Note, have reproduced the replies received
from West Bengal and Bihar State Governments
narrating the efforts made by them in this regard,
for instance, auction of fish ponds sale of sludge,
biogas utilization etc. The Committee, however,
are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as
it does not specify in concrete terms the quantum
of the positive results achieved in generating
additional revenue by virtue of the efforts made
by the States. They would like the Ministry to
furnish the details of the amount earned by each
state as additional revenue through the various
aforesaid measures and as to how they are being
utilized.
5. 21 -do- While disagreeing with the argument of the
Ministry that delay in the implementation of GAP
was attributed to its being the first of its kind of
project in the country, the Committee in their
earlier report had pointed out that delays were
experienced not only in GAP-I, but also in the
case of GAP-II and its components like Y AP, GoAP
& Damodar Action Plans. Expressing their
concern on the irregularities that had cropped up
in the operation of GAP due to absence of clear-
cut criteria for fixing responsibilities in GAP
provisions, the Committee had found that no
significant remedial action was initiated by the
Ministry in spite of being made aware of the
lacunae and shortcomings by expert reviews. The
12 3 4

108
Committee are disappointed to note from the
Action Taken Note that the Ministry have not
indicated any steps that have been taken with
regard to the observation made by them with a
view to curb overall delays, minimise irregularities
and to implement GAP so as to attain intended
goals without further loss of time. The Ministry
have chosen to remain silent which reflect their
lackadaisical approach in the entire matter.
6. 22 Environment & The Committee had also pointed out that a
Forests W orld Bank sponsored study had concluded that
in spite of the massive  Rs. 1500 crore plan
launched in the 80s to clean up the Ganga, its
pollution levels continued to be alarmingly high
and were contibuting to about 9 to 12 per cent of
the total disease burden in Uttar Pradesh. The
Committee had found that there were lack of
adequate attention and anticipation of coming
events and advance planning. They had,
therefore, observed that the GAP had become
un-coordinated and directionless amalgam of
different departments/agencies, and had urged
the Ministry to reconstitute NRCA as an
autonomous body like the National River Linking
Project. Surprisingly, the Ministry, in their Action
Taken Note, have chosen to challenge the
findings of the World Bank sponsored study by
calling it 'subjective' and 'gripped by other
limitations'. According to them the study does
not attribute the disease burden in Uttar Pradesh
to water quality of river Ganga alone. On the other
hand they have sought to bring forth an R&D
study report relating to the schemes taken up
under Ganga Action Plan in the towns of Varanasi
(Uttar Pradesh) and Nabadwip (West Bengal),
that has revealed a decreasing trend in the
incidence of water borne diseases there. However,
no facts and figures in this regard have been
furnished. The Committee find no sustainable
reason for the Ministry's reluctance in accepting
that pollution level in the Ganga River are by far
the biggest contributor in harbouring water borne
diseases among the population residing on its
banks. The Committee feel that the Ministry have
12 3 4

109
tried to divert their attention from the core issue
of the need for efficient and co-ordinated working
of different departments/agencies  related to the
'Ganga Action Plan' . As Gap seems to have
become un-coordinated and directionless
amalgam of different department/agencies, the
Committee would like to reiterate that the Ministry
should immediately take action to constitute the
NRCA as an autonomous body like National River
Linking Project.
7. 25 Environment & Expressing grave concern over the
Forests throwing of dead bodies/carcasses in Ganga
river, which they had witnessed for themselves,
the Committee, in their Original Report, had
specifically urged the concerned authorities to
make efforts for optimum operationalisation of
the already established electric crematoria at
Hardwar and also for setting up improvised wood
crematoria there in order to prevent the public
from cremating bodies on the banks of the River.
Further, the Committee had emphasized the need
for enhancing public awareness for the use of
modern crematoria. The Ministry have merely
stated vide their Action Taken note that necessary
action in this regard is being initiated by the State
Government. The Committee are disappointed
with the reply given by the Ministry which is too
vague and devoid of any details. The Ministry
have avoided providing specific information on
the action taken/proposed to be taken by the
Government so far and difficulties, if any, being
faced by them. In view of this, the Committee are
doubtful whether any  Concrete action has been
taken by the state Government at all in this regard.
The Committee, therefore, strongly deplore the
casual approach shown by the Ministry to a very
specific recommendation of the Committee
relating to a serious issue. The Committee have
been left with no choice but to reiterate their earlier
recommendation made in this regard. They expect
a detailed, complete, clear and specific reply from
the Ministry.
12 3 4

110
8. 28 Environment & The Committee had, in their original Report,
Forests  raised a very pertinent issue of initiating a public
awareness compaign with the help of law
enforcing agencies and religious seers, if
necessary, to inculcate a scientific temper in the
people, so that the horrendous practice of
throwing non-cremated dead bodies in the river
could be checked. In their reply, the Ministry have
furnished the information received from U.P. State
Government that the Superintendent of police
has already been instructed to take necessary
action to stop this practice. The Committee feel
that this is yet another example of an extremely
casual approach on the part of the Government
to a very serious matter. They have gathered the
impression that the Government have not only
taken their recommendation very lightly, but have
also sought to shirk their responsibility of
planning and carrying out a mass awareness
campaign to make public realise the inportance
of keeping the river clean. The Committee strongly
deplore the careless attitude of the Government
for having treated a vexed question of raising
mass awareness campaign against throwing non-
cremate dead bodies in the holy river as a simple
law and order problem, which can be handled by
a Superintendent of Police. The Committee
therefore, desire that the Ministry should assign
due priority to such an important and far reaching
issue concerning certain conventional beliefs and
ensure that the State Government takes it up at
the highest level with utmost seriousness. The
Committee also desire that the action taken in
this regard may be intimated to them in due
course.
12 3 4

PART  II
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-06) HELD ON 14TH MARCH, 2006
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 14th March, 2006 in
Room No "51" (Chairman's Chamber) Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri R.L. Jalappa
4. Dr. R. Senthil
5. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
6. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri R. K. Dhawan
8. Shri V . Narayanasamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Principal Director (INDT-Cus)
2. Shri R.P. Singh — Principal Director (Scientific
Departments)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports
and approved the same:
(i) Draft Report on Paragraph No. 3.7 of the Report of C&AG of India for the
111

112
year ended March 2004, No. 10 of 2005 (Indirect Taxes-Customs) relating to
"Non-disposal of Uncleared/Unclaimed Imported Cargo in ICDs/CFSs", and
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the
62nd Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha) relating to "Ganga Action Plan."
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the light of
verbal and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by Audit or
otherwise and present the same to the House.
4. The Chairman apprised the Members of the work done by the Committee. He
stated that 27 Reports—12 Original and 15 Action Taken were finalised and presented
within a short period of a year and a half during the two terms of 14th Lok Sabha i.e.
September 2004 to April 2005 and May 2005 to April 2006. While referring to the
qualitative and substantial work done by the Committee, he observed that this could
not have been possible but for the active participation and interest evinced by all the
Members.
5. The Committee also placed on record their appreciation of the valuable assistance
rendered by the Officers of the C&AG and the commendable work performed by the
Committee Secretariat in the examination of various subjects and finalisation of the
Reports thereon.
The Committee then adjourned.
MGIPMRND—6690LS—11.05.2006