55
DEVELOPMENT OF LAND BY
THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
PUB
LIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
DEVELOPMENT OF LAND BY THE DELHI
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30 August, 2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 August, 2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)

PAC No. 1841
Price: Rs. 69.00
©2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi–110 002.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-08)..............................
INTRODUCTION .....................................................................................................
REPORT................................................................................................................
P ART -I Background Analysis
I. Introductory ...................................................................................
II. Financial Management and Control ..............................................
III. A ward of Works .............................................................................
IV . Contract Management ...................................................................
V. Poor Planning and Co-ordination of Works ..................................
VI. Inadequate Quality Control ...........................................................
VII. Internal Audit .................................................................................
PART -II Observations and Recommendations
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee held on
12th June, 2006...............................................................................
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee held on
19th July, 2006................................................................................
III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee held on
7th  August, 2007 ...........................................................................
APPENDICES
I. Chapter II of Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2005 (No. 2 of 2006),
Union Government (Civil— Autonomous Bodies) relating to
“Development of Land by the Delhi Development Authority” ....
II. List of works taken up in anticipation of Administrative Approval
and Expenditure Sanction during the last 5 years (2001-02, 2002-03,
2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06)........................................................
P
AGE NO.
(iii)
(v)
1
2
8
18
20
23
25
36
38
40
42
58
27
1
CONTENTS

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
 (2007 - 2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri S. Lakshmikanta Singh — Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this 55th Report relating to “Development of Land by the Delhi Development
Authority” on Chapter II of Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for
the year ended March 2005, No. 2 of 2006 (Performance of Audit), Union Government
(Civil – Autonomous Bodies).
2.  The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year
ended March 2005, No. 2 of 2006 (Performance of Audit), Union Government (Civil –
Autonomous Bodies) was laid on the Table of the House on 19th May, 2006.
3. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Urban Development and Delhi Development Authority on the subject at their   sittings
held on 12th June, 2006 and 19th July, 2006.  The Committee considered and finalised
this Report at their sitting held on 7th August, 2007.  Minutes of the sittings form
Annexures to the Report.
4. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry
of Urban Development and Delhi Development Authority for the cooperation extended
by them in furnishing information and tendering evidence before the Committee.
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI;
16 August, 2007          PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
25  Sravana, 1929 (Saka)  Chairman,
                  Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
DEVELOPMENT OF LAND BY THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
PART I – Background Analysis
I. Introductory
1. The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) was established in 1957 to promote
the planned development of Delhi. During the period from 2000-01 to 2004-05, DDA
spent Rs. 2,061.56 crore on development of land under various developmental schemes.
The specific works undertaken under these schemes included construction of master
plan roads, development of green belts, leveling and dressing of land, construction of
storm water drains, internal drains and water supply lines, construction of connected
underground water tanks and pump houses and maintenance works.
Organisational set-up of Delhi Development Authority
2. The DDA is headed by the Lt. Governor of Delhi as its Chairman. Day to day
administration of the Authority is vested in the Vice-Chairman who is assisted by the
Member (Finance) and the Member (Engineering). Land acquisition matters are handled
by the Commissioner (Lands) assisted by the Director (Land Management) while
planning for the various developmental schemes is done by the Commissioner
(Planning) assisted by zone-wise Directors (Planning). Execution of the schemes is
through the six zonal Chief Engineers who function under the administrative control of
the Member (Engineering). The Chief Engineers are assisted by Superintending
Engineers at the circle and Executive Engineers at the divisional levels.
Audit Review
3. This Report is based on Chapter II of Report No. 2 of 2006 (Performance
Audit) of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India relating to “Development of Land
by the Delhi Development Authority” (Appendix-I). The audit methodology involved
scrutiny of records relating to execution of the six selected schemes in Dwarka and
Rohini during the period from 2000-01 to 2004-05 in the respective zones along with
those at the headquarters of the DDA.
4. Audit examination of the execution of the six developmental schemes involving
total expenditure of Rs. 605 crore undertaken in Dwarka and Rohini viz.  (i) Development
of 1769.88 hectares of land for housing colonies at Pappan Kalan in Dwarka Phase-I;
(ii) Construction of master plan road in Dwarka Phase I; (iii) Maintenance of parks and
plantation activities in the north zone; (iv) Development of 224.90 hectares of land for
residential colonies in Dwarka Phase II; (v) Construction of master plan road in Dwarka
Phase II; and  (vi) Development of 472.40 hectares of land for housing colonies in
Sectors 23, 24 and 25 in Rohini revealed mismatch in budget allocation and expenditure,
lack of financial control over expenditure, non-adherence to codal provisions in award
of works, award of works without ensuring availability of structural drawings, materials

2
and clear sites, inadmissible payments due to non-adherence to specifications, non-
recovery of outstanding amount from the defaulting contractor, poor planning and
co-ordination of works, inadequate quality control and weak internal audit and lack of
co-ordination with other concerned civic and public utility agencies. The highlights of
the Audit review are as follows:
(i)  Expenditure of Rs. 19.56 crore was incurred in anticipation of administrative
approval and expenditure sanction, which was irregular;
(ii) Lack of adequate scrutiny of tender rates and comparison with rates accepted
for similar works during the same time resulted in additional expenditure of
Rs. 7.43 crore;
(iii) DDA failed to adhere to codal provisions relating to ensuring availability of
drawings, design and materials as well as clear site before award of works
resulted in delay in completion of works ranging up to over three years as
well as cost escalation of Rs. 7.29 crore; and
(iv) Construction of command tanks and water reservoirs was not linked with
the actual availability of water so as to enable their utilization. Consequently,
expenditure of Rs. 33.78 crore incurred on construction of these tanks and
reservoirs was rendered idle due to lack of water.
II. Financial Management and Control
(a) Lack of Financial control over expenditure
5. Section 2.1 of CPWD Works Manual, which is followed by DDA for awarding
of works inter alia stipulate that no expenditure should be incurred without prior
administrative approval and sanction of the competent Authority and award or
execution of works should be based on technical sanction accorded by the competent
technical authority. Audit examination revealed that an expenditure of Rs. 19.56 crore
was incurred by DDA in the following cases in February 2001 in anticipation of
administrative approval and expenditure sanction thereby undermining financial
control:—
Sl. Name of work Date of T endered Date of Expenditure incurred
No. award of amount administrative before administrative
work (Rupees in approval & approval & expenditure
crore) expenditure sanction
sanction (Rupees in crore)
12 3 4 5 6
1. Strengthening    of    the February 33.81 November 6.10
existing two lanes carriage 2001 2001
way, construction of addi-
tional four lanes, service
road, foot path,  drainage,
X-drainage work and fixing
of  kerb  stones,  etc.  at
Dwarka Project,  Phase-II,
Group-I

3
2. Strengthening     of     the February 24.50 November 4.45
existing two lanes carriage 2001 2001
way,    construction    of
additional     four     lanes,
service  road,  foot  path,
drainage, X-drainage work
and fixing of kerb stones,
etc.  at  Dwarka  Project,
Phase-I, Group-III
3. Strengthening     of     the February 29.91 November 3.83
existing       two       lanes 2001 2001
carriage way, construction
of  additional  four  lanes,
service  road,  foot  path,
drainage, X-drainage work
and fixing of kerb stones,
etc.  at  Dwarka  Project,
Phase-I, Group-I
4. Strengthening     of     the February 25.98 November 5.18
existing two lanes carriage 2001 2001
way,    construction    of
additional     four     lanes,
service  road,  foot  path,
drainage, X-drainage work
and fixing of kerb stones,
etc.   at   Dwarka   Project,
Phase-I, Group-II
Total 19.56
6. Audit scrutiny of records indicate that execution of these works was held up
due to unresolved funding issues with the Delhi Government and there were delays
ranging from 10 months to over three years in completing these works along with cost
escalation.
7. Explaining the factual position with respect to the aforesaid Audit observation,
a representative of DDA stated during evidence as under:—
“Generally, we stick to the system of administrative approval and
expenditure sanction. That is the general rule. We generally stick to the
CPWD manual. There is a circular of the Engineering Member and we stick
to that. But in urgent issues, and the CPWD manual allows that, for example
providing services for infrastructure where such budgets are involved
and immediately they have to be taken up, with the approval of the
competent authority whether the Lt. Governor or the Vice-Chairman, those
issues are immediately taken up. Thereafter, immediately we take steps to
take the approval of the competent authority and take the administrative
approval and expenditure sanction and complete the process.’’
12 3 4 5 6

4
8. The Committee desired to know the conditions /circumstances under which the
aforesaid works were deemed as ‘urgent’ by DDA. The Ministry in a note stated as
under:—
“It has been stated by DDA that as a matter of fact, the powers to incur
emergent expenditure are contained in Rule 17 of the DDA Budget and
Accounts Rules which states that “Inevitable expenditure’’, which cannot
be met by re-appropriation, may be incurred with the previous approval of
the Authority, and in emergencies, under the orders of the Vice-Chairman,
a report of which shall be made to the Authority in its next meeting.”
9. Asked to state compelling reasons that led DDA to take up the afore-stated
works as an exception without the usual practice of obtaining administrative approval
and expenditure sanction, the Ministry of Urban Development stated in a note as under:—
“DDA has informed that it was the duty of PWD, Delhi Administration to
construct almost all the Master Plan Roads. It was observed that the Delhi
Government was not able to build infrastructure works of roads to keep
pace with the development of housing being done by the DDA. As such,
in its Authority Resolution No.43/92, it was decided that DDA may take up
construction of roads 30-m and above. Accordingly, DDA took up the
construction of Master Plan Roads in Dwarka. The matter was discussed
vide agenda item No. 34/2000 in the Authority meeting held on 28.3.2000.
It was decided in the meeting that DDA should take up development of
45 mt. and 60 mt.wide roads in Dwarka to its full section. Lt. Governor,
Delhi vide his U.O. Note No. 40(1) 2000-RM/1482/1957—67 dated 30.8.2000
ordered DDA to immediately award the works and construct  30 mt. and
above roads in Dwarka. He further ordered that the works must be taken
up by September 2000. The works, were therefore, taken up on emergent
basis. Vice-Chairman, DDA accorded permission to incur expenditure of
Rs. 20 crore on the Master Plan Roads keeping in view the Lt. Governor’s
orders as well as the need to provide infrastructure to the general public
who had been allotted houses and were facing difficulties.”
The Ministry added:—
“…such anticipatory approval to start work in urgent situations is provided
for in the relevant manuals being followed in DDA. The VC, DDA is
competent to grant such anticipatory permission and Estimates Approval
Committee is competent to grant A/A ands E/S. In this case, the decision
to grant anticipatory approval was in pursuance of orders of  Lt. Governor,
Delhi to start the work in a time-bound manner.”
10. Explaining it further, a representative of DDA stated during evidence as
under:—
“An approval was taken in anticipation from the Finance Member as well
as the Vice-Chairman, DDA. The final administrative approval and
expenditure sanction was given by the Vice-Chairman on 5.11.2001. It was
only for initial start of the work that the administrative approval was taken.”

5
11. In this regard, the Committee desired to know the time frame if any, fixed for
obtaining Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction once a work has been
started on anticipatory approval. The Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“No time limit has been prescribed by which Administrative Approval (A/A)
and Expenditure Sanction (E/S) has to be obtained, once the anticipation
approval of the works is given. The scrutiny of estimate required to grant
A/A and E/S takes some time, as it has to pass through various channels
at Finance & Administrative wings of DDA. The CPWD Manual V olume-II,
which is being followed by DDA, states that action to obtain AA & ES
should be taken by the concerned Engineering Wing as early as possible.
A/A & E/S consists of approval of administrative necessity and financial
concurrence. The administrative necessity was concurred by the Vice-
Chairman, DDA. The financial concurrence of Rs. 20 crore was also taken
from Finance Department of DDA.  Such cases are subsequently got
regularized by obtaining regular A/A & E/S of the competent authority as
early as possible.”
12. Asked whether steps have been taken now to regulate the system of
anticipatory approval so as to prevent its possible misuse, the Ministry submitted in a
note as under:—
“... in case of urgency or emergency the works can be executed in absence
of any or all the formalities. Such cases are subsequently got regularized
by obtaining regular A/A & E/S of the competent authority as early as
possible as such eventualities cannot be ruled out.”
13. In a note furnished to the Committee the Ministry have informed that DDA
has taken up a total of   30 works without obtaining administrative approval during
last 5 years details of which are given at  Appendix-II. It was further stated that after
receipt of the Audit Report in September 2005 in the Ministry the works relating to
Development of Common Wealth Games Village, Remodeling of  Suraj Mal Stadium at
Nangloi and Development of Park on land between Sainik Vihar and Shakti Vihar have
been taken in anticipation of Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction.
(b) Construction of Master Plan Roads by DDA
14. The Public Works Department, Government of NCT of Delhi are responsible
for construction of Master Plan roads in Delhi. In Dwarka project, however, construction
of such roads was taken up by DDA in anticipation of Administrative Approval and
Expenditure Sanction on the grounds of urgency of work and the need to keep pace
with fast moving development activities. This construction of Master Plan roads was
one of the major contributory reasons for incurring excess expenditure of Rs. 1.27 crore
and Rs. 2.34 crore in 2001-2002 and 2004-2005 respectively for the development of
472.40 hectares of land in Sectors 23, 24 and 25 Rohini and of Rs. 84 lakh in respect of
development of land at Dwarka Phase-I during 2000-01.
15. Asked about the reasons for constructing Master Plan roads by DDA, which
do not come under their jurisdiction, a representative of DDA stated during evidence
as under:—
“Normally the Master Plan roads are to be developed by the PWD in
Delhi. It was observed that PWD, Delhi was not coming up with the same

6
pace of progress as the housing in Dwarka was coming up. So, the
hon. Lt. Governor decided that the Master Plan roads should be taken up
by DDA on urgent basis. If you kindly permit, I will just read out the
instruction given by the hon. Lt. Governor in this regard. I quote: “I had
asked DDA to immediately award and construct the roads in Dwarka of the
width of 30 metres and above. That work must also begin on the ground in
September 2000”. These are the instructions signed by the hon.
Lt. Governor himself who also happens to be the Chairman of DDA. This
was the first time in the history of DDA that the Master Plan roads were
taken up by DDA on the specific instruction of the hon. Lt. Governor.”
16. In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during evidence
explained as under:—
“Construction of roads in Delhi is taken up by many agencies.  In the
NDMC areas, it is done by NDMC.  In the MCD areas, it is done by MCD.
Some other roads, which are State Highways and certain width roads are
maintained and constructed by Delhi PWD.  Some roads, which are Master
Plan roads, about them there is now a resolution of DDA that they will be
constructed by DDA.”
17. Citing the reasons for construction of the Master Plan roads in Dwarka project,
the Ministry submitted in a note as under:—
“About 7000 houses were constructed in various sectors of Dwarka. The
land was allotted to various group housing societies who had started
constructing residential buildings. People were hesitant in shifting to
Dwarka in the absence of infrastructure like approach roads etc. This
issue was brought by the public as well as by DDA to the notice of
Lt. Governor of Delhi, who finally ordered construction of Master Plan
roads.”
18. Explaining it further, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during
evidence deposed as under:—
“During the years 1999 and 2000 there were no roads and there were a lot
of public complaints.  People were allotted houses.  So, that DDA thought
as to how to mitigate their grievances.  So, Master Plan roads were proposed
for access to this sub city.  It was thought that Delhi PWD will construct
these roads.  But these roads could not be constructed and there was a lot
of resentment in the residents of Dwarka.  So, it was decided with the
approval of the hon. Lt. Governor that DDA will construct these roads.
With this background, under the constant public pressure, the hon.
Lt. Governor asked us that we should go ahead with the construction of
these roads.  One of the issues raised was that Administrative Approval &
Expenditure Sanction was not properly obtained. These were compelling
circumstances and later on Estimates Approval Committee had approved
these estimates.  The expenditure, which has been made by the DDA, was
spread over couple of years and it was for definite projects and
programmes.”

7
19. In this regard, the Vice-Chairman, DDA during evidence deposed as under:—
“The project was getting delayed because the State PWD was not
constructing the roads.  Several meetings took place with Chief Secretary,
Secretary, PWD and Lt. Governor and finally, it was decided in the interest
of the project that DDA will go ahead and will try to recoup this money, but
the State Government and the State PWD did not have enough resources
and funds.  So, we have not got that money.  It was also decided that the
cost of these roads would be put on the development cost. So, these costs
have been loaded on the project and recovered by DDA.”
20. The witness added:—
“We are loading this cost on the overall development cost. So the cost of
development of roads is already being loaded. So there is no loss to the
DDA. Since Delhi Government was not constructing these roads in time, it
was decided that in our colonies where roads are the impediments, we
would construct these Master Plan roads.”
21. Asked to explain as to why the residents of the colonies have to bear the
increased burden because of the failure of the Delhi Government to fulfil their
responsibility to construct the roads, the Secretary, Urban Development stated as
under:—
“It is not correct entirely to say that the whole amount of road construction
is loaded to the individual residents living there.  It is a part of the
infrastructure development, the cost of which is also built into total land
value that is put up by DDA.  The difficulty, at that time, was that if they
had waited and continued to discuss it, it would have taken longer.”
22. On being enquired whether DDA have recovered the money spent on these
Master Plan road constructions, a representative of DDA replied during evidence as
under:—
“...the issue has been taken up with the PWD time and again. But because
of the urgency of the work we have been finishing it and we have been
writing and the issue is in a stalemate and a final decision has not been
taken.”
23. The Secretary, Urban Development supplemented as under:—
“…..efforts were made to get reimbursed this amount from the Government
of NCT of Delhi, but this money was not forthcoming. They had their own
resource constraint and I am not commenting on that, but the facts available
to me as on date are these. I am afraid that in the situation of Delhi, it will
continue.  Some roads will be maintained by Delhi PWD as per their budget
provisions and in areas which are being developed by DDA, DDA will
have to upgrade them because they are not only for providing residences
also for providing infrastructure, and I think, they must bear the cost.
How much should go into infrastructure and how much should be passed
on to the consumers is a separate matter which they need to look into, but

8
the infrastructure must be provided by DDA because the cost of the land is
recovered by them in setting up a colony.  I think, they will examine the other
aspect of procedure etc. as to why it was done in anticipation and all that.”
He further stated:—
“After all, DDA also gets money from the public, and that money was
spent in upgradation of the infrastructure.  This was a policy decision
taken by the Lt. Governor as Head of the State, and also as the Chairman
of the DDA.”
24. In a post evidence reply, Ministry have informed the Committee that DDA
have also constructed Master Plan roads for Narela Sub-City and Rohini Sub-City in
the interests of the residents and have also taken up some Master Plan roads in trans-
Yamuna areas.
III. Award of  Works
(a) Award of works at higher rates without adequate justification
25. In DDA the works are awarded in accordance with the provisions of the
sections 14 to 19 of CPWD Works Manual. Tenders for works are to be scrutinized by
the Division concerned and its recommendations for acceptance of a tender and award
of the work submitted to the zonal Chief Engineer for approval. Works valued at more
than Rs. 2.50 crore have to be submitted by the Chief Engineer to the Works Advisory
Board for approval. Scrutiny of the tenders includes an assessment of the rates offered
and it is incumbent upon the divisional officers concerned to ensure that the rates
recommended for approval are fair as well as consistent with that approved for similar
works at the same time.
26. Audit scrutiny of award of three works relating to strengthening of roads
revealed that works were awarded at rates higher than that of a similar work awarded at
the same time in Dwarka Phase I, Group I, as tabulated below:
Sl. Name of Estimated T endered Percentage Percentage Percentage Cost
No. Work cost amount awarded awarded difference difference
(Rupees after above above between (Rupees
in crore) negotiation estimated estimated work in crore)
(Rupees in cost cost in awarded
crore) Dwarka and that
Phase-I in Dwarka
Group-I Phase-I
Group-I
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Strengthening of 30.33 33.81 11.46 1.30 10.16 3.08
roads at
Dwarka
Phase-II
Group-I

9
2. Strengthening 22.28 24.50 9.98 1.30 8.68 1.93
of
roads at
Dwarka
Phase-I
Group-III
3. Strengthening 23.25 25.98 11.72 1.30 10.42 2.42
of
roads at
Dwarka
Phase-I
Group-II
According to Audit award of above works at higher rates resulted in an additional
expenditure of Rs. 7.43 crore and undue benefit to the contractor.
27. Explaining their position on the Audit observation, DDA stated (December
2005) that though the names of the works were similar, the actual site condition, scope
and quantum of work differed in all the cases. It was added that the contractor had
inadvertently quoted a rebate of 14.1 per cent on the quoted rates. Moreover, rates
received in one case should not be construed to form an opinion about the prevailing
market rates in other cases. However, Audit contended that all the works were at
Dwarka and related to Master Plan roads comprising of roads, bridges and culverts
and were awarded in the same month. Audit compared the detailed schedule of items
and confirmed that the nature of the items of work were identical in all the cases. In fact,
the number of items was less in those works for which higher rates had been awarded.
Further, the number of bridges required etc. should have been clearly quantifiable and
in case more earthworks was to be done, this would have been accounted for through
increase in the quantum or scope of the specific item of work.
28. Explaining the circumstances leading to award of works at higher rates, the
representative of DDA stated during evidence as under:—
“….there was an inadvertent rebate of 14.1 per cent given by the contractor,
about which he wrote to DDA later on. That had affected the quotation.
Overall, it may be in the same locality, but the two rates cannot be
similar….out of four works, in three works, M/s. Unitech Ltd. was the same
contractor….M/s. Unitech was repeatedly asked to reduce the rates and
they placed on record that in the first tender, their rates were inadvertently
quoted low and they are not prepared to reduce. So, the Works Advisory
Board in its fifth meeting accepted the tenders. All the three tenders were
considered to be more nearer to the market rate than the first tender.”
29. In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during evidence
deposed  as under:—
“...Frankly speaking, in the first tender a rebate of 14 per cent is inexplicable,
and this has given rise to subsequent audit objections. I entirely agree
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

10
with my colleague that but for this inadvertent rebate the audit objection
would not be there.”
30. Giving reasons for quotation of lower rates for the first tender by M/s Unitech,
a representative of DDA during evidence stated as under:—
“In the lowest tender which M/s Unitech had quoted, there were three
reasons, which we can probably estimate, as to why the tender rates
quoted were lower.  One, there were approaches available for transportation;
and two, the bridge component in that particular tender was around 4.5 per
cent, whereas in other tenders, it varied from 8 to 11 per cent. From our
technical background, we can say that this component normally costs
more than the other things.  So, justifications were prepared, the rates
were compared with the tenders of NHAI and PWD, and then the Chief
Engineer specifically recommended that the rates were reasonable.
Negotiations were also conducted, and in one of the tenders, Rs. 73 lakh
was reduced, and in another tender, Rs. 2.18 crore was reduced during the
negotiations. The Works Advisory Board, as told by the Vice-Chairman,
held five meetings and the rates were reduced to a reasonable level.  All
the works have been completed to the satisfaction of the DDA as well as
the third party, that is, the Central Road Research Institute, which verified
the quality at various stages.”
31. In a subsequent note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry sought to
clarify that no undue benefit was extended to the contractor and explained the DDA’s
system of approving tenders as under:—
“Tenders are examined by concerned Executive Engineers/Superintending
Engineers/Chief Engineers. Detailed justification of each item is prepared
based on procedure laid down in para 18.12.6.1 of CPWD Works Manual
2003. The market rates of all items are also fixed by a Committee of SE
Planning & Field. These tenders are further examined by Finance, Chief
Engineer (QC), Chief Engineer (HQ) and the concerned Chief Engineer.
The Works Advisory Board chaired by VC, DDA and consisting of Finance
Member, Engineer Member, Chief Accounts Officer, Chief Engineer (QC),
Chief Engineer (concerned) discusses the tenders thoroughly. The rates
of these tenders were compared with NHAI, & PWD road tenders and
were found to be lower.  In view of the fact that the rates received were
lower than justified rates as well prevailing market trends, tenders were
negotiated, rates to the extent of Rs. 0.73 crore and Rs. 2.18 crore were
reduced and thereafter accepted.”
32. Asked why DDA was not able to award the subsequent works at the same
rate quoted by the M/s Unitech for the first work, the Ministry stated in a note as
under:—
“DDA has also informed that the rates quoted by the contractors for all
the groups were within the justified rate.”

11
33. When asked as to why DDA did not go for fresh tendering or re-tendering
when the contractor refused to reduce the rates, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development during evidence stated as under:—
“In each of the tenders, seven tender papers were sold.  In one case four
and in one case five tenders were received.  Tenders were received and
they are roughly 1.3 per cent, 11 per cent, 9 per cent or 11 per cent above
the estimated cost. After reduction, they have come down to 11.46, 9.98,
and 11.72.  It is a matter of subjective judgment whether you should go for
re-tendering or you should accept it.  If there was only one tender or two
tenders, then probably re-tendering could have been done.  To take the
work forward it is a call which has to be made by the officers.”
(b) Award of work without ensuring availability of structural drawing and  material
34. As per the CPWD Works Manual, no tender shall be invited unless stipulated
material are available or are likely to be received before the work commences and
essential architectural and structural drawings together with specifications are ready
for being made available to the contractor at the time of invitation of tenders. Audit
review revealed that the work of construction of a peripheral storm water drain in
sectors 1 and 2 of Dwarka was initially awarded to a contractor, M/s NRB Associates
in September 1996 at a cost of Rs. 1.47 crore for completion by October 1997. As the
firm failed to complete the work, the contract was rescinded and the remaining work
awarded in October 2003 to another contractor at tendered amount of Rs. 96.09 lakh for
completion by 17 July 2004. The work was finally completed in September 2005 after
lapse of more than one year due to non- availability of structural drawings and non-
availability or short supply of steel and cement, which were to be supplied by the
department.
35. In their explanation to the Audit observation, the Ministry in a note stated
that in 1996-97, while entering into contract with M/s NRB Associates for the work, all
the structural drawings were based on construction of RCC box drain with cement
concrete (1:1 ½ : 3). However since the said agency could not complete the work, it was
decided to assign the balance work, at the risk and cost to another agency namely
Sushil Kumar and Company. At this time i.e. in 2003, a revised IS code 2000 was already
in force. Based on this revised code, the Works Advisory Board gave approval for the
remaining work to be taken up based on using M-25 Grade as mandatory requirement
as per revised concrete code IS 456-2000. As a result of this revised code being made
applicable to the balance work, it became necessary to get structural design/drawings
revised. This resulted in some delay to the work. Moreover during this period, there
was a steep rise in the prices of steel and cement, which also resulted in shortage in the
availability of these materials resulting in delay in execution of the work. The work has
been completed on 15.9.2005.
36. Audit however, contended that the IS Code was revised in July 2000 whereas
the remaining work was awarded in October 2003 and hence, the structural drawings
should have been prepared as per the revised IS code before the award of the work to
the contractor. Moreover, it was incumbent upon the DDA to ensure availability of the
materials before commencement of the work.

12
37. In a subsequent note, the Ministry have submitted that the Central Road
Research Institute (CRRI), a Government body, was engaged as consultants for design,
who supplied the tentative and final drawings for the project.  The works were delayed
due to reasons beyond the control of the DDA only part of site was not available and
accordingly only part of the work was held up due to hindrance beyond control, while
the work was in progress in the rest of the available site.
38. Asked why DDA had failed to prepare the structural drawings as per the
revised Code for awarding the remaining work in October 2003 even though the new IS
Code for RCC works was revised way back in July 2000, the Ministry in a note stated
as under: —
“The original work was awarded initially in 1996 and as per the CPWD
Manual, NIT for the balance work was also prepared on the basis of the
original NIT.  In the case of any work which is carried out at the risk and
cost of the original agency, the items of work remain the same as given in
the original NIT.  Though the IS Code was prevailing in the year 2000, the
provision of M-25 concrete was not taken in the NIT for the balance work,
due to the above reasons.  It was, however, the W AB that while approving
the tender directed to implement the provision given in the IS Code 456/
2000.”
39. Pointing out the failure of the contractor to complete the contracted work, the
Committee enquired about the precautions taken by DDA while awarding a work to the
lowest tenderer so that the quality and timeframe of the work are not compromised. In
response, the Ministry replied in a note as under:—
“Before awarding the work to the lowest tenderer his financial and technical
capability to execute the work is examined. The quality of work is not
compromised at any stage, because of the lowest rate quoted by the
tenderer.  Once a contractor backs out after tendering or refuses to carry
out the work, action is taken by DDA to forfeit the Earnest Money as well
as to debar the agency for further tendering.”
40. The Committee desired to know whether time and cost overruns incurred in
the completion of the work and if so what action was taken against the first contractor
who had failed to complete the work within the stipulated time.  In response, the
Ministry stated in a note as under:—
“It has been indicated by DDA that the balance work was completed
in Sept., 2005.  The cost overrun is approx. Rs. 28.03 lakh.  10% penalty on
the estimated cost was imposed on the original agency for not completing
the work within the stipulated time.  Besides the agency was debarred
from further tendering for DDA works.”
41. Enquired whether there was any lapse on the part of concerned DDA officials
which led to failure in revision of the structural drawings as per the new Code for RCC
works and if so, whether responsibility has been fixed for the same, the Ministry in a
note submitted that no action was called for by DDA against any official.

13
(c) Award of works without ensuring availability of clear sites
42. Section 15.2.1.3 of the CPWD Works Manual provides inter-alia  that
availability of clear site; funds and approval of local bodies should be ensured before
approval of the Notice Inviting Tenders (NIT). The purpose of these provisions is to
ensure that works once awarded are executed without any hindrance or delay, which
may entail escalation in costs. Audit however, found that in five cases of works relating
to Dwarka Project, there was failure on the part of DDA to ensure clear site and removal
of all hindrances before award of works and ineffective co-ordination with the civic
agencies .  The details of these works are as under:—
(i) Strengthening of the existing two lanes carriage way, construction of
additional four lane service road, footpath, drainage works and certain
bridges and culverts at Dwarka Phase-II, Group-I
43. This work was awarded to a firm in February 2001 at its tendered amount of
Rs.33.81 crore for completion by 10 February 2002. The work was actually completed
on 29 December 2003.  The delay was on account of hindrances due to IOC pipeline
running below the site, electric duct sewer work in progress, shifting or electric pole
and MTNL cable  non-availability of drawing of a bridge and stoppage of work due to
VVIP visit. However the concerned Chief Engineer had assured the Works Advisory
Board at the time of its approval in November 2000 that the site was available for the
work. A sum of Rs.1.87 crore was paid to the contractor on account of these delays
under clause 10CC of the agreement.
44. Commenting on the Audit findings, DDA stated that a clear site is not always
available and work is often commenced on available portions of the site and action
initiated simultaneously to clear the hindrances.  The total period of hindrance works
out to 1486 days while the work was delayed by 700 days (Appx.) indicating that in
spite of the hindrances, the progress of work was accelerated.  The cost of escalation
is payable even otherwise during the stipulated period of the contract.  Out of Rs. 1.87
crore as mentioned by the audit, a sum of Rs.1.06 crore would have been paid even if
the work had been completed during the stipulated period as this amount had to be
paid due to cost escalation during the stipulated period of the contract. Further
hindrances that are not attributable to the Agency and were beyond control of DDA,
related to a pipeline of I.O.C. from Mathura to Jallandhar, which was passing below the
site of the bridge and being a very sensitive zone, the work on both the sides of the line
was not allowed. Ultimately the alignment of bridge was shifted resulting in delay in
completion of work.
45. In their vetted comments, Audit had pointed out that existence of the pipe
and the need to change the alignment of the works would have been apparent had
there been a proper site survey before commencement of the work.  Moreover, delay
was also caused by other hindrances, which could have been avoided or minimized
with better co-ordination and pursuance with other utility service providers.  Further,
the cost escalation mentioned by the department was hypothetical and was on account
of rise in the cost of labour and materials and it in no way justifies delays caused by
such poor planning and co-ordination.

14
46. In a further note submitted to the Committee, the Ministry explained their
position as under:—
“Before call of tender, the site surveys were conducted and that IOCL
pipeline was running across Dwarka, was known. It was expected that the
issue would be resolved before award of work  during execution. However,
it took little longer time to settle the issue with Indian Oil Corporation.”
47. The Ministry have maintained that in real terms, the DDA did not suffer any
loss as pointed out by the Audit.  Had the work been awarded after getting all the
hindrances cleared, this would have resulted in delayed start of work by about two to
four years and in such circumstances, DDA would have to pay a higher cost for the
whole of the work which could have been much more than the escalation paid at
present.  The higher increased cost on this account would have resulted in higher cost
structure not only in respect of this work but for the other construction works/projects
also since such other works could not have been possible for want of approach to the
construction site of such works. DDA has therefore argued that it has saved
considerable amount by taking up these works in time.
(ii) Strengthening of the existing two lanes carriage way and construction of
additional four lanes, service road, footpath, drainage works, bridges,
culverts etc. at Dwarka Project Phase-I, Group-III
48. Audit examination revealed that the above work was awarded to a firm in
February 2001 at the tendered amount of Rs. 24.50 crore for completion by 12 February
2002. However the work was actually completed on 31 December 2002.  The delay was
attributable inter-alia to delay in shifting of electric poles, non-existence of storm
water drains which delayed construction of footpaths, leakage in water lines at
different locations and failure to finalize the lay out of inter-sections of the roads.
Consequently, Rs.77.04 lakh was paid to the firm up to December 2002 under clause
10CC of the agreement.  The Executive Engineer, South Western Division 7 stated in
July 2005 that the delay was due to existence of electricity and telephone poles, existence
of trees on the alignment etc. which had to be cleared by the department before the
road work could be taken up.  Audit however observed that DDA should have taken
up the matter effectively with the other civic agencies at appropriate level. Moreover,
factors like non-availability of layout plans were internal to DDA and should have
been settled before award of the work
49. In their response to the aforesaid Audit observation, DDA stated that while
they made efforts to clear the hindrances, it was difficult as other agencies were
involved which are not under the administrative control of DDA. Hence, there is no
alternative left but to clear the hindrances with extra cost by way of paying escalation
under the relevant clause of the agreement. While granting the Extension of Time
(EOT), these aspects are critically examined and cases are decided on merits.  Hence,
the expenditure incurred on escalation (10CC) was mandatory as delay was unavoidable
and not attributable to the construction agency. The payment under 10CC is to be
made even during the stipulated period and a sum of Rs. 53.74 lakh would have become
due on account of cost escalation, even if the work was completed during the stipulated

15
period.  Had DDA waited for complete clearance of site, it would have resulted in delay
in starting of the work. In that case the escalation in terms of the increased rates would
have had to be paid not only for the whole of this work of approach road but also for
other development and construction works which were being taken up simultaneously,
and dependent upon this approach road.  This would have caused delay in completion
of all such works & DDA would have lost substantial amount by way of increase in the
market rates/escalation.
(iii) Strengthening of the existing two lanes carriage way, construction of
additional four lanes, service road, footpaths, drainage works, bridges,
culverts and pavement at Dwarka Project Phase I, Group-I
50. Audit examination revealed that the above-mentioned work was awarded to a
firm in February 2001, at the tendered amount of Rs. 29.91 crore for completion by
12 February 2002. However, the work was completed on 6 January, 2004. The delay was
attributed to non-availability of drawings for intersection and T-junction crossing of
MP Road and existence of a PWD site office in the line of the alignment   As the
reasons were attributable to lack of adequate coordination on the part of DDA, an
amount of Rs.1.33 crore was paid to the firm for the period up to January, 2004 as cost
escalation under clause 10CC of the agreement.  According to Audit, DDA should
have ensured availability of the drawings before award or commencement of the works.
51. Contesting the Audit observation, DDA stated that full efforts were made to
get these hindrances removed and that there was no lack of coordination on their part.
Delay in the completion of work was due to several hindrances that occurred from time
to time during the progress of work. Extension of Time (EOT) upto actual date of
completion was granted without levy of compensation on the basis of recommendation
of the concerned Executive Engineer and after considering all hindrances.  The amount
of Rs.1.33 crore paid to the contractor on account of 10CC, is due to various hindrances
at site, and consists of payment due to cost escalation within the stipulated period, as
well as payment due to delay on account of hindrances. Further, the amount of Rs.1.33
crore is not only due to delay on account of hindrances, but also due to cost escalation
which would have been payable even if there was no such delay beyond stipulated
time.
(iv) Development of land at Dwarka Phase-I involving covering of Palam drain
between road 6184 to 3841 and the construction of 45 metre wide road
52. According to Audit, this work was awarded to a firm in October, 2000 at its
tendered amount of Rs. 37.21 crore for completion by 20 October, 2002.  However, the
work was still in progress as of August 2005. Audit pointed out that the delay was due
to non-supply of structural drawing for about six months coupled with encroachment
on the land.  Consequently, the firm was paid Rs. 2.39 crore for the delay under clause
10CC for the period up to January 2005.
53. Responding to the Audit observation, DDA stated that the land in question
belonged to the Irrigation & Floor Control (I&FC) Department of the Government of
Delhi who had to hand over the land. Work was also stopped for three to four months
for the monsoons. The structural drawings, after being finalized by Central Road

16
Research Institute who were the consultants for the project, were issued to the
contractor after award of the work.  But they required certain clarifications, which took
considerable time.  Hence, the hindrances were beyond the control of the authority.
According to DDA, considerable efforts were made for removing the encroachment of
land.
54. In their vetted comments, Audit stated that the reply was not acceptable as
DDA should have taken timely action to resolve pending issues with the I&FC
department and ensured that the drawings were finalized by the time of award of the
work.  The occurrence of the monsoons is an annual phenomenon and should have
been taken into account while planning the work.
55. In their response to the Audit observation, the Ministry in a note stated that
the work was taken up after detailed meetings and correspondence with Irrigation and
Flood Control Department of GNCTD. Structural drawings were issued to the agency
before the start of the work. However, certain clarifications and amendments became
necessary during execution of the work, which took considerable time to obtain such
as expert consultation from CRRI.  The Ministry insisted that some of the delay was
due to stoppage of work every year during monsoon period for 3-4 months on the
advice of the I&FC Department and escalation paid for this period is within the purview
of the agreement and was unavoidable.
(v) Strengthening of existing two lanes carriage way, construction of additional
four lanes, service roads, footpath, drainage, X-drainage work etc.
and construction of a bridge connecting Sectors-6-10 to 5-11 in Dwarka
Phase-I, Group-II
56. Audit para revealed that the above-mentioned work was awarded to a firm
in February, 2001 at its tendered amount of Rs. 25.98 crore to be completed in
February 2002. The work except the bridge was completed in April 2005.  Expenditure of
Rs. 1.15 crore was incurred on construction of the abutments and piers of the bridge,
which remained incomplete as of December 2005. Audit noted that the primary reason
for the delay in execution of the work was non-removal of a power line crossing the site
and delay in taking a decision on a service road to nearby Bharat Vandana Park. The
high-tension power line posed danger of electrocution to the construction workers at
the site as well as to vehicles that would ply on the bridge and hence its removal was
necessary before the work could be executed.  However, the matter of shifting of the
HT line was taken up by the divisional authorities with the Delhi Transco Ltd. (DTL)
only in September 2001, i.e. after award of the work while a decision on the service road
was taken only in December 2003. These delays resulted in payment of Rs. 93.42 lakh
to the contractor up to February 2004 for the road works and non-completion of the
bridge despite expenditure of Rs. 1.15 crore. According to Audit, the failure/delay is
indicative of poor planning and lack of technical foresight and timely site survey. The
designs of the bridge should have been finalized before award of the work that would
have clearly revealed the need to shift the HT lines hence promoting timely action.
57. Responding to the Audit observation, the Ministry in a note stated that the
construction of Bridge No. 2 over Palam Drain could not be done because of delay

17
caused by high-tension electric line of 220 KV passing over the said bridge. DDA
had requested Delhi Transco Company several times to raise the line. However,
that was not done. This portion of the work was, therefore, withdrawn from the
contractor/agency. Later, after the electric line was raised on 30.4.2005, the work on
the remaining portion of the bridge was taken up. The amount paid as escalation to
the agency was on account of Section 10CC for the extended period and therefore
justified. The need for raising the high-tension wire could not be anticipated since
it was only brought to the attention at the time of preparation of detailed structural
drawings by the consultant. Therefore, the hindrance could not be foreseen and
was treated as unavoidable contingency for which payments have been made to
the agency under Clause 10CC of the agreement. It would not be appropriate to
hold divisional officers responsible for the additional payment, in view of what is
stated above.
58. Audit, however, pointed out that failure of DDA to ensure clear site and
removal of all hindrances before award of the aforesaid 5 items works as envisaged in
the codal provisions and ineffective co-ordination with the civic agencies resulted in
delay in execution of works by 10 to 38 months and cost escalation of Rs. 7.29 crore.
59. Asked as to how the above works were awarded without ensuring availability
of clear sites through proper surveys, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development
during evidence deposed as under:
“It is true that ideally the sites must be clearly available and all projects
must be taken after the administrative approval and expenditure sanction
has been given. But, many a times at the field level, in cases of emergency,
in cases of projects, which have long gestation period, some works are
taken up with appropriate delegation in anticipation of administrative
approval and expenditure sanction. But, ideally, as I said, the projects
must be taken up after the sanctions have been accorded or the site
clearances are available.”
60. When asked whether any responsibility has been fixed on the concerned
officials for erroneously sanctioning the works without ensuring availability of clear
sites and related materials, which had led to avoidable hindrances and delays resulting
in cost overrun of Rs. 7.29 crore and time overrun of 10 to 38 months, the Ministry in a
note stated as under:
“The DDA has stated that the amount of Rs. 7.29 crore worked out as cost
overrun due to delay in work is true, but the cost over run worked out
due to escalation payment  i.e. payment under Clause 10CC within the
stipulated time has not been accounted for. The payment under 10CC
is about Rs. 5.00 crore. Thus the effect of cost overrun due to delay is
Rs. 2.29 crore only. In view of the difficulties faced in getting site clearance,
DDA has informed that fixation of responsibility on the officials on account
of hindrances is not called for.”

18
IV . Contract Management
(a) Inadmissible payments due to non-adherence to specifications
61. According to condition No. 135 of the additional conditions of the agreement
for construction and maintenance of roads specifications of the Union Ministry of
Surface Transport (MoST) should be followed in the absence of any specific or particular
specification attached in the tender documents. Clause 504.8 of the MoST specifications
provide that the contract unit rate for a work shall be paid in full for carrying out all the
required operations and no separate payment should be made for primer coat/tack
coat.
62. Audit scrutiny of the work relating to Master Plan Road, Phase-I, Group-III
Dwarka, However, revealed that an amount of Rs. 32.68 lakh had been released during
December 2001 to June 2004 for payment to the contractor for primer coat/tack coat
though there was no such stipulation or requirement in the schedule of quantities
attached to the tender documents/agreement. Hence, no separate payment was to be
made for primer coat/tack coat and it should have been included in the unit rate of the
work as a whole as had also been clarified by the Chief Engineer in November 2004.
DDA stated in December 2005 that an amount of Rs. 32.68 lakh had been withheld and
action would be taken on receipt of reports from the Vigilance department and the
Chief Technical Examiner (CTE).
63. In their response to the Audit findings, the Ministry of Urban Development
have stated that the item of tack coat was executed & paid under agreement item
No. 7(a) &(b) to the tune of Rs. 31.31 lakh. The item of priming coat was executed as an
extra item No. 2(i) & payment made to the tune of Rs. 21.57 lakh. A similar work was
checked by CTE in a division of this Zone (WD-6) where the payment of these items,
were also made.  During the intensive examination by CTE, he was of the view that the
part payment of tack coat and total payment of priming coat is not admissible.
Accordingly CE (DWK) Vide his letter No. 13 (231) WD-6/2002/913 dated 18.10.2003
issued instructions to withhold the amount as pointed out by CTE pending clearance
from the Vigilance Department where the matter is being investigated. In this group the
total amount paid on tack coat & priming coat works out to be Rs. 52.88 lakh. The
amount withheld on account of CTE’s observations works out to Rs. 32.68 lakh. The
balance amount of Rs. 20.20 lakh, which is not covered under the observations of the
CTE is admissible for payment.  The balance amount withheld on account of CTE’s
observation works out to Rs. 32.68 lakh. The matter was referred to CVC and a view on
the balance payment is being taken in DDA on the basis of observations of CVC.
64. Similarly, an amount of Rs. 40.14 lakh was separately paid during
December 2001 to December 2003 to the contractor during execution of work of Master
Plan Road Phase-I, Group-I, Dwarka for tack coat/primer coat though there was no
such stipulation in the tender documents/agreement. Both the CTE as well as the Chief
Engineer had clarified in November 2004 that the amounts were not payable. DDA
informed (December 2005) that an amount of Rs. 46.48 lakh had been withheld upto the
22nd Running Account bill and action would be taken on receipt of reports from the
CTE and the Vigilance Department.

19
65. In a subsequent note, the Ministry have submitted that the points related to
tack coat and primer coat and were referred to CVC and the same has been dropped by
the CVC.  In view of these facts, no recovery from the contractor is required.
As regards report of Chief Technical Examiner (CTE), DDA has reported that CTE has
inspected only open work of construction of Master Plan Road, Group-II Phase-I.
(b) Injudicious reversal of decision to rescind contract resulted in delay as well as
non-recovery of Rs. 28.03 lakh from contractor
66. Audit para revealed that work of construction of peripheral storm water drain
in sectors 1 and 2 of Dwarka was awarded to a firm, M/s NRB Associates at its tendered
amount of Rs. 1.46 crore with stipulated date of start and completion as 8 October, 1996
and 7 October, 1997 respectively. The work was rescinded on 5 August, 1998 on the
ground of delay in completion of the work. Relying on assurances given by the firm as
to expeditious completion of the work, it was subsequently decided with the approval
of the Chief Engineer on 7 June, 2001 to revoke the decision to rescind the contract and
allow the contractor to resume the work. However, the firm could not complete the
work and the contract was finally rescinded on 1March 2003 at the risk and cost of the
contractor. In the meantime, over five years had elapsed since the stipulated date of
completion. Work worth Rs. 1.14 crore had been completed by the contractor at the
time of final rescinding of the contract. The balance of the work was awarded to
another firm in October 2003 at their tendered amount of Rs. 96.09 lakh against estimated
cost of Rs. 84.15 lakh at the risk and cost of the Original firm. The work was completed
in September 2005.
67. According to Audit the decision of DDA to reverse the rescission of the
contract proved to be injudicious as it was made without a realistic assessment of the
capabilities, track record and intention of the firm. This resulted in avoidable delay in
completion of the work as well as further escalated the cost. An amount of Rs. 28.03 lakh
including compensation leviable under the terms of the contract and the risk and cost
amount remained to be recovered from the first contractor. DDA stated in December 2005
that the decision to reverse the rescission of the contract was approved by the Work
Advisory Board on the basis of assurances given by the contractor, which he failed to
subsequently live up to. Action for filing a recovery suit was under process.
68. Asked about the rationale behind revoking the decision to rescind the contract
and allowing the contractor to resume the work and the subsequent failure of the
contractor to complete the work, the Ministry in a note explained the position of the
case as under:—
“After rescission of the contract, M/s NRB Associates approached various
higher authorities of DDA for revocation of rescission of the contract.  They
also promised to complete the whole work including construction of RCC box
drain work vide their letters dated 30.4.2001, 25.9.1998, 2.12.1998, 18.12.1998,
19.1.2000, 2.2.2000, 1.3.2001 & 6.5.2000.
Considering the assurances and undertakings vide said letters of contractor,
it was decided to re-award the work including RCC box drain portion to
M/s NRB Associates at their old agreement rates. Accordingly, letter of
revocation of rescission of contract was issued vide letter No. F.54 (10)

20
EE/WD-10/A/2003 dated 7.6.2001 with stipulated period of 12 months to
complete the entire balance work including c/o RCC box drain portion.  At the
time of revocation of contract, the stipulated date of start and stipulated date
of completion was fixed as 7.6.2001 and 6.6.2002 respectively. To complete the
whole work of construction of RCC box drain in time, the agency was requested
through letters and telegrams from time to time.  The construction of RCC box
drain was not even started by him, despite issue of drawing and structural
design for RCC box drain handed over to him on 3.2.1998.  The contractor
even failed to complete the brick masonry drain work, wherever it was feasible.
Since 7.10.2002, the contractor did not turn up to bring any material for
construction and thus the work remained suspended without any valid
reasons.
Show cause notice under clause ‘3’ was served upon the contractor vide
office letter No. F.54 (10) EE/WD-10/DDA/1433 dated 25.10.2002 and even
No. 74 dated 16.1.2003 through registered AD post but no response was
received. The notice under clause 2 of the agreement was also served upon
from the office of Suptdg. Engineer/Civil Circle-13, DDA vide letter No. EE (P)/
CC-13/F.3 (525) 2001/Pt.IV/125 dated 21.1.2003.
The Agency’s letter No. nil dated 12.7.02 and dated 11.11.2002 also showed
their inability to execute the RCC box drain work in their old rates (agreement
rates), which is breach of commitment/undertaking and agreement as well.
Ultimately, W AB in its meeting held on 26.12.2002 decided to rescind the
contract and get the work, done at the risk and cost of the original agency
with the approval of CE (Dwarka)/SE, CC-13. The contract has been rescinded
vide letter No. F.54 (10) EE/WD-10/DDA/95-96/397 dated 1.3.2003 and levy of
compensation to the tune of Rs. 14,52,856/- has also been imposed on the
contractor by SE/CC-13 vide his letter No. EE (P)/CC-13/F.3 (525) 2001/Pt.IV/
369 dated 24.2.2003 which they failed to pay so far.  Later on a circular was
also issued to all DDA offices vide letter No. F.54 (10) EE/WD-10/95-96/466
dated 12.3.2003.
Finally, the tenders for balance work were called with the approval of W AB
and the balance work was awarded to the agency M/s Sushil Kumar. & Co.
vide letter No. F.54 (12) EE/WD-10/DDA/2003-04/1701 dated 8.10.2003.”
69. The Ministry further stated that the aforesaid work has been completed on
15.09.2005. The action for filing recovery suit of Rs. 28.03 lakh against M/s NRB
Associates is already in process. DDA has been instructed to file the recovery suit
without delay.
V .  Poor planing and co-ordination of works
(a) Construction of command tanks without ensuring availability of the required water
70. The Project Report prepared in July 1992 for the development of Dwarka
Phase-I envisaged a water requirement of 80 MGD (Million Gallons per Day) to cater to
an anticipated population of about 12 lakh in the sub-city. Based on a norm of storage
capacity equal to 40 per cent of daily requirement, the project report anticipated a
requirement of six command tanks. Based on these projections, DDA planned the
construction of four command tanks in phase I and two in Phase-II for the supply of

21
water to the general public. The position of the construction and utilization of the four
command tanks in phase I was as under:—
Command Year & month Y ear & month of  Cost Capacity of Present
Tank Number of start of work completion (Rupees in the tank availability
crore) (MGD) of water
  (MGD)
1 . October 1999 October 2001 17.13 13 Nil
2 . October 1996 February 1999 6.22 10  3
3 . September 2001 March 2004 7.61 7 Nil
4 . November 1997 May 1999 4.40 6 Nil
71. The storage capacity thus created by DDA was of 36 MGD whereas the
present availability of water from the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) was only three MGD with
effect from July 2004.
72. According to Audit, the construction of the command tanks was not linked
with the actual requirement as well as availability of water. Based on the present
population in Dwarka, the requirement of water was actually only 10 MGD as of
February 2005. DJB had expressed their inability to supply any more than three MGD
of water to Dwarka in the immediate future till the availability of raw water improves.
This quantum of three MGD of water supplied by DJB or in fact even the full present
requirement of 10 MGD was within the capacity of command tank No.2 alone. Hence,
the remaining tanks would remain idle till the requirement increased and availability of
water from DJB. Moreover, as the command tanks are underground structures, prolonged
non-use would result in their progressive deterioration and blockage requiring
additional funds to render them usable at a subsequent stage.
73. In their response to the Audit observation, the Ministry stated that the
command tanks have been constructed as per scheme approved by DJB. Water cannot
be supplied from one tank to the whole of Dwarka. Infrastructure is created not for
immediate use; rather the same is required to be used during the years to come.  Such
big tanks cannot be constructed within a short period. These are to be constructed to
cater to the future needs of the population. Moreover, the cost factor for early
construction is also beneficial to DDA. The cost of the construction has now increased
manifold. The services are ultimately to be handed over to D.J.B., which needs specified
number of tanks as per their approved scheme. As regards expenditure on making the
tanks usable at a later stage, it is intimated that the maintenance expenditure on wear
and tear is a routine feature in all types of infrastructure whether used immediately or
not. The Ministry also stated that command tank Nos. 2, 3 & 4 are being utilized at
present.  The Sonia Vihar water treatment plant of Delhi Jal Board is expected to be
operational shortly, and all the four tanks will be getting water. As such, the observa-
tion of the audit that there were no immediate prospects of utilization of the three tanks
may not be appropriate.
74. When asked about the justification for incurring an expenditure of Rs. 29.14
crore on the construction of four command tanks, when three out of four tanks remained
idle, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“DDA has stated that Dwarka Project envisages supply of drinking water
to an area as large as 5648 hectares of land, intended for housing one

22
million people. This is planned to be accomplished by providing 6 command
tanks covering various sectors.  In the 162nd meeting of the Standing
Committee held on 6.2.1996 in the chamber of Chief Secretary, GNCTD, it
was decided that DDA should expedite the construction of commands
tanks and DJB will supply 10 MGD water to DDA at command tank No. 2.
…thus DDA has constructed four command tanks so far and the fifth tank
is under construction for which work has been awarded recently.  Three
tanks are in operation.  Due to inadequate water pressure, the fourth tank
could not be made operational.  Creation of infrastructure requires sufficient
time and that is why DDA has constructed the command tanks on the
assurance of DJB that they would provide water for filling up the tanks
and supply of water to the residents of Dwarka Sub-city.  DDA has been
trying its best at various levels to get the required quantity of water from
DJB but due to its own constraints, DJB has not been able to supply the
required quantity of water.  The matter is still under active pursuasion with
DJB for getting the required quantity of water and also for handing over
the water supply system to DJB.
The maintenance cost is nil except expenditure on watch and ward by
DDA officials. The annual expenditure on manpower for all the tanks is
approximately Rs. 3.00 lakh per year.”
 (b) Construction of underground water reservoir without ensuring availability of
water
75.  The construction of two underground water reservoirs of 3.75 MGD
capacity each was commenced in February 1997 and completed in November 2000
in Rohini Phase-III at a total cost of Rs. 4.64 crore. Audit pointed out that as per
the project report on development of Rohini Sub-city, the water requirement of
Phase-III was 10 MGD by 2005-06. However, the actual present requirement was
eight MGD of which only 0.30 MGD was being supplied by DJB. Due to the lack
of water, these underground tanks remained unutilized even after expiry of five
years since their completion.  It was therefore, apparent that the construction of
the underground water reservoirs was not linked to either the actual requirements
or the prospect of availability of water resulting in the expenditure being rendered
idle.
76. Responding to the Audit observation, the Ministry in a note stated that
coordination meetings are being held and all efforts are made to have proper
coordination with all the concerned civic authorities. The expenditure has been
incurred on the infrastructure based on actual requirement.  At the time of planning,
the capacity of tanks is to be decided with reference to the full occupancy. The
tanks cannot be constructed in stages or in parts. The scheme for underground
reservoirs as planned by DDA has been technically approved by DJB as per
norms laid down by them. The capacity was also decided by the Delhi Jal Board.
However, the DJB has not been able to supply the requisite quantity of water due
to general water shortage.

23
77. When asked to explain the rationale for incurring expenditure on construction
of the reservoirs when there was no immediate prospect of their utilization. The Ministry
in a note stated as under:—
“DDA has stated that the construction of the two reservoirs at Rohini is
not related to availability of water.  The capacity of the reservoir is decided
with reference to the full occupancy/requirement. The reservoirs had been
constructed as per the scheme approved by Delhi Jal Board.  DDA could
not put up infrastructure constructed to its optimum use in view of the
inadequate supply of water.”
78. On being enquired whether the structure of the reservoirs which remained
idle were facing any deterioration as also the annual maintenance cost thereof, the
Ministry stated in their note as under:—
“DDA has in formed that there is no deterioration in the structure.  As
such, no additional expenditure will be required when the same is put to
use.  There is  only marginal expenditure on watch and ward amounting to
Rs. 2 lakh per annum.”
79. On being pointed out the poor planning and coordination work on the part of
DDA in execution of various works, a representative of DDA during evidence stated as
under:—
“…coordination is done at the level of the Vice-Chairman in our senior
officers meeting, and the projects are properly monitored. There is also a
system of coordination at the level of the Vice-Chairman, and the
Lt. Governor (LG) also holds weekly meetings of the senior officers. So,
I would like to submit that coordination is there in different departments.”
80. In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development supplemented
as under:—
“...coordination is required at two levels. One is coordination within the
DDA because approval of site plans and layouts, etc. is done by planning
and the construction work is done by engineers. This coordination is
done at the level of the Vice-Chairman and the LG. LG meets all the Heads
of Departments every Tuesday, and the Vice-Chairman has his weekly
meetings. But the difficulty is when it comes to coordination with the
external agencies, that is, where it is a project-based coordination and
monitoring, which helps.”
VI. Inadequate quality control
Lack of quality test of infrastructure created
81. According to the Audit the agreement for construction of command tank
No. 3 in Dwarka Phase I, August 2001 stipulated that the contractor should fill up the
tank to a level of  212.55 metre immediately after the construction and curing is complete
in order to test its retaining capacity and detect leakages etc. Subsequently, work of
applying a minimum of two coats of water base protective epoxy coating with sikgard

24
on retaining wall, water tanks floor or masonry structure at a cost of Rs. 86.41 lakh was
sanctioned as an extra item in February 2002. However, neither was the test conducted
on the plea of lack of water nor was the epoxy coating applied. Consequently, the
quality of the work done at a cost of Rs. 7.61 crore could not be assured. DDA accepted
in December 2005 that the work relating to water base protective epoxy coating had not
been executed as of November 2005.
82. Explaining their position on the Audit observation, the Ministry stated in a
note stated that Protective Epoxy Coating was not an item included in the agreement in
respect of the work of Command tank.  The work of epoxy coating was to be taken up
under clause 12 of the Agreement which provides for extra items and addition / alteration
etc. The expenditure on the extra item was got approved from Chief Engineer (DWK)
for an amount of Rs. 86.41 lakh.  Before the execution could be taken up, it was found
necessary to revise the rate. Thereafter, work on one of the four tanks in Command 3
was got executed at the revised rate as an extra item under the agreement for an amount
of Rs. 7, 20,594.  For remaining three tanks, tenders have been floated. As far as filling
of water is concerned, the agency usually kept tank filled as per the conditions of the
agreement and in the instant case the tanks were filled and leakage was checked and
the results were found satisfactory. It is stated here that final testing is yet to be done
after the proper connection of tanks with the water gallery etc. and for that a sum of
Rs. 50, 000 has been withheld from the dues of the agency which is also executing the
work of water gallery and pump house etc.
83. As regards  internal control on quality of work in DDA, the Ministry informed
that the works are inspected by the Quality Control Cell of DDA, which ensures that the
works are being carried out as per laid down specifications and drawings.  The Reports
of the Quality Control Department are forwarded to the respective Engineering Wing in
order to ensure that defects, wherever these are noticed by the Quality Control Cell, are
removed.  The Cell itself is independently headed by an officer of the Chief Engineer level
who reports any non-compliance of instructions to the Vice-Chairman, DDA.
84. To a specific query on how DDA ensure that the quality of the works executed
by its contractors is well within the accepted standards, the Ministry responded
as under:—
“The works are carried out according to the specifications.  Field tests are also
conducted to assess the quality of work according to the specifications.
Besides the supervision of the work, the DDA Engineers also inspect the work
to ensure better quality of work.   Besides, the works are also inspected by the
Quality Control Wing of DDA and by the Chief Technical Examiner (CTE) of
CVC. To maintain the quality of work, the services of reputed government
organization like CRRI, IIT, NCCBM, and CBRI, Roorkee for Third Party Quality
Assurance are also engaged on certain prestigious projects.”
85. Asked whether responsibility has been fixed on the concerned officials for
their failure to conduct quality test in the case of the construction of command tank
No. 3 in Dwarka Phase I,  the Ministry in their reply stated as under:—
“The DDA has informed that necessary tests to check the retaining capacity
of the command tank No. 3 and to check the leakages were conducted by

25
the field staff.  No defects have been observed in the structure, therefore,
action against the staff is not called for.”
VII. Internal Audit
86. DDA has an Internal audit cell headed by the Member (Finance) who is
assisted by the Chief Accounts Office along with other staff. There are a total of 197
auditable units of which 61 were at its headquarters and 136 in its field formations. The
Internal Inspection Manual of the Authority did not specify the frequency or periodicity
of the audit to be conducted by the internal audit wing. It however, provided that the
Member (Finance) was authorized to approve the quantum and extent of audit applicable
to various records. The Manual also envisages that the internal audit parties should
conduct audit of various schemes/projects being executed by the various divisions.
87. An appraisal of the functioning of the internal audit wing of DDA with special
reference to the checks exercised in respect of the developmental schemes by the
Audit indicated that while the coverage of units had steadily improved over the last
four years, the coverage was still just about 30 per cent of the total number of auditable
units as tabulated below:—
Sl. Financial Total No. of auditable No. of units Percentage of units
No. Y ear units audited audited
1. 2002-03 197 15 7.61
2. 2003-04 197 37 18.78
3. 2004-05 197 53 26.90
4. 2005-06 197 59 29.94
88. Audit further pointed out that no review had so far been conducted of any of
the developmental schemes being executed by the Authority during the last five years.
89. The Ministry have informed the Committee that there has been a considerable
improvement in the coverage of internal audit of DDA at Head Quarters as well as in
the field units. In the financial year 2005-06 DDA has already completed audit of
59 units.  Five Special Audit Units have also been conducted during the year 2005-06
including two special audits of Hotel Taj Palace. The new Internal Inspection Manual
is also in the advanced stage of finalization. The issues as pointed out by the Audit
such as periodicity, procedures and necessary checks to be exercised by the Internal
Audit Parties are being included in the Internal Audit Manual, which is under finalization.
90. Admitting the shortcomings in DDA’s internal audit, the Ministry were stated
that due to paucity of staff, the internal audit of various Units is in arrears.  DDA has
proposed to take steps towards strengthening of the internal audit system like
preparation of Annual Audit Plan, increasing percentage of audit coverage by
rationalizing available manpower and existing duration for auditable units, completion
of 100 per cent audit of units in a cycle of 3 to 4 years, categorization of units, etc.
Presently there are 197 auditable Units as a result of augmentation and streamlining
the internal audit system, it is expected to conduct audit of 40 units during the
year 2005-06.  The internal audit of the Divisions falling under Dwarka Zone is in
arrears due to the aforesaid reasons and is now being taken up.

26
91. Enquired about the efforts made by DDA to strengthen it’s internal audit
mechanism so as to ensure timely coverage of all major schemes executed by the
authority, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“DDA has informed that the Draft Audit Manual containing the periodicity,
procedures and checks to be exercised in Internal Audit has been finalized.
To ensure coverage of all major schemes, efforts have been made to put
them in the recently finalized Audit Plan.  Audit of Dwarka and Rohini
Projects are being taken-up in line with this objective.”
92. To a query regarding measures taken to liquidate the audit arrears
expeditiously, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“DDA has stated that it is a fact that due to shortage of audit staff in DDA,
the Internal Audit of various Units of DDA is in arrears.  Efforts are being
made to minimize the arrears. In this regard, DDA has recently prepared
the Annual Audit Plan for the year 2006-07 and it is expected that audit will
be brought up-to-date by the close of the financial year.  Efforts have been
made to classify the auditable units in annual/bi-annual/tri-annual audit
units depending upon the risk factors/the sensitivity involved in nature of
the transactions.  The Units with high risk factor have been brought under
annual audit category.
Efforts are also underway to fill-up the existing vacant posts and to divert
the staff from the other units of DDA by rationalizing the sanctioned
strength wherever possible.  By adopting such measures, it is expected to
liquidate the arrears expeditiously. As regards the question of the
computerized accounting/auditing system, this is part of the compre-
hensive computerization of DDA, which has been taken up by DDA.”
93. Asked about the extent to which the internal audit system of DDA has been
able to detect the irregularities committed by it’s officials, the Ministry in a note stated
as under:—
“At present there are five Internal Inspection Parties. After the audit is
completed, the Inspection Report containing cases of irregularities,
financial deviation, procedural lapses etc. is issued to the concerned HODs
for taking necessary remedial action.  Although, it is difficult to answer
whether internal audit has resulted in decrease of project cost, the deterrent
impact of internal audit cannot be undermined. Instances of irregularities
are brought to the notice of EM/VC from time to time for taking remedial
measures wherever necessary.’’
94. The Committee desired to know the number of meetings conducted by DDA
during a year to monitor as well as take stock of various ongoing activities. In response,
the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“DDA has indicated that besides conducting the monthly review by the
Zonal Chief Engineers, a monthly review of each zone is being done at
EM’s level.  In case of any bottlenecks in specific project, the same are
also brought to the notice of the Vice-Chairman.”

PART - II
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95. During the period from 2000-01 to 2004-05, DDA spent Rs. 2,061.56 crore
on development of land under various developmental schemes. The specific works
undertaken under these schemes included construction of master plan roads,
development of green belts, levelling and dressing of land, construction of storm
water drains, internal drains and water supply lines, construction of connected
underground water tanks and pump houses and maintenance works. The Committee
note that expenditure on 19 such developmental schemes exceeded Rs. 10 crore each.
Out of these, 6 developmental schemes involving a total expenditure of Rs. 605 crore
and constituting about 29 per cent of the total expenditure were taken up in Dwarka
and Rohini.  These schemes relate to — (i) Development of 1769.88 hectares of land
for housing colonies at Pappan Kalan in Dwarka Phase I; (ii) Construction of master
plan road in Dwarka Phase-I; (iii) Maintenance of parks and plantation activities in
the north zone; (iv) Development of 224.90 hectares of land for residential colonies in
Dwarka Phase-II; (v) Construction of master plan road in Dwarka Phase II; and
(vi) Development of 472.40 hectares of land for housing colonies in Sectors 23, 24
and 25 in Rohini.
96. The Committee note with concern that the execution of the aforesaid
six  developmental schemes in Dwarka and Rohini by DDA  revealed mismatch in
budget allocation and expenditure; lack of financial control over expenditure; non-
adherence to codal provisions in award of works; award of works without ensuring
availability of structural drawings, materials and clear sites; inadmissible payments
due to non-adherence to specifications; non-recovery of outstanding amount from the
defaulting contractor; poor planning and co-ordination of works, inadequate quality
control; and weak internal audit and lack of co-ordination with other concerned civic
and public utility agencies. The specific instances of irregularities/lapses  as
highlighted by Audit are— (i)  Expenditure of Rs. 19.56 crore was incurred in
anticipation of administrative approval and expenditure sanction, which was irregular;
(ii) Lack of adequate scrutiny of tender rates and comparison with rates accepted for
similar works during the same time leading to an additional expenditure of Rs. 7.43
crore; (iii) Delay in completion of works ranging up to over three years as well as cost
escalation of Rs. 7.29 crore; and (iv) Construction of command tanks and water
reservoirs without linking with the actual availability of water so as to enable their
utilization leading to idling of an expenditure of Rs. 33.78 crore incurred on
construction of these tanks and reservoirs due to lack of water.   These alongwith
other issues have been dealt with in detail by the Committee in the succeeding
paragraphs.
97. Section 2.1 of CPWD Works Manual, which is followed for execution of
various works in  DDA stipulate that no expenditure should be incurred without prior
27

28
administrative approval and sanction of the competent Authority and award or
execution of works should be based on technical sanction. The Committee are, however,
perturbed to find that despite this stipulation, an expenditure of Rs. 19.56 crore was
incurred in 4 Master Plan road related works such as strengthening of the existing
two lanes carriage way, construction of additional four lanes in Dwarka Project in
February 2001 in anticipation of administrative approval and expenditure sanction
undermining the financial control. While these works were awarded by deviating
from the normal procedure ostensibly on grounds of urgency, scrutiny of records,
however,  indicate that execution of these works was held up due to unresolved funding
issues with the Delhi Government. This amply shows the necessity for adhering to
prescribed procedure and the need for obtaining proper approvals before
commencement of the work. The Committee further note that there were delays
ranging from 10 months to over three years in completing these works besides cost
escalation.  What is surprising to the Committee is the fact that as many as 30 major
works have been taken up by DDA as a matter of routine by invoking the clause of
urgency over the last five years. The Committee deplore DDA for having to bypass the
normal procedure and award such a large number of works as ‘urgent issues’. Even
the connotation of the circumstances that are deemed ‘urgent’ as envisaged in
Rule 17 of the DDA Budget and Accounts Rules which states that “Inevitable
expenditure, which cannot be met by re-appropriation, may be incurred with the
previous approval of the Authority, and in emergencies, under the orders of the
Vice-Chairman, a report of which shall be made to the Authority in its next meeting”
is vague and not properly codified and has the concomitant scope for its misuse or
unrestricted manipulation. The Committee note that neither the Ministry of Urban
Development nor DDA had made efforts for circumscribing the circumstances, under
which the works are to be taken on urgent basis. The Committee do not see any
justification for awarding such a large number of works without obtaining prior
approval and sanction. The Committee  recommend that DDA should lay down a
definite set of guidelines/parameters whereunder a particular work can be taken up
as an emergent case.  The cases that are deemed emergent should be kept to the
barest minimum possible and efforts should be made to ensure that the works are
executed after due process with prior approval and sanction of the Authority.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 1)
98. The Committee note that DDA have constructed Master Plan roads in Dwarka
Project, Narela Sub-City and Rohini Sub-City and in trans-Yamuna areas with its
funds although the construction of these Roads comes under the purview of the
Public Works Department of Delhi Government. In Dwarka project, these roads were
constructed in anticipation of Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction on
the grounds of urgency. Explaining the reasons for construction of these Master
Plan roads by DDA, the Ministry have stated that despite several meetings by
Lieutenant Governor, Delhi with the Chief Secretary and the Secretary (PWD),
GNCTD, funds from PWD, Delhi were not coming up in the same pace as that of
progress of development work in Dwarka . The then Lt. Governor, under constant
public pressure, decided that the Master Plan roads should be taken up by DDA on
urgent basis. It has further been stated that this was the first time in the history of

29
DDA that the Master Plan roads were taken up by DDA on the specific instructions of
the Lt. Governor. Subsequently, a policy decision was taken by the Lt. Governor that
the construction of Master Plan roads in DDA colonies would be a part of the sub-city
development and the cost would be loaded to the overall development cost recovered
from the land/house allottees. Worse still, the roads were constructed in some selected
areas and without any agreement/understanding with the GNCTD that the cost would
subsequently be recovered from them.   As a result, DDA had failed to recover the
money from the Delhi Government and decided that the cost of these roads would be
loaded on the overall development charges to be collected from allottees which is but
regrettable. The Committee have an apprehension that if this practice is continued
unchecked it will lead to a situation that might not be very far away when the entire
responsibility for building all the roads in Delhi (being Master Plan roads) would
legally be shifted onto DDA and the burden of cost would unjustifiably be charged
from the civic population.  The Committee are of the view that since construction of
roads comes under the jurisdiction of the Government of NCT of Delhi, it would be
unjustifiable for DDA to construct  Master Plan Roads in lieu of PWD, Delhi
Government  and pass the burden to the allottees. The Committee are unhappy over
the extant arrangement whereunder DDA has taken upon itself the task of construction
of Master Plan Roads as a matter of routine and pass on the burden on to the allottees.
They desire that this situation should be remedied forthwith.  For this the DDA
should hold consultations on this matter with the GNCTD at the highest level so as to
put an end to this practice.  An institutional coordination mechanism should be set up
in DDA and GNCTD so that funds for construction of Master Plan roads are allotted
expeditiously by the GNCTD.  In exceptional cases where it is found difficult to allot
funds for Master Plan Roads by GNCTD,  DDA may construct Master Plan roads  as
a special case and in all such cases the cost should be recovered from GNCTD at the
earliest.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 2)
99. The Committee note that 3 works relating to the strengthening of roads at
Dwarka Phase-II Group-I, Phase-I Group-III and Phase-I Group-II were awarded by
DDA at rates higher than that of a similar work awarded around the same time in
Dwarka Phase-I Group-I in as much as that the cost difference in these cases were
Rs. 3.08 crore, Rs. 1.93 crore and Rs. 2.42 crore respectively. These works were
awarded in the same month and the nature of the items of work were identical in all
the cases. This, in effect, resulted in an additional expenditure of Rs. 7.43 crore. The
Ministry have contended that though works were similar, the actual site condition,
scope and quantum of work differed in all the cases.  It was further stated that in the
first tender M/s Unitech, the contracting firm, inadvertently quoted a  rebate of 14.1
percent on the quoted rates and the firm was not prepared to reduce the rates for the
other two works. However, after negotiations Rs. 73 lakh was reduced in one tender
and in another tender, Rs. 2.18 crore was reduced by the contractor. All the three
tenders were considered to be more nearer to the market rate than the first tender.
The Ministry further stated that at the instance of Vice-Chairman, DDA the Works
Advisory Board held five meetings and the rates were reduced to a reasonable level.
The Committee, however, find that in these three cases the works were awarded at

30
rates above the estimated cost by 11.46, 9.98 and 11.72 percent respectively whereas
the work in Dwarka Phase-I Group-I was awarded above the estimated cost by 1.30
percent only. This means that these three works were awarded at rates higher than
that of the work in Dwarka Phase-I Group-I by 10.16, 8.86 and 10.42 percent
respectively. The Committee are surprised to note that how a private firm like
M/s Unitech could inadvertently quoted the rates at rebate without calculating the
margin of profit from the work.  The Committee do not accept the DDA’s contention
that all the three tenders were considered to be more nearer to the market rate than
the first tender. The Committee recommend that in future a mechanism should be put
in place whereby the rates offered for works by the contractors are invariably compared
with the rates accepted for similar works within the same time frame and the number
of items in each work are clearly quantified so that the quantum or scope of the work
is properly specified with a view to ensuring that deals are made transparent and no
extra payments are paid to the contractors and that the financial interests of the
Authority are secured needless to point out that such efforts would help the common
man as DDA adds all costs to plot/flat allottees.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 3)
 100. As per CPWD Works Manual, no tender shall be invited unless stipulated
material are available or are likely to be received before the work commences and
essential architectural and structural drawings together with specifications are
ready for being made available to the contractor at the time of invitation of tenders.
The Committee note that DDA awarded the work of construction of a peripheral
storm water drain in sectors 1 and 2 of Dwarka without ensuring availability
of structural drawing and material to a contractor, M/s NRB Associates in
September 1996 for completion by October 1997. As the firm failed to complete the
work, the contract was rescinded and the remaining work was awarded in October
2003 to another contractor namely M/s Shushil Kumar & Company at tendered
amount of Rs. 96.09 lakh for completion by 17 July, 2004.  The work was finally
completed in September 2005 after lapse of more than one year due to non- availability
of structural drawings and non-availability or short supply of steel and cement, which
were to be supplied by the department. The contract value for M/s NRB Associates
was Rs. 1.47 crore and the cost over run thereof was approximately Rs. 28.03 lakh.
The Ministry have informed the Committee that the Work Advisory Board of DDA
gave approval for the remaining work to be taken up based on using M-25 Grade as
mandatory requirement as per revised concrete code IS 456-2000. This necessitated
revision of structural design/drawings based on revised code and  thus led to some
delay in the work. A steep rise in the prices of steel and cement during this period had
also resulted in shortage in the availability of these materials resulting in delay in
execution of the work.  The works were delayed due to reasons beyond the control of
the DDA. Only a part of site was not available and accordingly only some part of the
work was held up due to hindrance beyond control, while the work was in progress in
the rest of the available site. The Committee are not convinced by the reply of the
Ministry for the reason that the new IS Code was revised way back in July 2000
whereas the balance work was awarded in October 2003.  Hence the structural
drawings should have been prepared as per the new IS code well before the award of

31
the work to the second contractor. Further, as per Section 15.2.1.3 of the CPWD
Works Manual, it was incumbent upon the DDA to ensure availability of the materials
before commencement of the work.  Based on the facts of the circumstances, the
Committee cannot but come to the conclusion that the works were not delayed due to
reasons beyond the control of the DDA but due to lack of proper planning as well as
concerted efforts. It is grossly erroneous on the part of DDA to justify the delay on the
ground that only a part of the site was not available and, accordingly, only a part of the
work was held up while the work was in progress in the rest of the available site which
is nothing but to trivialize the issue to defend its lapses. The Committee recommend
that DDA should set up a monitoring cell which should meet at frequent intervals to
take stock of the progress of works with particular reference to ensuring strict
adherence to codal provisions of ensuring availability of structural drawings and
unhindered site before award of work.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 4)
101. Section 15.2.1.3 of the CPWD Works Manual provides inter-alia that
availability of clear site; funds and approval of local bodies should be ensured before
approval of the Notice Inviting Tenders. These are necessary to ensure that works
once awarded are executed without any hindrance or delay, which may entail escalation
in costs. The Committee are concerned to note that despite this codal provision, in five
cases of work relating to Dwarka Project, DDA not only failed to ensure clear site at
the time of award of the works but also could not get removed hindrances such as pipe
line running below the site, electric duct sewer work in progress, shifting or electric
pole and MTNL cable, non-availability of drawings of a bridge etc. This resulted in
delay in execution of these works by 10 to 38 months and avoidable cost escalation of
Rs. 7.29 crore.
The Committee’s examination of the five cases of works revealed that much of
the so called unavoidable hindrances were manifestation of lack of sound planning
and institutionalized mechanism for coordination with concerned civic agencies and
absence of a synchronized action plan for execution of the works in cooperation with
other agencies in DDA. Even though DDA was very much conscious of the possible
cost escalation and felt that early award of works was necessary for avoiding the
same, however, the benefits of taking up projects early on were nullified due to total
lack of initiative in taking timely efforts to remove the hindrances resulting in
avoidable time and cost over runs.  The Committee observe that frequent invoking of
Clause 10 CC of tender agreements which sanctifies extra payment for cost escalation
to the contractors on account of delays in execution of the works arising from the
hindrances, give raise to the suspicion about the possibility of deliberate exploitation
of this very clause by DDA officials in nexus with the contractors, whereunder DDA
would sanction the works without ensuring clear sites and removing obstacles and
hindrances that may arise in the course of execution of the works so that the works
may get delayed and the contractors could be extended undue favours in the form of
cost escalation. The Committee recommend that all the five cases of works, which
resulted in cost overrun of Rs. 7.29 crore and time overrun of more than 5 years,
should be thoroughly investigated with a view to fixing responsibility on the concerned

32
officials. The Committee further recommend that DDA should strictly adhere to the
codal provisions for ensuring that clear and unhindered site is available before award
of work and the clause for taking up works on emergency basis should be confined to
the rarest of the rare cases and is not resorted to on a regular basis. In this regard,
the Committee concur with the view expressed by the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development during evidence that ideally the projects must be taken up only after the
site clearances are available. To achieve this, Committee would like DDA to set up an
institutionalized mechanism in coordination with other civic agencies so that the
obstacles and hindrances are timely detected and expeditiously removed so that the
works are taken up and completed on time.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 5)
102. According to Clause 504.8 of the Ministry of Surface Transport specifications
contract unit rate for a work shall be paid in full for carrying out all the required
operations and no separate payment should be made for primer coat/tack coat.  Audit
scrutiny  of the work relating to Master Plan Road Phase-I Group-III Dwarka revealed
that an amount of  Rs. 32.68 lakh was released by DDA during December 2001 to
June 2004 for payment to the contractor for primer coat/tack coat though there was
no such stipulation or requirement in the schedule of quantities attached to the
tender documents/agreement.   According to Audit, no separate payment was to be
made for primer coat/tack coat and it should have been included in the unit rate of
work as a whole. This was also clarified by Chief Engineer in November, 2004.
Similarly in another work of Master Plan Road Phase I  Group I, Dwarka, Rs. 41.14
lakh was separately paid to the contractor for primer coat/ tack coat.  The Chief
Technical Examiner as well as the Chief Engineer clarified that the amount were not
payable. Accordingly, DDA withheld Rs. 32.68 lakh and Rs. 46.48 lakh respectively
from the payments made for these 2 works pending final action to be taken on receipt
of reports from the Vigilance Department and the Chief Technical Examiner. The
Committee was informed that the matter was subsequently referred to Central
Vigilance Commission (CVC) and a view on the balance payment is being taken in
DDA on the observations of CVC. The Committee regret to note that despite clear
specification laid down by the Ministry of Surface Transport that contract unit rate
for a work includes all the required operations including prima coat/tack coat, DDA
has conveniently ignored or by passed these specifications resulting in release of
excess amount to the contractor in 2 works relating to construction of Master Plan
roads.  Though the amount was withheld subsequently in view of the instructions  by
the Chief Engineer, nevertheless these instances points to lack of proper
understanding and interpretation the work specifications relating to construction of
road.  The Committee trust that in future DDA would take adequate precautions so
that no extra amount is paid to the contractor for carrying out these operations/items,
which per se are subsumed in the contract unit rate for the work as a whole.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 6)
103. The Committee’s examination has revealed that there is a lack of a definite
policy in DDA to deal with cases arising out of the failure of its contractors to complete
the work within the stipulated time frame. This was best manifested in its imprudent
handling of the work of construction of peripheral storm water drain in sectors 1 and

33
2 of Dwarka.  As per records, this work was awarded to a firm, M/s N.R.B. Associates
at its tendered amount of Rs. 1.46 crore with stipulated date of start and completion as
8 October 1996 and 7 October 1997 respectively. However, the work was rescinded
on 5 August 1998 on the ground of delay in completion of the work. Relying on
assurances given by the firm for expeditious completion of the work, it was
subsequently decided with the approval of the Chief Engineer on 7 June 2001 to
revoke the decision to rescind the contract and allowed the contractor to resume the
work.  As the firm could not complete the work, the contract was finally rescinded on
1 March 2003. Due to the flip-flop by DDA in the decision making process, the
proposed civic amenity could not be put in place for over 5 years. The Committee note
that at the time of final rescinding of the contract, the contractor had completed work
worth Rs. 1.14 crore and the balance of the work was awarded to another firm in
October 2003 at their tendered amount of Rs. 96.09 lakh against estimated cost of
Rs. 84.15 lakh. The work was finally completed in September 2005. The Committee
are surprised to note that the Work Advisory Board of DDA had decided to reverse the
rescission of the contract merely on the basis of assurances given by the contractor
and without conducting any due diligence and  realistic assessment of the capabilities,
track record and intention of the firm and hence was injudicious. As a result there
was unavoidable delay in completion of the work as well as cost escalation, which is
anything but regrettable. The Committee would like DDA to recover the amount of
Rs. 28.03 lakh compensation leviable, along with interests, under the terms of the
contract from the first contractor without any further delay.  The Committee trust
that DDA must have provision for black listing such defaulting contractors.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 7)
104. The Committee are dismayed to find that DDA do not have a system for
synchronizing creation of infrastructure and their utilization.   Based on the Project
Report prepared in July 1992, which envisaged water requirement of 80 MGD (Million
Gallons per Day) to cater to an anticipated population of about 12 lakh in the sub-city,
DDA planned the construction of four command tanks in phase I and two in phase II
for the supply of water to the general public. By March 2004, DDA had created a
storage capacity of 36 MGD whereas the quantum of water received from the Delhi
Jal Board (DJB) was only 2 MGD, which was subsequently increased to 3 MGD with
effect from July 2004.  As a result,   three out of the four command tanks constructed
in Dwarka in between 1999 to 2004 at an expenditure of Rs. 29.14 crore remained
idle as of December 2005. The Committee note that based on the present population in
Dwarka, the requirement of water was actually only 10 MGD as of February 2005 and
thus the construction of the command tanks was not linked with the actual requirement
as well as availability of water. The Committee observe that this quantum of 3 MGD of
water being supplied by DJB or in fact even the full present requirement of 10 MGD
was within the capacity of command tank No. 2 alone and hence the money invested on
the remaining  three unused tanks could have been avoided till the increased supply
of water is obtained from DJB. The Committee are not convinced by the Ministry’s
explanation  that such big tanks cannot be constructed within a short period in view of
the fact that the command tanks were completed within a period of  2 to 3 years
whereas the township like Dwarka took about 10 years to come up. The Committee do

34
not accept the DDA’s stand that the cost factor for early construction of the command
tanks is beneficial as the cost of construction has now increased manifold for the
simple reason that prolonged non-use of underground structures faces the risk of
their progressive deterioration requiring additional funds for their repair so as to
render them usable at a subsequent stage. In addition  expenditure on manpower for
managing these tanks approximately comes to around Rs. 3.00 lakh per year. Moreover,
the huge money invested on these assets could always have been used on other more
important and pressing requirements. The Committee are baffled  that DDA had
started construction of the fifth tank despite the fact that only three tanks are partially
in operation at present due to inadequate water supply/pressure. What is  missing in
this whole episode is  lack of anticipation and coordination with the concerned agencies
as well as  prioritizing of schemes and the objective of creating infrastructure, which
is actually required and that can be immediately usable on its completion. The
Committee urge upon DDA to take up the matter at appropriate levels to get the
required quantity of water from DJB so that the unused command tanks are put to use
without any delay. They also recommend that DDA should put in place  a proper
mechanism in coordination with other civic bodies like DJB to ensure that scarce
resources are invested wisely and assets created therefrom do not remain idle.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 8)
105. DDA constructed two underground water reservoirs of 3.75 MGD capacity
each between February 1997 and November 2000 in Rohini Phase-III at a total cost of
Rs. 4.64 crore. However, these reservoirs could not be operationalized even after five
years of their completion due to the lack of water.  The Committee note that as per
project report on development of Rohini sub-city, the water requirement of Rohini
phase III was 10 MGD by 2005-06 whereas the actual present requirement was
8 MGD, of which only 0.30 MGD was being supplied by DJB and hence the rationale
for incurring expenditure on construction of these structures without immediate
prospect of their utilization could not be justified. The Committee are concerned to
note that this mismatch between infrastructure created and prospect of their immediate
use has rendered an expenditure of Rs. 4.64 crore idle for more than 5 years besides
incurring maintenance cost amounting to Rs. 2 lakh per annum as well as risk of
deterioration in the structures created. The Committee cannot but express their
serious displeasure over the inability of DDA in linking the construction of these
underground water reservoirs to the actual requirements as well as the prospect of
availability of water and consequent failure to operationalize them. The Committee
regret to observe that this is nothing but an indication of poor planning and lack of
coordination with concerned civic agencies on the part of DDA despite the fact that
these works are supervised at the level of the Vice-Chairman, DDA.  The Committee,
therefore, recommend that institutional mechanisms should be strengthened to ensure
adequate co-ordination at all stages with other civic planning and public utility agencies
which is vital for ensuring creation of public infrastructure and facilities by DDA in
consonance with the plans and projections of the connected civic agencies so that
scarce resources are properly utilized only on infrastructures, which are actually
required and immediately usable on completion of the work, and expenditure incurred
does not remain idle.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 9)

35
106. The Committee regret to note that the internal audit cell of DDA headed by
its Member (Finance) had dismally failed to ensure timely audit of DDA’s 197 auditable
units comprising 61 units at its headquarters and 136 in field formations. Worse
still, the internal audit system prevalent in DDA has not been able to detect the
irregularities committed by it’s officials and no review has so far been conducted of
any of the developmental schemes being executed by the Authority during the last five
years.  The Committee are perturbed to find that the Internal Inspection Manual of
the Authority did not specify the frequency or periodicity of the audit to be conducted
by the internal audit wing and it was left to the authority of the Member (Finance) to
approve the quantum and extent of audit applicable to various records. Audit appraisal
of the functioning of the internal Audit wing of DDA with special reference to the
checks exercised in respect of the developmental schemes revealed that while the
coverage of units had steadily improved over the last four years i.e. 2002-2003 to
2005-2006, the coverage was less than 30 per cent of the total number of auditable
units.  The Committee are not inclined to accept DDA’s argument that paucity of staff
had led to arrears in  the internal audit of various units. The lack of staff is not a
problem that has cropped  up all of a sudden.  DDA ought to have anticipated the
problem well in advance and taken steps for deployment of adequate staff including
filling up of vacancies.  The Committee have been informed that steps are now being
taken by DDA to strengthen the internal audit system. These include  preparation of
annual Audit Plan, increasing percentage of audit coverage by rationalizing available
manpower and existing duration for auditable units, completion of 100 per cent audit
of units in a cycle of 3 to 4 years, categorization of units, etc. The Committee consider
that these steps were in fact long overdue.  They recommend that every possible step
should now be taken in full earnest by DDA  to overhaul its internal audit mechanism
to the best level possible so that the shortcomings as pointed out by the Audit such as
non-specification of frequency or periodicity of audit, procedures and necessary checks
to be exercised by the Internal Audit Parties and other possible shortcomings are
given proper consideration and included in the Internal Audit Manual currently
under finalization. In this connection, the Committee would also like to impress upon
DDA to take full advantage of the computerization and information technology in the
internal auditing so as to ensure faster and efficient disposal of work.
(Recommendation Sr. No. 10)
107. The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish the Action Taken Notes
in respect of various recommendations made in this Report, within three months
from the date of presentation of the Report.
 (Recommendation Sr. No. 11)
N
EW DELHI;
16  August, 2007
25  Sravana, 1929 (Saka)   PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
Chairman,
Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE-I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007) HELD ON 12TH JUNE, 2006
The Committee sat from 1600 hours  to 1720 hours on 12th June, 2006 in
Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Raghunath Jha
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Brajesh Pathak
5. Prof. M. Ramadass
6. Shri Mohan Singh
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
8. Shri Kharabela Swain
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Janardhana Poojary
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri Nand Lal — Principal Director (AB)
3. Shri R.K. Ghose — AG (Audit), Delhi
36

37
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri Anil Baijal — Secretary
2. Dr. M.M. Kutty — Joint Secretary (D&L)
3. Smt. Neena Garg — Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Representatives of the Delhi Development Authority
1. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Finance Member
2. Shri A.K. Sarin — Engineering Member
3. Shri V.K. Sadhu — Principal Commissioner
4. Shri R.K. Singh — Commissioner (D)
5. Shri R.K. Vats — Commissioner (LM)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has
been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Urban
Development and the Delhi Development Authority (DDA) on Chapter II of the Report
of C&AG of India for the year ended March 2005, Union Government (Civil-Autono-
mous Bodies), No. 2 of 2006 (Performance Audit) relating to ''Development of Land by
the Delhi Development Authority''. Thereafter, the Officers of the C&AG of India
briefed the Committee on the specific points arising out of the audit paragraph. Then,
the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and the Delhi Development
Authority were called in.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development informed the Committee that the
Vice-Chairman, DDA was not in a position to attend the sitting as he had undergone
emergency surgery, for which prior permission of the Chairman was obtained. The
Committee then commenced oral evidence on the subject. The Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Development and the representatives of the Delhi Development Authority
explained the various points arising out of Audit para and queries raised by the
Members. To certain queries, for which the witnesses could not give satisfactory
replies as admitted by the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, the Hon'ble
Chairman directed that the Ministry of Urban Development and the DDA might furnish
the requisite information in writing at the earliest. The evidence remained inconclusive
and the Committee decided to hold another sitting on the subject on a subsequent
date.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE-II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007) HELD ON 19TH JULY , 2006
The Committee sat from 1600 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room 'D',
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
7. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
8. Shri Mohan Singh
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan
11. Shri Janardhana Poojary
12. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyaya — Additional Deputy C&AG
2. Shri R.N. Ghose — Principal Director (AB)
3. Shri R.K. Ghose — AG (Audit), Delhi
38

39
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri Anil Baijal — Secretary
2. Dr. M.M. Kutty — Joint Secretary (D&L)
3. Shri A.K. Rath — Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
Representatives of the Delhi Development Authority
1. Shri Dinesh Rai — V ice-Chairman
2. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Finance Member
3. Shri A.K. Sarin — Engineering Member
4. Shri K.B. Lal — Chief Engineer (Dwarka)
5. Shri R.K. Vats — Commissioner (LM)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman recalled that an evidence of the represen-
tatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and the Delhi Development Authority
(DDA) on Chapter II of the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended March 2005,
Union Government (Civil — Autonomous Bodies), No. 2 of 2006 (Performance Audit)
relating to ''Development of Land by the Delhi Development Authority'' was held on
12th June, 2006 during which several points raised by the Members remained
unanswered and that the Vice Chairman, Delhi Development Authority could not
attend the said sitting. In view of this, the Committee had decided to hold another
sitting to hear the views of representatives of Ministry of Urban Development and
Delhi Development Authority on the Subject. Accordingly, the sitting has been
convened to resume the discussion on the subject, which remained inconclusive.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and
the Delhi Development Authority were called in. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development, the Vice Chairman, DDA and other representatives of the DDA replied
to the various points/quesries raised by the Members. To certain queries, for which
the witnesses could not give satisfactory replies, the Hon'ble Chairman directed the
Ministry of Urban Development and the Delhi Development Authority to furnish the
requisite information in writing at the earliest.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE-III
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008) HELD ON 7TH AUGUST, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. on 7th August, 2007 in Room No. 51
(Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Raghunath Jha
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
5. Shri Mohan Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri V . Narayanasamy
9. Prof. P.J. Kurien
10. Shri Janardhana Poojary
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
4. Shri N.K. Jha — Under Secretary
Representative of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Shri P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (RC)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and
adoption the following draft Reports:
(i) Draft Report on ''Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2005-2006)'';
40

41
(ii) Draft Report on ''Development of Land by the Delhi Development Authority'';
and
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken on the 30th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to ''Non-recovery of Guarantee Fee from Air India and Indian
Airlines''.
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without
any amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalize and present
the same to Parliament in the light of factual verification, if any, done by the Audit.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX-I
Chapter II of Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2005
(No.2 of 2006), Union Government (Civil — Autonomous Bodies) relating
to Development of land by the Delhi Development Authority''
Development of Land by the Delhi Development Authority
Highlights
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) spent Rs. 2,061.56 crore during the period
2000-01 to 2004-05 on various land developmental schemes which included construc-
tion of master plan roads, development of green belts, leveling and dressing of land,
construction of water supply facilities, etc. Performance audit of six such schemes
involving expenditure of Rs. 605 crore during the five year period revealed lack of
financial control over expenditure, non-adherence to codal provisions in award of
works and lack of co-ordination with other concerned civic and public utility agencies
which resulted in undue delays as well as extra expenditure.
/circle6Construction of command tanks and water reservoirs was not linked with the
actual availability of water so as to enable their utilization. Consequently,
expenditure of Rs. 33.78 crore incurred on construction of these tanks and
reservoirs was rendered idle due to lack of water.
(Paragraphs 2.9.1 & 2.9.2)
/circle6Expenditure of Rs. 1956 crore was incurred in anticipation of administrative
approval and expenditure sanction which was irregular.
(Paragraph 2.6.2)
/circle6Lack of adequate scrutiny of tender rates and comparison with rates
accepted for similar works during the same time resulted in additional
expenditure of Rs. 7.43 crore.
(Paragraph 2.7.1)
/circle6DDA failed to ensure adherence to codal provisions relating to ensuring
availability of drawings, design and materials as well as clear site before
award of works. This resulted in delay in completion of works ranging up to
over three years as well as cost escalation of Rs. 7.29 crore.
(Paragraph 2.7.3)
Summary of recommendations
/circle6Institutional mechanisms should be strengthened to ensure adequate
co-ordination both at the planning stage as well as in the implementation phase
with other civic planning and public utility agencies so that creation of public
42

43
infrastructure and facilities by DDA are in consonance with the plans and
projections of the connected civic agencies and the progress of works under
execution is not hampered.
/circle6No works should be awarded or commenced without prior administrative
approval and expenditure sanction by the competent authority. DDA should
also ensure availability of clear and unhindered site before award of work.
/circle6A mechanism should be evolved whereby the rates offered for works are
compared with rates accepted for similar works within the same time frame so
as to ensure that no undue payments occur and the financial interests of
DDA are secured.
/circle6Delays attributable to omission and commission on the part of divisional
officials and leading to escalation in costs or extra payments to contractors
should be investigated with a view to fixing responsibility.
/circle6Internal audit should be strengthened so as to ensure coverage of all major
schemes being executed by DDA.
2.1 Introduction
The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) was established in 1957 to promote the
planned development of Delhi. During the period from 2000-01 to 2004-05, DDA spent
Rs. 2,061.56 crore on development of land under various developmental schemes. The
specific works undertaken under these schemes included construction of master plan
roads, development of green belts, leveling and dressing of land, construction of
storm water drains, internal drains and water supply lines, construction of connected
underground water tanks and pump houses and maintenance works.
2.2 Organisational set up
The DDA is headed by the Lt. Governor of Delhi. Day to day adminstration of the
Authority is vested in the Vice Chairman who is assisted by the Member (Finance) and
the Member (Engineering). Land acquisition matters are handled by the Commissioner
(Lands) assisted by the Director (Land Management) while planning for the various
developmental schemes is done by the Commissioner (Planning) assisted by zone
wise Directors (Planning). Execution of the schemes is through the six zonal Chief
Engineers who function under the administrative control of the Member (Engineer-
ing). The Chief Engineers are assisted by Superintending Engineers at the circle and
Executive Engineers at the divisional levels.
2.3 Audit objectives
The primary objective of the performance audit was to see whether the schemes
and the specific works for development of land conformed to the Master Plan and
whether they were executed efficiently and economically in pursuance of the stated
objectives. This was divided into the following sub-objectives;
/circle6Whether adequate financial controls were in position in ensure that the works
were being executed in accordance with the sanctions;

44
/circle6Whether the works were being awarded and thereafter executed in accor-
dance with the stipulated codal provisions and instructions;
/circle6Whether the works being properly planned and co-ordinated so as to ensure
optimum utilization of available resources and reaching of the benefits of the
project to the intended beneficiaries;
/circle6Whether the progress of works were being monitored so as to ensure that
they were being executed in accordance with the terms of the contracts; and
/circle6Whether adequate system of internal control and maintenance of the quality
of the works were in place.
2.4 Acknowledgement
The draft performance audit report was sent to DDA as well as the Ministry in
August 2005. It was discussed with the Member (Finance) of the DDA along with
other concerned officials at a meeting held on 14 October 2005. The views expressed at
the meeting as well as those communicated formally by DDA in December 2005 have
been incorporated in the report. The comments of the Ministry were not received as of
December 2005.
2.5 Scope and methodology of audit
Expenditure on 19 developmental schemes exceeded Rs. 10 crore each out of
the total expenditure of Rs. 2061.56 crore incurred during the five years from 2000-01
to 2004-05. Of these, six schemes involving a total expenditure of Rs. 605 crore
were selected for detailed appraisal namely, (i) development of 1769.88 hectares
of land for housing colonies at Pappan Kalan in Dwarka Phase I, (ii) construction
of master Plan road in Dwarka Phase I, (iii) maintenance of parks and plantation
activities in the north zone, (iv) development of 224.90 hectares of land for resi-
dential colonies in Dwarka Phase II; (v) construction of master plan road in Dwarka
Phase II; and (vi) development of 472.40 hectares of land for housing colonies in
Sectors 23, 24 and 25 in Rohini. The total expenditure on these six selected schemes
constituted about 29 per cent of the total expenditure incurred by DDA on such
schemes during the five year period.
The audit methodology involved scrutiny of records relating to execution of the
selected schemes during the period from 2000-01 to 2004-05 in the respective zones
along with those at the headquarters of the DDA, communicating the preliminary audit
findings to the appropriate field authorities of the DDA for confirmation of facts and
soliciting their comments and thereafter taking those into account while finalizing the
audit conclusions.

45
(Rupees in crore)
Name of the Development of Development of Construction of Development of Maintenance of
scheme 1769.88 Hect. of Land at Dwarka Ph-II Master plan road of 472,40 hect. of land in parks, plantation &
land at Dwarka  (224.90 Hect. 45 to 60 M wide road Sectors-23, 24, 25 equipment of Hort.
Ph-I of land) Ph-I  &  Ph-II* Rohini Wing of the
North zone
Year of Start 1990-91 1996-97 2001 1993 Annual Maintenance
Scheme
Alloca- Expen- Alloca- Expen- Alloca- Expen- Alloca- Expen- Expen- Alloca-
tion diture tion diture tion diture tion diture diture tion
Expenditure
incurred Not
upto 31st 283.97 12.47 Nil 141.70 aplica-
March, 2000 ble
2000-01 48.15 48.98 15.10 14.88 2.50 2.80 14.00 13.84 12.40 12.06
2001-02 61.16 56.52 18.68 18.68 59.00 58.93 10.30 11.57 12.80 12.78
2002-03 81.00 69.79 22.35 20.69 60.00 57.50 9.65 4.02 12.89 12.86
2003-04 38.55 34.50 17.99 10.97 23.00 19.88 21.03 13.48 15.82 14.88
2004-05 40.00 39.96 11.25 9.12 7.80 6.17 17.90 20.24 20.46 20.16
           Total 249.75 74.34 145.28 63.15 72.74
* Two schemes clubbed into one.
2.6 Financial management and control
2.6.1 Budget allocation and expenditure
The budget allocation for and expenditure on the six selected schemes during the five years from 2000-01 to 2004-05 were as below:—

46
There were savings ranging upto 58.34 per cent during the five years under
review. Savings exceeded 10 per cent in respect of the five developmental schemes
during the years from 2002-03 to 2004-05. DDA attributed (December 2005) the
savings to "unavoidable hindrances". The reply is not acceptable since the savings
arose every year which was indicative of either inadequate planning and unrealistic
estimations or poor implementation of works.
2.6.2 Lack of financial control over expenditure
Codal provisions
1 stipulate that no expenditure should be incurred without
prior administrative approval and sanction of the competent authority. Moreover,
award or execution of works should be based on technical sanction accorded by the
competent technical authority. The purpose of these provisions is to ensure that
expenditure is incurred only after allocation of funds has been decided for the pur-
pose and works are thereafter executed in accordance with pre-determined
specifications and standards. Audit noted that expenditure of Rs. 19.56 crore was
incurred in the following cases in anticipation of administrative approval and
expenditure sanction thereby undermining financial control:—
Sl. Name of Work Date of Tendered Dat e of Expenditure
No. award of amount administrative incurred before
work (Rupees in approval & administrative
crore) expenditure approval &
sanction expenditure
sanction
(Rupees in
crore)
12 3 4 5 6
1. Strengthening of the existing February    33.81 November     6.10
two   lanes   carriage   way, 2001 2001
construction  of  additional
four lanes, service road, foot
path, drainage, X-drainage
work   and   fixing   of   kerb
stones,    etc.    at    Dwarka
Project, Phase-II, Group-I
2. Strengthening of the existing February    24.50 November    4.45
two    lanes    carriage   way, 2001 2001
construction  of  additional
four lanes, service road, foot
path,  drainage,  X-drainage
work   and   fixing   of   kerb
stones,    etc.    at    Dwarka
Project, Phase-I, Group-III
1Section 2.1 of CPWD Works Manual.

47
12 3 4 5 6
3. Strengthening of the existing February     29.91 November     3.83
two    lanes    carriage    way, 2001 2001
construction of additional
four lanes, service road, foot
path, drainage, X-drainage
work  and  fixing  of  kerb
stones,   etc.   at   Dwarka
Project, Phase-I, Group-I
4. Strengthening of the existing February    25.98 November     5.18
two   lanes   carriage   way, 2001 2001
construction  of  additional
four lanes, service road, foot
path,  drainage,  X-drainage
work   and   fixing   of   kerb
stones,    etc.    at    Dwarka
Project, Phase-I, Group II
Total 19.56
Further, there were delays ranging from 10 months to over three years in
completing these works along with cost escalation as commented in para 2.7.3.
DDA stated (December 2005) that the works were taken up as an exception in
anticipation of administrative approval and expenditure sanction in order to
ensure that the area of the site was accessible and people could move into their
offices. The reply is not accurate as scrutiny of records indicated that execution
of these works was held up due to unresolved funding issues with the Delhi
Government. This only emphasizes the need for obtaining proper approvals
before commencement of the work.
Recommendation
/circle6No works should be awarded or commenced without prior administrative
approval and expenditure sanction by the competent authority.
2.7 Award of works
Works are awarded by DDA in accordance with the provisions of the CPWD
Works Manual. 2 A review of the award of works under the six selected schemes
revealed non-adherence to codal provisions which undermined the credibility of
the award process and resulted in delay in completion of the works as well as
escalation of costs as detailed in the following paragraphs.
2.7.1 Award of works at higher rates without adequate justification
Tenders for works are to be scrutinized by the Division concerned and its
recommendations for acceptance of a tender and award of the work submitted to
the zonal Chief Engineer for approval. Works valued at more than Rs. 2.50 crore
have to be submitted by the Chief Engineer to the Works Advisory Board for
approval. Scrutiny of the tenders includes an assessment of the rates offered and
it is incumbent upon the divisional officers concerned to ensure that the rates
recommended for approval are fair as well as consistent with that approved for
similar works at the same time.
1Sections 14 to 19.

48
Sl. Name of work Estimated T endered Percentage Percentage Percentage
No. cost amount after awarded awarded above difference Cost
(Rupees in negotiation above estimated cost in between work difference
crore) (Rupees in estimated Dwa rka Phase I awarded and that (Rupees in
crore) cost Group I in Dwarka crore)
Phase I Group I
1 2 34 56 7 8
1. Strengthening of 30.33 33.81 11.46 1.30 10.16 3.08
roads at Dwarka
Phase-II Group-I
2. Strengthening of 22-28 24.50 9.98 1.30 8.68 1.93
roads at Dwarka
Phase-I Group-III
3. Strengthening of 23.25 25.98 11.72 1.30 10.42 2.42
roads at Dwarka
Phase-I Group-II
A scrutiny of award of three works relating to strengthening of roads revealed that works were awarded at rates higher than tha t
of a similar work awarded at the same time in Dwarka Phase-I Group-I as tabulated below:—

49
Such award of works at higher rates resulted in an additional expenditure of
Rs. 7.43 crore and undue benefit to the contractor.
DDA stated (December 2005) that though the names of the works were similar, the
actual site condition, scope and quantum of work differed in all the cases. It was added
that the contractor had inadvertently quoted a rebate of 14.1 per cent on the quoted
rates. Moreover, rates received in one case should not be construed to form an opinion
about the prevailing markets rates in other cases.
The reply is not tenable as all the works were at Dwarka with broadly similar site
conditions and two of these works were in fact awarded to the same agency. All of
them related to Master Plan roads comprising of roads, bridges and culverts and were
awarded in the same month. Audit compared the detailed schedule of items and con-
firmed that the nature of the items of work were identical in all the cases. In fact, the
number of items was less in those works for which higher rates had been awarded.
Further, the number of bridges required etc. should have been clearly quantifiable and
in case more earth work was to be done, this would have been accounted for through
increase in the quantum or scope of the specific item of work.
2.7.2 Award of work without ensuring availability of structural drawing and material
The CPWD Works Manual
3 provides that no tender shall be invited unless stipu-
lated material are available or are likely to be received before the work commences and
essential architectural and structural drawings together with specifications are ready
for being made available to the contractor at the time of invitation of tenders. The work
of construction of a peripheral storm water drain in sectors 1 and 2 of Dwarka was
initially awarded to a contractor in September 1996 for completion by October 1997. As
the firm failed to complete the work, the contract was rescinded and the remaining work
awarded in October 2003 to another contractor at tendered amount of Rs. 96.09 lakh for
completion by 17 July, 2004. The work was finally completed in September 2005 after
lapse of more than one year due to non-availability of structural drawings and non-
availability or short supply of steel and cement which were to be supplied by the
department.
DDA stated (December 2005) that all the structural drawings were available at the
time of calling of the tender. Subsequently, the Works Advisory Board directed a
change in the specifications of the cement to be used based on revised I.S. Code for
RCC works. This necessitated revision of the structural drawings causing the delay. It
was added that the delay was exacerbated by a steep rise in the cost of steel and
cement during that time. They reply is not valid because the IS Code was revised in
July 2000 whereas the remaining work was awarded in October 2003. Hence, the struc-
tural drawings should have been prepared as per the revised I.S. code before the award
of the work to the contractor. Moreover, it was incumbent upon the DDA to ensure
availability of the materials before commencement of the work.
3Section 15.2. 1.3

50
2.7. 3 Award of works without ensuring availability of clear site
The CPWD Works Manual 4 provides  inter alia  that availability of clear site,
funds and approval of local bodies should be ensured before approval of the Notice
Inviting Tenders (NIT). The purpose of these provisions is to ensure that works once
awarded are executed without any hindrance or delay which may entail escalation in
costs.
(i) The work of strengthening of the existing two lane carriageway, construction of
additional four lane service road, footpath, drainage works and certain bridges and
culverts at Dwarka Phase-II Group-I was awarded to a firm in February 2001 at its
tendered amount of Rs. 33.81 crore for completion by 10 February 2002. The work was
actually  completed on  29  December 2003.  The delay was on account  of hindrances
due to IOC  pipe line running below  the site, electric duct, deep sewer works in
progress, shifting of  electric pole  and MTNL  cable, non-availability of drawing of a
bridge and stoppage of work due to VVIP  visit. However, the concerned Chief
Engineer had assured  the  Works Advisory Board at the time of its approval in
November 2000 that the site was available for the work. A sum of Rs. 1.87 crore was
paid to the contractor on account of these delays under clause 10CC of the agreement.
DDA stated (December 2005) that a clear site is not always available and work is
often commenced on available portions of the site and action initiated simultaneously
to clear the hindrances. In the instant case, the work was delayed due to the existence
of an IOC pipeline running below the site which ultimately necessitated change in the
alignment of the road. Further, there would in any case been a cost escalation of about
Rs. 1.06 crore even had the work been completed during the stipulated time.
The reply is not tenable as existence of the pipeline and the need to change the
alignment of the works would have been apparent had there been a proper site survey
before commencement of the work. Moreover, delay was also caused by other
hindrances which could have been avoided or minimized with better co-ordination and
pursuance with other utility service providers. Further, the cost escalation mentioned
by the department was hypothetical and was on account of rise in the cost of labour
and materials and it in no way justifies delays caused by such poor planning and
co-ordination.
(ii) Similarly, the work of strengthening the existing two lane carriageway and
construction of additional four lanes, service road, footpath, drainage works, bridges,
culverts, etc. at Dwarka Project Phase-I Group-III was awarded to a firm in February
2001 at the tendered amount of Rs. 24.50 crore for completion by 12 February 2002.
However, the work was actually completed on 31 December, 2002. The delay was
attributable inter alia to delay in shifting of electric poles, non-existence of storm
water drains which delayed construction of footpaths, leakage in water lines at differ-
ent locations and failure to finalize the lay out of inter-sections of the roads. Conse-
quently, Rs. 77.04 lakh was paid to the firm up to December 2002 under clasue 10CC of
the agreement. The Executive Engineer South Western Division 7 stated in July 2005
that the delay was due to existence of electricity and telephone poles, existence of
4Section 15.2.1.3

51
trees on the alignment etc. which had to be cleared by DDA before the road work could
be taken up.
DDA stated (December 2005) that while they made efforts to clear the hindrances,
it was difficult as other agencies were involved which are not under the administrative
control of DDA. Hence, there is no alternative left but to clear the hindrances with extra
cost by way of paying escalation under the relevant clause of the agreement. The reply
is not acceptable as DDA should have taken up the matter effectively with the other
civic agencies at appropriate levels. Moreover, factors like non-availability of lay-out
plans were internal to DDA and should have been settled before award of the work.
(iii) The work of strengthening the existing two lane carriageway, construction of
additional four lanes, service road, footpath, drainage works, bridges, culverts and
pavements at Dwarka Project Phase-I Group-I was awarded to a firm in February 2001
at the tendered amount of Rs. 29.91 crore for completion by 12 February 2002. The
work was actually completed on 6 January 2004. The delay was again attributable to
non-availability of drawings for inter-section and T-junction crossing of MP Road and
existence of a PWD site office in the line of the alignment. As the reasons were
attributable to lack of adequate coordination on the part of DDA, an amount of Rs. 1.33
crore was paid to the firm for the period up to January 2004 as cost escalation under
clause 10CC of the agreement.
DDA stated (December 2005) that full efforts were made to get these hindrances
removed and that there was no lack of coordination on their part. The reply is not valid
as DDA should have ensured availability of the drawings before award or
commencement of the works.
(iv) The work of development of land at Dwarka Phase-I that involved covering
of the Palam drain between road 6184 to 3841 and the construction of a 45 metre wide
road was awarded to a firm in October 2000 at its tendered amount of Rs. 37.21 crore for
completion by 20 October 2002. However, the work was still in progress as of August
2005. Audit noted that the delay was due to non-supply of structural drawing for about
six months coupled with encroachment on the land. Consequently, the firm was paid
Rs. 2.39 crore for the delay under clause 10CC for the period up to January 2005.
DDA stated (December 2005) that the land in question belonged to the Irrigation
& Flood Control (I&FC) department of the Governemnt of Delhi who had to hand over
the land. Work was also stopped for three to four months for the monsoons. The
structural drawings, after being finalized by Central Road Research Institute who were
the consultants for the project, were issued to the contractor after award of the work.
But they required certain clarifications which took considerable time. Hence, the
hindrances were beyond the control of the Authority. The reply is not acceptable as
DDA should have taken timely action to resolve pending issues with the I&FC
department and to ensure that the drawings were finalized by the time of award of the
work. The occurrence of the monsoons is an annual phenomenon and should have
been taken into account while planning the work.
(v) The work of strengthening of existing two lane carriage way, construction of
additional four lanes, service road, footpath, drainage, X-drainage work etc. and

52
construction of a bridge connecting sectors 6-10 to 5-11 in Dwarka Phase-I Group-II
was awarded to a firm in February 2001 at its tendered amount of Rs. 25.98 crore to be
completed in February 2002. The work except the bridge was completed in April 2005.
Expenditure of Rs. 1.15 crore was incurred on construction of the abutments and piers
of the bridge which remained incomplete as of December 2005. Audit noted that the
primary reasons for the delay in execution of the work was non-removal of a power line
crossing the site and delay in taking a decision on a service road to the nearby Bharat
V andana Park. The high tension power line posed danger of electrocution to the
construction workers at the site as well as to vehicles that would ply on the bridge and
hence its removal was necessary before the work could be executed. However, the
matter of shifting of the HT line was taken up by the divisional authorities with the
Delhi Transco Ltd. (DTL) only in September 2001, i.e. after award of the work while a
decision on the service road was taken only in December 2003. These delays resulted
in payment of Rs. 93.42 lakh to the contractor up to February 2004 for the road works
and non-completion of the bridge despite expenditure of Rs. 1.15 crore.
DDA stated (December 2005) that it had been presumed at the time of preparation
of the estimate that the top of the bridge would be at the same level as that of the road.
However, at the time of preparation of the detailed drawings by the consultant, it
transpired that the hight of the bridge would be much more than that of the road and
there was danger of electrocution from the overhead HT line. This could not be foreseen
at the time of award of the work. DTL was subsequently requested many times to raise
the HT line which was finally done on 30 April 2005. In the meantime, the balance
portion of the bridge work was withdrawn from the scope of the work and the contract
with the agency closed on 15 April 2005. Fresh tenders have now been invited for the
balance portion of the bridge work.
The reply is indicative of poor planning and lack of technical foresight and timely
site survey. The designs of the bridge should have been finalized before award of the
work that would have clearly revealed the need to shift the HT lines hence promoting
timely action.
Thus, failure of DDA to ensure clear site and removal of all hindrances before
award of works as envisaged in the codal provisions and ineffective coordination with
the civic agencies resulted in delay in execution of works by 10 to 38 months and cost
escalaction of Rs. 7.29 crore.
Recommendations
/circle6A mechanism should be evolved whereby the rates offered for works are
compared with rates accepted for similar works within the same time frame
so as to ensure that no extra payments occur and the financial interests of
the Authority are secured.
/circle6DDA should ensure strict adherence to the codal provisions of ensuring
clear and unhindered site before award of work.
/circle6DDA could establish a co-ordination mechanism with other civic agencies
and public utilities so as to ensure that hindrances are expeditiously
removed.

53
/circle6Delays attributable to lapses or inaction on the part of divisional officials
and leading to escalation in costs or extra payments to contractors should
be investigated with a view to fixing responsibility.
2.8 Contract management
It is incumbent upon the executing authorities to ensure that the terms of the
contract entered into with the contractors and the specifications of the works are
strictly adhered to and enforced. Any laxity in this regard exposes DDA to the possi-
bility of undue delay in completion of works, poor quality of works  done as well as
undue payments to the contractors.
2.8.1 Inadmissible payments due to non-adherence to specifications
Condition No. 135 of the additional conditions of the agtreement for construction
and maintenance of roads stipulates inter alia that specifications of the Union Minis-
try of Surface Transport (MoST) should be followed in the absence of any specific or
particular specification attached in the tender documents. Clause 504.8 of the MoST
specifications provide that the contract unit rate for a work shall be paid in full for
carrying out all the required operations and no separate payment should be made for
primer coat/tack coat.
(i) Scrutiny of the work relating to Master Plan Road Phase-I Group-III Dwarka
revealed that an amount of Rs. 32.68 lakh had been released during December 2001 to
June 2004 for payment to the contractor for primer coat/tack coat though there was no
such stipulation or requirement in the schedule of quantities attached to the tender
documents/agreement. Hence, no separate payment was to be made for primer coat/
tack coat and it should have been included in the unit rate of the work as a whole as
had also been clarified by the Chief Engineer in November 2004.
DDA stated (December 2005) that an amount of Rs. 32.68 lakh had been withheld
and action would be taken on receipt of reports from the Vigilance department and the
Chief Technical Examiner (CTE).
(ii) Similary, an amount of Rs. 40.14 lakh was separately paid during December
2001 to December 2003 to the contractor during execution of work of Master Plan Raod
Phase-I Group-I Dwarka for tack coat/primer coat though there was no such stipula-
tion in the tender documents/agreement. Both the CTE as well as the Chief Engineer
had clarified in November 2004 that the amounts were not payable.
DDA informed (December 2005) that an amount of Rs. 46.48 lakh has been with-
held upto the 22nd Running Account bill and action would be taken on receipt of
reports from the CTE and the Vigilance department.
2.8.2 Injudicious reversal of decision to rescind contract resulted in delay as well as
non-recovery of Rs. 28.03 lakh from contractor
Work of contruction of peripheral storm water drain in sectors 1 and 2 of Dwarka
was awarded to a firm at its tendered amount of Rs. 1.46 crore with stipulated date of

54
start and completion as 8 October 1996 and 7 October 1997 respectively. The work was
rescinded on 5 August 1998 on the ground of delay in completion of the work. Relying
on assurances given by the firm as to expeditious completion of the work, it was
subsequently decided with the approval of the Chief Engineer on 7 June, 2001 to
revoke the decision to rescind the contract and allow the contractor to resume
the work. However, the firm could not complete the work and the contract
was finally rescinded on 1 March, 2003 at the risk and cost of the contractor.
In the meantime, over five years had elapsed since the stipulated date of
completion.
Work worth Rs. 1.14 crore had been completed by the contractor at the time
of final rescinding of the contract. The balance of the work was awarded to
another firm in October 2003 at their tendered amount of Rs. 96.09 lakh against
estimated cost of Rs. 84.15 lakh at the risk and cost of the original firm. The work
was completed in September 2005.
Audit noted that the decision of DDA to reverse the rescission of the
contract proved to be injudicious as it was made without a realistic assessment of
the capabilities, track record and intention of the firm. This resulted in avoidable
delay in completion of the work as well as further escalated the cost. An amount
of Rs. 28.03 lakh including compensation leviable under the terms of the
contract and the risk and cost amount remained to be recovered from the first
contractor.
DDA stated (December 2005) that the decision to reverse the rescission of
the contract was approved by the Work Advisory Board on the basis of
assurances given by the contractor which he failed to subsequantly live up to.
Action for filing a recovery suit was under process.
2.9 Poor planning and co-ordination of works
It is incumbent upon the executing authorities to plan, sequence and
co-ordinate their works in a manner so as to ensure that the infrastructure created
is utilized and the intended benefits from the expenditure incurred accrue within
a reasonable time frame. Audit appraisal of the records relating to construction of
facilities for supply of water revealed that infrastructure was being created
without linkage with the actual requirements or availability of water which
resulted in expenditure of Rs. 33.78 crore being rendered idle.
2.9.1 Construction of command tanks without ensuring availability of the
required water
The Project Report prepared in July 1992 for the development of Dwarka
Phase-I envisaged a water requirement of 80 MGD (Million Gallons per Day) to
cater to an anticipated population of about 12 lakh in the sub-city. Based on a
norm of storage capacity equal to 40 per cent of daily requirement, the project
report anticipated a requirement of six command tanks. Based on these
projections, DDA planned the construction of four command tanks in Phase-I
and two in Phase-II for the supply of water to the general public. The position of

55
the construction and utilization of the four command tanks in Phase-I was as
under:—
Command Year & month Y ear & Cost Capacity of Present
tank of start of work month of (Rupees in the tank availability of
number completion crore) (MGD) water (MGD)
1. October 1999 October 2001 17.13 13 Nil
2. October 1996 February 1999 6.22 10 3
3 . September 2001 March 2004 7.61 7 Nil
4. November 1997 May 1999 4.40 6 Nil
As evident from above, the storage capacity created by DDA was of 36 MGD
whereas the present availability of water from the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) was only three
MGD with effect from July 2004.
Audit noted that the construction of the command tanks was not linked with the
actual requirement as well as availability of water. Based on the present population in
Dwarka, the requirement of water was actually only 10 MGD as of February 2005. DJB
had expressed their inability to supply any more than three MGD of water to Dwarka in
the immediate future till the availability of raw water improves. This quantum of three
MGD of water supplied by DJB or in fact even the full present requirement of 10 MGD
was within the capacity of command tank No. 2 alone. Hence, the remaining tanks
would remain idle till the requirement increased and availability of water from DJB.
Moreover, as the command tanks are underground structures, prolonged non-use
would result in their progressive deterioration and blockage requiring additional funds
to render them usable at a subsequent stage.
DDA stated (December 2005) that the command tanks had been contructed
according to the scheme approved by the DJB and each tank was required to feed a
particular area/sector of Dwarka. Early construction is beneficial to DDA. Further,
maintenance expenditure would inevitably have to be incurred on the tanks to make
them usable at a later stage.
However, the fact remained that there was no immediate prospect of utilization of
the three command tanks constructed tanks constructed at a cost of Rs. 29.14 crore.
2.9.2 Construction of underground water reservoir without ensuring availability of
water
Similarly, construction of two underground water reservoirs of 3.75 MGD capacity
each was commenced in February 1997 and completed in November 2000 in
Rohini Phase-III at a total cost of Rs. 4.64 crore. According to the project report on
development of Rohini sub-city, the water requirement of Phase-III was 10 MGD by
2005-06. However, the actual present requirement was eight MGD of which only 0.30
MGD was being supplied by DJB. Due to the lack of water, these underground tanks
remained unutilized even after expiry of five years since their completion. Here again,
it was apparent that the construction of the underground water reservoirs was not
linked to either the actual requirements or the prospect of availability of water resulting
in the expenditure being rendered idle.

56
DDA reiterated (December 2005) that the water reservoirs had been constructed
in accordance with the scheme approved by DJB who were subsequently unable to
supply the water due to general water shortage in Delhi.
Recommendation
/circle6Institutional mechanisms should be strengthened to ensure adequate
co-ordination at the planning stage itself with other civic planning and
public utility agencies so that creation of public infrastructure and
facilities by DDA are in consonance with the plans and projections of
the connnected civic agencies. The objective should be to ensure that
scarce resources are utilized only on infrastructure which is actually
required and immediately usable on completion of the work and
expenditure incurred does not remain idle.
2.10 Inadequate quality control
2.10.1 Lack of quality test of infrastructure created
Unless infrastructure created is tested in accordance with the norms, the
quality of the works is not assured.
The agreeement for construction of command tank No. 3 in Dwarka Phase-I
stipulated (August 2001) that the contractor should fill up the tank to a level of
212.55 metre immediately after the construction and curing is complete in order to
test  its retaining capacity and detact leakages etc.  Subsequently, work of
applying a minimum of two coats of water base protective epoxy coating with
sikgard on retaining wall, water tanks floor or masonry structure at a cost of
Rs. 86.41 lakh was sanctioned as an extra item in February 2002. However, neither
was the test conducted on the plea of lack of water nor was the epoxy coating
applied. Consequently, the quality of the work done at a cost of Rs. 7.61 crore
could not be assured.
DDA accepted (December 2005) that the work relating to water base
protective epoxy coating had not been executed as of November 2005.
2.11 Internal Audit
DDA has an internal audit cell headed by the Member (Finance) who is
assisted by the Chief Accounts Office along with other staff DDA has a total of
197 auditable units of which 61 were at its headquarters and 136 in its field
formations. The Internal Inspection Manual of the Authority did not specify the
frequency or periodicity of the audit to be conducted by the internal audit wing.
It however, provided that the Member (Finance) was authorized to approve the
quantum and extent of audit applicable to various records. The Manual also
envisages that the internal audit parties should conduct audit of various schemes/
projects being executed by the various divisions.
An appraisal of the functioning of the internal audit wing with special
reference to the checks exercised in respect of the developmental schemes

57
indicated that while the coverage of units had steadily improved over the last
three years, the coverage was still just about 27 per cent of the total number of
auditable units as tabulated below:—
Sl. No. Financial Total No of No. of units Percentage of units
Year auditable units audited audited
1. 2002-03 197 15 7.61
2. 2003-04 197 37 18.78
3. 2004-05 197 53 26.90
Moreover, no review had so far been conducted of any of the developmental
schemes being executed by the Authority during the last five years.
DDA stated (December 2005) that efforts are being made to strengthen their
internal audit. An Internal Inspection manual is being finalized where the periodicity,
procedures and necessary checks to be exercised by internal audit would be specified.
Recommendation
/circle6Internal audit should be strengthened so as to ensure coverage of all major
schemes being executed by the Authority Preparation of the manual should
be expeditiously completed so as to prescribe the periodicity, procedures
and checks to be exercised in internal audit.

58
APPENDIX-II
LIST OF WORKS TAKEN UP IN ANTICIPATION OF A/A & E/S DURING THE LAST 5 YEARS
(2001-02, 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05, 2005-06)
Sl. Name of work Details of PE Deails of taking Up work Present status of
No. sent to finance in anticipation A/A & E/S
Amount in lacs Sent vide No. Amount in lacs Dt. of approval
12 3 4 5 6 7
ROHINI ZONE
1. C/o 2630 Slum houses 8411.79 F(Misc) EE(P)/ 10.0 23-3-06 Accorded
near Rithala Sewerage SE(P)R/73/
plant in Sect. 26 Rohini dt. 3-10-05
Ph-IV
2. C/o 4100 LIG DUs in 9389.00 A/A & E/S yet 100.00 10-12-02 Not yet accorded
Sect. 28 Rohini to be accorded
3. D/o land for resettlement 200.00 F11(06)EE(P)/ 100.00 22-7-02 -do-
of squatters in Sect. 26 & CC-9/DDA/
27 Rohini PH-IV 1468 dt. 21-8-06
NORTH ZONE
4. Development of B-4 49.84 — — 7-11-04 -do-
Narela
5. Development of 978.31 — — 2003 Accorded
Yamuna Pushta at Vijay
Ghat behind Samadhis

59
SEZ
6. C/o link road along 302.00 CE(SEZ)7(189) 302.00 3-3-03 Not yet accorded
barapullah nallah 03/331
connecting Mathura Rd. dt. 17-2-03
to Nizamuddin Rly. Stn.
7. Upgradation of 272.09 F53(8)/EE(P)/ 300.00 24-6-02 -do-
Community Centre at CC-16/1691
 Zamroodpur dt. 2-8-04
8. D/o Tughlakabad 826.16 F5(304)/EE(P) 50.00 4-10-99 -do-
recreational complex CC-15/DDA/1564- 160.00 24-8-01
67 dt. 25-2-04
9. Upgradation of Indl. 220.00 F1(137)06/SE(P)/ 220.00 5-6-03 -do-
sheds in Okhla Ph-I & II SEZ/DDA/214
dt. 10-7-06
10. D/o Madanpur Khaddar 2041 — 382.00 30-3-01 Accorded
Ph-I & II
11. Upgradation of District 566.22 — 300 30-4-02 Accorded
Centre at Bhikaji Cama
Place
12. Link Road 60 M R/W from 5138.79 — 3775 27-6-02 -do-
NH-8 to Dwarka through
Souther boundary of I.G.I.
Airport Authority

60
12 3 4 5 6 7
13. Rejuvenation & Up- 3199.44 — 100.00 23-12-02 Accorded
gradation of District 343.00 1-7-03
Centre Nehru Place 200.00 29-1-04
14. D/o Bus Terminal at 158.04 — 30.00 25-11-02 -do-
Lado Sarai
15. D/o land for Aastha 1792.47 — 75.00 25-11-02 -do-
Kunj in District green 600.00 4-11-03
at Kalkaji
16. Beautification of DDA 26.69 — 26.69 27-2-03 -do-
Park at National Park
Lajpat Nagar-IV
17. Upgradation of parking 835.77 — 28.99 6-8-02 -do-
area near Narula
Restaurant(South side)
under Defence Colony
Flyover Market
18. M/o Sirifort Sports 65.20 F62(33)EE(P)/ 65.20 8-10-03 Yet to be accorded
Complex CC-16/3394
SH: Conversion of Deco Dt. 25-9-03
Turf surface tennis courts
19. Upgradation of Swimming 83.15 F15(7)04/CC- 48.00 8-12-03 -do-
Pool at Siri Fort Sports 16/1474
Complex dt. 7-7-04

61
20. Community Hall at 30.45 — Only — Accorded
Gautam Nagar (Yusuf permission for
Sarai) call of tender
21. Construction of Library- 40.86 — -do- — -do-
cum-Community Hall at
Sant Nagar Opposite East
of Kailash
SWZ
22. D/o Sultan Garhi Heritage 222.90 F235(EE)(P)/SE 58.68 26-4-02 Yet to be accorded
complex at Sultangarhi (P)-I/SWZ/05/
Vasant Kunj 343 dt.12-7-05
23. C/o Multizym at Salvage 37.50(RPE) F21(172)EE(P)/ 10.00 24-5-03 -do-
Park opp. Maya Enclave CC-5/0506/DDA/
1801
dt. 8-11-05
24. C/o Multizym at Park 35.20(RPE) F21(174)EE(P)/ 20.00 20-11-02 -do-
adjacent to water tank CC-5/05-06/DDA/
Mansarovar Garden 1803
dt. 8-11-05
25. D/o Bio Diversity Park at 1590.58 — 132.00 21-10-03 Accorded
North of Vasant Kunj

62
DWARKA
26. C/o LIG houses on 2670.65 F1(237)EE(P) 1450.00 upto 11-4-05 Yet to be accorded
Turnkey basis at Sect-14, II/SE(P)II/574
Dwarka Ph-II(2.4 hac.) dt. 5-9-01
EAST ZONE
27. Convention Center Bldg. 1197.57 F4(1)02 50.00 28-8-02 Yet to be accorded
at plot No. 17 in Distt. dt. 23-8-02
Center Shastri Park
28. C/o 5496 LIG houses at 218.44 F20(282)EE(P)I/ 17000.00 Approval given Yet to be accorded
Bakkarwala (Lok Nayak SE(P)IV/2000/ six times on
Puram) 1568 different dates
dt. 28-6-01
29. D/o 60 Hact. of land at 2174.00 F1(18)EE(P)II/ 1600.00 Approval given Yet to be accorded
Bakkarwala SE(P)IV/02/37 two times on
dt. 14-5-2000 different dates
30. P/L PVC line for utilisation 45.39 F20(340)EE(P)-I/ 45.39 31-8-05 Accorded
of effluent treated water SE(P)IV/04
from S.P. Kondli to Green dt. 5-1-05
area
MGIPMRND—3736LS—15-10-2007 .
12 3 4 5 6 7 fdsdfdsfdfssdfsdfsdfsdfsdfsdsdfdsfsdfsdf