AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE DUE TO
DELAY IN TAKING DECISION—
CHENNAI PORT TRUST
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING, ROAD
TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
(DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
FORTY-NINTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
49

FORTY-NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
A VOIDABLE  EXPENDITURE  DUE  TO
DELAY  IN  TAKING  DECISION—
CHENNAI  PORT  TRUST
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING, ROAD TRANSPORT &
HIGHWAYS
(DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22-08-2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22-08-2007
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

P.A.C. No. 1834
Price : Rs. 39.00
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by the Manager, Govt. of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008) ....................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
PART – I  Report — Background Analysis
I. Introductory ........................................................................... 1
II. Audit Paragraph .................................................................... 1
III. Comparison of rates per cubic metre of the Port’s own
Dredger and outsource dredger with departmental rate ....... 3
IV . Shifting stands of the Chennai Port Trust and the Ministry
in respect of the procurement and outsourcing of dredger.... 4
V. Non-utilization of new dredger during September 2003—
March 2004............................................................................ 13
VI. Major Bottlenecks faced in respect of using the Port Dredger 17
PART – II      Observations and Recommendations.............................................
A
NNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 16th November, 2006. ................................................ 24
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 18th July, 2007. .......................................................... 26
APPENDIX
I. Statement of Observations and Recommen dations ..............     28
19

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V. Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P. J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary Gr.-II
5. Shri N.K. Jha — Under Secretary
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee to
present this Forty-ninth Report relating to "Avoidable expenditure due to delay in
taking decision—Chennai Port Trust" on Paragraph 12.1 of the Report of Comptroller
& Auditor General of Inda for the year ended 31 March, 2005 (No. 3 of 2006), Union
Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies).
2. The Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India for the year ended
31 March,  2005 (No. 3 of 2006), Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies),
was laid on the Table of the House on 21 March, 2006.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of Shipping) and Chennai Port
Trust on the subject at their sitting held on 16 November , 2006. The Committee
considered and finalised this Report at their sitting held on 18th July, 2007. Minutes
of the sittings form Annexures to the Report.
4. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry
of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (Department of Shipping) and Chennai
Port Trust for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing information and tendering
evidence before the Committee.
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of   Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with
the Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
24 July, 2007 Chairman,
02 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
PART I
Background Analysis
I. Introductory
India with nearly 7517 kilometres long coastline has 12 major ports and
187 minor ports.  Ports in India are divided into “major ports”, a list of named ports
where the Central Government plays policy and regulatory functions, and “minor
ports”, which are governed by State Governments.  All the major ports except the
Ennore Port, are governed by the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 which vests powers
in a Board of Trustees (BoT) to conduct regulatory as well as commercial functions.
The Act also empowers the Boards to involve private participation to augment
facilities and increase the efficiency of the ports.
Chennai Port Trust
2. Chennai Port is situated on the Coromandel Coast in South–East India.  It is
strategically located and well connected to the other major ports across the globe.
It handled 11.5 % of the 384 million tonne cargo in 2001-02.  Like the other major
ports of  the country, Chennai Port is also governed by the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963, made applicable to it from February 1975.
II. Audit Paragraph
3. This Report is based on the Audit Paragraph 12.1 of C&AG’s Report No. 3 of
2006 Union Government (Civil-Autonomous Bodies) relating to “Avoidable expenditure
due to delay in taking decision — Chennai Port Trust”.
4. The Audit paragraph focuses on a case of dredging operations by the Port. The
Chennai Port Trust maintained the required depth in the Port with its own dredger
Coleroon and by engaging dredgers of the Dredging Corporation of India (DCI).
Since the port dredger Coleroon completed its economic life of 20 years
by 1996 and required replacement, the Port decided (August 1996) to procure a
dredger for replacing Coleroon. After inviting tenders, the Port Trust placed (November
2000) the work order costing Rs. 52.24 crore with the Cochin Shipyard Limited (CSL)
for delivery of a dredger within 24 months. Meanwhile, the Secretary (Shipping) of
the Ministry, noting the high cost of dredging, suggested (September 2001) to the Port
Trust to examine the possibility of selling the dredger under construction, and then
to in-charter it for dredging in the Port. Acting on this suggestion, the Port Trust
approached (January 2002) DCI to purchase the dredger. DCI agreed, subject to
execution of a long-term dredging contract (10 to 20 years) with them.

2
5. Audit scrutiny has revealed that the Ministry, without assigning any reasons,
did not agree (April 2003) to the Port entering into such a long-term contract with
DCI. Thereafter, the Port Trust approached CSL for sale of the dredger directly from
their shipyard. Accordingly, CSL initiated action in June 2003. CSL completed the
construction (cost: Rs. 56.23 crore) in October 2003. As CSL was taking action to
sell the dredger directly, the Port Trust allowed retention of the dredger by them.
However, in March 2004, the Port Trust asked CSL to deliver the dredger if it could
not sell the dredger in the near future. Meanwhile, the Port Trust paid an additional
amount of Rs. 40 lakh to CSL towards charges for upkeep, maintenance, etc., for
the period from October 2003 and for trials arranged for three prospective buyers.
The Port Trust took delivery of the dredger in May 2004.
6. Audit also pointed out that in the meantime, the dredger Coleroon was
decommissioned in October 2002. The Port Trust, after inviting tenders
(February 2003) entrusted (June 2003) the work of deepening of Dr. Ambedkar Dock
basin (estimated quantity 8.67 lakh cu.m.) and maintenance dredging in turning
circle, approach channel, etc., (estimated quantity 7.15 lakh cu.m.) to DCI at rates
ranging from Rs. 84 to Rs. 96.50 per cu.m., in addition to payment of Rs. 60 lakh
towards mobilisation and demobilisation charges. The DCI commenced the work in
September 2003 and completed it in March 2004. During 2004-05, the Port Trust
deployed its new dredger and dredged 8.911lakh cu.m. The average dredging cost
for the new dredger worked out to Rs. 61.68 per cu.m. including depreciation.
Audit commented on the process of evaluating dredging options by the Ministry
and the Port Trust. Initially, the Port Trust made (May 1996) a strong case in the
feasibility study, for the acquisition of a new dredger, as the most economical
option. Even in January 2002, the Committee constituted for examining the capacity
and suitability of the proposed dredger concluded that the dredger under
construction was most economical. Yet the Chennai Port Trust accepted the
Ministry’s suggestion for selling the dredger under construction.  In
December 2003, when the Ministry advised the Port Trust to prepare a comparative
study, the Port Trust reported that outsourcing was cheaper than owning a
dredger, contradicting their earlier study. However, after taking delivery of the new
dredger and operating it, the Port Trust reported (October 2004) to the Ministry
that operating the dredger was more economical than engaging DCI.
7. Hence, the shifting stands of the Port Trust and the Ministry points to serious
deficiencies in the process of evaluating dredging options. The Port Trust while
entrusting the work of dredging including maintenance dredging to DCI in
June 2003 did not consider the possibility of utilising the newly constructed dredger
evidently due to its decision to sell the dredger. Had the Port Trust used the new
dredger for maintenance dredging during September 2003 — March 2004, they need
not have paid Rs. 7.58 crore to DCI and could get the job done at an estimated cost
of Rs. 4.97 crore, thus saving Rs. 2.61 crore.  Thus, the inconsistent decisions of
the Port Trust and the Ministry, after placing a work order for construction and
supply of a dredger, led to the belated delivery of the dredger with consequent
avoidable expenditure of Rs. 2.61 crore.

3
8. The Committee’s examination of various issues arising out of Audit Para 12.1
of Report No. 3 of 2006 on “Avoidable expenditure due to delay in taking decision”
has been discussed in detail in succeeding paragraphs.
III.  Comparison of Rates per Cubic Metre of the Port's Own Dredger and
OutsourceDredger with Departmental Rate
9. The rate per cubic  metre of the Port’s own  dredger and that of the outsourced
dredger (from M/s DCI) and the permissible departmental rate that was fixed for
dredging during the period May 1996, January 2002, December 2003 and
October 2004 are given as under:—
Rate per cu.m. of the Port’s own Trailer Suction Hopper Dredger (TSHD) for the
years May 1996, January 2002, December-2003 and October 2004
(a) May 1996—Rs.764.84 per cu.m. (Dr. Coleroon was
under Dry-Docking repairs)
(b) January 2002—Rs.137.00 cu.m (for 12.50 lakh cu.m.)
(c) December 2003—Rs.225.00 cu.m.(for 5.63 lakh cu.m.)
(d) October 2004—Rs.110.33 cu.m. (for 12.50 lakh cu.m.)
Dredger Corporation of India (DCI) Rates
(a) May 1996 — DCI was not engaged.
(b) January 2002 — Rs. 162.56
(c) December 2003 — Rs.96.63
(d) October  2004 — DCI was not engaged.
Departmental Rate
(a) The departmental rate for 2003 when dredging was outsourced to DCI was
Rs. 141.00.  DCI quoted average rate works out to be Rs 96.63 per cu.m.
Factors Determining the Rate Dredging
10. According to Ministry, the Rate of Dredging per cubic metre depends upon
following factors:—
(a) Type of Dredging — Maintenance/Capital.
(b) Quantity to be dredged.
(c) Nature of Bottom.
(d) Size of the Dredger.
(e) Location of Dumping Area.
(f) Dredging Area.
All estimated
rate for the new
Dredger
⎫
⎬
⎭

4
IV . Shifting Stands of the Chennai Port Trust and the Ministry in Respect of the
Procurement and Outsourcing of Dredger
11. The shifting stands taken by the Ministry and Chennai Port Trust at various
points of time in respect of owning/outsourcing a dredger are given as under:—
Y ear Stands of Ministry/ ChPT
May 1996 Acquisition of a new dredger was most economical option
December 2003 Outsourcing was cheaper than owning a dredger
October 2004 Operating own dredger was cheaper than outsourcing
dredger
(A) Stand Taken by the Chennai Port Trust in May 1996
12. The Port Trust initially made (May 1996) a strong case in the feasibility study,
for the acquisition of a new dredger, as the most economical option. However, the
Secretary (Shipping) noting the high cost of dredging, suggested (September 2001)
to the Port Trust to examine the possibility of selling the dredger under construction,
and then to in-charter it for dredging in the Port.
13. When asked whether the Port Trust had specifically analysed the reasons  for
higher dredging unit cost in the Port and satisfy itself that the costs could not be
curtailed  even with the new dredger, the Ministry, in a written note stated as
under:—
“The port had assessed that the Unit dredging cost was high mainly due to
following reasons:—
1. The dredger could not be used to its optimum capacity because it could
be deployed for only one shift because of non-availability of a Dredger
Master and due to shortage of certain categories crew.
2. In the event of outsourcing the dredging work, the port would still have
to incur the expenditure on account of the salaries etc. of all the crew
members. This amount would also have to be reckoned with while
working out the unit cost of dredging.
3. Statutory maintenance such as Dry Docking of the Dredger in addition
to normal maintenance have to be carried out periodically, the cost of
which also has to be apportioned to the Unit Cost.
In view of above factors, none of the above mentioned cost can be curtailed
even with a New Dredger.”
14. In their vetted comments, Audit stated that since the pay and allowances of
all the crew members of the Port had to be paid under both options and as such

5
it would be more advantage to the Port only in the case of owning a dredger
because the Port under that option at least could avail itself of services of some
crew members in the operation of its dredger. According to Audit the performance
of the two dredgers of the Chennai Port Trust during 2000-01 to 2002-03 was as
follows:—
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03
Coleroon Pride Coleroon Pride Coleroon* Pride
Working days 133.50 92 106.50 73.50 48 127.50
Non-working days 231.50 273 258.50 291.50 135 237.50
Rate per cu.m
of dredging,
depreciation and
interest – Rs. 157.16 468.31 101.84 774.32 175.19 466.31
Excluding
depreciation and
interest – Rs. 150.20 313.44 91.41 528.24 142.94 305.20
*Decommissioned with effect from 01.10.2002.
From the above table, it may be seen that the cost of dredging was more in
the case of ‘Pride’ and performance of ‘Coleroon’ was comparatively better than the
performance of Pride.
Audit further stated that the dredger Coleroon had completed its economic
life of 20 years by 1996 itself and as such the cost of repair, maintenance etc., would
definitely be more besides non-availability of the dredger for more time due to time
required for special repair and maintenance. The maintenance cost would further
decrease with the new dredger. Thus the Department’s reply that the cost could not
be curtailed even with a new dredger is not acceptable.
15. Explaining their stand on the Audit observation, the Ministry, in their reply,
stated as under:—
“It is stated that whether the dredger is new or old, expenditure on account
of maintenance will have to be incurred. Whether the dredger is new or old
there are bound to be breakdown of machineries/equipments. In fact, it has
been the experience world over, that it takes quite sometime for the machineries
to settle down on a new ship and that breakdowns are more frequent on a
new ship than on old ship where machineries have settle down.  Dredger
Cauvery is a state of the art Dredger whereas Coleroon is a dredger with
obsolete technology.   Hence the maintenance cost would be higher in case
of Cauvery and not less as averred by Audit. Further depreciation in case of
Cauvery will be much higher compared to Dr. Coleroon, because Dr. Coleroon
was acquired at a cost of Rs. 3.66 crores whereas the Cauvery  was acquired
Rs. 57.00 crores approx.  Fuel cost also has increased manifold in the recent
past which will definitely add to the hike in the operational cost.  The repair
and maintenance cost of Dredger Cauvery is more than the Dredger Coleroon
due to the modern technology and increase in price of equipment. Apart from

6
that, whether it is new dredger or old dredger, dry-docking has to be undertaken
once in 2 years to ensure the sea worthiness of the dredger as per the
statutory regulations.  The dry docking expenditure for Dredger Cauvery will
be much more than the expenditure for Dredger Coleroon. As the Dredger
Cauvery is a modern dredger with high cost of spares compared to the
Dredger Coleroon which was an old model dredger with obsolete technology.
In view of that the maintenance cost of Dredger Cauvery will also be
substantially high and hence cannot be compared with the old outdated
dredger Coleroon.  In view of that, the Audit contention that maintenance cost
will further decrease with the acquisition of new dredger is not correct.  On
the other hand the operation and maintenance cost of new dredger shall be
higher due to higher cost  of acquisition and price of the spares of sophisticated
equipment and machinery fitted in the dredger.”
16. The Committee enquired about the circumstances under which the Secretary
(Shipping) suggested that Chennai Port Trust may examine the possibility of selling
the dredger under construction and then in-charter for dredging. In response,  the
Ministry, in a written note, stated as under:—
“Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), another major Port under the administrative
control of this Department did not own any dredger and was getting the
dredging done by in-chartering a dredger, apparently with good results.
Therefore, during a Meeting held on 29.09.2001 to review the performance of
Chennai Port Trust, the then Secretary (Shipping) suggested that Chennai
Port may also explore the possibility of selling the new dredger under
construction and in-charter the same on the lines of JNPT.  Obviously, the
main consideration was the need to bring down the cost of dredging in
Chennai Port.  Accordingly, the Port explored the possibility of selling the
Dredger under construction to another Government organization viz., Dredging
Corporation of India (DCI), on cost plus basis”.
17. When asked whether the Port Trust simply proceeded further on the lines
suggested by the Secretary (Shipping) without conducting feasibility study/cost
analysis, the Ministry, in a written note, stated as under:—
“In the wake of suggestion given by this Ministry to  Chennai Port to
consider Dredging through outside agencies, the Port explored the possibility
of selling the Dredger to DCI keeping in view the then existing dredging
policy.  Chennai Port Trust made a comparative study of owning and
outsourcing only with respect to M/s. DCI as per the Rate quoted by them
at that time.  The Port approached DCI, a public sector undertaking also under
the administrative control of this ministry to take over the Dredger on “Cost
plus” basis.  Here it needs to be kept in mind that till the adoption of the then
applicable dredging policy, dredging work by almost all Major Ports was
awarded to DCI on nomination basis. Since the Major Ports as well as DCI
were under the administrative control of the same Ministry and there was
virtual absence of other dredging companies that could provide an alternative
to DCI, most Major Ports naturally looked towards DCI for meeting their
dredging requirements. However, it was apparent that in line with changing

7
economic scenario, dredging policy would also gradually provide for more
competition in this field. As the Dredging Policy was due for a review in 2004,
it is obvious why DCI insisted on a long term dredging contract for buying
the dredger. It was because of the same reason that this Ministry did not
agree for sale of dredger to DCI with the condition of a long term contract.”
18. In their vetted comments Audit stated that there was no evidence on record
in the files produced to them that the Port Trust made any comparative study
specifically after Ministry’s suggestion in September 2001. In any of the references
or in Board’s agenda notes/resolution also, no mention about any comparative
analysis was mentioned. All the above indicates that the Port Trust simply started
attempting to sell the dredger under construction without any fresh study. In
response, the Ministry, in a written note, stated as under:—
“It is stated by Audit that no comparative study was made after the Ministry’s
suggestion in September ’01, whereas Audit itself stated that Port undertook
comparative study in January ’02, another comparative study in December ’03,
when the DCI quoted Rs. 96.63/cu.m.  It is seen that Port undertook comparative
study at every stage depending on the circumstances prevailing at that
particular point of time.  The decisions are taken as per the circumstances
prevailing at a particular point of time only.  The Audit observation is self-
contradictory.  In view of that, the Audit observation that the Port Trust
simply started attempting to sell the dredger under construction without any
study is not correct.  The Port Trust took the decision to buy the dredger only
after conducting detailed study and after exploring the possibility of selling
the dredger to DCI and enter into long-term contract with them.  Since the DCI
insisted for long-term contract and the Ministry did not give permission for
that, the Port had no option, except to buy the dredger under construction.”
19. To a specific query whether the Port Trust had compared the cost of dredging
by its own dredger with that of outsourced dredger before taking the decision to sell
the dredger under construction, the Ministry, in a written note, stated as under:—
“The Chennai Port Trust compared the cost of outsourcing only with respect
to the Rate quoted by M/s. DCI at that time. M/s. DCI had quoted very low
Unit Cost during that period.  The Rate on comparison led to the conclusion
that Outsourcing of Dredging operation with M/s. DCI was more economical
than owning the Dredging.  Accordingly, the Chennai Port approached
M/s. DCI to sell the Dredger and re-charter it to Chennai Port Trust.  However,
M/s. DCI wanted to enter into a Long-Term Maintenance Dredging contract
with Chennai Port Trust.  Hence, Chennai Port Trust sought the views of the
Government. Here it needs to be pointed out that the dredging policy applicable
at that point of time provided that all Major Ports (except Kolkata Port) at their,
option may call tenders for maintenance dredging or negotiate with DCI for
executing the work on nomination basis. Further, the policy provided for
purchase preference to DCI, if it participated in the tender. As this policy was
due for review in 2004, the Government did not consider it prudent to go into
a long term agreement with DCI and accordingly advised the Port. However,

8
without a long term contract, DCI refused to buy the Dredger.  Taking into
account the then prevailing market circumstances, Chennai Port Trust compared
the cost of outsourcing the dredger with respect to the Market conditions and
accordingly a comparison was made based on the NPV of Cash Outflow with
5% Annual Escalation and without Escalation. Based on this analysis, the Port
felt that it would be beneficial for it to own, operate and maintain the dredger
which the Port could deploy whenever needed particularly during emergency
period."
20. In their vetted comments, Audit, stated that in January 2002 itself, the officials
of the Port, in the meeting to examine the capability and suitability of new dredger
concluded, bringing out the unit cost under both options, that engaging the new
dredger would be cheaper than outsourcing through DCI. Hence, the Ministry reply
that DCI had quoted a very low unit cost which influenced Port’s decision in favour
of outsourcing/engaging DCI is not acceptable. Responding to the Audit observation,
the Ministry stated as under:—
“In January 2002, the cost of dredging by the new dredger worked out as
Rs. 137.00 per cu.m. and by DCI dredger Rs. 162.56 per cu.m.  However DCI
quoted the rate of Rs. 96.63 per cu.m. dredging during 2003.  It is seen from
this that the rate quoted by DCI at this particular point of time is much less
than the rate of Rs.137 per cu.m. dredging cost worked out for the
New Dredger.  Decisions are based on inputs available at a particular point
of time.  Since the DCI rate was much less, hence the decision was to
outsource the dredging to DCI.  Moreover, the order for outsourcing the
dredging to DCI was placed in June 2003, when there was an urgent need for
capital and maintenance dredging.  At this point of time the Trust new dredger
was still under construction and it was also not known as to when the new
dredger would be ready for dredging operation.  Further the maintenance
dredging also involved urgent berth dredging and the Trust’s Grab Hopper
Dredger Pride was also not available during this period on account of dry
docking repairs. Moreover the total quantity to be dredged (both Capital &
Revenue) was also huge quantity (15,82,000 cu.m.) this entire quantity had to
be dredged within 6 months and the Trust’s New Dredger if it was available
would have taken much longer time to carry out the same quantity of dredging.
Considering the fact that Dredger Cauvery was a small capacity dredger and
works only in single shift, decision was taken to outsource the dredging to
DCI under the above circumstances. Apart from that, the Port had to dredge
huge quantity of 15.82 lakh cu.m. during the period of six months as the New
Dredger was still under construction. Since the rate quoted by DCI was
comparatively less than the rate arrived by the Port for owning the dredger,
DCI was asked to carry out the dredging at that point of time.  Hence,
outsourcing the dredging operations to DCI at that particular point of time
was commercially viable.  Subsequently, the Port had to change its decision
because of the Ministry not agreeing for a long-term contract with DCI.”

9
21. When enquired whether the Port Trust took into consideration the report of
the Committee before proceeding further, the Ministry, in a written note, stated as
under:—
“On 21.12.2001, a Committee was constituted with Superintending
Engineer (Mtec), Dredging Superintendent, Engineer Superintendent (Dredger)
and Sr. Scientific Officer examined the following in order to plan the future
strategy for dredging:
1. The expected percentage utilization of the new dredger inside the harbour
per year.
2. Will this dredger be able to cater for the maintenance dredging in the
channel also?
3. Will this dredger be able to clear the sand trap periodically?
This Committee took into account the quantity to be dredged i.e. 12.5 lakhs
cu.m., and estimated the unit cost of dredging as Rs. 137 per cu.m. and the
percentage of the utilization was worked out as 87.50%.  As the new dredger
had the capacity to dredge upto (-) 22m this dredger was capable of catering
to the requirements of maintenance dredging in the channel as well as the
sand trap periodically.  The Committee’s findings only reinforced the stand of
the Port to procure the new dredger with capacity to dredge upto (-) 22m in
order to carry out all maintenance dredging work including sand trap dredging.
The Chennai Port Trust took a decision to own a dredger, as M/s. DCI was
not able to provide the dredger on immediate basis whenever the Port required
to carry out the maintenance dredging on need basis or during emergency
situations.  Since the dredging operations are essential and required to be
undertaken on a continuous basis in order to maintain adequate depths, the
Chennai Port Trust decided to procure a dredger on its own to meet the
operational requirements under all circumstances.  In view of the above, there
was no lapse in the decision making process.”
22. In their vetted comments, Audit stated that if the Port Trust required its own
dredger to carryout dredging on need basis and during emerging situations, it
would be appropriate on the part of Port to bring the above to the notice of the
Ministry and it would not have resorted to sell the dredger under construction.
Responding to the Audit observation the Ministry stated as under:—
“The Port Trust initially decided to procure its own dredger and accordingly
the investment proposal was sent to Government.  On this aspect, the Port
Trust also placed an order on Cochin Shipyard Ltd. after following the
tendering process for the procurement of new dredger.  Meanwhile, it was
suggested by Ministry to examine the possibility of outsourcing the dredging
contract to DCI.  At that point of time, DCI offered very low rate, since that
rate offered by DCI was comparatively less as compared to the cost of
owning, the Port Trust thought of selling the dredger under construction to
DCI and enter into a long-term contract with DCI.  Since, the proposal of the
Port to enter into a long-term contract with DCI was not agreed to by the
Ministry, the Port had no option except to buy the dredger as the Port
required to undertake dredging activities on a regular basis and cannot
depend on dredging through an outside agency without any long-term
commitment.”

10
(B) Stands of the Ministry and Chennai Port Trust in December 2003
23. In December 2003, the Ministry of shipping advised the Port Trust to make
a comparative study of the cost involved in owning a dredger vis-à-vis outsourcing.
The Port Trust reported that outsourcing was cheaper than owning a dredger,
contradicting their earlier study.  When asked about the basis on which it was
concluded that the outsourcing was cheaper than owning a dredger, the Ministry,
in a written note, stated as under:—
“During 2003, the Port entered into a contract with DCI for its maintenance
dredging works as a part of overall dredging contract.  The rate quoted by
the DCI at that time was very competitive and even cheaper than the
departmental estimate for such dredging works.  The per unit cost of dredging
by deploying Port’s own dredger at that point of time would have worked out
Rs. 110.33 per cu.m.  Considering that the total dredge quantity was 891437
cu.m. the total dredging expenditure would have been Rs. 9.83 crores.  As
against this, the Port got the dredging done from DCI at a total expenditure
of Rs. 7.58 crores.  Thus, the Port saved an amount of Rs. 2.25 crores by
outsourcing the dredging work to DCI.”
24. In their vetted comments, Audit stated that the question is, on what basis the
Port Trust concluded that outsourcing was cheaper than owning a dredger when
the Ministry in December 2003 required the Port Trust to prepare a comparative
study. It would not be relevant to substantiate the decision taken in December 2003
with the actual out turn during 2004-05. The actual quantity relevant to 2003-04
under maintenance dredging was 8.04 lakh cu.m. only as against 8.91 lakhs cu.m.
adopted by the Ministry.  In December 2003, the Port arrived at the cost of
maintenance dredging by its new dredger as Rs. 225 per cu.m. (details of working
were not available). Now the Ministry has projected the cost of dredging by its new
dredger as Rs. 110.33 per cu.m. which was inclusive of return on investment at
6.50 per cent plus operating cost of Rs. 61.68 per cu.m. and corresponding
administrative charges. Applying this rate of Rs. 110.33 per cu.m., the Ministry has
projected the resultant savings and thus justified that outsourcing was cheaper. If
so, it is not clear as to why the Port reported to the Ministry in October 2004 that
operating its new dredger was cheaper.  In their response to Audit observation, the
Ministry stated as under:—
“The observation of Audit is not correct.  During 2003 when the Port undertook
the comparative study of owning vs outsourcing, it was considered that
outsourcing was cheaper as M/s. DCI had quoted the rate of  Rs. 96.63/cu.m.
The rate of Rs. 225/- worked out by the Port was based on the anticipated
cost of procurement of new dredger (not the actual cost of acquisition) and
also the anticipated maintenance expenditure.  The above rate of Rs. 225/- was
worked out based on the anticipated quantity of 5.63 lakh cu.m. of dredged
quantity. The rate of Rs. 96.63 of DCI and also subsequently the rate of
Rs. 110.33 arrived by the Port was based on the anticipated quantity of 12.50
lakh Cu.m. of dredged quantity.  If the dredged quantity is considered at 12.50
lakh Cu.m., then the comparative cost of owning during 2003 works out to

11
Rs. 101.28 only.  This rate is more than the rate of Rs. 96.63 offered by
M/s. DCI and hence the Port concluded at that point of time that outsourcing
is cheaper.  Subsequently, the Port Trust offered to sell the dredger to DCI
and re-charter the dredger for its own dredging operations.  The DCI stipulated
condition that the Port Trust shall enter into a long-term contract in case DCI
offered to take over the dredger.  Since, the Ministry has not agreed to the
above proposal, the question of comparing the rates of DCI quoted during
December ’03 and in October ’04, when the dredger was actually acquired is
not appropriate.  The Port Trust conducted another study during October ’04
after the acquisition of new dredger by doing NPV analysis and arrived at the
rate of Rs. 123.60 crores towards outsourcing the dredging work to DCI. At
this point, the owning of dredger worked out to Rs. 102.77 crores on the NPV
analysis which is cheaper than the cost of outsourcing and hence, the Port
advised the Ministry in October ’04 that owning new dredger was cheaper
that outsourcing at the time.  It is to be seen that decisions are taken at a
particular period and it varies depending on the circumstances.  Audit has to
see the circumstances under which the decisions are taken and should not
come to a conclusion that a decision taken in June ’03 shall hold good in
October ’04."
(C) Stands of the Ministry and Chennai Port Trust in October 2004
25. However, after taking delivery of the new dredger and operating it, the Port
Trust reported (October 2004) to the Ministry that operating the dredger was more
economical than engaging DCI. When asked about the basis for taking such
position, the Ministry, in a written note, stated as under:—
“The Chennai Port Trust and M/s. DCI reached an understanding during 2001
on the deployment programme of dredgers to carry out the work in sand trap
and other area including rates for engaging the DCI Dredger as on Long-Term
Contract.  The said understanding inter-alia contains the details of the rates
proposed from 2000-2001 upto 2004-05, which varies between Rs. 125/- per
cu.m. to Rs.145/- per cu.m.  Hence, rate per cu.m. worked for owning and
operating the dredger as Rs. 103.43 per cu.m. was considered economical at
that point of time.”
26. Audit in their vetted comments have stated that the reply of the Ministry is
contrary to their earlier reply.  It is not clear how an estimated cost per unit between
two options would vary vastly during a short span of three years i.e. January ’02
to October ’04.  In response, the Ministry, stated as under:—
“There is no contradiction in the estimated unit cost arrived by the Port.
During January, ’02, the Port arrived at the rate of Rs. 137.00 as the cost of
dredging by its own dredger.  The Port has arrived at the rate of Rs. 110.33/-per
cu.m. in October 2004 for owning.  The difference is due to difference in the capital
cost considered for the calculation.  While arriving at the rate during
January ’02, the capital cost was assumed at Rs. 53 crores whereas in
October ’04 the capital cost was considered at Rs. 57.00 crores based on the
actuals. The rate was subsequently revised to Rs. 101.28 in December, ’03.  In view

12
of that, it may be seen there is no vast variation between the estimated unit
cost worked out in January ’02 and October ’04.”
27. The Committee sought to the reasons for contradicting the earlier decision
taken in December, 2003 for outsourcing the dredger and concurring with the finding
of the Committee constituted for examining the suitability of the dredger proposed
to be acquired.  In response, the Ministry, in a written note, stated as under:—
“The decisions have to be considered in the context of the then prevailing
circumstances.  It may be appreciated that there are no contradictions.  The
decisions taken as per the best commercial judgment of the Port in the
circumstances prevailing at the time.  When a comparison was made between
Owning and Outsourcing with M/s. DCI during 2003, the lowest rate offered
by M/s. DCI for maintenance dredging in the Port area was Rs. 96.63 per cu.m.
Whereas the rate quoted in 2004 by M/s. DCI worked out to Rs. 194/- per
cu.m.  The Department Rate was constant at Rs. 122/- per cu.m. on both the
occasions.  Therefore, a decision was accordingly taken for outsourcing
dredging to DCI when it quoted lower rates.  However, when the rates quoted
were higher it was considered prudent to dredge with own dredger.  Thus, it
may be appreciated that the decisions were driven by the then existing
circumstances and cannot be construed as contradictory or inconsistent.”
28. Audit, in their further vetted comments stated that the decision to own the
dredger or outsource should be based on all relevant factors, which are likely to
affect the costing, stretching over a considerable period of time. When the life of
an equipment is around 20 years, any decision based on one time position may not
be correct. The different stands and the Ministry’s attempt to justify each stand on
one ground or other only points to lack of understanding of the issue. The Ministry
now in its reply states that availability of a suitable dredger to meet the emergency
situation would only support the option of owning a dredger. Under the
circumstances, the Port Trust would have considered all these before making the
attempt to sell the dredger under construction and brought this to the notice of the
Ministry instead of blindly taking action to sell the dredger immediately on the lines
suggested by the Ministry. Had this been done, the Port could have avoided the
additional expenditure of Rs. 2.61 crores.  Responding to Audit observation, the
Ministry stated as under:—
“The observation of Audit that shifting of stand of the Port Trust and the
Ministry points to the serious deficiency in the process of evaluating dredging
option is not correct.  There are no serious deficiencies in the process of
evaluation the dredging options.  The evaluation is done based on the
circumstances prevailing during a particular period.  The evaluation done
5 years ago need not hold now because of the change in the policy of the
Government and changed circumstances.  Even though, the Port took the
decision to procure the dredger as the most economical option in May 1996,
there is no wrong in exercising the option of outsourcing the dredging, if the
option is beneficial to the Port.  In this regard, Ministry based on the
experience gained by them, advised the Port to go in for dredging through

13
outside agency through a Dredging Company.  Hence, Port explored the
option suggested by the Ministry and only in that aspect, Port approached
DCI and also advised Cochin Shipyard Ltd. to sell the dredger. Since the
Government of India had directed the Port not to enter into long-term contract
with DCI, the Port had no option except to accept the dredger constructed
by Cochin Shipyard Ltd., and deploy the dredger for its own use. The Audit
reached at the conclusion that by deploying the new dredger for maintenance
dredging. Port has incurred an additional expenditure of Rs. 2.61 crores.  The
Audit has arrived at the above amount by applying the rate Rs. 61.68/cu.m.
on the quantity of 891437 cu.m. quantity dredged during the period from
September '03 to March '04.  It is submitted that the Audit has considered
Rs. 61.68/cu.m. by taking into account the Operating Expenditure of
Rs. 2,63,54,560/- and the depreciation of Rs. 2,86,30,478/- to arrive at the per
unit cost of Rs. 61.68/cu.m.   However, Audit has not considered the component
of interest on Capital, which is also part of a cost element included to arrive
at the rate for deployment of any equipment.  Even though, TAMP has
proposed a return on capital of 13.50% at a conservative interest rate basis
of 6.50% was considered to arrive at the per unit cost of dredging for
deploying the Trust own dredger. The rate works out to Rs. 103.43/cu.m.   If
the above rate is applied on the quantity of 8,91,437 cu.m., the total dredging
expenditure works out to Rs. 9.22 crores, by deploying the Port’s own dredger.
Whereas, the Port had spent only a sum of Rs. 7.58 crores towards dredging
by DCI and thus the Port had not incurred any additional expenditure rather
saved a sum of Rs. 1.64 crores by outsourcing to DCI. Since it was informed
by the Government not to enter into any long-term contract with DCI, the Port
had no option, but to procure the dredger from Cochin Shipyard Ltd. and
deploy it for its own use. In view of that, there is no additional expenditure
or loss to the Port on account of undertaking the dredging through DCI.”
V .  Non-utilization of New Dredger during September 2003—March 2004
29. When the Committee asked about the reasons for non-utilisation of new
dredger during the period September 2003 — March 2004, the Ministry, in their post-
evidence reply, stated as under:—
“The dredger was under construction in Septermber 2003.  Dredger was ready
for trial in October 2003 only.  During the sea trials, the Port officials had
identified some defects and made observations.  After rectification of these
observations and after fulfilling certain mandatory requirements dredger would
have been ready to sail from Cochin in December 2003 only.  Thus, the
dredger was not available with the port and the exact date when it would
become available could not be stated with certainty. Further, based on the
suggestion made by the Ministry, the port was exploring the possibility to sell
the dredger. If the Port had taken delivery of the dredger from the shipyard
and then tried to sell it, then it would have become a second hand sale and
it would not have fetched the same price as a new dredger. Thus, M/s. CSL

14
was informed to retain the dredger for scouting a buyer upto May 2004.
Hence, Port could not utilize the dredger during September, 2003 to March,
2004.”
30. According to Audit, failure to decide between outsourcing the Chennai Port’s
dredging requirements and owning a dredger contributed to the delay in delivery
of the dredger ordered by the Port and resulted in avoidable expenditure of Rs. 2.61
crores. In his deposition before the Committee, the Secretary, Department of Shipping,
stated that it is a kind of notional loss or notional avoidable expenditure because
in any case the dredging job had to be taken and at that time their own dredger
was not available.  Therefore, their dependence, on DCI was almost inevitable. In
their post-evidence reply, the Ministry further stated as under:—
“Audit contention that failure to decide outsourcing the Chennai Port’s dredging
requirements and owning a dredger contributed to the delay in delivery of the
dredger ordered by the Port and resulted in avoidable expenditure of Rs. 2.61
crore is not correct.  Because when the contract for outsourcing the dredging
work was given in June 2003, Trust’s dredger cauvery was still under
construction and it was not known at that particular point of time when the
dredger would be ready.  Further urgent capital and Maintenance dredging
had to be done to facilitate handling of deep draught vessels.”
31. Asked to explain the rationale behind the Department of Shipping justification
that the avoidable expenditure of Rs. 2.61 crore incurred on account of non-use of
the new dredger during September 2003 to March, 2004 as a “Notional Loss”, the
Ministry in their note stated:
“There is no loss to the Port Trust as pointed out by the Audit for the
following reasons:—
1. The Port Trust has taken timely action to purchase the new dredger i.e.
order placed during 2000, with a delivery schedule of December 2002.
2. As the Dredger was not ready by CSL during December 2002, a decision
was taken to call for tender for the immediate requirement of maintenance
dredging along with capital dredging during December, 2002 and order
was placed on DCI during June, 2003.
3. The CSL failed to deliver the dredger in time, due to the Force Majeure
Clause like weather, delay in getting approval from statutory bodies etc.,
and not due to delay in taking any decision by the Port Trust.
4. Even though the Port Trust has examined the possibility for selling the
dredger after placement of order on CSL, yet this decision neither had any
bearing on the CSL to deliver in time i.e. before December, 2002, nor Port
Trust to outsource the dredging operations during the period from June,
2003 to December, 2003.”
32. When asked whether the system of cost evaluation adopted by the Port had
an inherent deficiency that gave scope for manipulation in the cost calculations so

15
as  to suit the decision, which the authorities desired to take, the Ministry, in a
written note, stated as under:—
“It may be appreciated that the cost factor is not the only factor in deciding
whether to own a dredger or to outsource the dredging work.  The availability
of a suitable dredger as and when required particularly in the emergency
situations is an equally important factor to reckon.  All the relevant factors
are taken into account to evaluate various options, which was done in this
case as well.  As such, there is no deficiency in the Cost evaluation method
adopted by the Port which is a universally accepted method.  The cost
evaluation varies from time to time depending upon the inputs and circumstances
prevailing at the point of time of decision making, which is a variable factor.”
33. In their vetted comments Audit pointed out that different conclusions
contradicting to each other over a short period of less than three years i.e. from
January ’02 to October '04 would only point to serious deficiency in the cost
evaluation method adopted by the Port.  If the Port required its own dredger to meet
emergency situation, as now stated, the Port would not have resorted to initiate
action for sale of the dredger under construction. Responding to Audit observation,
the Ministry stated as under:—
“…….. In addition, it is submitted that cost alone cannot be a critical factor
for decision making.  As already stated, the Port required to undertake dredging
through the year and for that purpose, a dredger for the Port is essentially
required.  Since, the Dredger Coleroon had outlived its life, proposal was sent
to Government to replace the above dredger.  Meanwhile, the Port awarded
the work to DCI, since dredging work had to be undertaken urgently, as the
new dredger was still under construction.  Port wanted to enter into a longterm
contract with DCI, as the dredging work has to be undertaken on a regular
basis.  Since, the Ministry has not agreed for entering into long-term contract
with DCI, the Port had no option except to buy the dredger from M/s.Cochin
Shipyard Ltd.”
34. According to Audit, the huge difference between the cost evaluation based
on certain assumptions and actuals would only point to serious deficiency in the
system of cost evaluation. Any cost evaluation between two options viz. own
service and outsourcing should be based on all relevant factors stretching over a
considerable period of time.  Different conclusions contradicting to each, over a
short period of three years i.e. January 2002 to October 2004 could only be a pointer
to the serious deficiency in the system of evaluation.  In response the Ministry, in
a written note, stated as under:—
“As already stated earlier, there is no deficiency in the system of cost
evaluation.  The evaluation is done based on the circumstances prevailing
during a particular period.  The evaluation done 5 years ago need not hold
now because of the change in the policy of the Government and changed
circumstances.  Even though, the Port took the decision to procure the
dredger as the most economical option in May 1996, there is no wrong in
exercising the option of outsourcing the dredging, if the option is beneficial

16
to the Port.  In this regard, Ministry based on the experience gained by them,
advised the Port to go in for dredging through outside agency through a
Dredging Company.  Hence, Port explored the option suggested by the
Ministry and only in that aspect, Port approached DCI and also advised
Cochin Shipyard Ltd. to sell the dredger. At every stage, the Port worked out
the cost of Owning Vs Outsourcing the decision was taken at that time to
choose the best option that was commercially viable and beneficial to the
Port.  When the outsourcing decision was taken, the rate of DCI was compared
with the estimated cost of owning of new dredger.  When the new dredger
was acquired, the actual cost of new dredger was compared on NPV analysis
with the rate offered by DCI.  In both the options, the decisions were taken
based on the commercial viability.  Hence, there is no deficiency in the system
of cost evaluation.”
35. In their vetted comments Audit pointed out that if the Port could save
Rs. 2.25 crore by outsourcing the dredging operation, how the Port Trust reported
to the Ministry in October 2004 that operating its own dredger was more economical
than engaging DCI. The Department has ignored the fact that the Port has already
invested the amount on the dredger.  Keeping the dredger idle on one side without
any earning the outsourcing dredging services cannot be construed as “best
commercial judgement”. Loading the return on investment on the equipment without
any earning and comparing this cost with outsourcing to show that outsourcing
was cheaper can only be construed as an another attempt of manipulation of result
according to the requirement.  The return on investment could be really earned only
if the dredger was used for its operation.  Had the Port Trust utilized the dredger
for its operation, it could have completed the task at a lesser cost (Rs.4.97 crore)
besides earning some return on investment ( i.e. Rs. 2.61 crore).
36. In response to Audit observation, the Ministry stated as under:—
“The Port has only pointed out the deficiency with the calculation made by
Audit assuming notional loss of Rs. 2.61 crores.  The Audit has arrived at the
figure by selectively taking the cost components included to arrive at the rate
of Dredger Cauvery.  Even Audit has compared the rate of new dredger upon
its acquisition during October ’04 and compared with the cost of outsourcing
done during the year 2003.  The Port only clarified the deficiency in the
calculation of Audit as Audit has not considered the return on investment in
the cost component.  The return on investment is always included as part of
any normal costing exercise to arrive at the unit cost.  Even in this case, the
Port has considered only 6.50% as rate of return on a very conservative basis
as compared to the rate of 13.50% proposed by the TAMP. It is submitted
that, Audit has considered only a rate of Rs. 61.68/cu.m. on quantity of 804685
cu.m. and arrived at the dredging cost of Rs. 4.97 crores. The Audit calculation
is only notional as it is not practically possible to get the dredging done at
the rate of Rs. 61.68.  This shows clearly that Audit has not considered the
practical aspects relating to the decision making process and choose to arrive
at a figure of Rs. 2.61 crores on notional basis.  In view of the above, the Audit
Observation is not correct.”

17
VI. Major bottlenecks faced in respect of using the Port Dredger
37. According to Chennai Port Trust the total Dredging capacity of the TSHD per
year is 12.00 lakhs cu.m. (approx.) when the Dredger works round the clock in three
shifts.  Presently Dredger is working in Single shift only hence it can dredge about
4.00 lakhs cu.m. per year to meet the requirement.  Its capacity utilization is only
one third of its total capacity. The Committee desired to know about the major
bottlenecks faced by the Chennai Port Trust.  In response, the Ministry, in their
post-evidence reply, stated as under:—
“The dredger is presently operating in single shift and carrying out daily
maintenance dredging satisfactorily.  The major bottle neck is the non-
availability of certified/trained manpower in the officer as well as crew categories
for optimal utilization.  For satisfactory single shift operation in house training
has been given to certain category of crew.  As stated earlier a proposal is
being mooted for outsourcing of manning the dredger for optimum utilization.”
38. When asked whether the Dredger crew were sufficient in number so as to
carry out the dredging operations at the optimum level, the Ministry, in their post-
evidence reply, stated as under:—
“Dredger crew numbering 130 are sufficient for operating  TSHD Cauvery in
single shift and GHD Pride in 2 shifts. The Crew engaged in running the Port
Dredger (TSHD) are permanent employees of the Chennai Port Trust.  However,
one Dredger Master and two Dredger Engineers are engaged on contract.”
39. Asked whether the existing dredger crew possessed requisite knowledge of
running and maintaining the new dredger which was proposed to be acquired, by
the Port Trust, the Ministry, in their post-evidence reply, stated as under:—
“The new Dredger is equipped with variety of electronically controlled
equipment with advanced Technology. The existing Dredger crew, after
receiving adequate training, is able to maintain and run the new Dredger
satisfactorily.”
40. When asked about the latest position with regard to shortage of crew in
certain categories, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as under:—
“When the dredger ‘Cauvery’ was inducted into the Chennai Port Trust there
was shortage of crew for Dredge pipe operation, Winch operation, steering
etc., even for single shift operation, despite Dredger ‘Coleroon’ crews were
available for manning Dredger Cauvery.  However in due course by giving
training to the above categories of Port Trust crew, shortage for one shift
operation has been overcome. However shortages of Dredger Master (DM)
still continued.  One D.M. has been inducted on contract basis but one
vacancy still remains unfilled despite best efforts taken by Chennai Port Trust.
However Port Trust has taken action to widen the scope of qualification
prescribed for the post of Dredger Master by including Dredger Master
Grade-I as exists in DCI. With regard to shortage of Dredger Engineers, the

18
same have been overcome by employing Dredger Engineers on contract basis
for one shift operation.  For optimal utilization of Dredger ‘Cauvery’, there is
requirement of four Dredger Masters and 7 Engineers.  As stated earlier
response for taking up assignment of Dredger Master, the response is very
poor due to shortage of required qualified crew in the open market, as they
prefer sailing considering the remuneration/salary. Shortages of crew are there
in all categories due to superannuation, VRS, non-availability of certified/
trained crews, restriction imposed by Government.  This Department is
considering the proposal of Chennai Port for recruitment under Annual Direct
Recruitment Plan.  However, even induction of crew at the entry level also
cannot resolve the problem because MMD certified categories of crew required
for operating and manning the dredger will not be available in the open market
for induction.  It is because of this reason that possibility of outsourcing the
manning of the dredger is under examination.”

PART  II
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
41. The Chennai Port being an artificial Port has to be dredged throughout the
year to remove the siltation/material spilled alongside the berths in order to
maintain the required depths in basin, berths and approach channels.  The Chennai
Port Trust maintains the required depth in the Port with its own dredger Coleroon
and by   engaging dredgers of the Dredging Corporation of India (DCI).  The Port
dredger Coleroon had completed its economic life of 20 years by 1996 and therefore
required replacement. The Port had decided in August 1996 to procure a dredger
for replacing Coleroon, which was ultimately procured in 2004, after frequent
shifting of stands between owning and  outsourcing during the years  2001 to
2004. Audit had pointed out that failure to decide between outsourcing the Chennai
Port’s dredging requirements and owning a dredger contributed to the delay in
delivery of the dredger ordered by the port and resulted in avoidable expenditure
of Rs. 2.61 crore. The Committee’s examination of the Audit Para has revealed
major flaws in the decision making process in the Chennai Port Trust which are
dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1)
42. The Committee have noted that the Chennai Port Trust initially made a strong
case for procuring a new dredger, as the most economical option and decided in May
1996 to procure the  dredger to replace the old dredger “Coleroon”.  After four
years of dithering, the work order was finally awarded  to Cochin Shipyard only on
18.11.2000 to construct and deliver the dredger within 24 months.  The justification
for procurement of a new dredger was that the Dredging Corporation of India
(DCI)was not able to  provide the dredger, whenever  the  Port required to carry out
the maintenance dredging on need basis or during emergency situations. However,
noting the high cost of dredging by the Port owned dredger, the Secretary (Shipping)
suggested in September 2001 to the Port Trust to examine the possibility of selling
the dredger under construction and then to in-charter it for dredging activities in
the Port.  The factors attributed for the higher unit cost of dredging by the Port
dredger, due to  which it had been decided to sell the dredger, were under-utilization
of the dredger due to non-availability of a dredger master and shortage of crew and
the extra expenditure incurred on account of the salaries etc. of the crew members.
Subsequently, in December, 2001 the Chennai Port Trust constituted a Committee
to examine the suitability and capacity of the proposed dredger for their operational
requirements. In its report submitted in January, 2002, the Committee inter-alia
came to the conclusion that the proposed dredger under construction was capable
of catering to the requirements of maintaining dredging to the requisite levels and
to carry out all maintenance dredging including sand trap dredging, which thus only
re-inforced the original decision taken by the Port Trust in 1996 that owning of a
dredger was the most economic option.  Instead of taking into consideration the
Report of the Committee of Officers and bringing out the findings of the Committee
to the notice of the Ministry, the Port Trust,   based on the suggestion of the
Secretary (Shipping), simply approached Dredging Corporation of India (DCI) in
January, 2002 to buy the dredger under construction, which speaks volume of the
19

20
casual approach of the Port authorities in the matter. The Ministry have however
contended that Chennai Port Trust had compared the cost of outsourcing only with
respect to the rate of unit cost  quoted by Dredging Corporation of India (DCI)  at
that time which was very low during  that period, which led to their conclusion that
outsourcing of dredging operation was more economical than owning the dredger.
         (Recommendation Sl. No. 2)
43.  However, the judgement of the Ministry and the Port Trust were belied when
the DCI refused to buy the dredger under construction unless the Port Trust
entered into a long term dredging contract (10 to 20 years). As the dredging policy
was due for review in 2004, the Government did not consider prudent for the Port
Trust to enter into a long term agreement with DCI.  The Committee find it strange
that having decided to go in for outsourcing of dredging operation by Dredging
Corporation of India on grounds of cost efficiency, economy and trends in other
major ports, the Ministry did not allow Chennai Port Trust to enter into a long
term agreement with the Dredging Corporation for their dredging work.  If the
Ministry, in the first place, had wanted only a short-term out-sourcing arrangement,
it is a matter of contradiction that they directed the Port trust to sell the dredger
under construction and eventually in-charter it for dredging  operations at the
port.  Althought the Ministry have tried to justify their shifting positions as
“decisions based on circumstances”, it cannot escape logical conclusion that the
Ministry made an undesirable interference in the affairs of the Port Trust outside
the purview of policy.  The Committee would like to be apprised about the precise
circumstances and the objective conditions behind the Ministry’s directive to
Chennai Port Trust in the case in question and also about similar instances in the
last three years or so when the Ministry’s directive ran contrary to the decisions/
recommendations of the Port Trust.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3)
44. The Committee further note that as per the own admission of the Ministry,
since the dredging operations are essential and are required to be undertaken on
a continuous basis in order to maintain adequate depths, the Chennai Port Trust
had decided to procure a dredger of its own to meet the operational requirements
under all circumstances.  The Committee are surprised that instead of taking into
consideration all these factors and bring  to the notice of the Ministry the operation
requirements in the long run,  the Chennai Port Trust simply obeyed the Ministry’s
diktat to sell the dredger ignoring the cost effectiveness of owning a dredger at
that given point of time.  Even though the Ministry and Chennai Port Trust have
pleaded that the dithering and delay in decision making did not lead to additional
costs for the Port Trust, it is obvious the dredger which should have been in place
by the year 2002 actually came to be installed at the Port Trust only in 2004,
resulting in avoidable additional expenditure incurred on dredging operations done
through out-sourcing.  In this context, the Committee desire that the Ministry
should do a detailed study/analysis of the pros and cons involved in the owning vs.
out-sourcing issue, keeping in view the emerging operational requirements in the
ports and apprise the Committee about the policies formulated as a result thereof.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4)

21
45.  The Committee are astonished to note that Chennai Port Trust decided in
August, 1996 to procure a replacement dredger, but floated a global tender only
in 1998 for the same.  This tender was however, cancelled on technical grounds
and the tender was re-invited in 1999.  Subsequently, the work order was placed
for the replacement dredger on M/s. Cochin Shipyard Limited in 2000 with the
scheduled delivery date in December 2002.  However, the new dredger could be
delivered only in May, 2004.  It is thus clearly evident that there was inexplicable
delay at every stage of decision making.  In this regard, the Secretary (Shipping)
during his deposition before the Committee also conceded that there was indeed
a delay in the process of acquisition of new dredger and that the action for
procurement should have been initiated by the Port Trust in 1993-94 itself.  While
deploring the all-round delay on the part of Chennai Port Trust in taking crucial
decisions concerning their operations, the Committee would like to emphasise that
the Ministry should oversee and ensure setting up of an in-built mechanism in the
Port Trust to pre-empt such avoidable delays in decision-making.
                   (Recommendation Sl. No. 5)
46. The Committee further observe that the unit cost calculation for dredging
with own dredger and outsourcing the operation varied over the period 2002-04.
While the initial calculations before the decision to sell the dredger indicated
owning a dredger as cheaper, the calculation made after the decision to sell the
dredger was taken concluded that outsourcing was cheaper.  Then again, after
taking over the dredger finally, the Port Trust reported that dredging with newly
owned dredger was more economical than outsourcing.  Such varying conclusions
over a period of less than three years i.e. from January 2002 to October 2004
would only point to serious deficiencies in the cost evaluation method adopted by
the Port Trust.  Although the Ministry have contended that the evaluation is based
on the circumstances prevailing during a particular period, contradictory
conclusions arising out of cost evaluations based on same assumptions only brings
out the serious deficiencies in the financial system obtaining in the Port Trust.
The Committee cannot agree with the Ministry’s contention that decisions may
vary according to circumstances, as the decision relating to owning a dredger is
a major investment decision running into crores of rupees and involving long term
interests of the port and which thus cannot be left to vagaries of time. The
Committee are of the view that any cost evaluation between two options viz. owning
and outsourcing should have been based on all relevant factors including futuristic
scenario so that a long term contract could be effected for dredging works in the
Port.  Accordingly, appropriate parameters could have been incorporated in the
cost- evaluation system of the port.  The Committee now desire that henceforth,
while taking such crucial financial decisions, “due diligence” studies should be
carried out, keeping in view all possible factors including anticipated scenarios.
Once a decision is taken, it should not be changed to the detriment of the business
interests of the Organisation.  In the light of this experience, the Committee, would
like the Port Trust to review their internal processes for better evaluation of
financial decisions. The Committee would await specific action taken by the Ministry/
Port Trust in this regard.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6)

22
47. The Committee note with concern that there are shortages in various
categories of the dredger’s crew due to various reasons like superannnuation,
VRS, non-availability of certified/trained crews, restrictions imposed by the
Government, higher remuneration/salary given to the crew members in the open
market etc. for optimal utilization of the new dredger. When the dredger ‘Cauvery’
was inducted into the Chennai Port Trust, there were shortages of crew for dredge
pipe operation, winch operation, steering etc., even for a single shift operation,
despite the crew of the earlier dredger ‘Coleroon’ being also available for manning
it.  Presently, the new dredger is dredging about 4 lakh cu.m. per year only, which
is about 1/3rd of its total capacity, on account of shortages of certified/trained
manpower in the officer as well as crew categories. The Committee trust that Port
authorities would initiate early action for filling up vacant positions so as to carry
out dredging operations optimally.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7)
48. The Committee are unable to understand as to why the Ministry/Chennai
Port Trust had purchased T.S.H.D. Cauvery costing about Rs. 52.24 crore having
total capacity of 12.00 lakhs cu.m. per year when they knew that they were unable
to utilise the full capacity. This factor assumes significance particularly in the
backdrop of high costs involved in the operation of Port dredger and which prompted
the Ministry to suggest to the Port Trust to opt for outsourcing. Purchasing
higher capacity dredger and keeping it idle by utilizing its 1/3rd capacity, is
evidently against the basic tenets of financial propriety.   The Committee thus
would once again like to emphasise the need for a through cost-benefit analysis
while taking major financial decisions for better working of the Port Trust.
(Recommendation Sl. No.8)
49. The Committee’s examination of the subject has brought into sharp focus the
policy issue relating to the autonomy of the Port Trust and the larger role and
responsibility of the administrative Ministry vis-à-vis Port Trust Management.
Facts discussed in the preceding paragraphs abundantly reveal that there has been
uncalled for interference from the  Ministry in the internal working of the
Chennai Port Trust and that too in matters relating to commercial decisions such
as owning vis-à-vis outsourcing of dredger for meeting their operational
requirements. Since the Port Trust is in a better position to assess its varied
requirements relating to dredging and the various operational/functional difficulties
relating thereto, the Ministry should have left the matter relating to owning  and
outsourcing of dredger to the wisdom of the Port Trust rather than issue
instructions peremptorily, which tantamounted to erosion of the  functional and
managerial autonomy of the Port Trust. On the other hand the Chennai Port Trust
being in a better position to understand their dredging requirements, should have
brought to the notice of the Ministry the difficulties faced by them  in accepting
the decision of the Ministry for outsourcing.  What perturbs the Committee   is
the fact that though in December, 2003 the Dredging Corporation of India had
offered a very competitive rate of Rs.96.63 per cu.m., the Ministry did not accept
the same for a long term agreement with them in view of the impending change
in the dredging policy in 2004.  As a consequence thereof, the Port Trust could

23
not take a prudent commercial decision.  Such interventions by the administrative
Ministry in the internal matters of the Port Trust, particularly those relating to
commercial and investment decisions, do not augur well for the healthy functioning
of the Port Trust as it has to operate and survive in the  market and face  fierce
competition from other ports, both public and private, in attracting traffic.  The
Committee hope that the Ministry would desist from such interference in the
internal matters of Port Trusts and would allow adequate functional and operational
autonomy to the managements of all the Port Trusts in the Country.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9)
50.  Another issue which has come to fore is the role of Boards of the Trusts.
The Committee are not sure whether the issue dealt with in this Report relating
to acquisition of dredger was placed before the Board of Chennai Port Trust which
apart from various experts, has nominees of the Central Government.  The
Committee would accordingly await necessary clarification from the Government
in this regard.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10)

ANNEXURE-I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007) HELD ON 16TH NOVEMBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. on 16th November, 2006 in
Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
7. Shri Mohan Singh
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
9. Shri Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Shri Janardhana Poojary
13. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
14. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri Nand Kishore — Principal Director (AB)
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar — Director (DT-II)
24

25
Representatives of the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways
(Department of Shipping)
1. Shri A.K. Mohapatra — Secretary (Shipping)
2. Shri T. Srinidhi — Director (Finance)
Representatives of Chennai Port Trust
1. Shri K. Suresh — Chairman
2. Shri P.C. Parida — FA & CAO
Representatives of Dredging Corporation of India Limited
1. Shri A.K. Dhar — Director (Finance)
2. Shri P. Rama Rao — General Manager (Marketing)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members and the Officers of
C&AG of India to the sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration and
adoption of the following draft Reports:—
(i) Action Taken on 14th Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges and Coaching Centres".
and
(ii) Action Taken on 23rd Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Review of Norms for Re-appropriation of Funds".
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without
any amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present
the same to the Parliament in the light of factual verification by Audit.
3. Thereafter, the Committee were briefed by the Audit Officers on Paragraph
Nos. 12.1 and 12.2 of C&AG's Report No. 3 of 2006, Union Government (Civil—
Autonomous Bodies) relating to "Avoidable Expenditure due to Delay in Taking
Decision" and "Loss of Revenue" respectively.
4. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport &
Highways (Department of Shipping) and Chennai Port Trust were called in and the
Committee commenced the oral evidence on the subject. The Secretary, Department
of Shipping and Chairman, Chennai Port Trust explained to the various points
arising out of Audit Para and the queries raised by the members. To certain queries,
for which the witnesses could not give satisfactory replies, Hon'ble Chairman
directed the Secretary (Shipping) to furnish the requisite Information in writing  at
the earliest.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE-II
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008) HELD ON 18TH JULY , 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. on 18th July, 2007 in Room No. 51
(Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Janardhana Poojary
13. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
14. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
15. Dr. K. Malaisamy
16. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri  Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Duputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan— Under Secretary
5. Shri N.K. Jha — Under Secretary
26

27
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Nand Kishore — P r. Director (AB)
2. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director (INDT)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the following
draft Reports:—
(i) Draft Report relating to "Functioning of Employees' State Insurance
Corporation (ESIC)";
(ii) Draft Report relating to "Avoidable expenditure due to delay in taking
decision—Chennai Port Trust";
(iii) Draft Report relating to "Delay in finalisation of demands";
(iv) Draft Report relating to "Property Management by Ministry of External
Affairs";
(v) Draft Report on Action T aken on 9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
"National Scheme for Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers"; and
(vi) Draft Report on Action Taken on 27th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
"Non-disposal of uncleared/unclaimed Imported Cargo in ICDs/CFSs".
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without
any amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present
the same to Parliament in the light of factual verification done by Audit.
3. The Committee then desired that Audit may be asked to revive the practice
(upto 12th Lok Sabha) of furnishing to the Committee a compilation titled "Epitome of
the Reports of the Central Public Accounts Committee" containing action taken by the
Ministries on the recommendations made by PAC in their Reports alongwith the status
of their implementation.
4. Further, it was decided that the Committee would convene their next sitting on
30th and 31st July, 2007.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX-I
STATEMENT OF OBSERV A TIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para No. Ministry/Deptt. Observations/Recommendations
No. concerned
12 3 4
1. 41 Shipping, Road The Chennai Port being an artificial Port has
Transport and to be dredged throughout the year to remove
Highways the siltation/material spilled alongside the
(D/o Shipping) berths in order to maintain the required
depths in basin, berths and approach
channels. The Chennai Port Trust maintains
the required depth in the Port with its own
dredger Coleroon and by engaging dredgers
of the Dredging Corporation of India (DCI).
The Port Dredger Coleroon had completed
its economic life of 20 years by 1996 and
therefore required replacement. The Port had
decided in August 1996 to procure a dredger
for replacing Coleroon, which was ultimately
procured in 2004, after frequent shifting of
stands between owning and outsourcing
during the years 2001 to 2004. Audit had
pointed out that failure to decide between
outsourcing the Chennai Port's dredging
requirements and owning a dredger
contributed to the delay in delivery of the
dredger ordered by the port and resulted in
avoidable expenditure of Rs. 2.61 crore. The
Committee's examination of the Audit Para
has revealed major flaws in the decision
making process in the Chennai Port Trust
which are dealt with in the succeeding
paragraphs.
2. 42 -do- The Committee have noted that the Chennai
Port Trust initially made a strong case for
procuring a new dredger, as the most
economical option and decided in May 1996
to procure the dredger to replace the old
dredger "Coleroon". After four years of
dithering, the work order was finally awarded
to Cochin Shipyard only on 18.11.2000 to
construct and deliver the dredger within
28

29
24 months. The justification for procurement
of a new dredger was that the Dredging
Corporation of India (DCI) was not able to
provide the dredger, whenever the Port
required to carry out the maintenance
dredging on need basis or during emergency
situations. However, noting the high cost of
dredging by the Port owned dredger, the
Secretary (Shipping) suggested in September
2001 to the Port Trust to examine the
possibility of selling the dredger under
construction and then to in-charter it for
dredging activities in the Port. The factors
attributed for the higher unit cost of dredging
by the Port dredger, due to which it had been
decided to sell the dredger, were under-
utilization of the dredger due to non-
availability of a dredger master and shortage
of crew and the extra expenditure incurred on
account of the salaries etc. of the crew
members. Subsequently, in December, 2001
the Chennai Port Trust constituted a
Committee to examine the suitability and
capacity of the proposed dredger for their
operational requirements. In its report
submitted in January, 2002, the Committee
inter alia came to the conclusion that the
proposed dredger under construction was
capable of catering to the requirements of
maintaining dredging to the requisite levels
and to carry out all maintenance dredging
including sand trap dredging, which thus
only re-inforced the original decision taken
by the Port Trust in 1996 that owning of a
dredger was the most economic option.
Instead of taking into consideration the
Report of the Committee of Officers and
bringing out the findings of the Committee
to the notice of the Ministry, the Port Trust,
based on the suggestion of the Secretary
(Shipping), simply approached Dredging
Corporation of India (DCI) in January, 2002
to buy the dredger under construction, which
speaks volume of the casual approach of the
12 3 4

30
Port authorities in the matter. The Ministry
have however contended that Chennai Port
Trust had compared the cost of outsourcing
only with respect to the rate of unit cost
quoted by Dredging Corporation of India
(DCI) at that time which was very low during
that period, which led to their conclusion that
outsourcing of dredging operation was more
economical than owning the dredger.
3. 43 However, the judgement of the Ministry and
the Port Trust were belied when the DCI
refused to buy the dredger under construc-
tion unless the Port Trust entered into a long
term dredging contract (10 to 20 years). As
the dredging policy was due for review in
2004, the Government did not consider
prudent for the Port Trust to enter into a long
term agreement with DCI. The Committee find
it strange that having decided to go in for
outsourcing of dredging operation by
Dredging Corporation of India on grounds
of cost efficiency, economy and trends in
other major ports, the Ministry did not allow
Chennai Port Trust to enter into a long term
agreement with the Dredging Corporation for
their dredging work. If the Ministry, in the
first place, had wanted only a short-term out-
sourcing arrangement, it is a matter of
contradiction that they directed the Port
Trust to sell the dredger under construction
and eventually in-charter it for dredging
operations at the port. Although the Ministry
have tried to justify their shifting positions
as "decisions based on circumstances", it
cannot escape logical conclusion that the
Ministry made an undesirable interference in
the affairs of the Port Trust outside the
purview of policy. The Committee would  like
to be apprised about the precise
circums tances and the objective conditions
behind the Ministry's directive to Chennai
Port Trust in the case in question and also
about similar instances in the last three years
or so when the Ministry's directive ran
contrary to the decisions/recommendations
of the Port Trust.
12 3 4
Shipping, Road
Transport and
Highways (D/o
Shipping).

31
4. 44 The Committee further note that as per the
own admission of the Ministry, since the
dredging operations are essential and are
required to be undertaken on a continuous
basis in order to maintain adequate depths,
the Chennai Port Trust had decided to
procure a dredger of its own to meet the
operational requirements under all
circumstances. The Committee are surprised
that instead of taking into consideration all
these factors and bring to the notice of the
Ministry the operation requirements in the
long run, the Chennai Port Trust simply
obeyed the Ministry's diktat to sell the
dredger ignoring the cost effectiveness of
owning a dredger at that given point of time.
Even though the Ministry and Chennai Port
Trust have pleaded that the dithering and
delay in decision making did not lead to
additional costs for the Port Trust, it is
obvious the dredger which should have been
in place by the year 2002, actually came to be
installed at the Port Trust only in 2004,
resulting in avoidable additional expenditure
incurred on dredging operations done
through out-sourcing. In this context, the
Committee desire that the Ministry should
do a detailed study/analysis of the pros and
cons involved in the owning  vs. out-sourcing
issue, keeping in view the emerging
operational requirements in the ports and
apprise the Committee about the policies
formulated as a result thereof.
5. 45 -do- The Committee are astonished to note that
Chennai Port Trust decided in August, 1996
to procure a replacement dredger, but floated
a global tender only in 1998 for the same.
This tender was however, cancelled on
technical grounds and the tender was re-
invited in 1999. Subsequently, the work order
was placed for the replacement dredger on
M/s. Cochin Shipyard Limited in 2000 with
the scheduled delivery date in December
2002. However, the new dredger could be
12 3 4
Shipping, Road
Transport and
Highways (D/o
Shipping).

32
delivered only in May, 2004. It is thus clearly
evident that there was inexplicable delay at
every stage of decision making. In this regard,
the Secretary (Shipping) during his
deposition before the Committee also
conceded that there was indeed a delay in
the process of acquisition of new dredger
and that the action for procurement should
have been initiated by the Port Trust in
1993-94 itself. While deploring the all-round
delay on the part of Chennai Port Trust in
taking crucial decisions concerning their
operations, the Committee would like to
emphasise that the Ministry should oversee
and ensure setting up of an in-built
mechanism in the Port Trust to pre-empt such
avoidable delays in decision-making.
6. 46 The Committee further observe that the unit
cost calculation for dredging with own
dredger and outsourcing the operation varied
over the period 2002-04. While the initial
calculations before the decision to sell the
dredger indicated owning a dredger as
cheaper, the calculation made after the
decision to sell the dredger was taken
concluded that outsourcing was cheaper.
Then again, after taking over the dredging
with newly owned dredger was more
economical than outsourcing. Such varying
conclusions over a period of less than three
years i.e. from January 2002 to October, 2004
would only point to serious deficiencies in
the cost evaluation method adopted by the
Port Trust. Although the Ministry have
contended that the evaluation is based on
the circumstances prevailing during a
particular period, contradictory conclusions
arising out of cost evaluations based on same
assumptions only brings out the serious
deficiencies in the financial system obtaining
in the Port Trust. The Committee cannot agree
with the Ministry's contention that decisions
may vary according to circumstances, as the
12 3 4
Shipping, Road
Transport and
Highways (D/o
Shipping).

33
decision relating to owning a dredger is a
major investment decision running into
crores of rupees and involving long term
interests of the port and which thus cannot
be left to vagaries of time. The Committee are
of the view that any cost evaluation between
two options viz. owning and outsourcing
should have been based on all relevant
factors including futuristic scenario so that a
long term contract could be effected for
dredging works in the Port. Accordingly,
appropriate parameters could have been
incorporated in the cost-evaluation system
of the port. The Committee now desire that
henceforth, while taking such crucial financial
decisions, "due diligence" studies should be
carried out, keeping in view all possible
factors including anticipated scenarios. Once
a decision is taken, it should not be changed
to the detriment of the business interests of
the Organisation. In the light of this
experience, the Committee, would like the Port
Trust to review their internal processes for
better evaluation of financial decisions. The
Committee would await specific action taken
by the Ministry/Port Trust in this regard.
7. 47 The Committee note with concern that
there are shortages in various categories of
the dredger's crew due to various reasons
like superannuation, VRS, non-availability of
certified/trained crews, restrictions imposed
by the Government, higher remuneration/
salary given to the crew members in the open
market etc. for optimal utilization of the new
dredger. When the dredger 'Cauvery' was
inducted into the Chennai Port Trust, there
were shortages of crew for dredge pipe
operation, winch operation, steering etc.,
even for a single shift operation, despite the
crew of the earlier dredger 'Coleroon' being
also available for manning it. Presently, the
new dredger is dredging about 4 lakh cu.m.
per year only, which is about 1/3rd of its total
12 3 4
Shipping, Road
Transport and
Highways (D/o
Shipping).

34
capacity, on account of shortages of
certified/trained manpower in the officer as
well as crew categories. The Committee trust
that Port authorities would initiate early
action for filling up vacant positions so as to
carry out dredging operations optimally.
8. 48 The Committee are unable to understand as
to why the Ministry/Chennai Port Trust had
purchased T.S. H.D. Cauvery costing about
Rs. 52.24 crore having total capacity of
12.00 lakhs cu.m. per year when they knew
that were unable to utilise the full capacity.
This factor assumes significance particularly
in the backdrop of high costs involved in the
operation of Port dredger and which
prompted the Ministry to suggest to the Port
Trust to opt for outsourcing. Purchasing
higher capacity dredger and keeping it idle
by utilizing its 1/3rd capacity, is evidently
against the basic tenets of financial propriety.
The Committee thus would once again like to
emphasise the need for a thorough cost-
benefit analysis while taking major financial
decisions for better working of the Port Trust.
9. 49 -do- The Committee's examination of the subject
has brought into sharp focus the policy issue
relating to the autonomy of the Port Trust
and the larger role and responsibility of the
administrative Ministry vis-a-vis Port Trust
Management. Facts discussed in the
preceding paragraphs abundantly reveal that
there has been uncalled for interference from
the Ministry in the internal working of the
Chennai Port Trust and that too in matters
relating to commercial decisions such as
owning vis-a-vis outsourcing of dredger for
meeting their operational requirements. Since
the Port Trust is in a better position to assess
its varied operational/functional difficulties
relating thereto, the Ministry should have
left the matter relating to owning and
outsourcing of dredger to the wisdom of the
Port Trust rather than issue instructions
12 3 4
Shipping, Road
Transport and
Highways (D/o
Shipping).

35
peremptorily, which tantamounted to erosion
of the functional and managerial autonomy
of the Port Trust. On the other hand the
Chennai Port Trust being in a better position
to understand their dredging requirements,
should have brought to the notice of the
Ministry the difficulties faced by them in
accepting the decision of the Ministry for
outsourcing. What perturbs the Committee
is the fact that though in December, 2003 the
Dredging Corporation of India had offered a
very competitive rate of Rs. 96.63 per cu.m.,
the Ministry did not accept the same for a
long term agreement with them in view of the
impending change in the dredging policy in
2004. As a consequence thereof, the Port
Trust could not take a predent commercial
decision. Such interventions by the
administrative Ministry in the internal matters
of the Port Trust, particularly those relating
to commercial and investment decisions, do
not augur well for the healthy functioning of
the Port Trust as it has to operate and survive
in the market and face fierce competition from
other ports, both public and private, in
attracting traffic. The Committee hope that
the Ministry would desist from such
interference in the internal matters of Port
Trusts and would allow adequate functional
and operational autonomy to the
managements of all the Port Trusts in the
Country.
10. 50 Another issue which has come to fore is the
role of Boards of the Trusts. The Committee
are not sure whether are issue dealt with in
this Report relating to acquisition of dredger
was placed before the Board of Chennai Port
Trust which apart from various experts, has
nominees of the Central Government. The
Committee would accordingly await
necessary clarification from the Government
in this regard.
12 3 4
Shipping, Road
Transport and
Highways (D/o
Shipping).
MGIPMRND—3407LS—23-10-2007.