35
ALLOTMENT OF LAND TO PRIVATE
HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES
BY DELHI DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY

MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT

THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT

g

Er

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI



THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)

(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)

ALLOTMENT OF LAND TO PRIVATE
HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES BY DELHI
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT

[Action Taken on 12th Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]

Presented to Lok Sabha on-———~> कुएं =

Laid in Rajya Sabha on ota

LOK SABHA SECKETARIAT.
NEW DELHI
November, 2006: Karuka. 1928 (Sakap


P.A.C. No.1820

Price: Rs. 56.00

©2006 By Lok 84894 SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi— 110002.


CONTENTS

Pace No.

Composition OF THE PuBLic Accounts ComMiTTEE (2006-2007) ...--+++ +++ (iii)
INTRODUCTION wwe eee cece ee teeter eee een n ene e teens eee (v)
Cuapter | रकुणा ....... eee cece cece ee een eee teen eee e ne nee 1
Cuapter IT Observations/Recommendations which have been

accepted by Government 8
Cuapter HT Observations/Recommendations which the Committee

do not desire to pursue in view of the replies

received from Government ......-.-0-0-eeeer eee eee 26
CrapTer 1५ Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies

of Government have not been accepted by the Committee

and which require reiteration ........--+++seeere rere 29
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which

Government have furnished interim replies ........---- 4

PARTI
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2006-07) held on 31.10.2006 .....-.. +e ese reer trees 42
APPENDIX
Statement of Observations and Recommendations ...... 44


wend 9 ७ # ४२ (७

REBNES

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006 - 2007)

Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman

Lok Sabha

. Shri Khagen Das

. Shri P.S. Gadhavi

. ShriR.L. Jalappa

. Shri Raghunath Jha

. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

. Shri Brajesh Pathak

. Prof. M. Ramadass

. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
. Shri Madan Lal Sharma

. Shri Mohan Singh

. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu

. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

Rajya Sabha

. Shri V. Narayanasamy

. ShriR.K. Dhawan

. Shri Janardhana Poojary

. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj

). Shri Prasanta Chatterjee

. Dr. K. Malaisamy

. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy

SECRETARIAT

1. ShriS.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary

3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director

4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary

(iii)


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Thirty-Fifth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations
and Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 12th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals and Dispensaries by
Delhi Development Authority ”.

2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 31st October, 2006. Minutes of the sitting form Part Il of the
Report.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the pCommittee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of
India.

New DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
2 November, 2006 Chairman,
11 Kartika, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

(vy)


CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Twelfth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on “Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals and
Dispensaries by Delhi Development Authority”.

2. The Tweifth Report, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 26th April 2005,
contained 18 Observations/ Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Urban
Development and are categorized as under:—

(6) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by Government:
Paragraph Nos. 83, 84, 85, 88, 89, 90,91, 93, 94, 98, 99 and 100

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from Government:
Paragraph Nos. 96 and 97

(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 86, 87, 92 and 94

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:
NL-

3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Urban Development
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations made in the Original Report, which need reiteration or merit
comments.

Irregular allotment of land to Trusts or Private Companies
[Paragraphs 85 & 86 of the 12th Report (14th Lok Sabha) J

4. In their original Report, the Committee had observed that allotment of land at
concessional rates by DDA to three ineligible institutions viz. Arya Vaidya Sala,
Kottakkal; Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre and Unique Hospitals
and Research Institute was in contravention of Rule 20 of the Nazul Rules which
deprived DDA of revenue of Rs. 38.54 crore. The Committee had found that Arya
Vaidya Sala and Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre were not Societies
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 at the time of their application/
allotment and allotments were made to these institutions against the opinion of Legal
Advisor, DDA. Unique Hospitals and Research Institute was actually incorporated as
a company in January 1996 under the Companies Act, 1956 and registered itself as a
Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 only in February 1997, the very


2

month in which it applied for land. It was observed that the institute continued to
subsist as a company and the registration as a society was merely a facade in order to
obtain allotment.of land at concessional rate. Considering allotment of land at
concessional rates to these ineligible institutions as glaring examples of abuse of
official position and machinery at the highest echelons in DDA to show favouritism to
certain institutions on one or the other pretext, the Committee had desired that
responsibi should be fixed and appropriate punitive action be taken against the
erring officials who misinterpreted the rules to enable certain institutions to have the
land allotted at concessional rates.

5. The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note stated that the
proposal for allotment of land to Arya Vaidya Sala was sponsored by the Ministry of
Works & Housing in 1976 and by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in 1980. The
eligibility of the Trust for allotment of land by the DDA, keeping in view the provisions
of the Nazul Rules, was considered at the highest level in DDA in the background of
earlier allotment to the society in 1985 for which it had already made payments and in
the light of conflicting legal opinions about whether such a trust could be treated at
par with the Societies registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1980 as per
Nazul Rules. Considering the fact that the particular trust was a public and charitable
trust which runs a renowned Ayurvedic Centre in Kottakkal (Kerala) and its status was
considered at par with a charitable society and different from the objectives of a
commercial enterprise, a conscious decision was taken in 1995 by the competent
authority in DDA for allotment of land in their favour. Thus, the matter was considered
in totality and a decision was taken by the competent authority to consider allotment
of land to the public Trust.

6. As regards Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre, it has been
stated that the Centre, which was a Trust, had been allotted land on provisional rates
in 1990. Subsequently, it was registered as a ‘Society’ under the same name and title
and the Trust was merged with the society through a resolution passed in its Governing
body meeting held in 1.4.1991. The issue of original allotment made to the Trust in 1990
being ab initio void and contrary to the Nazul Rules was raised in December 1992 and
it was decided that the technical and legal issues be resolved by placing the matter
before the Authority. Accordingly, the matter was placed before the Authority in its
meeting held in June 1993 where it was decided that the change in allotment of land
from Trust to the registered Society be approved and no unearned increase be charged
since the Trust has merged into the Society and the Trust and Society are managed by
the same set of people for the same purpose.

7. In respect of Unique Hospital and Research Institute, the Ministry have
stated that on the date of allotment of land to the society, it was functioning as a
society, well covered under the provisions of the Nazul Rules, 1981 for allotment of
land. Its previous character, in this case a company did not make it ineligible or debar
it from allotment of land. The affidavit of ‘no profit no loss’ character of society had
also been furnished. Keeping in view that the allotment of land was made in favour
of an eligible society as per the provisions of Nazul Rules, there does not appear to
be any ground for considering it as-any financial loss to the DDA. However, the
hospital has also been put on notice for cancellation of allotment separately on


3

grounds for non-construction. The matter is being decided by the competent authority
of DDA.

8. The Ministry affirmed that in each of these three allotments, approvals have
been given for allotment by the Lieutenant Governor or by the Authority and therefore,
it may not be possible to fix responsibility for any alleged lapses/irregularity in these
cases. It may further be submitted that there was no misinterpretation or any
mala-fide in the individual cases.

9. The Committee are not convinced by the reasons given by the Ministry of
Urban Development for the irregular allotment of land to the three institutions viz.
Arya Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal; Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre
and Unique Hospitals and Research Institute. The Ministry’s reply has failed to
address the core issue involving the questionable failure of DDA to verify the credibility,
genuineness and charitable nature of these beneficiaries before allotting land to
them. Instead of accepting the lapses/irregularities committed in allotment ofland to
these institutions, the Ministry have, surprisingly, chosen to justify the action of
DDA on the ground that the allotments were approved by the Lieutenant Governor/
Authority. Such excuses only reinforces the notion that DDA had rather espoused the
cause of tokenism and had acted against the common interest of the public so far as
selection of beneficiaries for the concessional land allotment is concerned. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that responsibility
should be fixed and appropriate punitive action be taken against the concerned officials
who had deliberately misinterpreted the rules to convince the Competent Authority to
enable these institutions to obtain the land at concessional rates.

Non-inclusion of conditions for monitoring provision of free treatment to indigent
patients
[Paragraph 87 of the 12th Report (14th Lok Sabha)]

10. The Committee in their original Report had observed that in 24 cases of land
allotment during 1982 to 1999, DDA had not imposed the mandatory condition that the
institution shall serve as a general public hospital with at least 25 percent of total
indoor patients and that it would provide free treatment to 40 percent patients in the
outdoor departments without assigning any reason in allotment thereby defeating the -
primary objective of allotment of land at concessional rates and thus depriving the
indigent patients of the benefit of free treatment. The Committee have recommended
that a high level inquiry by an independent agency should be constituted for a thorough
probe to fix responsibility and appropriate punitive action taken against officials who
failed to incorporate requisite clause in the letters of allotment for whatsoever reasons.

11 In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Urban Development stated that in
respect of societies where condition was not imposed even after 1992 the cases were
examined further to identify lapses on the parts of officials if any and to initiate action
against such officials. After scrutiny of cases 15 officials have been identified to have
committed lapses and show cause notices are being issued to them.

12. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation, the
Government have merely examined the casesin respect of societies where the condition


4

of free treatment to indoor and outdoor patients was not imposed even after 1992 and
show cause notices are being issued to 15 officials for their connivance. The Committee
regret to note that rather entrusting the case to an independent agency, the Ministry
was content with departmental enquiry into the matter. The Committee are, not satisfied
with the tepid response of the Ministry to such an important matter. There is no
indication from the limited enquiry conducted by the Ministry whether the
circumstances, which had led to the administrative/systemic slackness had been
probed into and how these irregularities went undetected for several years by their
Vigilance Department. The reply of the Ministry is also conspicuously silent about
details of the scrutiny of cases said to have been carried out by the Government, penal
action proposed to be taken against the offenders, and the measures contemplated to
overhaul the monitoring system so as to avoid recurrence of such lapses in future etc.
Obviously no adequate action has been taken by the Government to cleanse a system
infested with loopholes and lapses even after the recommendation of the Committee.
Re-affirming their earlier stand of ensuring accountability and the probity in the
domain of public service, the Committee reiterate that irregularities should be probed
into by a high level independent agency to unearth the circumstances under which
the mandatory terms and conditions of free treatment (25 percent of total Indoor
Patients and 40 per cent in the Out Patients Department) were overlooked while
issuing letters of allotment to the concerned parties for setting up of hospitals and
action should be taken against all those found guilty. The Committee also recommend
that DDA should strengthen their internal control system so that these glaring
omissions and commissions are noticed promptly for taking suitable remedial steps.

Inaction in reported cases of non-adherence to terms of allotment
[Paragraph 92 of the 12th Report (14th Lok Sabha)]

13. In their original Report the Committee had observed that DDA had neither
set up any Grievances Redressal Celi nor put in place any other system to deal with
the complaints received against the hospitals functioning in contravention of the
terms and conditions of allotment. Consequently in cases of violation of terms and
conditions of land allotment by Deepak Gupta Memoria! Hospital, Mai Kamli Wali
Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust and Sondhi Charitable Hospital, the follow up action
taken in the form of-inquiry/investigation was not only belated but also totally
inadequate and DDA simply relied on the statement of hospital authorities and did
not care to cross check their version by any means. The Committee had desired that
responsibility should be fixed on the erring officials for their inaction in these reported
cases of complaints and recommended that DDA should evolve a proper mechanism
with adequate manpower and authority to ensure prompt and proper follow up action
on complaints received against hospitals functioning in contravention of terms of
conditions of allotment.

14. The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note stated that
DDA called for the records from Deepak Gupta Memorial Hospital vide its letter-dated
15.3.2004 to verify the compliance of the free bed condition. The reply was received
from the hospital on 21.4.2004 wherein it had been indicated that, they are fulfilling the
free bed condition. The reports submitted by the hospital were forwarded to Directorate
of Health Services for examination, vide letter dated 26.8.2004. Directorate of Health


5

Services had informed that this hospital had earmarked 12 out of 48 beds (25 percent)
for free patients.

15. Regarding Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust, the Ministry stated
that the allegation regarding sale of lease property allotted to Mai Kamli Wali was
enquired into. It was revealed that the Power of Attorney and agreement to sale were
executed in February 2001 by the president of Mai Kamli Wali (Shri R.N. Bakshi)
stating to have been authorized by the trust. This was in breach of terms and conditions
of allotment. It was later ascertained that the General Body of the trust passed resolution
‘on 20.7.2004 to cancel the said Power of Attorney (PoA) and agreement to sale. This

_resolution indicated that members had no proper information about alleged authorization
in favour of Shri R.N. Bakshi, the President of the society for executing PoA and
agreement. Since the Power of Attorney for sale and the subsequent sale agreement
had been cancelled by the general body of the society by way of registered PoA there
is no violation as on date as far as alleged sale is concerned.

16. On Sondhi Charitable Hospital the Ministry stated in their Action Taken Note
that the hospital was served show cause notice for not providing free bed to the poor
vide letter dated 3.11.2003. Thereafter, the society vide their letter dated 12.11 .2003 has
replied that they have reserved 20 per cent beds for the patients belonging to weaker
sections of the society, besides providing free OPD and concessions to the senior
citizens. DDA while giving morigage permission to the hospital has imposed the free
bed condition vide letter dated 28.6.2005, and an affidavit was also obtained in this
regard from the hospital.

17. The Committee regret to note from the reply that DDA had failed to take
action for evolving a proper mechanism with adequate manpower and authority to
ensure enforcement of the free treatment conditions and to take prompt and proper
follow up action on complaints received against the hospitals functioning in
contravention of terms and conditions of concessional land allotment as suggested by
them. What is surprising to the Committee is that the Ministry/ DDA have accepted
the statement made by the 2 hospitals viz. Deepak Gupta Memorial Hospital and
Sondhi Charitable Hospital that they have been adhering to the condition of providing
free beds to poor patients etc. at the face valueand did not bother to cross-check the .
facts as also the veracity of their statements. It is quite evident from the reply of the
Ministry that no inspection has been carried out by DDA of these hospitals so as to
check whether the free bed conditions has been actually implemented by them. Further
in respect of 10 hospitals namely Amar Jyoti Charitable Trust, Pushpawati Singhania
‘Research Institute for Renal & Digestive Diseases, Dha ramshila Cancer Hospital,
Escorts Heart Institute & Research Centre, Jaipur Golden Hospital, Shanti Mukand
Hospital, National Heart Institute, Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Society, Bhagwati Hospital
(Sarvodaya Foundation), and Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust, Rajouri
Garden, New Delhi that were issued show cause notices for violating the condition of
providing free treatment to poor patients, the Ministry’s reply is silent about the
follow-up action taken in each of these cases. The Committee recommend that the
latest status in respect of implementation of the terms and conditions of concessional
land allotment viz. free beds to poor sections etc. by all these hospitals in both letter
and spirit may be apprised to the Committee. The Committee are of the view that in the


absence of any institutional mechanism to enforce the requisite terms and conditions,
the cases of violation of free-bed condition and other conditions would continue to
recur. They, therefore, reiterate that DDA should constitute a high power body with
an effective mechanism and adequate manpower for taking prompt, effective and
clearly laid out follow up action on complaints received against defaulters so that the
primary objective of providing free treatment to poor patients while allotting land at
concessional rates is achieved. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
penal action taken against the other defaulting hospitals, which were served show
cause notice as also the delinquent DDA officials entrusted with the job of enforcing
the provisions for free treatment to poor by the hospitals/dispensaries.

Non-appointment of Government representatives
[Paragraph 95 of the 12th Report (14th Lok Sabha)]

18. In their original Report, the Committee had observed that DDA failed to
incorporate the condition of the ‘Guidelines for Disposal of Institutional Land’ requiring
a representative of the Government of Delhi to be made a member of the registered
society administering the hospital in the allotment letter in 39 out of 42 cases. Even in
Venu Charitable Eye Hospital, Tagore Academy and Lala Muni Ram Mange Ram Hospital
where this condition was included in the allotment letter there was nothing on record
to establish whether any such representatives had been appointed. The Committee
have recommended that the Ministry of Urban Development should impress upon
DDA to immediately act in this direction in consultation with Directorate of Health
Services, Government of NCT of Delhi with a view to ensuring appointment of
representatives of Government in the Societies administering these 42 hospitals within
3 months of the presentation of this Report.

19. The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note stated that
barring Venu Charitable Eye Hospital, Tagore Academy and Lala Muni Ram Mange
Ram Hospital where representatives have been appointed by Directorate of Health
Services, there is no specific condition regarding appointment of representatives either
in the allotment letter or in the lease deed in remaining hospitals. However, DDA is
incorporating this condition while processing request for extension of time or mortgage
permission or execution of lease deed. The reply further stated that Government of the
National Capital Territory of Delhi have reported that on the request of DDA to nominate
Government representatives in case of 9 Trusts, Directorate of Health Services has
nominated Government representative in the board of management of the 5 Trusts
where the hospitals have been found functioning. The role of the Directorate comes
only after the hospital has been established and becomes functional. Government of
the National Capital Territory of Delhi is also of the view that this issue can be tackled
by an administrative order and does not require amendment in the Delhi Nursing Home
Registration Act, 1952.

20. From the Ministry’s reply, the Committee are concerned to note that DDA
had conveniently overlooked the provisions outlined in the Guidelines for Disposal of
Institutional Land requiring a representative of the Government of Delhi to be made
a member of the registered society administering the hospital ostensibly to cover up
their lapses. In their original Report the Committee had questioned the very omission


7

of this clause in 39 out of 42 allotment letters issued by DDA either due to gross
negligence on the part of concerned officials or deliberately done to give favours to
certain allottees. The Ministry have submitted in their reply that there is no specific
condition regarding appointment of representatives either in the allotment letter or
in the lease deed. Non-imposition of this mandatory condition in the allotment letters/
lease deeds is nonetheless unpardonable lapse for which accountability has to be
fixed on the concerned DDA officials. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the
Ministry of Urban Development/DDA should take immediate action in this regard in
consultation with Directorate of Health Services, Government of NCT of Delhi with a
view to ensuring appointment of representatives of Government on the Governing
Bodies of the Societies administering these 42 hospitals within three months ofthe
presentation of this Report.

21. The Committee cannot but conclude that both 004 and Government of NCT
of Delhi have done precious little to fulfil their respective share of responsibility in
achieving the primary objective ofland allotment to hospitals and dispensaries at
concessional rate despite the matter being in public focus for the last couple of years.
Rather striving towards success of the policy it had launched with high hopes of
reaching out medical care to some of the capital city’s least fortunate people who are
afflicted with deadly diseases but could not afford expensive treatment involved
therewith, DDA had tried to cover-up its failure on the alibi of inadequate staff and
machinery, whereas the Government of NCT of Delhi had shown total lack of sensitivity
and urgency in dealing with such an issue meant for benefiting their less privileged
citizens and in the process had contributed to the failure of the policy. The Committee
regret to note that no concrete system has been put in place as yet by DDA or
Government of NCT of Delhi to effectively deal with cases arising out of concessional
land allotment with free treatment conditions as pointed out by audit. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should take immediate
necessary steps to sort out the problem relating to coordination and cooperation
among DDA and Government of NCT of Delhi in relation to monitoring the
implementation of terms and conditions of concessional allotment of land and to deal
with the problems and complaints arising therefrom. The Ministry may also consider
setting up ofan institutional. coordination mechanism at the Ministry level so as to
oversee the proper implementation of the terms and conditions of concessional land
allotment to hospitals and dispensaries.



CHAPTER I

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY GOVERNMENT

Observations and Recommendations

The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) was established in 1957 with the
objective of promoting and securing planned development of Delhi which was
necessitated to check its haphazard growth following the inflow of migrants to the
capital city in the post independent days. To fulfil its obligations, DDA acquires land,
develops lands and properties under Master Plan and Zonal plans. DDA also disposes
of commercial, industrial, Institutional and residential plots in accordance with the
provisions of the DDA (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981. Rule 5 stipulates
that DDA may allot Nazul lands for construction of hospitals and dispensaries to
social or charitable institutions. The premium and ground rent will be determined by
the Government of India. Allotment of Nazul land to public institutions is subject to the
fulfilment of certain conditions prescribed in Rule 20. The Committee note that till
May, 2003, DDA had allotted land to.65 social or charitable institutions for construction
of 53 hospitals and 12 Dispensaries at varying consessional rates fixed by the Union
Ministry of Urban Development from time to time upto 1995-96 and at rates fixed by
the DDA in consultation with the Ministry thereafter. The primary objective of these
allotments was to provide free treatment to the poor patients according to norms
which stipulate that the beneficiary hospitals and dispensaries shall serve as a general
public hospital with at least 25 per cent total indoor beds reserved for free treatment to
indigent patients and that it would provide free treatment to 40 per cent of the outdoor
patients.

The review conducted by Audit from April 2003 to July 2003 included examination
of the records of the Institutional Land Branch of DDA relating to allotment of land to
hospitals and dispensaries for the period from 1981-82 to 2000-2001 and records of the
Land Sales Accounts (Nazul Accounts) branch relating to recovery of dues to ensure
that:

the allotment of land to private hospitals and dispensaries had been made
according to the rules and orders in force from time to time;

the premia of land and ground rent had been charged at the rates approved
by the Government of India/DDA;

aproper mechanism for monitoring the adherence to the terms and conditions
of allotment existed; and

a proper account of dues recoverable and received from the institutions had
been maintained.

The allotment of land at concessional rates to certain institutions by DDA with
the primary objective of providing free treatment to poor patients was a laudable step


9

towards making modern medical facilities accessible to economically weaker sections
of the society. If successfully implemented, the policy could have provided life saving
opportunities to some of those, at least, who are afflicted with complicated and deadly
diseases but are practically beyond the realm of the costly medical treatment.
Unfortunately however, the policy itself suffered from.serious inadequacies right from
the beginning and instated of providing succour to its targeted sections of the society,
it became a victim of its own deficiency. Ultimately, what was started with a grand idea
of benefiting the poor turned out to be a hunting ground for the rich in the garb of
public charitable institutions. The records of allotment of land to 42 hospitals and
dispensaries revealed various irregularities and shortcomings in both the allotment of
land and in enforcement of the terms of allotment which defeated or undermined the
very purpose of allotment of land to such organizations at concessional rates. At this
stage, the Committee cannot but deplore the failure on the part of Ministry of Urban
Development and DDA in taking proper, timely and necessary steps in allotment of
land enforce the terms and conditions on the Societies. The Government of NCT of
Delhi too, on their part failed to provide logistic support to DDA for ensuring successful
implementation of the policy. Monitoring of adherence to the terms and conditions of
the concessional rates was conspicuously non-existent. This will be amply corroborated
by the Committee's findigns dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.

Rule 20 of the DDA Rules, 1981 prescribes inter-alia that an institution seeking
allotment of institutional land should be a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 or such institution should be owned and run by the Government
or any local authority or constituted or established under any law for the time being in
force. The Committee have found that allotments of land were made to the following
three ineligible institutions at concessional institutional rates instead of at commercial
rates in contravention of the extant guidelines which deprived the DDA of revenue of
Rs. 38.54 crore.

() Arya Vaidyashala Kottakkal, a charitable Trust of public nature since 1902
was allotted a plot of land measuring 0.95 hect. in Karkardooma Complex.
This was despite legal opinion taken at the instance of the then Vice-Chairman,
DDA in September 1994 when it was concluded that a public or private Trust
cannot be deemed to be a Society under the Societies Registration Act nor
can it be deemed to have been constituted or established under any law in
terms of the meaning of Rule 20 and hence it was not entitled for allotment.
However, the approval was made subject to the specific condition that the
Trust would get itself registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
Surprisingly, the stipulation of the Trust getting itself registered under the
Societies Registration Act was not incorporated in the allotment orders even
while making a modified allotment in Junc, 1995 despite the specific directions
of the Lt. Governor of Delhi in Ociot 94. The Ministry have ju
allotment of land by stating that the matier was considered in its totality by
the then Lt. Governor and exemption permitting allotment of land to this
particular trust was granted in view of various factors such as the fact that
the society had already made payments for the original allotment that the
particular Trust was a public and charitable trust which runs a renowned



10

Ayurvedic Centre in Kottakkal, Kerala and that having been created by a ‘will’
it could not convert itself into a registered society etc.

(i), Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre, a public charitable Trust
was allotted two acres of land at Rs. 14.25 lakh per acre in March 1990 though
\ it was not registered as a society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860
as required under the rules for allotment of land at concessional rates. The
Trust was subsequently registered as a Society in April 1990. In December
1992, while dealing with a reference from the Trust relating to revision of rates
applicable to it, the Joint Director (Institutional) of DDA observed that the
Trust was not in fact eligible for being considered for allotment as it was not
a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act at the time of its
application/allotment. The Legal Advisor concerned with this view and
observed in January 1993 that (i) the allotment of land to the Trust was
ab initio void and (ii) since the allotment was void, the Trust could not
subsequently pass on the property to the Society and the subsequently
formed Society could not also take over the assets and liabilities of the
erstwhile Trust in respect of the allotted land. Despite this unambiguous
advice of its Legal Advisor, DDA by its Resolution of June 1993 approved a
propsoal permitting/passing over the land allotted to the Trust to the Society
without charging the unearned increase. The decision of the Authority
permitting passing over the land to the Society on concessional terms was in
clear contravention of the conditions for allotment of such land and resulted

in loss of Rs. 3.11 crore.

(iil) Unique Hospitals and Research Institute applied for allotment of land in
February 1997. Anallotment of 8,907 sq.m. of land was made to the Institute
in December 1997. In April 1998, it was noticed that the Institute had been
actually incorporated in January 1996 under the Companies Act, 1956 and
registered itself as a Society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 only
in February 1997. It was observed by Audit that allotment of land at
concessional rates to an organization which remained in essence and to all
intents and purposes a ‘Company’ resulted in loss of Rs. 34.03 crore to DDA.
The Ministry have explained in this case that when the allotment was applied,
it was a registered society and was thus eligible. The affidavit of no profit no
loss character of society was also furnished.

[(S.No. 1 to 3) Paras 83 to 85 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken

'DDA has allotted land to 65 hospitals (both hospitals and dispensaries) till May
2003 at varying concessional rates. One of the main objective of these allotments was
to provide free treatment to the poor patients i.e. 25% IPD and 40% OPD.

The PAC mentioned that Arya Vaidyashala Kottakkal, Unique hospitals and
Dharmshila Cancer Foundation Hospital were allotted land though they were not
societies.


i

Regarding Arya Vaidyashala, the proposal for allotment was sponsored by the
Ministry of Works & Housing in 1976 and by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
in 1980. The eligibility of the Trust for allotment of land by the DDA, keeping in view
the provisions of the Nazul Rules, was considered at the highest level in DDA in the
background of earlier allotment to the society in 1985 for which it had already made
payments and in the light of conflicting legal opinions about whether such a trust
could be treated at par with the Societies registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1980 as per Nazul Rules. Considering the fact that the particular trust was a public
and charitable trust which runs a renowned Ayurvedic Centre in Kottakal (Kerala) and
its status was considered at par with a charitable society and different from the objectives
of a commercial enterprise, a conscious decision was taken in 1995 by the competent
authority in DDA for alltoment of land in their favour. Thus, the matter was considered
in totality and the decision was taken by the competent authority to consider allotment
of land to the public Trust.

The Nazul Rules with regard to dispensaries and hospitals have since been
amended vide Gazette Notification dated Sth July, 2002 (Annexure-A).

A Society by the name of Unique Hospital and Research Institute was registered
in February, 1997 and had applied for allotment of land. Accordingly, allotment was
made to the institute in December, 1997. The contention is that this Society had been
existing as a company prior to 1997 and had registered itself as a society only to avail
the concessional rates of land by DDA. In this context, it is submitted that as on date
of allotment of land to the society, it was functioning as a society, well covered under
the provisions ofthe Nazul Rules, 1981 for allotment of land. Its previous character, in
this case a company, did not make it ineligible or debar it from allotment of land. The
affidavit of 'no profit no loss’ character of society had also been furnished. Keeping in
view that the allotment of land was made in favour of an eligible society as per the
provisions of Nazul Rules, there does not appear to be any ground for considering itas
any financial loss to the DDA.

However, the hospital has also been put on notice for cancellation of allotment
separately on grounds for non-construction. The matter is being decided by the
competent authority of DDA.

The Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre, which was a Trust,
had been allotted land on provisional rates in 1990. Subsequently, the Dharmshila
Cancer Foundation and Research Centre was registered as a ‘Society’ under the same
name and title and the Trust merged with the society through its resolution passed in
its govering body meeting held on 1.4.1991 The issue of original allotment made to the
Trust in 1990 being ab initio void and contrary to the Nazul Rules was raised in
December, 1992 and it was decided that the technical and legal issues be resolved by
placing the matter before the Authority. Accordingly, the matter was placed before the
Authority in its meeting held in June 1993 where it was decided taht the change in
allotment of land from Trust to the registered Society be approved and no unearned
increase be charged since the Trust has merged into the Society and the Trust and
Society are managed by the same set of people for the same purpose.


12

In each of these 3 allotments, approvals have been given for allotment by the
LG or by the Authority and therefore, it may not be possible to fix responsibility for
any alleged lapses/irregularity in these cases.

It may further be submitted that there was no misinterpretation nor any mala-
fide in the individual cases.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DDVA(Vol.I)
dated 26.10.2005]


ANNEXURE ‘A’
‘THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY
[Part गा 30) ss eee पका प ३ 30]

MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
NOTIFICATION

New Delhi, the 5th July, 2002

GS.R. 486(E).— In exercise of the powers conferred by section 56 of the Delhi
Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957), the Central Government, after consultation with
the Delhi Development Authority, hereby makes the following rules to amend the
Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of Development Nazul Land) Rules, 1981,
namely:—

1.(1) These rules may be called the Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of

Developed Nazul Land) Amendment Rules, 2002.

(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official
Gazette.
2. In the Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land)
Rules, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as the said rules), in rule 2;

(a) after clause (०) the following clause shall be inserted namely:—
(ca) "company" means a company as defined in section 3 of the
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);
(b) after clause (d) the following clause shall be inserted namely:—
(da) "Firm" means a firm as defined in section 4 of the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932);
(c) after clause (m) the following clause shall be inserted namely:—
(ma) "Trust" has the meaning assigned to it in section 3 of the
Indian Trust Act, 1882 (2 of 1882);
3, Rule 4 of the said rules shall be numbered as sub-rule (1) thereof, and after
sub-rule (1) as so numbered, the following sub-rule shall be inserted namely:—

"(2) The Authority may, in conformity with the plans, and subject to the other
provisions of these rules, allot Nazul land to a company, firm or trust for the purpose
of the establishment of hospitals or dispensaries."

4. In rule 5 of the said rules, the following Explanation shall be inserted at the
end, namely:—

‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this rule the expression "hospitals" do not
include the hospitals/dispensaries established by a company, firm or trust as referred
to in sub-rule (2) of rule (4).”

5. Inrule 8 of the said rule, for the words "a commercial purpose", the words "a
commercial purpose, or for the purpose of the establishment of hospital or dispensary”
shall be substituted.

13


14

6. Inrule 20 of the said rules sub-rule (1) shall be renumbered as rule 20 and in
rule 20 as 50 renumbered—

(i) in clause (b), for the words, "for the time being in force" the following
words and figures shall be substituted, namely:—

“for the time being in force, or itisa company, firm or trust for the purpose
of establishment of hospital or dispensary";

(ii) in clause (०)--

(a) for the words "Department of the Delhi Administration", the words
"Department of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi" shall be
substituted.

(b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

“Provided that in case of allotment to a company, firm or trust for the
purpose of establishment of hospital or dispensary by tenders or auction,
as the same may be, such company, firm or trust, as the case may be, shall
not be required to be sponsored by a Department of the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi or a Ministry of the Central Government".

[F.No.J-13036/3/99-DD VA]
P.K. PRADHAN,
Jt. Secy.

Note: The Principal rules were published in the Gazette of India vide notification
number GSR 872, dated the 26th September, 1981 and lastly amended vide notification
number GSR 677 (8) , dated the 11th November, 1991.


15

Observations and Recommendations

What has surprised the Committee is the fact that even in the cases where the
condition for free treatment was imposed in the allotment letters, there have been
numerous instances where the respective hospitals/dispensaries did not adhere to
the requisite conditions. The Committee regret to observe that there was no mechanism
in place to demarcate responsibilities between DDA and Directorate of Health Services,
Government of NCT of Delhi for monitoring the terms of allotment and their effective
enforcement. Wheres DDA contested that they did not have proper mechanism or
ability to be able to monitor the compliance of these conditions, the Principal Secretary,
Health, of Government of NCT of Delhi pleaded that land owning agency can alone
ensure the implementation of the requirements by the private hospitals as Delhi
Nursing Homes (Registration) Act does not empower them to do so. The Committee
are inclined to conclude that lack of coordination and shifting of responsibility by
DDA and Government of Delhi on each other provided ample opportunity to
beneficiaries in avoiding the implementation of the terms and conditions of land
allotment under the Nazul Rules. As a consequence, no effective moniotring of the
provisions of free treatment to indigent patients could be enforced with the result that
the primary objective of allotment of land at concessional rates was defeated. Obviously,
DDA's motive was directed more towards providing favours to certain allottees than
its genuine concern for providing free treatment to indigent patients. The Committee
desire that the Ministry of Urban Development should work in close coordination with
DDA and Government of NCT of | ‘Delhi to ensure compliance of the terms and conditions
by the hospitals/dispensaries. The Government of NCT of Delhi may be impressed
upon to amend Delhi Nursing Homes. (Registration) Act, if necessary, which would
empower them to enforce on the hospitals, the requisite condition regarding provision
of free treatment to indigent patients.

[(S.No. 6) Para 88 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken

DDA officials form part of the inspection team that has been set up by
Government of NCT of Delhi under the directions of High Court Order in CWP No.
2866/2002 to oversee the implementation of condition relating to free treatment. A team
of officers under Directorate of Health Services, GNCTD along with officials from DDA
and L&DO set up for the purpose are visiting the hospitals and monitoring compliance
of the free treatment conditions. In addition, a fortnightly reporting system has already
been put in place where the hospitals provide the information on fortnightly basis
about the percentage of free treatment provided by them. ‘The format for providing
information by the hospitals is at Annexure-B.

GNCTD have reported that as per recommendations of Justice Qureshi Committee
and the requirements for enforcement of the conditions as found necessary from time
to time, anew legislation has been drafted. In the draft Bill, ithas been proposed that
the societies/trusts to whom the land has been allotted for hospitals with the conditions
to provide free beds for the poor patients, shall have to adhere to the stipulated
conditions laid down by the land owning agencies. Violations of the said conditins
would constitute a ground for cancellation of registration.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DD-VA(Vol. II)
i dated 26.10.2005]


16

“ON euoydajay

s19})9] YOO] g Ul UIEN,

Aloyeusis paziioyine hq pausig Aq paypal Aq poseday,
i | 'ज००१० id

uonsadsur 10j yday uaaq sey sjuaned 100d yo A1089}v9 au} Jepun paiva syuaned ey) Jo spiosas a[qelyUep! ayy yeY? Payyi9D

Cdl ddO. Cdl ado CdI ddO ddl 050
5थष्टा pazipisqns quoueay say
qns 1४ pajway UdAIS squateg sjuaneg 59०१ spaq
SyeUloy syuaneg JO “ON, 952% JO “ON jo ou eioy aay JOON Jo‘oujmol, ‘on's
Ynuo- jo pug /yig] 8णएप० ysup0g ~ yuo, dea, Tendsoy ay) Jo owen

एप JO TUSUO||Y JO SUOHIPUOD 7% SULID} dt YIM 9०१९७०१००००४ UI 5४ PezIPIsqng/aedy payor] sjuoTeg ay 10 sleep Apysiu0y

VIWOANd

/D-TANXNINNE


17

Observations and Recommendations

The Committee have also been informed that DDA is considering a proposal,put
forward by some of the beneficiaries like Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre
for freeing them from the obligation of free treatment by charging them the commercial
rates. The Committee view such proposals from these beneficiaries which have earned
huge profits after acquiring precious land at concessional rates on the plea of being
charitable institutions as unethical and unacceptable. The Committee are of the firm
opinion that primary objective of allotment of land by Government to hospitals and
dispensaries at concessional rates should be driven-more towards alleviating miseries
caused by diseases to the poor people rather than earning hefty profits. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommend that no hospital/dispensary that was allotted land at
concessional rate should be allowed under any circumstances to back track their
commitments of providing free treatment to poor patients.

[(S.No. 7) Para 89 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

With regard to Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre PAC, has commented
as under:—

“The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that no hospital/dispensary
that was allotted land at concessional rate should be allowed under any circumstances
to back track their commitments of providing free treatment to poor patients."

The facts of the allotment to the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre are
as under:—

Land was allotted in favour of Escorts Hospital on several occasions for various
requirements of the hospital. The details of allotment made in favour of | ‘the hospital are
as follows:

SL Date of ‘Area SS a ne ee Remarks
No, Allonment, २ ्‌ ऊ+ ++--दक्तइज्ञा Allotment
1. 8.4.1982 2 Acres Hospital 25% free bed
condition exists.
2. 15.12.1983 3668.72 Hospital and
sq. yds. essential staff
quarters
3 3.5.1990 0.83 acres Rehabilitation 25% free bed
services to the condition exists.
patients.
4 28.8.1985 2 acres Staff quarters -
attached to Hospital
5 213.1994 0.643 Hospital. -
acres
6. 31.7.1995 0.412 Referral Centre for -
acres treatment of
Cardiac diseases.
"4 14.6.1996 1135.43 Maintaining as न

Se oe err व व नल green.



18

The allotments to Escorts Hospital have a categorical stipulation of 25% free
bed condition. The Escorts Hospital vide their letter dated 25.5.04 has stated that the
condition for free treatment are highly burdensome and not possible to comply. If this
is done then it wili result in closure of Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre. The
Delhi Government has asked Escorts Hospital along with other hospitals to forward
the compliance of free bed to the extent of 25% IPD and 40% OPD vide DHS letter
dated 6.12.04,

The Government is presently considering a proposal for freeing the hospitals
from the obligation of free treatment on payment of the market value of land and
penalty and starting a health insurance scheme in lieu thereof. A view on the proposal
of Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre for exemption from the freeship condition
on payment of the difference between the concessional allotment rate and the market
rate is possible after the final decision is taken in the proposal which is under
consideration.

Meanwhile, on 06/10/2005 the DDA has cancelled the lease of the EHIRC for
non-compliance with the free treatment condition as well as unauthorized transfer of
the land by way of its conversion (of the society) into a private limited company.

[Ministry of Urban Development 0.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DD-VA(Vol.I1)
dated 26.10.2005]

Observations and Recommendations

The Committee desire that DDA should immediately review land allotment (before
the introduction of action system) to ail the hospitals and dispensaries and take
adequate steps to impose the requisite condition of providing free treatment to ind: igent
patients as per the provisions on all the hospitals and dispensaries retrospectively.
For this, the Government, if considered necessary, should bring about appropriate
legislative changes. An effective mechanism should also be put in place to monitor the
implementation of terms and conditions of allotment by the parties. Failure to adhere to
such terms should attract a deterrent penalty.

[(S. No. 8) Para 90 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

DDA has reported that in those cases where the free bed condition was not
specified at the time of allotment of land to the hospital, it has now started imposing
such condition at the time of granting extension of time letters, permission to mortgage
or while finalizing the lease deed, if not already done.


19

In order to monitor the implementation of condition of free beds/treatment where
such condition exists, the DDA and GNCTD have established a joint monitoring
mechanism based on a system of fortnightly reporting by hospitals and inspections
by the monitoring tear. The joint team has so far conducted 17 inspections of various
hospitals.

As regards the legislative changes, based on the Qureshi Committee report
and other issues raised from time to time, the GNCTD has already prepared a draft
legislation which provides for imposition of freeship conditions on hospitals. The
draft legislation further provides that it shall be ensured that hospitals which have
been established and have the conditions relating to free beds/treatment will be
registered or if already registered, such registration will be renewed, only subject to
compliance of the conditions. If any contravention is noticed by the monitoring
team or by the Directorate of Health, GNCTD, the land owning agency ‘will be informed
to take necessary action.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No G-20014/9/2003-DD-VACVol. If)
dated 26.10.2005]

Observations and Recommendations

The Committee are constrained to point out that the Ministry/DDA could
not furnish information regarding the prevalent market price of land allotted to
hospital/dispensaries at’concessional rates prior to the year 2002 which would
have indicated the huge financial benefits derived by the respective hospital/
dispensaries. This advantage would appear more pronounced considering the fact
the some of the hospitals/dispensaries were not even asked to adhere to the
requisite clauses of free treatment and the remaining, though required to do so, did
not eventually bother to implement the same. It is also pertinent to note in this
regard that out of 65 cases, DDA could provide only provisional rates of
concessional land allotment to 33 hospitals/dispensaries despite the fact that they
were allotted plots 6 to 25 years ago. Worse still, in 9 other cases the related files
are not available whereas in 2 more cases of land allotment during 1995 and 1996,
the files are still under submission. The Committee deplore the casual approach
adopted by DDA in maintaining the proper records for allotment of land.and would
like the matter to be investigated with a view to taking deterrent action against the
delinquent officials. The Committee expect the DDA to take suitable steps to ensure
maintenance of proper records in future.

[(S. No. 9) Para 91 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]


20

Action Taken

The PAC observed that 9 files were not available. In respect of specific cases
which have been commented by PAC, details are as under:—

SI. No. Name of Hospitals Whether Whether Remarks
condition 25% free
of free bed is
bed 25% mentioned
isin in
sponsorship allotment
letter letter
1. Aishi Ram Batra No No The free bed
Public Charitable condition has been
Trust imposed while giving
subletting permission.
2. Sunder Lal Jain No No
Charitable Trust
3६ Sant Nirankari No No Lease not yet
Mandal executed, the condition
will be imposed during
execution of lease.
4, Human Care No No Free bed condition has
Medical Trust been imposed while
granting Extension of
Time.
5. Unique Hospital No No An affidavit
and Research undertaking to provide
Institute free treatment has been
obained. Moreover as
lease is yet to be
executed; this condition
will be imposed at the
time of execution of
lease.
6. B.R. Jassa Ram No No Land allotted by Delhi
Hospital Improvement Trust
7. Dr. B.L. Kapoor No No Land allotted by Delhi
Memorial Hospital Improvement Trust
8. Birla Centre for No No Allotment cancelled
Medical Research due to non-
construction and the
same was challenged in
High Court and the
matter is subjudice.
OF Delhi Cheshire No No Meant for poor
Home (Hospital for persons.

Disabled Persons)



21

; Inthis context, it may be mentioned that the files were not available at that point of
time because the files were either with the Panel Lawyer in connection with court cases
or other competent authorities for considering various issues. However, their status, as
far as compliance with free bed condition is concerned, is reflected in the above table.

As already mentioned, DDA does maintain proper records of allotments. Certain
files may not be readily available at a particular time because files were with DDA counsels
due to ongoing court cases. However, all the 9 files are available. However, the Commitee's
recommendation on maintenance of proper records has been noted for compliance.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DDVA (Vol. II)
dated 26.10.2005]

Observations and Recommendations

Another area of concern is the DDA's failure to define in specific terms as to
‘what comprises free treatment' and 'who can be benefited under this free treatment!
which ultimately became the biggest stumbling block in achieving the primary objective
of the policy of allotting land at concessional rates to hospitals and dispensaries. The
Committee feel that this lapse, no doubt, empowered hospitals and dispensaries to
interpret the provisions differently which in turn gave them immunity from restricting
the scope of free service to consultations only and even not entertaining eligible ‘poor’
patients at all. Further, the Ministry of Urban Development could not furnish information
regarding the number of patients who have been benefited from this policy over the
years. It may not be out of place to mention that in few cases which hospitals/
dispensaries claim to have entertained poor patients for free treatment, it is actually the
friends and relatives of their staff who ultimately get the benefit.

{(S.No. 11) Para 93 of 12th Report of PAC
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

GNCTD have reported that in order to fix some bench mark, it has been agreed
that those poor patients who belong.to BPL category and carry a valid BPL ration card
or produce a certificate from area SDM that the person belongs to poor category
should be extended the benefit of free beds and treatment.

In case the person fails to bring either of the two documents, still based on the
information provided on a proforma declaration (as suggested by Justice Qureshi
Committee), the free beds/treatment should be provided. Through regular inspection
schedules, it is ensured that the poor patients of this category are not refused treatment.

Further GNCTD has reported that all kinds of treatment is free in GNCTD Hospitals
and for such poor patients who wish to obtain treatment from tertiary care Government
Hospitals for life threatening conditions, the cost of treatment is paid to the treating
hospital from Delhi Arogya Nidhi.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DDVA (Vol. II)
dated 26.10.2005]


22

Observations and Recommendations

Another disquieting feature of the functioning of DDA is the fact,that it failed to
incorporate the condition of the ‘Guidelines for Disposal of Institutional Land’ requiring
a representative of the Government of Delhi to be made a member of the registered
society administering the hospital in the allotment letter in 39 out of 42 cases. In the
cases of Venu Charitable Society and Tagore Academy where this condition was
included in the allotment letter, there was nothing on record to establish whether any
such representative had been appointed. The Committee are surprised at the reasons
advanced by the Ministry that non-appointment of Government representatives appears
to be a case of omission and default rather than indicative of any intent to give undue
favour to such allottees. The Committee feel that this requisite incorporation of the
condition could have ensured that the commitment of medical care for indigent patients
was honoured. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Urban
Development should impress upon DDA to immediately act in this direction in
consultation with Directorate of Health Services, Government of NCT of Delhi witha
view to ensuring appointment of representatives of Government in the Societies
administering these 42 hospitals within 3 months of the presentation of this Report.

[(S.No. 13) Para 95 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

PAC pointed out that representatives in Venu Charitable Eye Hospital, Tagore
Academy and Lala Muni Ram Mange Ram hospitals have not been appointed. In this
context, it is mentioned that representatives have already been appointed by the DHS.
Regarding remaining hospitals, there is no specific condition regarding appointment
or representatives either in the allotment letter or in the lease deed. However, DDA is
incorporating this cbndition while processing request for extension of time or mortgage
permission or execution of lease deed.

GNCTD have reported that on the request of DDA to nominate government
representatives in case of 9 Trusts, it was informed to DDA that, DHS has nominated
government representative in the board of management of the 5 Trusts where the
hospitals have been found functioning. The role of the Directorate comes only after
the hospital has been established and becomes functional. GNCTD is also of the view
that this issue can be tackled by an administrative order and does not require amendment
in the DNHR Act.

[Ministry of Urban Development 0.५. No. G-20014/9/2003-DDVA (Vol. If)
dated 26.10.2005]

Observations and Recommendations

Due to inadequate and ineffective pursuance for recovering outstanding
dues on account of premia, ground rent and interest thereon, arrears to the tune of
Rs. 6 crores accumulated against the allottees as of October 2003. While the
outstanding premia and interest thereon related to the period 1996-97 onwards, the


23

outstanding ground rent related to the period from 1985-90 onwards. The fact that
such old arrears could not be collected so far only goes to prove the gross
negligence and carelessness exhibited by the DDA authorities in the matter. What
is surprising is the fact that Ledger Accounts maintained by the Director (Land
Costing) did not present the true picture of outstanding dues against the allottees.
Thus effective pursuance of the dues was also thwarted by the incomplete
maintenance of records and unreliable ledger accounts. The Committee are inclined
to conclude that adequate action was not taken to effectively pursue the pending
dues and non-collection of same from the defaulting institutions extended an
undue benefit to them.

[(S.No. 16) Para 98 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

The position relating to recovery of ground rent/licence fee for the hospitals has
been reported by DDA as follows:

in order to ensure effective improvement of the recovery of ground rent in
respect of allotment of land to hospitals and dispensaries an exhaustive exercise has
been conducted by DDA as under:

(i) Further defaulter notices have been issued to ali the lessees of private hospitals
and dispensaries during the period 10/4 to 12/04 with follow up by issue of
reminders in January, 2005 and June, 2005;

(ii) A special drive to note down particulars of the institutional properties
including private hospitals and dispensaries has been carried out on manual
basis for updation of ground rent ledgers and the same has been almost
completed;

(1) Computerisation of the D&C ledgers in respect of institutional properties is
being done;

(iv) The work of recovery of ground rent has been outsourced as
a result of which effective steps are being taken for improvement of recovery of
ground rent. The details of ground rent recovered from 41 hospitals/dispensaries

is as follows:
SI.No. Year Amount Recovered व
(Rs. lakhs)
1६ 2002-03 23.6
2: 2003-04 76.08
3: 2004-05 68.00
4. 2005-06 (Upto September) 55.14



24

The ground rent from institutional properties as a whole has gone up from
Rs, 381.51 lakhs in 2002-03 to Rs. 1337.26 lakhs in 2004-05. The collection of ground
rent during 2005-06 is expected to increase over the previous year. It may also be
mentioned here that there has been a general improvement in collection.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.-G-2001 4/9/2003-DDVA(Vol.II) dated
26.10.2005]

Observations and Recommendations

The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that for recovery
of the outstanding dues, DDA has, from time to time issued default notices to the
concerned societies/organizations and also issued press releases in this regard and
the DDA propose to take action under Punjab Revenue Act, 1887 in case the society
fails to remit the requisite dues. The Committee feel that mere issuance ofreminders to
the defaulters to pay the necessary dues was not enough and the necessary action
under this Act which empower the DDA to issue the attachment order or seal the
premises should have been taken much earlier. The fact that this was not done against
the defaulting parties is questionable. The Committee desire that DDA should take
immediate action in this regard so that all the pending dues are recovered from the
parties within three months of the presentation of this Report.

{(S. No. 17) Para 99 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

After issue of defaulter notices/reminders, action under Punjab Land Revenue
Act, 1887 has been initiated by issue of non-recovery certificate to the Assistant
Collector, Grade-I(II) to take action for recovery of ground rent by issue of notices,
attachment orders or sealing of the premises under the said Act.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.-G-2001 4/9/2003-DDVA(Vol.II)
dated 26.10.2005]

Observations and Recommendations

The Committee have been informed that the Government had by notification
No. 486 (E) dated 5.7.02 amended the Nazul Rules to provide for auction of the DDA
land to hospitals and dispensary sites. This would include all sites except those meant
for local bodies and Government. Accordingly, DDA can now allot land for hospitals/
dispensaries through auction system without imposing any condition for providing
free treatment to the poor patients since there is no subsidy and market forces determine
the prices. After switching over to auction system in the year 2002, a sum of about
Rs. 81.53 crore has already been collected from 9 societies. The Committee desire that
the Ministry/DDA should examine the feasibility of creating a corpus from the money
so generated for providing medical insurance to the bonafide poor and economically
weaker sections of the NCT of Delhi. In addition, the Committee desire that penalties
and fines collected from those hospitals/dispensaries which were allotted land at
concessional rates prior to auction system and which have been found wanting in


25

providing free medical treatment as per laid down criterion may be added to this
corpus. The identification of poor and indigent persons who could be covered under
this insurance scheme may be left to the Government of NCT of Delhi as to how best
they can identify these people in Delhi through their Social Welfare Department or
Health Department or Urban Local Bodies within six months of the presentation of this
Report. Another option could also be to set up new Government hospitals out of this
fund to discourage the dangerous mushrooming of private clinics and dispensaries by
unqualified people at every nook and comer of the city. The Committee would, therefore,
like the authorities concerned to explore all viable options in this regard so that these
funds are utilised judiciously and the cause of poor and indigent patients is best
served.

[(S. No. 18) Para 100 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken

The recommendations of PAC will be kept in view by Government while finalizing
the scheme for insurance cover for free treatment to poor patients and by the GNCTD
for incorporating in the draft legislation if the same is required.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No.-G-2001 4/9/2003-DDVA(Vol.II)
dated 26.10.2005]


CHAPTER II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT

Observations/Recommendations

According to the conditions of allotment, building plans should be approved
and sanctioned by the DDA and construction completed within a period of two years
from the date of taking over possession of the land. If the society is unable to construct
the structure within two years, extension of time is allowed upto five years without
composite fee and thereafter extension of time [upto 20 years] can be granted on the
basis of charging composite fee after a considered decision is taken by the Competent
authority in DDA. The Committee find it strange that whereas conditions of allotment
require the parties to construct the structure in only two years, extension from time to
time can be granted upto 20 years. 23 out of 27 hospitals had not started functioning till
July 2003 despite lapse of periods ranging from 4 to over 30 years. Such developments
give an unmistakable impression that the intention of the majority of the allottees was
more or less to grab the coveted plots of land at the concessional rate using ‘public
charity’ as a ploy. What is intriguing is the fact that DDA did not have any system to
monitor timely construction of buildings for hospitals/dispensaries on the lands allotted
by it. This is evident from the fact that out of 10 cases where extension was granted for
construction of buildings, the extension period had already expired in seven cases.
DDA could not furnish to Audit the details of approval of plans, stipulated date of
completion, actual date of completion and date of occupancy of buildings by various
hospitals and dispensaries which was awaited from the Building Department (July
2003). Obviously there did not exist any inbuilt mechanism to ensure that societies
build the hospitals quickly and within the time frame of extended period.

The Committee observe that DDA need to follow a stricter norm for selecting
genuine charitable institutions and clear cut time limits to avoid delay in construction
and operationalisation of hospitals and dispensaries which is synonymous with idling,
if not waste, of precious land resources. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
DDA should amend the building construction rules in this regard to provide therein
that where the societies fail to complete construction activities on the plots allotted to
them and start fynctioning within a maximum period of five years of: allotment, letters of
allotment are cancelled invariably. Provisions for not permitting transfer or resale of
the allotted land to a third party should also be made to help prevent commercial
minded societies from applying for institutional land at concessional rates. As of now,
no extension should be given to any Society and they be asked to complete the
construction and operationalise the hospitals positively by the end of the end of 2005
failing which the Ministry of Urban Development should take necessary action to

26


27

cancel the allotment of land made at concessional rates to these hospitals/dispensaries.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the latest position in regard to
construction in all these cases of allotment and the precise steps taken to operationalise
them within three months of the presentation of this Report. Action taken by DDA to
initiate recovery of penalty or action against defaulters violating the conditions of
allotment should also be intimated in the Action Taken note.

[S.No. 14-15 Para 96 & 97 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

The PAC has observed that DDA should cancel lease of those hospitals who
have not started functioning even though more than 20 years of time lapsed. In
this context, it is mentioned that none of the hospitals, which are not yet
functioning, have crossed 20 years of time. The status of non-construction of
hospitals is as under:—

Status in respect of non-construction/under construction Hospitals

Sl Name of Hospitals Status
No.
1 2 3)
1. Sant Nirankari Mandal Dispute with Training and Technical Education

Department of GNCTD. Moreover, possession
has been given on 23.2.02, hence within the
five years grace period.

2. | Manav Sewarath Trust Possession of revised area has been handed
over on 8.10.03, hence ‘within the five years
grace period.

3. Vikrant Children Medical Cancellation of allotment has been made on

Foundatign account of non-construction.
4. - Multan Sewa Samiti Under construction, possession handed over
on 1.7.98.
5. | Human Care Medical Under construction. Possession handed over
Trust on 23.4.96, EOT up to 24.4.07 has been granted.
6. Narayan Dutt Srimali Possession handed over on 26.6.96. Proposal
Foundation for cancellation is submitted. The society has

filed the writ petition in the High Court.



28

2:

3

Nirogi Charitable Medical
Trust

Param Shakti Peeth

Unique Hospital &
Research Institute

Shanti Memorial Society

Madhukar Multi Speciality
Hospital

Maha Durga
Bala Sahib Gurdwara

National Society for
Prevention of Blindness

Delhi ENT & Research
Centre

V.N. Gupta Charitable
Trust

Possession handed over on 7.2.97 AHotment
cancelled on account of non-construction and
CBI reports regarding criminal antecedents of
members of society. The society has filed the
writ petition and obtained stay in the High
Court.

The matter regarding alternative land has been
settled recently on 28.1.05 and society has
requested for EOT for 5 years to facilitate
approval of sanctioned building plan.

The building plans are under submission.
Possession handed over on 31.8.98. Proposal
is under process for cancellation.

The matter of change of land use is under
process. Possession handed over only on
30.6.99. Lease yet to be executed. Allotment
was made on 6.5.99.

The matter regarding alternative land has
been settled recently on 18.2.05, hence, within
the grace period of 5 years.

Possession yet to be handed over since
demarcation has not been done.

Within the five years grace period.
Possession handed over on 25.6.2002.

EOT up to 30.6.05 had been approved.
Possession handed over on 24.9.90. The
society has not paid composition fee and
matter is being processed for cancellation.

Under construction. Possession handed over
on 1.2.2000.

Within the five years grace period.
Possession handed over on 19.8.03.

Thus, it may be noted that lease of Nirogi Charitable Trust and Vikrant Children
Foundation & Research Center, out of the above, have already been cancelled for non-
construction and violation of allotment conditions etc. In addition, lease of GM. Modi
Hospital has also been cancelled for various violations including non-construction of
major portion of the land.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DDVA(Vol. IT)

dated 26.10.2005]


CHAPTERIV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION

Observations/Recommendations

It is thus evident that DDA had allotted land at concessional rates to three
ineligible institutions viz. Arya Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal; Dharmshila Cancer Foundation
and Research Centre and Unique Hospitals and Research Institute in contravention of
Rule 20 of the Nazul Rules which deprived DDA of revenue of Rs. 38.54 crore. The
Committee do not see the Ministry of Urban Development's contention that the
application of these institutions were sponsored by either the Government of India or
the Government of NCT of Delhi and duly approved by the competent authority under
the chairmanship of Lt. Governor of Delhi as the legitimate basis for allotting land to
these institutions when Rule 20 of the Nazul Rules clearly prescribed, inter alia, that
an institution seeking allotment of institutional land should be a society registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. Institutional land was allotted at concessional
rate to Arya Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal which still remains as a trust. The Ministry of Urban
Development claimed that one time exemption from this requirement was given to Arya
Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal whereas the Nazul Rules do not provide for such exemptions.
No Government approval for this exemption was obtained. Dharmshila Cancer
Foundation and Research Centre was a trust when it was allotted land in March, 1990
and controversially allowed to retain the land when it was converted into a society in
April, 1990. Even after converting from trust to society, it remained more or less same
as before. The Institution has also been issued a ‘show cause notice’ for failing to
honour their commitment of providing free treatment to indigent patients. Unique
Hospitals and Research Institute incorporated as a company in January, 1996 under
the Companies Act, 1956 registered itself as a society under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 only in February, 1997 when it applied for allotment of land. Without
ascertaining the fact that the Unique Hospitals and Research Institute continued to
subsist as a company and registration as a society was a mere facade in order to obtain
allotment of land at concessional rates, the Institute was allotted land in December,
1997. This undue haste became meaningless as the Hospital is yet to be constructed
and extension of time for construction of the building has been given. The Committee
view the land allotments to these ineligible institutions as glaring exampies of abuse of
official position and machinery at the highest echelons in DDA to show favouritism to
certain institutions on one or the other pretext. The Committee therefore, desire that
responsibility should be fixed for these irregular allotments and appropriate punitive
action taken against the erring officials who misinterpreted the rules to enable certain
institutions to have the land allotted at concessional rates.

{(S. No. 4) Para 86 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

29


30

Action Taken

DDA has allotted land to 65 hospitals (both hospitals and dispensarjes) till May,
2003 at varying concessional rates. One of the main objective of these allotments was
to provide free treatment to the poor patients i.e. 25% IPD and 40% OPD.

The PAC mentioned that Arya Vaidya Shala, Kottakal, Unique Hospitals and
Dharmshila Cancer Foundation Hospital were allotted land though-they were not
societies.

Regarding Arya Vaidya Shala, the proposal for allotment was sponsored by the
Ministry of Works & Housing in 1976 and by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
in 1980. The eligibility of the Trust for allotment of land by the DDA, keeping in view
the provisions of the Nazul Rules, was considered at the highest level in DDA in the
background of earlier allotment to the society in 1985 for which it had already made
payments and in the light of conflicting legal opinions about whether such a trust
could be treated at par with the Societies registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1980 as per Nazul Rules. Considering the fact that the particular trust was a public
and charitable trust which runs a renowned Ayurvedic Centre in Kottakal (Kerala) and
its status was considered at par with a charitable society and different from the objectives
of a commercial enterprise, a conscious decision was taken in 1995 by the competent
authority in DDA for allotment of land in their favour. Thus, the matter was considered
in totality and a decision was taken by the competent authority to consider allotment
of land to the public Trust.

The Nazul Rules with regard to dispensaries and hospitals have since been
amended vide Gazette Notification dated 5th July, 2002 (Annexure-A).

A Society by the name of Unique Hospital and Research Institute was registered
in February, 1997 and had applied for allotment of land. Accordingly, allotment was
made to the Institute in December, 1997. The contention is that this Society had been
existing as a company prior to 1997 and had registered itself as a society only to avail
the concessional rates of land by DDA. In this context, it is submitted that as on date
of allotment of land to the society, it was functioning as a society, well covered under
the provisions of the Nazul Rules, 1981 for allotment of land. Its previous character, in
this case a company, did not make it ineligible or debar it from allotment of land. The
affidavit of ‘no profit no loss' character of society had also been furnished. Keeping in
view that the allotment of land was made in favour of an eligible society as per the
provisions of Nazul Rules, there does not appear to be any ground for considering it as
any financial loss to the DDA.

However, the hospital has also been put on notice for cancellation of allotment
separately ‘on grounds for non-construction’. The matter is being decided by the
competent authority of DDA.

The Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre, which was a Trust,
had been allotted land on provisional rates in 1990. Subsequently, the Dharmshila
Cancer Foundation and Research Centre was registered as a 'Society' under the same
name and title and the Trust merged with the society through its resolution passed in


31

its governing body meeting held on 1.4.1991. The issue of original allotment made to
the Trust in 1990 being ab initio void and contrary to the Nazul Rules was raised in
December, 1992 and it was decided that the technical and legal issues be resolved by
placing the matter before the Authority. Accordingly, the matter was placed before the
authority in its meeting held in June, 1993 where it was decided that the change in
allotment of land from Trust to the registered Society be approved and no unearned
increase be charged since the Trust has merged into the Society and the Trust and
Society are managed by the same set of people for the same purpose.

Ineach of these 3 allotments, approvals have been given for allotment by the LG
or by the Authority and therefore, it may not be possible to fix responsibility for any
alleged lapses/irregularity in these cases.

It may further be submitted that there was no misinterpretation nor any mala-
fide in the individual cases.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DDVA (Vol. II)
dated 26.10.2005]

Observations/ Recommendations

Institutional land was allotted to hospitals and dispensaries at concessional
rates on the condition that the institution shall serve as a general public hospital
with at least 25 per cent of total indoor patients and that it would provide free
treatment to 40 per cent patients in the outdoor departments. The Committee are
surprised to find that DDA did not impose this mandatory condition without assigning
any reason in allotment letters in 24 cases during 1982 to 1999. The Ministry of
Urban Development stated that it was only in 1992 when DDA brought out guidelines
in which the conditions were specifically mentioned in the context of allotment of
land to private hospitals at concessional rates. However, the fact remains that even
after its introduction, DDA had not applied the condition uniformly with the result
that out of 26 cases belonging to post 1992 period test checked by Audit, the condition
was not imposed in as many as 18 cases. Failure to incorporate in the letters of
allotment the term stipulating provision of 25 per cent free indoor and 40 per cent free
outdoor treatment to poor patients defeated the primary objective of such allotment
of land at concessional rates and deprived the indigent patients of the benefit of free
treatment. The Committee are of the firm view that nothing is going to set the things
right until the system stops tolerating the officials who do not perform the task
assigned to them judiciously and impartially. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that a high level inquiry by an independent agency should be constituted for a
thorough proble to fix responsibility and appropriate punitive action taken against
officials who failed to incorporate requisite clause in the letters of allotment for
whatsoever reasons.

[(S.No. 5) Para 87 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]


32

Action Taken

The PAC has observed that the DDA has not imposed freeship condition in
allotment letters issued between 1982 and 1999. Further, it was only in 1992 when DDA
brought out guidelines in which the conditions were specifically mentioned in the
context of allotment of land of private hospitals at concessional rates. However, even
after its introduction, DDA had not applied the condition uniformly even after 1992
and accordingly, PAC sought to probe this issue, so as to fix responsibility against
officials who failed to incorporate the clause.

In respect of societies where condition was not imposed even after 1992 the
cases were examined further to identify lapses on the parts of officials if any and to
initiate action against such officials. After scrutiny of cases 15 officials have been
identified to have committed lapses and show cause notices are being issued to them.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DDVA (Vol. II)
dated 26.10.2005]

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee are perturbed to find that DDA neither set up any Grievances
Redressal Cell nor put in place any other system to deal with the complaints received
against the hospitals functioning in contravention of the terms and conditions of
allotment. The Ministry of Urban Development claim that as and when complaints are
received against erring hospitals or dispensaries, action as per lease terms is taken.
However, this contention of the Ministry is unacceptable as DDA failed to take any
concrete action in complaints received against Deepak Gupta Memorial Hospital, Mai
Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust and Sondhi Charitable Hospital during April-
November, 2002. In Deepak Gupta Memorial Hospital case, the investigation officer
inspected the hospital after more than one year of the receipt of complaint. Even then
he could not give any conclusive report and no further action was taken after the
hospital submitted an affidavit on stamp paper that it was providing 25 per cent free
beds and also free treatment to the poor and indigent category. Inquiry report of
Director (Lands), DDA in respect of Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust is
pending as of now. No action was taken against Sondhi Charitable Hospital despite
the orders of the Director (Lands) to initiate cancellation proceedings against the
Institute except for issuing a final show cause notice on 30.10.2003. No further action
‘was contemplated after the hospital replied on 12.11.2003 undertaking to reserve 25 per
cent beds for poor patients and to adhere to all the conditions. The Committee are
constrained to point out that action taken in these cases was not only belated but also
totally inadequte. What is surprising is the fact that DDA at times simply relied on the
statement of hospital authorities that they are entertaining poor patients as per provision
and did not care to cross-check their version by having surprise checks. The Committee
desire that responsibility should be fixed on the erring officials for their inaction in
these reported cases of complaints. The Committee do not consider measures taken by
these hospitals as appropriate and are of the opinion that strict deterrent penal action
should have been taken against known defaulters of terms and conditions of allotment
to set an example for other hospitals. Renowned and highly profitable hospitals like
Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, Vimhans, which were allotted land on the
same condition, have violated the obligation of free treatment. However, no concrete


33

follow-up action could be taken against them. Worse still, the Ministry of Urban
Development could not submit information regarding the number of complaints received
during the last five years. Obviously, there is no system to deal with complaints
received against the functioning of the hospitals in contravention of the terms and
conditions of allotment. The Committee, therefore, recommend that DDA should evolve
a proper mechanism with adequate manpower and authority to ensure prompt and
proper follow up action on complaints received against hospitals functioning in
contravention of terms of conditions of allotment.

[(S.No. 10) Para 92 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

(a) With regard to Deepak Gupta Memorial Hospital, PAC has mentioned that the
Investigating Officer(JE) inspected the hospital on 30.10.03 and in spite of more than
one year no conclusive action was taken against the hospital.

In this context, DDA called for the records from the hospital vide its letter-dated
15.3.04 to verify the compliance of the free bed condition. The reply dated 21.4.2004
was received from the hospital which indicated that, they are fulfilling the free bed
condition. The reports submitted by the hospital were forwarded to DHS for examination,
vide letter dated 26.8.04. DHS has informed that this hospital has earmarked 12 out of
48 beds (25%) for free patients.

(b) Regarding Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust, the PAC pointed out
that the Enquiry Report of Director (Lands), DDA is pending as of now.

The allegation regarding sale of lease property allotted to Mai Kamli Wali was
enquired into. It was revealed that the Power of Attorney and agreement to sale were
executed in February, 2001 by the President of Mai Kamli Wali (Shri R.M. Bakshi)
stating to have been authorized by the trust. This was in breach of terms and conditions
of allotment. It was later ascertained that the General Body of the trust passed resolution
on 20.7.04 to cancel the said Power of Attorney (PoA) and agreement to sale. This
resolution also indicated that members had no proper information about alleged
authorization in favour of Shri R.N. Bakshi, the President of the society for executing
PoA and agreement. Since the Power of Attorney for sale and the subsequent sale
agreement was cancelled by the general body of the society by way of registered PoA,
there is no violation as on date as far as alleged sale is concerned.

(c) Regarding Sondhi Charitable Hospital, it was reported by Delhi Government
that the hospital is functioning as a private nursing home charging exorbitant fees. In
this context, it is to mention that the hospital was served show cause notice for not
providing free bed to the poor vide letter dated 3.11.03. Thereafter, the society vide”
their letter dated 12.11.03 has replied that they have reserved 20% beds for the patients
belonging to weaker sections of the society, besides providing free OPD and
concessions to the senior citizens. DDA while giving mortgage permission to the
hospital has imposed the free bed condition vide letter dated 28.6.05, and an affidavit
was also obtained in this regard from the hospital.

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DDVA(Vol. II)
dated 26.10.2005]


34

Observations and Recommendations

The Committee recommend that DDA in consultation and coordination with the
concerned authorities should specify clear norms to identify the category of people
who could be eligible for ‘this free treatment’. In order to eliminate differences in
interpretation as to what comprises the ‘free treatment’, the Ministry of Urban
Development in consultation with DDA and the Directorate of Health Services,
Government of NCT of Delhi should stipulate the nature of service indicating a list of
medicines; a list of diagnostic services; a list of surgical services etc. that should be
provided free of charge. Further, it should be made compulsory for the hospitals to
display clearly the sign boards indicating that it is functioning on concessional land
allotted by DDA for public charity and the type of free treatment and services available
with them for a particular category of people. The position of availability of free beds
in such a hospital should also be notified on daily basis. Surprise checks need to be
conducted by DDA and concerned Health Official of the Government of NCT of Delhi
to ensure that poor patients are actually given the requisite benefits and the hospitals/
dispensaries simply do not maintain and furnish the required statistics in this regard.
A monthly report to this effect should be obtained by DDA from the concerned
hospitals/dispensaries for forwarding of the same to the Ministry of Urban Development
for effective monitoring of the requisite clauses by the respective hospitals/
dispensaries.

[(S.No. 12) Para 94 of 12th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken

DDA has reported that the fortnightly reporting system has been put in place.
Besides this, a monitoring Committee under DHS is inspecting the hospitals at regular
intervals so as to ensure that the freeship condition is observed.

GNCTD have further reported that a separate monitoring cell is being created.
However, till the monitoring cell becomes functional, a joint team consisting of
representatives of DDA, DHS & L&DO under the chairmanship of Additional Director
of Health Services, GNTD has started inspecting the hospitals since January, 2005.
17 inspections were carried out by Monitoring Team.

Fortnightly reports are being collected on a proforma provided to them from the
hospitals to which the land has been allotted on concessional rates with conditions.
The joint team ensures that no BPL patient is refused treatment by these hospitals.

The government hospitals have been instructed to refer the poor patients to the
beneficiary hospitals in case the said facility is not available at the time of referral.
Various orders issued in this regard are enclosed (Annexure-C).

[Ministry of Urban Development O.M. No. G-20014/9/2003-DDVA(Vol. II)
dated 26.10.2005]


ANNEXURE—'C'

DIRECTORATE OF HEALTH SERVICES: GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI SWASTHAYA.
SEWANIDESHALAYA BHAWAN F-17, KARKARDOOMA, DELHI-110 032
F. 13/2/2003/NH/DHS/44813-41 Dated 6.12.04
ORDER

The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in its proceedings held on
18.11.2004 in the CWP No. 2866/2002 titled as Social Jurist Vs NCT Delhi and others
has directed that the hospitals which have been granted land with the conditions to
provide treatment to the poor people to the extent of 25% beds will adhere to this
condition till further orders.

You are, therefore, directed to ensure that the conditions as stipulated in the
letter of allotment of land, with regard to the free treatment to the poor patients, are
strictly adhered to. In case it is brought to the notice of this directorate that the above
conditions are not being adhered to the same shall be viewed seriously and intimated
to the land allotment agency for necessary action. A report every fortnightly ending
15th and the end of the month giving the details of the patients provided free treatment
in OPD and IPD is to be submitted (on the enlcosed proforma) to this directorate
positively till further orders and to keep identifiable records of the patients so treated.
The said records will have to be made available to the officers so authorized on behalf
of this directorate.

The receipt of the above order to be acknowledge and is to be complied
scrupulously.

(DR. R.N. BAISHYA)
DIRECTOR HEALTH SERVICES

To
The Medical Suptd/Medical Directors
1. Dharmshila Cancer Hosp. and Research Centre, Vasundhara Enclave,
Delhi-110096
2. Deepak Memorial Hospital & Medical Research Centre, 5 Institutional Area,
Vikas Marg Extn. Delhi-110092.
3. Escorts Heart Institute & Research Centre, Okhla Road, Okhla, Delhi-1 10025

4. Indian Spinal Injuries Centre, Opp. Police Station, Sector-C, Vasant Kunj,
Delhi-110070

5. Jaipur Golden Hospital, 2, Institutional Area, Sector 2, Rohini, Delhi-110085

6. Pushpawati Singhania Research Institute, Sheikh Sarai, Phase-II, Saket,
New Delhi-110017

7. National Heart Institute, 49, Community Centre, East of Kailash, Delhi, 110065.

8. Mai Kamli Wali Ch. Hosp. Plot No. 12, J-Block, Community Centre,
Rajouri Garden, Delhi-110027

9. Saroj Hospital, Sector-14, Extn, Near Madhuban Chowk Rohini, Delhi,-1 10085.

10. Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute & Research Centre, 0-18, Sector V, Rohini,
Dethi- 110085.

35


36

11.

Shanti Mukund Hospital, 2, Institutional Area, Vikas Marg Extn., Vikas Marg,

__ Delhi-110092

12. Venu Eye Institute & Research Centre, Plot-1, Shekh Sarai, New Delhi-110017

13, Veeranwali International Hospital, Chander Gupt Road, Chankapuri, Delhi-110021

14. Dr. Vidya Sagar Kaushalya Devi Memorial Health Centre (VIMHANS),
Nehru Nagar, Delhi-110065

15. Bhagawati Hospital, C-5/OCF-6, Sec-13, Rohini, Delhi-110085

16. Gujarmal Modi Hospital, Mandir Marg, Saket, Saket, Delhi-110017

17. Kottakkal Arya Vaidyashala, Karkardooma, Delhi-110092

18. Amar Jyoti Ch. Trust, Karkardooma, Delhi-1 10092

F, 13/2/2003/NH/DHS/44842-44 Dated 6/12/04

Copy for Information to:—

1. Vice Chairman, DDA, Vikas Sadan, INA Market, New Delhi

2. Pr. Secretary (H) Govt. of NCT, Delhi, 9th floor, Delhi Secretariat, New Delhi

३. Ms. Zubeda Begam, Additional Standing Counsel, 438, Lawyers Chamber
Delhi High Court with the request to inform the court accordingly.

(DR. RN. BAISHYA)
DIRECTOR HEALTH SERVICES


ANNEXURE 'C’

DIRECTORATE OF HEALTH SERVICES: GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI, SWASTHAYA
SEWA NIDESHALAYA BHAWAN
F-17, KARKARDOOMA, DELHI-1 10032

F. No. 13/2(3)2003/DHS/NH/ Dated
ORDER

Consequent upon taking éver charge of Director Health Servics by the
undersigned, joining of Dr. (Mrs.) Sukla Das as Additional Director Health Services,
the office order dated 24.2.2005 (copy enclosed), is partially modified to that extent and
names of the officers received from DDA and L&DO, as their representatives are
indicated accordingly. The other contents of the order remain the same.

The joint team shall now consist of the following:—

S.No. Designation of officer Deptt. Name of officer Nominated as

| Additional Director DHS Dr. (Mrs) Sukla Das Chairperson
Health Services

2. Med. Suptdt. Nursing DHS Dr. J. N. Mohanty Member
Homes-I

3 Med. Suptdt. Nursing DHS Dr. Ashok Kumar Member
Homes-II :

4 OSD (Lands) DDA Sh. O.P. Mishra Member

5 Dy. Land and L&DO, Sh. H.K. Beniwal Member
Development Officer MOUD

GOI

The above joint team will visit the institutions twice in a month and will submit
the report to the undersigned. The MSNH at DHS shall coordinate the aforesaid
inspections in the respective institutions in their respective area; and shall submit the
report as per schedule.

(DR. ANIL MEHRA)
DIRECTOR HEALTH SERVICES
F. No. 13/2(3)2003/DHS/NH/18620-49 Dated 18.5.05
Copy to:
1. Dr. (Mrs.) Sukla Das, Additional Director Health Services, DHS, Karkardooma,
Delhi

. Dr. J.N. Mohanty Med. Suptdt. Nursing Homes-I, DHS, Karkardooma, Delhi

. Dr. Ashok Kumar Med. Suptdt. ‘Nursing Homes-II, DHS, Karkardooma, Delhi
Sh. O.P. Mishra, OSD (Lands), Vikas Sadan, DDA, New Delhi

. Sh. HK. Beniwal, Dy. Land and Development Officer, L&DO, Min. of Urban
Development, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi, GOI.

Copy for information to:

UPRwD

37


Avpune

38

. Pr. Secretary (H), Delhi Govt, 9th Floor, Delhi Sachivalaya, New Delhi
. Commissioner (LD), Vikas Sadan, DDA, New Delhi

L&DO, Min. of Urban Development, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi, GO

. PS to Secretary (UD), MOUD and PA, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi
. Ms, Zubeda Begum, GC, Chamber No. 436, Lawyers Chambers, High Court Delhi
. All concerned hospitals (20 Hospitals)

(DR. ANIL MEHRA)
DIRECTOR HEALTH SERVICES


ANNEXURE 'C’

DIRECTORATE OF HEALTH SERVICES: GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI, SWASTHAYA
SEWA NIDESHALAYA BHAWAN
F-17, KARKARDOOMA, DELHI-1 10032

F-No. 13/2(3)/03/NH/DHS/ Dated

Sub: Referral of Poor patients to Private hospitals for free treatment.

Sir,

This is in continuation to the letter of even number dated 3.1.05 of this directorate,
1am to inform that the patient belonging to the poor category having BPL ration card
or having the certificate from the area SDM with regard to his eligibility certifying that
he belongs to poor category and suffering from conditions like Cancer, Cardiac ailments,
Nephrology Gastroenterology etc. for which the facilities are not available in the hospital

may be referred to the private hospitals, where these specific facilities are available
(list enclosed).

The said referral shall be subject to non availability of the said facility in your
hospital at the time of referral and a separate record of such referrals may be kept. The
reports of such referrals may be sent as per performa already sent to you by the
10th day of the month. A 'nil' report may also be sent for the month if no referrals have
been made to the private hospitals.

Sd/-
(DR. ANIL MEHRA)
ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR

The Medical Suptdt./Medical Directors 12383—409
. GB Pant Hospital, New Delhi
. Guru Nanak Eye Centre, Maharaja Ranjeet Singh Marg, New Delhi
. Lok Nayak Hospital, Delhi Gate, New Delhi
. GTB Hospital, Dilshad Garden, Shahdara, Delhi
. DDU Hospital, Hari Nagar, New Delhi
. Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital, Rohini, Sector 6, Delhi
. Aruna Asif Ali Hospital, Civil Lanes, Delhi
. Sanjay Gandhi Memorial Hospital, Mangol Puri, Delhi
. Sushruta Trauma Centre, Metcalf Road, Delhi
. Chacha Nehru Children Hospital, Geeta Colony, Delhi
11. Rajeev Gandhi Superspecialty Hospital, Tahirpur, Delhi
12. Babu Jagjivan Ram Memorial Hospital, Jahangir Puri, Delhi
13. Guru Gobind Singh Government Hospital, Raghubir Nagar, Delhi
14. Lal Bahadur Shastri Hospital, Khichri Pur, Delhi
15. Maharishi Balmiki Hospital, Pooth Khurd, Delhi
16. Rao Tula Ram Memorial Hospital, Delhi
17. Malviya Nagar Colony Hospital, New Delhi
18. Attar Sen Jain Hospital, Lawrence Road, Delhi
19. Acharya Sri Bhikshu Sarkari Hospital, New Delhi

Swern 9 ७ # ४० [७ :-

39


20.
. Patel Hospital, Patel Nagar, New Delhi

. Bhagwan Mahavir Hospital, Peetam Pura, Delhi
. Shastri Park Hospital, Delhi

BBE

40

NC Joshi Hospital, Karol Bagh, New Delhi

24. Dr. Hedgewar Arogya Sansthan, Karkardooma, Delhi

.. Satyawadi Raja Harish Chander Hospital, Narela, Delhi

Copy for information to:

. Pr. Secretary (H), Govt. of Delhi, Delhi Sachivalaya, I.P. Estate, New Delhi
. Commissioner (LD), DDA, Vikas Sadan, New Delhi.


CHAPTERV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES

-NIL-

New Deut; PROF. VJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
2 November, 2006 Chairman,
11 Kartika, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

41


PART II

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON 31ST OCTOBER, 2006,

The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs on 31st October, 2006 in Committee
Room "A" Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT

Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra 9 — Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha
. Shri Khagen Das
. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
| Shri R.L. Jalappa
. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
. Shri Brajesh Pathak
Prof. M. Ramadass
. Shri Kharabela Swain
. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar

CPerNAnAUN

Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Janardhana Poojary
12. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Dr. K. Malaisamy
15. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy

* SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Mukhopadhyay तू Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin _ Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan = Under Secretary
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan = Assistant Director

42


43

Officers of the office of C & AG of India
1. Shri Kanwal Nath न DAI
2. Ms. Subhashini

rinivasan = — Principal Director (Railways)

2. At the ouset, the Chairman, welcomed the members of the Committee to
the sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the
following draft Reports:

(i) Draft Report relating to "Injudicious Waiver of Demurrage Charges"
(Railways).

(ii) Draft Report relating to "Delayed purchase and insignificant utilization of equip-
ment procured under Fast Track Procedure" (Defence).

(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken on 12th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals and Dispensaries by DDA".

After some diliberations the Committee adopted these draft Reports without any
amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the
same to Parliament in the light of factual verification done by Audit and the security
clearance received from the Ministry of Defence in respect of Report on Fast Track
Procedure.

3s. XXXXKK XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX
4... XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX
5. XXXXXxx XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX XXXXXX

The Committee then adjourned.


APPENDIX

STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS

SI.No. Para No.

Ministry

Observations/Recommendations

1

2)

3

4

9

12

Urban
Development

Urban
Development

The Committee are not convinced by the
reasons given by the Ministry of Urban
Development for the irregular allotment of land
to the three institutions viz. Arya Vaidya Sala,
Kottakkal; Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and
Research Centre and Unique Hospitals and
Research Institute. The Ministry’s reply has
failed to address the core issue involving the
questionable failure of DDA to verify the
credibility, genuineness and charitable nature
of these beneficiaries before allotting land to
them. Instead of accepting the lapses/
irregularities committed in allotment of land to
these institutions, the Ministry have,
surprisingly, chosen to justify the action of
DDA on the ground that the allotments were
approved by the Lieutenant Governor/
Authority. Such excuses only reinforces the
notion that DDA had rather espoused the
cause of tokenism and had acted against the
common interest of the public so far as
selection of beneficiaries for the concessional
land allotment is concerned. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
that responsibility should be fixed and
appropriate punitive action be taken against
the concerned officials who had deliberately
misinterpreted the rules to convince the
Competent Authority to enable these
institutions to obtain the land at concessional
rates.

The Committee note that in pursuance of their
recommendation, the Government have merely
examined the cases in respect of societies
where the condition of free treatment to indoor
and outdoor patients was not imposed even
after 1992 and show cause notices are being
issued to 15 officials for their connivance. The
Committee regret to note that rather entrusting

44


45

we

4

we

7

Urban
Development

the case to an independent agency, the
Ministry was content with departmental
enquiry into the matter. The Committee are,
not satisfied with the tepid response of the
Ministry to such an important matter. There is
no indication from the limited enquiry
conducted by the Ministry whether the
circumstances, which had led to the
administrative/systemic slackness had been
probed into and how these irregularities went
undetected for several years by their Vigilance
Department. The reply of the Ministry is also
conspicuously silent about details of the
scrutiny of cases said to have been carried out
by the Government, penal action proposed to
be taken against the offenders, and the
measures contemplated to overhaul the
monitoring system so as to avoid recurrence
of such lapses in future etc. Obviously, no
adequate action has been taken by the
Government to cleanse a system infested with
loopholes and lapses even after the
recommendation of the Committee. Reaffirming
their earlier stand of ensuring accountability
and the probity in the domain of public service,
the Committee reiterate that irregularities
should be probed into by a high level
independent agency to unearth the
circumstances under which the mandatory
terms and conditions of free treatment (25 per
cent of total Indoor Patients and 40 per cent in
the Outdoor Patients Department) were
overlooked while issuing letters of allotment
to the concerned parties for setting up of
hospitals and action should be taken against
all those found guilty. The Committee also
recommend that DDA should strengthen their
internal control system so that these-glaring
omissions and commissions are noticed
promptly for taking suitable remedial steps.

The Committee regret to note from the reply
that DDA had failed to take action for evolving
a proper mechanism with adequate manpower
and authority to ensure enforcement of the



46

4

free treatment conditions and to take prompt
and proper follow up action on complaints
received against the hospitals functioning in
contravention of terms and conditions of
concessional land allotment as suggested by
them. What is surprising to the Committee is
that the Ministry/DDA have accepted the
statement made by the 2 hospitals viz. Deepak
Gupta Memorial Hospital and Sondhi
Charitable Hospital that they have been
adhering to the condition of providing free
beds to poor patients etc. at the face value and
did not bother to cross-check the facts as also
the veracity of their statements. It is quite
evident from the reply of the Ministry that no
inspection has been carried out by DDA of
these hospitals so as to check whether the
free bed conditions has been actually
implemented by them. Further in respect of 10
hospitals namely Amar Jyoti Charitable Trust,
Pushpawati Singhania Research Institute for
Renal & Digestive Diseases, Dharamshila
Cancer Hospital, Escorts Heart Institute &
Research Centre, Jaipur Golden Hospital,
Shanti Mukand Hospital, National Heart
Institute, Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Society,
Bhagwati Hospital (Sarvodaya Foundation),
and Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kaiyan Charitable
Trust, Rajouri Garden, New Delhi that were
issued show cause notices for violating the
condition of providing free treatment to poor
patients, the Ministry’s reply is silent about
the follow-up action taken in each of these
cases. The Committee recommend that the
latest status in respect of implementation of
the terms and conditions of concessional land
allotment viz. free beds to poor sections etc.
by all these hospitals in both letter and spirit
may be apprised to the Committee. The
Committee are of the view that in the absence
of any institutional mechanism to enforce the
requisite terms and conditions, the cases of
violation of free-bed condition and other
conditions would continue to recur.



47

4

. 20

Urban
Development

They, therefore, reiterate that DDA should
constitute a high power body with an effective
mechanism and adequate manpower for taking
prompt, effective and clearly laid out follow up
action on complaints received against
defaulters so that the primary objective of
providing free treatment to poor patients while
allotting land at concessional rates is achieved.
The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the penal action taken against the other
defaulting hospitals, which were served show
cause notice as also the delinquent DDA
officials entrusted with the job of enforcing
the provisions for free treatment to poor by
the hospitals/dispensaries.

From the Ministry’s reply, the Committee are
concerned to note that DDA had conveniently
overlooked the provisions outlined in the
‘Guidelines for Disposal of Institutional Land’
requiring a representative of the Government
of Delhi to be made a member of the registered
society administering the hospital ostensibly
to cover up their lapses. In their original Report
the Committee had questioned the very
omission of this clause in 39 out of 42 allotment
letters issued by DDA either due to gross
negligence on the part of concerned officials
or deliberately done to give favours to certain
allottees. The Ministry have submitted in their
reply that there is no specific condition
regarding appointment of representatives
either in the allotment letter or in the lease deed.
Non-imposition of this mandatory condition
in the allotment letters/ lease deeds is
nonetheless unpardonable lapse for which
accountability has to be fixed on the concerned
DDA officials. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate that the Ministry of Urban
Development/DDA should take immediate
action in this regard in consultation with
Directorate of Health Services, Government of
NCT of Delhi with a view to ensuring
appointment of representatives of Government
on the Governing Bodies of the Societies



48

4

Urban
Development

administering these 42 hospitals withifi three
months of the presentation of this Report.

The Committee cannot but conclude that both
DDA and Government of NCT of Delhi have
done precious little to fulfil their respective
share of responsibility in achieving the primary
objective of land allotment to hospitals and
dispensaries at concessional rate despite the
matter being in public focus for the last couple
of years. Rather striving towards success of
the policy it had launched with high hopes of
reaching out medical care to some of the capital
city’s least fortunate people who are afflicted
with deadly diseases but could not afford
expensive treatment involved therewith, DDA
had tried to cover-up it’s failure on the alibi of

.inadequate staff and machinery, whereas the

Government of NCT of Delhi had shown total
lack of sensitivity and urgency in dealing with
such an issue meant for benefiting their less
privileged citizens and in the process had
contributed to the failure of the policy. The
Committee regret to note that no concrete
system has been put in place as yet by DDA or
Government of NCT of Delhi to effectively deal
with cases arising out of concessional land
allotment with free treatment conditions as
pointed out by audit. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry of Urban
Development should take immediate necessary
steps to sort out the problem relating to
coordination and cooperation among DDA and
Government of NCT of Delhi in relation to
monitoring the implementation of terms and
conditions of concessional allotment of land
and to deal with the problems and complaints
arising therefrom. The Ministry niay also
consider setting up of an institutional
coordination mechanism at the Ministry level
50 as to oversee the proper implementation of
the terms and conditions of concessional land
allotment to hospitals and dispensaries.

MGIPMRND—3143LS—25-11-2006.


LIST OF AUTHORISED AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

PUBLICATIONS
Sr Name of Agent Si, Name of Agent
No. No.
ANDHRA PRADESH 20. The International Book Service, Deccan
1. M/s Vijay Book Agency, 11-1-477, Gymkhana, Pune-4,
Mylargadda, Secundrabad-500361 21. The Current Book House, Maruti Lane,
2. Mis Booklinks Cooperation, 3-4-423/5 Raghunath Dadaji Street, Bombay-
3 ae 2 aniace, Fivsetabad 500027 22 Ms Usta Book Depot, “Law Book Sell:
. M/s Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle, दि I-
Vasavya Nagar, Vijayawada-520006. (AP) crs and Publishers” Agents Govt, Publica-
4. Mis Labour Law Publications, 873, Kothi ious SESe Gira, Bkzacs Khas, House,
Bus Stand, Hyderabad-500001. jombay~
5; Mfa Law Publico Pvt. Lid,, opp. Tele- 23. M & J Services; Publishers Representa-
Bap fice $-1-873, Kothi, Hyderabad- Et cae EarCe He atitic nat"
6. Shri VAN. Raju, Newspaper Agent, H.No. Nalgaum-Dadar, Bombay-400014.
1-2-58, Rahamath Nagar, Kazipet. 24. The Marathwada Book Distributors,
506003, (AP) 2 Parmimal Khadkeshwar, Aurangabad-
7, Mis Vivekananda Law Publishers, Shop ३० 1
No.8, opp. Secundrabad Courts, 25 Le 32nKalbedevi,
(-500010, Hyderabad पु >
peace Sell 26. M/s Jaina Book Agency (India), 64-A,
8. Departmental Publications Sales Centre, कफ Road, 19000 Tala, Bombay-
wae ये eave tla EAE 27 न Granitagar Shula Tasls201;
9. Mis Progressive Book Centre, Zila School, SA naire a nrane nee S31 O02
Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramma, Muzaffarpur: A
ores 28. M/s P.C. Jain & Co. Thangal Bazar,
(eine): Imphal-795001.
CUE aS . MEGHALAYA
Jai Mis, VijaysMagazined Agency, Station” “59 116 ‘Paul's Agency! & Distribatots, RK.
Lr eaten ERTL Ts . Mission Road, Laitumkharh, Shillong-
11. The New Order Book Company, Ellis Lae
Bridge, Ahmedabad-380006, (T.No. पाक एक
ere तर 30. Editor of Debates, Legislative Assembly,
. Department, Pondicherry-605001
12. Mis Indian Documentation Service, Patel गाजर
Ae Post Box No. 13, Gurgaon-122001 31 M/s Lyall Book Depot, Chaura Bazar,
ye) Ludhiana-141008
13. M/s Prabhu Bodk Service, Sadar Bazar, AYASTHAN
Gurgaon-122001 PAT
14. M/s Maharishi-Dayanand University Book °7" 16201 7 Pustek Bhandar, Jaipur
Shop, Rohtak-124001, (Haryana) TAMIL NADU
JAMMU पर 33. M/s ९. Sitaraman & Co., 37, Royappettah
15. M/s Haldia Publishers (India), 128-A, High Road Madras-600014.
Gandhi Nagar, Jammu-180004. 34. Shri I. Gopalkrishnan, Principal, Salem
KARNATAKA Sowdeswari College, Salem-636010
16. Mis People’s Book Houses, JIM. Palace 35. M/s MM. Subscription Agencies, 123,
Cer ie eee i Third Street, Tatabad, Coimbatore-641012.
17, Mis Geetha Book House, K.R. Circle, UTTAR PRADESH
Mysore-570001 36. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel Marg, P.B.
18. The Editor, Youth Gazette No. 154, Jyoti No. 70, Allahabad, (0.2)
Niwas, 4th Cross, 4th Main, 2nd Phase, 37. M/s International Publicity Service, GPO
Marjinath Nagar-560010 (Karnataka). Box No. |114, Varanasi-211001 (U.P)
MAHARASHTRA 38. The Law Book Company (P) Ltd., Sardar
19. M/s Sunderdas Gian Chand, 601, Girgaum Patel Marg, P.B. No. 1004, Allahabad-

Road, Near Princes Street, Bombay-400002.

211001. (U.P)



Si.

No.

Name of Agent

SI.

No.

Name of Agent

39.

40

41

42.

43.

44

45

46.

47.

48.

49

50.
51.

52.

53.

54.

$f:

Mis 5. Kumar & Associates, Marketing &
Sales Division, Information Group, 32,
Sarojini Devi Lane, Guru Govind Singh
Marg, GPO Box No. 251, Lucknow-
226001

M/s Ram Advani Bookseller, Hazrat Ganj,
GPO Box No. 154, Lucknow-226001
WEST BENGAL

M/s Manimala Buys & Sells, 123, Bow
Bazar Street, Kolkata-700001.

M/s Bankura News Paper Agency,
Machantola, P.O. & Distt. Bankura-
722101.

M/s Book Corporation, 4, R.N. Mukherjee
Road, Kolkata-700001.

Més Bolpur Pustakalaya, Rabindra Sarani
(Shantiniketan), P.O. Bolpur (W.B.).
DELHI

M/s Jain Book Agency, C-9, Connaught
Place, New Delhi-110001
(T.Nos. 23321663 & 23320806)

M/s 1M. Jaina & Brothers, P. Box 1020,
Mori Gate, Dethi-110006,
(T. Nos. 291564 & 230936).

M/s Oxford Book & Stationery Co.,
Scindia House, Connaught Place,
New Delhi-110001 (T. Nos. 23315308
& 23315896).

M/s Bookwell, 2/72 Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp, Delhi-110009
(T.Nos. 27112309 & 23268786).

M/s Rajendra Book Agency, IV-DR-59,
Lajpat Nagar Old, Double Storey,
New Dethi- 110024. (T.Nos. 26412362
& 26412131).

M/s Ashok Book Agency, BH-82, Poorvi -

Shalimar Bagh, Delhi-110033.
M/s Venus Enterprises, B-2/85, Phase-Il,
Ashok Vihar, Delhi.

M/s Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
23/90, Connaught Circus, New Delhi-
110001. (T.Nos. 23364448, 23364478).
M/s Amfit Book Co., N-21, Connaught
Circus, New Delhi-110001
(T.No. 23310398).

M/s Books India Corporation, Publishers,
Importers & Exporters, L-27, Shastri
Nagar, Delhi-110002. (T.Nos. 269631 &
714465).

M/s Sangam Book Depot, 4378/4B,
Murari Lal Street, Ansari Road, Darya
= Sent Ganj P New: Delis!" OO02 at osteo se ampere New Fiebus11 0034. on

56

37.

58

59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

70.

71.

qa.

13.

74.

M/s Grover Book & Stationery Co.,
58/109, Sahyog Building, Nehru Place,
New Delhi-110019. (T.Nos. 26419877,
26419651, 26440902).

M/s Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18, Ansari
Road, New Delhi-110001.

M/s Universal Book Traders, 80 Gokhale
Market, Opp. New Courts, Dethi-110054
Mis Eastern Book Co. (Sales), Kashmere
Gate, Delhi-110006.

M/s International Publicity Service, GPO
Box No. 1114

M/s Jain Book Agency (South End) 1,
Aurobindo Place, Hauz Khas, New Delhi-
110016.

M/s Seth & Co., Room No. 31-D, Block B,
Delhi High Court, Sher Shah Road,
New Delhi-110003.

M/s Dhaowantra Medical & Law House,
592, Lajpat Rai Market, Delhi-110006.
M/s Oxford Subscription Agency, A-13,
Green Park Extension, New Delhi-110016.
M/s K.L. Seth, B-55, Shakarpur,
Delhi-110092.

M/s Jaina Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol Bagh,
New Delhi-110005.

M/s Kamal & Co., 27, DDA Shopping
Centre, Arjun Nagar, Safdarjung Enclave,
New Delhi-110029.

M/s Standard Book Co., 125, Municipal
Market, Connaught Place, P.B. No. 708,
New Delhi-110001. (1. Nos. 23712828,
23313899).

M/s Jayale(W) Agency, 1-196, Naraina
Vihar, New Dethi-110028

M/s Sat Narain & Sons, 40-A, Municipal
Market, Babar Road, Behind Modern
School, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi-
110001.

M/s RK. Books, 40/21-A, Gautam Nagar,
New Delhi-110049.

M/s D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.

Mis Ishwar* Chandra Co., Baldev Bhawan,
9986, Ram Behari Road, Sarai Rohella,
New Dethi-110005.

M/s Vijay Book Service, C/D/123/C
Pitampura, New Delhi-1 10034.

PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.