58
CONTROL SYSTEMS IN INDIA
SECURITY PRESS, NASIK
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
CONTROL SYSTEMS IN INDIA
SECURITY PRESS, NASHIK
(MINISTRY OF FINANCE)
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
[Action Taken on 28th  Report of Public Accounts Committee ( 14th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.11.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.11.2007
LOK  SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka)

PAC No. 1854
Price: Rs. 38.00
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 2007-2008 ..................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report .................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by Government ...................................................................... 8
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which  the  Committee  do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies from Government. .... 16
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect to which replies
of  Government  have  not  been  accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ................................................. 23
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government
have furnished interim replies ............................................... 29
PART II
Minutes  of  the  Sitting  of  Public  Accounts  Committee
(2007-2008) held on 2nd November, 2007. 31

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramdass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary Gr.-II
5. Dr. Y umnam Arun Kumar — Committee Officer

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Fifty-eighth Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 28th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on ''Control System in India Security Press, Nashik''.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 2nd November, 2007. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secratariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI;                    PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA
7 November, 2007 Chairman,
16 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with action taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Twenty-Eighth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the Report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 14 of 2005), Union
Government (Civil Performance Audit) relating to ''Control Systems in India Security
Press, Nashik’’.
2. In their Twenty-Eighth Report presented to Lok Sabha on 7th August, 2006,
the Committee had dealt with various issues concerning the deficient controls in the
procedures for indents, printing and supply; non-existence of risk perception in the
areas associated with different stages of production and supply of stamps; non-
investigation of sharp swings in the indents received from State Governments, Union
Territories etc.; failure of India Security Press (ISP) to gauge the risk of the severe
short supply of stamp on the functions dependent on the stamps and stamp papers
and the possibility of counterfeits; absence of effective control over the actual
quantity of security paper manufactured by the Private Paper Mills, impact of the
decision of ISP to permit the presence of the representatives of the successful bidder
for disposal of printing machine during its dismantling which entailed the risk of its
re-assembly for counterfeit printing; non-establishment of a surveillance and
intelligence system by ISP to provide assurance that genuine stamps were used and
fake stamps were not in circulation; and failure of ISP to prepare comprehensive
response to the high risk of counterfeit stamps despite large number of stamps referred
to it for examination being found fake. Thus, it was concluded by the Committee that
India Security Press approached the responsibility of printing of the stamps and stamp
papers in a machanical way rather than as an important partner and stake holder.
3. The Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommenations
have been received from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
and the same have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
Government:
Sl. Nos. 3, 6, 8, 13, 14, 15 and 20
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 7, 10, 17, 19 and 21
1

2
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee which requires reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 5, 9, 11, 12 and 16
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Sl. No. 18
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Economic Affairs) have been reproduced in the subsequent Chapters of this Report.
The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of
their observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.
Gist of Committee's Observations/Recommendations in 28th Report
(14th Lok Sabha)
5. The important Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee in
their 28th Report on the subject are as follows:
* In order to check the mismatch between indents, production and supply
of stamps and stamp papers, the Committee had recommended for
examining the feasibility of introducing a comprehensive and transparent
information system in coordination with the State Governments and other
indenting entities on one hand and the Finance Ministry on the other for
exchanging/sharing the information relating to indents.
* The Committee had emphasized the need to enhance the installed capacity
of India Security Press and also sought for removal of the various
bottlenecks such as old machinery, lack of availability of raw materials in
time etc.
* With a view to prevent misuse of Dandy Rolls, the Committee had
emphasised the need for exclusive control of Dandy Rolls by the India
Security Press.
* The feasibility of completely doing away with the system of engagement
of private paper mills for production of paper and entrusting the job to
the Government Security Press by augmenting its production capacity or
setting up a second line of production may be examined.
* With a view to curb and prevent circulation of large scale counterfeit stamp
papers, the Committee had emphasised that the Ministry of Finance should
explore the possibility of setting a Centralised Surveillance and Vigilance
System comprising of representatives of India Security Press and State
and Central Investigative Agencies.
* The Committee had emphasized implementation of dematting of Stamp
Papers by all the States/UTs at the earliest.

3
6. The Committee desire that Government should furnish final/conclusive action
taken reply to the recommendation for which interim reply has been furnished.
A. Introduction of a comprehensive and transparent information system to address
 erratic indents of stamp papers.
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 5—Para No. 115)
7. With a view to curtail and curb erratic indents by various indenting agencies,
the Committee had urged upon the India Security Press to set up an institutional
mechanism to rationalise the indents received from various entities and also introduce
a system of coordination with indenters to address the issue of erratic and inflated
indents by setting up a printing and supply plan consistent with the indents. The
Committe had also suggested that the Ministry should examine the feasibility of
introducing a comprehensive and transparent information system in coordination with
the State Governments and other indenting entities on one hand and the Finance
Ministry on the other for exchanging/sharing the information relating to indents so
that the possibility of shortages of stamp papers could be eliminated.
8. Apprising the Committee about the steps taken by the Ministry of Finance
to check the erratic indents by various indenting agencies, the Ministry in their Action
Taken Note have stated as under:—
''Apart from introduction of the 30 per cent advance payment system which
has rationalized the indents to a large extent, the ISP, Nashik has devised the
proforma of indent requiring indenters to indicate reasons for any abnormal
variation of more than 10 per cent over the last indent to ensure that indents
are strictly according to the requirements. Most of the State/UTs (28) have
started paying advance payment of 30 per cent at the time of placing their
indents with the ISP. The remaining six States/UTs who have not yet adopted
this system are supplied stamps after meeting the requirements of those who
have made the advance payment. Moreover, with the introduction of this system
in indenters have started collecting stamps regularly from the ISP. However,
the ISP ensures that no artificial scarcity of stamps arises as a result of the
system. Any urgent requirement of stamps reported by such State is given
urgent attention to ward off any untoward situation. The issue of feasibility of
introducing a comprehensive and transparent information system is being
included in the agenda for discussion in the next meeting of State Revenue
Secretaries organized by the National Institute of Public Finance and Fiscal
Policy, scheduled in April, 2007.''
9. The Committee are dismayed to find that even after lapse of more than
3 years since the introduction of the system of advance payment of 30 per cent amount
of the indented value along with indents some States/UTs are yet to comply with the
system. This indicates that concerted efforts have not been made by the Ministry to
make the States comply with this stipulation. The Committee reiterate that
Government  should take all possible measures to make the remaining States/UTs

4
comply with the new system at the earliest. The Committee also regret to note that
despite lapse of about  a year since the presentation of their Report, a comprehensive
and transparent information system in coordination with the State Governments and
other indenting entities for exchanging/sharing information relating to indents has
not yet been put in place. The Committee now understand that the issue of introducing
a comprehensive and transparent information system for exchanging information
relating to indents had recently been discussed in a meeting of State Revenue
Secretaries organized by National Institute of Public Finance and Fiscal Policy. The
Committee would like to be apprised  of the outcome of the meeting on the issue and
conclusive action taken thereon within 3 months from presentation of this Report.
B.  Strict vigilance and constant monitoring  on the functioning of private paper
mills called upon.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9—Para No. 119)
10. The Committee had observed that despite the contractual obligation
whereunder the paper mills cannot produce more than the quantity ordered by ISP
without their permission, there was no guarantee that paper mills will not violate this
condition. The Committee had therefore, recommended that Ministry should be extra
cautious and vigilant in monitoring the functioning of the private paper mills. They
had also recommended for evolving a mechanism which can detect production of
excess paper by the paper mills.
11. The Ministry  of Finance in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated
as under:
"It is submitted that there are sufficient safeguards in the contract with the
paper suppliers that ensure that paper mills do not produce more paper than
the quantity ordered. The above position stands vindicated by the  fact that
no genuine paper was found in any of the counterfeit stamps detected by the
intelligence agencies.  However, system of periodic inspections would be
instituted for more effective monitoring."
12. Considering the importance and sensitivity of the issue of production of
stamp papers which have grave  implication for the economy, the Committee had
apprehended that absence of control and monitoring of the production of stamp paper
by Private Paper Mills entails the risk of diversion for counterfeit operations. From
the Ministry's  Action Taken Reply, the Committee find that a system of periodic
inspection  is yet to be set up for control and monitoring the activities of private
paper mills. While deploring lack of urgency on the part of the Ministry of Finance
to such a critical area of operation relating to  stamp papers, the  Committee once
again emphasise the need to take measures for expediting setting up of an
institutionalised system for periodic inspection of Private Paper Mills within a time
bound period with  a view to effectively controlling and monitoring the activities of
Private Paper Mills. The Committee would like to be apprised of the conclusive
action taken in the matter.

5
C.  Augmentation of the production capacity of Government Press.
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 11—Para 121)
13. The Committee had noted that there was a total lack of threat perception
on the part of ISP towards the high risk involved in the use of Dandy Rolls in the
production of Stamp Papers. The Committee also noted that far from carrying out a
risk assessment on the probable misuse of Dandy Rolls by the Private Paper Mills
for excess production of papers than the indented quantity, ISP had chosen to rely
upon the contractual obligation entered with them. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that with a view to prevent misuse of Dandy Rolls, the  custody and
use of dandy rolls should be controlled by ISP by way of retaining the same with
them and released only  for the  duration of production of security paper. Possibility
of automatic embedding of the number of sheets of use with each dandy roll may
also be explored. Further, the Committee also recommended that the feasibility of
completely doing away with the system of engagement of Private Paper Mills for
production of paper and entrusting the job of producing all the pepers required for
security paper production—both high and low value security paper to the
Government Security Press. They also recommended that the Government Press
should augment their production capacity or set up a second line of production.
14. In their Action Taken Note the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) have stated as follows:—
"The Ministry appreciates the concern  of the Committee for preventing misuse
of Dandy rolls by the paper manufactures. Because of its huge, weight and
fragility leading to difficulty in transportation to and fro ISP and the paper
mills, it is not practicable for ISP to retain Dandy Rolls with them and release
only for the duration of production of security paper. Therefore, it  will be
appropriate to seal the Dandy Rolls during the period when it is not in use and
deface/destroy them in the presence of representatives of ISP at once after the
contract is fully executed. The Committee's recommendation for exploring the
possibility of automatic embedding of the number of sheets has been examined
and it has not been  found feasible due to technical constraints since Dandy
Rolls are used to produce paper in reels and not in sheets, which is a continuous
process. Regarding setting up a second line of production,decision would now
be taken by the Board of Security Printing & Minting Corporation of India
Limited."
15. The Committee note that steps have been taken by the Ministry for
preventing misuse of Dandy Rolls by paper manufacturers. However, they regret  to
note that the Ministry's reply is conspicuously silent with regard to examining the
feasibility of completely doing away with the system of  engagement of private paper
mills. The Committee, reiterate that Government should examine this important
aspect  as it would facilitate minimise the risk of excess and duplicate production;
theft/diversion of the Dandy Rolls and also the high risk of replication for counterfeit
etc. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made in
augmenting the production capacity of the Government Press as well as setting up

6
of a second line of production. In the opinion of the Committee, this is absolutely
necessary to avoid the risk of diversion of paper for counterfeit operations.
D. Regular physical inspection and verification of Dandy Rolls by India Security 
Press emphasised.
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 12 — Para No. 122)
16. The Committee had noted that no periodicity or interval appeared to have
been fixed for the physical verification of Dandy Rolls which was borne by the fact
that verification was sometimes carried out after a yawning gap of more than 7 years
which betrayed total lack of seriousness and sensitivity to this important function
which was fraught with the risk of counterfeit production. They had also noted that
some paper mills which were no longer producing  paper for ISP were in possession
of Dandy Rolls rather than destroying them. The Committee had therefore,
recommended that atleast in future ISP would carry out the physical inspection at
regular interval and also ensure that as soom as the mills produced the ordered
quantity, the Dandy Rolls are defaced/destroyed.
17. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
"The figure of dandy rolls with various paper mills as  per India Security Press
records have been reconciled and the figures have been certified by a Committee
of officers specially constituted for this purpose. After this the discrepancy
noted regarding the dandy rolls held at Titagrah Paper Mill, Kolkata has also
been rectified and all the dandy rolls held by  this mill have been defaced on
10th June 2006 in the presence of India Security Press representative. During
the verification, all the mills have been located and verified expect two mills
viz. (1) M/s J.B. Paper Mills, New Delhi (2) M/s Cicar Paper Mills Ltd., Nellore
(A.P.), which could  not be located as they are no more in existence at their
sites, In view of this, the  concerned Government authorities  have been
requested to locate their present whereabouts so that  the dandy rolls held by
these two mills could be located and defaced. Regarding the observation of
the Committee about carrying out physical inspection of Dandy Rolls at regular
interval and ensuring that they are defaced/destroyed, a mechanism has been
put in place at ISP to ensure that Dandy Rolls are completely destroyed/defaced
on conclusion of the contract for production of security paper."
18. The Committee regret to note that the Ministry have yet not been able to
locate and verify the whereabouts of the two paper mills viz., M/s J.B. Paper Mills,
New Delhi and M/s Cicar Paper Mills. Ltd., Nellore (Andhra Pradesh) even after
nearly two decades when the first verification was conducted by ISP in the year
1987-88. The Committee are not sure as to whether assistance of State police/
authorities has been taken in the matter. They, accordingly,  are of the strong view
that Ministry should take all possible measures to locate these mills in coordination
with State Government to avoid likely misuse of Dandy Rolls. The Committee also
recommend that henceforth Units/Agencies who are given Dandy Rolls should be
subject to prior police/intelligence scrutiny.

7
E.  Implementation of the Recommendations of Intelligence Bureau regarding
physical security within India Security Press.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16 — Para No. 126)
19. In their 28th Report, the Committee had noted that the physical security
within India Security Press, which ought to have been multi-level reinforced security
system, had been lax and that some of the security related recommendations made
by the Intelligence Bureau were yet to be implemented as of March 2004  such as
installation of Watch Tower, CCTV system and the shifting of Trade Union Offices.
The Committee had expected that the Ministry of Finance  would ensure that the
remaining recommendations of Intelligence Bureau are implemented at the earliest.
They also sought to be apprised of as to how far the implementation of
recommendations made by Intelligence Bureau had helped in beefing/strengthening
the security set up in ISP.
20. The Ministry of Finance in their Action taken Note have stated as under:
"Out of 38 recommendations by IB, all were complied with except the following
two recommendations:
1. Installation of CCTV.
2. Shifting of Trade Union Offices away from Main Gate.
The present status of the above two recommendations is as under:
1. CCTV—under installation.
2. Shifting of Trade Union Offices—New building where the office will be
shifted is nearing completion.
As regards the observation about the effectiveness of recommendations of IB
in beefing/strengthening of security is concerned, it is submitted that the
recommendations have strengthened the security to a significant extent."
21. The Committee are happy to note that the implementation of
recommendations of the Intelligence Bureau have strengthened the security set up
at India Security Press. However, the Committee are disappointed  to note that despite
their recommendation for implementing the remaining three  recommendations of
Intelligence Bureau at the earliest, only one recommendation relating to installation
of Watch Tower has been implemented by the Ministry so far. The remaining two
recommendations pertaining to installation of CCTV and shifting of Trade Union
Offices are yet to be implemented. The Committee expect that the remaining
recommendations relating to vital aspects of security would be implemented  by the
Government expeditiously.

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee find that the total  indents in terms of number of sheets varied
over a wide range of 18.10 crore to 52.82 crore sheets per year during  the period
1996-97 to 2003-04  and there was no evidence to suggest that ISP had analysed the
reasons for such wide fluctuations in the indents in consultation with the indenters.
The Ministry have informed the Committee that ISP undertakes printing on orders
from various State Governments/Union Territories and Central Government Ministries/
Offices and it is difficult for  it to  undertake studies on all India basis to find out the
reasons for abnormal fluctuations in the indents. The Committee were further
informed that analysis of the indents received during the last nine years indicate
that there was no pattern and they appear to have been raised in 'ad-hoc' manner.
Even when the full  supplies were not met against the indents of a particular year, in
the subsequent year  the indents did not increase in the same proportion. Instead, in
most of the cases, it had gone down that  too without any consistent pattern.
[Sl. No. 3 Appendix II, Para No. 113 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply :  The India Security Press has  set up a new Section known as
"Production, Planning & Warrant Section"  which works in close harmony  with the
Central Stamp Depot and other production and Control Sections in order to correct
the mismatch between indents and supplies. The Central Stamps Depot, where the
indents are received and this new Section have been put under one head i.e.
Dy. General Manager for  closer interaction and the indent received from various
indenters and the status of supply has been computerized for effective monitoring.
This new Section is manned by technical hands who are being professionally trained.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to point out that the actual  production
of stamp papers in terms of sheets disclosed  that it did not have any
relationship with the indents. There was a wide variation in the annual production
CHAPTER II
8

9
varying between 8.77 crore to 20.66 crore sheets. During the eight years period, i.e.,
from 1996 to 2004, India Security Press cumulatively produced 127.83 crore sheets
against  the total indent of 277.23 crore sheets, which is only 46 per cent of  the indents.
Analysis of Category and denomination-wise production of stamps over the period
from 1995 to 2003 confirmed that there was no co-relation between indent and
production as well as indent and supply. Moreover, the  production was consistently
lower than the indent and the ISP did not bother  to increase production despite
large unment indents. The Ministry of Finance have  however contended that
production and supply  were more or less consistent over years. Because of wide
fluctuation  in indents it was impracticable to enhance installed capacity all  of a
sudden and that too when there was no certainty that demand would continue to
remain in the coming years.  The Ministry have further  informed the Committee that
on analysis of production capacity of ISP it had been observed that current
requirement of indents can be met with the existing capacity and therefore, at present,
there is no proposal to enhance the installed capacity. Since dematting is under active
consideration, the requirement of stamp papers is likely to reduce significantly.
Though the Committee appreciate the Ministry's view point that it would be difficult
for ISP  to increase the installed capacity all of a sudden  and that too in the light of
erratic indents which vary from year to year, nevertheless the fact remains that ISP
did not bother to review the reasons for consistently low production with reference
to the indents and the attendant risks such as the possibility of counterfeit stamp
papers entering the market to make good of the wide variation in the supply and
demand. The Committee feel that this  betrays total lack of risk perception in ISP
towards their highly sensitive and risk function of production and supply of stamps
and stamp papers. The Committee are quite sceptical about the Ministry's optimism
that the existing production capacity of ISP would take care of the current requirements
of indents, since there is no evidence to suggest that ISP  had carried out an
assessment in this regard. Further, the Committee cannot subscribe to the Ministry's
view that demat  of stamp papers would significantly reduce the demand  for  stamps
and stamp papers when it is still at a very nascent stage and is yet to be implemented.
With a view to maintain equilibrium between indent and production, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Finance may consider the feasibility of enhancing
the  installed capacity of ISP. V arious bottlenecks such as old machinery, lack of
availability of raw materials in time etc.  that come in the way of achieving optimum
production  level should have been removed by taking timely remedial action. The
Ministry ought to ensure that there is no shortages in supply of stamps and stamp
papers vis-a-vis demand raised in the indents which  could  lead to a crisis situation
that  can be exploited by the scamsters. Requisite quantity of stamp papers should
be made available by fulfilling all the indents raised by the  indenting agencies.
[Sl. No. 6, Appendix II, Para No. 116 of Report of PAC [14th (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: The existing plan & machinery at India Security Press has been
overhauled and fitted with new parts and certain modifications to some of the machines
has been carried out to take care of the production of the 1st Phase of new design

10
of stamps with enhanced security features. The issue regarding enhancement of
installed capacity of ISP would be dealt with by the Board of the Security Printing &
Minting Corporation of India Limited (SPMCIL), which is now responsible for the
management ISP, Nashik  alongwith eight other security Presses/Mints/Mill.
Regarding ensuring that there is no shortage in supply of stamps and stamp papers
viz-a-viz demand raised in the indents it is  submitted that all the confirmed indents
of year 2005-06 have been met  in full and during the current year also ISP, Nashik is
confident of meeting the confirmed indent fully.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee note that just as production of stamp/stamp papers did not
have any relationship with Indents, the supply also did not follow any pattern. The
supply varied between as low as 27 per cent and a maximum of 59 per cent of the
indents. Over the eight-year period i.e., from 1996 to 2004, the supply was only 118.33
crore sheets against the indent of 277.23 crore sheets i.e., a shortfall of about 57 per
cent. State-wise and denomination-wise analysis of supply against the indents
disclosed that while the supplies were largely much lower than the indent, it did not
follow any pattern. The Ministry have taken a stand that the apparent shortfall of
indents by 57 per cent  had not resulted in crisis in any of the States since the indents
were highly inflated and because of the efforts initiated by ISP to curb inflated indents,
the indented  quantities have come down substantially. It has also been stated that
some of the indenters did not lift the non-judicial stamp-papers which were duly
packed and ready for dispatch, inspite of reminders which shows that there was hardly
any problem in respect of supply of stamps and stamp papers. The Committee have been
further informed that when the indents were going beyond the  printing capacity of
ISP, the fact was communicated to all the Treasuries/Sub Treasuries and Postal Stores
Depots all over the country vide Central Stamp Depot. Nasik Road, Circular No. 2304 dated
13th November, 1991 and subsequent reminder circular bearing No. 2606 dated 13th April,
1996. It was clearly brought out in these Circulars that the indenters should raise
realistic indents and the unmet indents for quarter would not be carried forward and would
be treated as cancelled. The committee regret to note that post 1996 the Ministry have not
made any efforts to review the indents in consultation with the users. Though the Ministry
had issued a Circular way  back in 1991 followed by a reminder in 1996 asking the indenters
to make realistic indents, it  appears that thereafter it had not bothered to review the situation
and slept over the matter till Audit had pointed out the mismatches in the Indent.

11
Production and Supply. It is only after Audit had taken up review of ISP, the Ministry
had woken up to the issue and conducted meetings with the respective State
Governments and UTs in 2004. The Committee are of the opinion that had the Ministry
been alive to the problem in the intervening period from 1996-97 to 2003-04, and taken
remedial measures to correct the imbalances between indent and supply things would
not have come to such a pass. Further, the possibility of scamsters exploiting the
situation arising out of consistent low supply of  stamp papers for counterfeit
operations would have greatly minimized.
[Sl. No. 8, Appendix II, Para No. 118 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply : As already submitted in reply to para 113, a new Section has been
created and started functioning to ensure complete synchronization between indents
and supplies. Further, as submitted in reply to para 115, a revised Indent Proforma
has been prescribed to keep a watch on fluctuation in the indents.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
Instances of short and excess supply and supply of stamps and stamp papers
of denominations other than indented or declared in the packing list have come to
the notice of the Committee which is a high-risk deficiency that could point towards
pilferage of the printed stamps and stamp paper. Sample check of documents relating
to different  consignments in various States disclosed short supplies with aggregate
value of Rs. 1453.75 crore i.e. Delhi (239.75 crore), Gujarat (332.71 crore), Haryana
(Rs. 1.00 crore), Kerala (Rs. 72.26 crore), Punjab (Rs. 0.13 crore) and Uttar Pradesh
(Rs. 807.90 crore) and excess supplies of stamps of value of Rs. 687.89 crore in six
States during 1996-2003 i.e, — Delhi (Rs. 15.73 crore), Gujarat (Rs. 132.41 crore), Kerala
(Rs. 142.75 crore), Orissa (Rs. 6.75 crore), Punjab (Rs. 0.25 crore) and Uttar Pradesh
(Rs. 390.00 crore). The Committee are constrained to point out that India Security
Press did not take suitable remedial measures despite a number of instances and
complaints about the packets dispatched by them contained stamps of incorrect
denominations, excess and short supply. The Committee hope that suitable steps
would be taken by ISP in future to avoid such instances.
[Sl. No. 13, Appendix II, Para No. 123 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

12
Action Taken
Reply : In the old design of non judicial stamps, there was no State name nor
any serial number on the Non-judicial Stamps. Hence this could be used anywhere
in India and since it had no number; it was difficult to keep a track. In the new design
of Non-Judicial Stamps, every stamp paper bears the State name and a running serial
number and hence discrepancy is  very  remote and can be easily detected. Hence
this aspect has been taken care of. This has resulted into streamlining the process
of packing and dispatch thereby almost eliminating the possibility of shortage/excess
in supply of stamp papers.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
Audit Review has revealed that there were three cases of theft of stamps from
ISP shop floor with an aggregate value Rs. 1.17 crore. Out of these, two cases were
reported to be pending in the courts of law. In the third case involving theft of stamps
valued at Rs.0.85 crore, which took place in April 2002, The culprit was yet to be
traced but the case was reported to have been closed. The Ministry have clarified
that the theft case relating to India Foreign Bill Stamps amounting to Rs. 0.85 crores
has not been closed and the same is being pursued with the concerned State police
authorities. An FIR had already been lodged with  State police. Explaining the action
against the culprits involved in the  theft cases, the  Secretary, Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance during evidence deposed that General Manager
of ISP was suspended and arrested and later on dismissed from the service. Beside,
a few more employees have been suspended/arrested and in one or  two cases, the
CBI after due verification, had subsequently given clean chit. The Committee while
expressing their serious concern over the  theft that occurred in ISP shop floor,
recommend that suitable penal action should be taken against all the persons found
guilty in the  theft cases. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken
to strengthen the security and vigilance systems in the shop floor of ISP so as to
prevent recurrence of theft.
[Sl. No. 14, Appendix II, Para No. 124 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: The  Security set up in the ISP has been revamped. CISF has been
deployed in place of the Departmental Security  Organization and the Maharashtra
State Police. A Vigilance-cum-Surveillance Cell has also been set up. In all  four cases
of theft from shop  floor, the persons concerned have been removed from service
and criminal case against them is also going on. For further strengthening of security
surveillance, installation of  Closed Circuit T.V . systems is already underway.

13
As already submitted before the Committee, one Vigilance-cum-Intelligence Cell has
started functioning w.e.f. 01.3.2005.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee find that India Security Press did not have an institutionalized
system of surveillance/vigilance in discharge of its high risk and vulnerable operation,
expect for a Forgery Detection Cell, whose task was limited to verification  of the
genuineness of  the stamps, whenever a complaint was received from the indenters
or investigating agencies. Even this operation was approached in a routine manner,
limiting its role tile to more reporting of the findings. The Committee note that there
was an inordinate delay in the verification of the  genuineness of the stamps on the
referred cases and ISP did not extend the scope of investigation to the possibility of
counterfeit on a large scale which again points to the lack of  threat perception by
ISP towards this high  risk function. The Ministry of Finance have contended that
ISP is not at investigating agency and its role is limited to ascertaining genuineness
of documents presented to it by various investigating agencies like State Police etc.
According to the Ministry, investigation of cases of forged stamps is done by
respective State Governments. The Committee note that many cases relating to
forgery of stamps/stamp papers had remained un-investigated for years, sometimes
on the ground of non-receipt of the  examination fee of a mere Rs. 100 per document.
They further note that a large number of the cases referred for examination of
genuineness of the stamps pertained to Uttar Pradesh (241), Maharashtra (294),
Andhra Pradesh (156), New Delhi (140) and Tamil Nadu (57), were incidentally a
number of cases relating to counterfeit stamp papers were reported/found in the wake
of Forged Stamp Paper Scam. Out of the total 69,648 documents of suspected
counterfeit stamps consisting of non-postal stamps and stamp papers, the examination
by the fraud detection unit disclosed face stamps in 50313 documents. The Committee
regret to note that though the Ministry had subsequently set up a Vigilance-cum-
Surveillance Cell, which had started functioning with effect from 1.3.2005, the Cell is
concerned only with activities within ISP and it has nothing  to do with intelligence
gathering and surveillance all over the country. Though it is appreciated that
intelligence gathering and surveillance relating to circulation of counterfeit stamps
in the economy pertains to State and Central Intelligence Agencies, nevertheless the
Committee are of the opinion that with a view to curb and prevent circulation of
large scale counterfeit stamp paper in the system, the Ministry of Finance should
explore the possibility of setting a Centralised Surveillance and Vigilance System

14
comprising of representative of ISP and State and Central Investigative  Agencies.
The modalities of functioning of the system should be worked out by Ministry of
Finance in coordination with Ministry of Home Affairs and in consultation with
respective State Governments. The system so set up should be alert to the error
signals that may manifest in various form viz. theft within ISP and in transit, missing
dandy rolls etc. The Committee further recommend that in view of the ramifications
of counterfeit stamps on the economy as a whole ISP should therefore, examine the
genuineness stamps in respect of all the complaints received irrespective of whether
the examinations fee had been paid or not.
[Sl. No. 15, Appendix II, Para No. 125 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply : No centralized system is possible except that which already exists under
the aegis of the Ministry of Home Affairs for sharing of information on crime between
Central Government and State Governments. As regards examination of documents
referred to by the CBI, all the cases were examined without insisting on advance
payment. There is no hold up  on this count as on date. The ISP has already
implemented the recommendation of the Committee that all the cases received for
examination of stamps be examined irrespective of whether the examination fee has
been paid or not. A Vigilance-cum-Surveillance Cell responsible for vigilance/
surveillance within the ISP, Nashik has started functioning with effect from 1.3.2005.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee note that though the Ministry of Finance had taken a decision
in principle to encourage dematting of Stamp Papers way  back in December, 2003
i.e. 18-12-2003, the proposal was approved by the Government after more than a year
i.e. on 28-2-2005. Despite holding 3 meetings so far with State Revenue Secretaries
and Inspector General (Registration and Stamps) on 22-12-2003, 4-3-2004 and 2-9-2004,
respectively, the Committee regret to note that dematting of stamp papers is yet to
take a final shape. The Committee were given to understand that some States are
still in the process of understanding the proposal. The Committee while expressing
their unhappiness over the tardy progress made in the implementation of demat
process recommend that Ministry should make concerted efforts to convince all the
States/UTs so that the demat of Stamp Papers is implemented at the earliest. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the latest position in this regard.
[Sl. No. 20, Appendix II, Para No. 130 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

15
Action Taken
Reply : Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited (SHCIL) has been appointed
as the Central Record Keeping Agency which has been authorised to undertake the
project on a pilot basis in selected cities in States willing to join the system. Most of
the States have shown interest on the project and presentation has been made/is
being made by the SHCIL as intimated. SHCIL has received mandates for
implementation of e-stamping systems from Maharashtra, Gujarat and Delhi.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO  PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
Observation and Recommendation
The India Security Press (ISP) Nashik, was set up in 1924 as an industrial
establishment of the Government of India under the Ministry of Finance (Currency
and Coinage Division). It is considered to be the only organisation in India and one
of the few in the world where a wide variety of security and non-security papers are
printed and supplied. The security papers consist of postal stamps, judicial and non-judicial
stamps, cheque books for Reserve Bank and State Bank of India, saving certificates,
postal orders, passports, promissory notes and other security documents required
by the Central/States and Union Territory Governments, Public Sector Undertakings
and Local Bodies. In addition to postal stamps of various denominations, India
Security Press produces 25 categories of stamps and stamp papers in 212
denominations. The non-security documents comprise of welfare  stamps non-MICR
Cheques, and railway warrants etc. In so far as India Security Press is concerned,
the value of these security and non-security documents is limited to their cost of
production, which are realized from the indenters. For the indenting entities i.e., for
the Union and State Governments, the security and non-security documents are the
financial instruments of Revenue. Thus, for the indenting entities, the security papers
are the money worth their face value.
[Sl. No. 11, Appendix II, Para No. 111 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply : This para contains factual information about ISP and its functioning
and requires no comments.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The India Security Press receives quarterly indents from the State
Governments, Union Territories etc. for supply of stamp papers of various categories
16

17
and denominations. As per the extant arrangement in ISP, the consolidation of the
indents and supply of stamp papers in managed by its Central Stamp Depot (CSD).
Based on the print requisition by the CSD, the Warrant Section issues print warrant
to the Production Section. However during 1996-97 to 2003-04 against the cumulative
indent of 277.22 crore of stamp paper sheets, the production and supply were 127.83
and 118.32 crore sheets respectively. The shortfall in supply with reference to indent
was 158.89 crore sheets and the percentage of shortfall in production and supply to
the indents were 53.89 and 57.32 per cent respectively. Explaining the reason for ISP's
inability to meet the demand raised in the indents, the Ministry informed the Committee
that indents placed by indenters were vary erratic, fluctuating between 52 crore to
18 crore per year and it was difficult to plan production according to such abnormal
fluctuations in the indents. In addition to the above, there are other constraints such
as old machinery, lack of availability of raw materials in time, tengthy purchase
procedure leading to delay in timely receipt of raw materials, etc.
[Sl. No.2, Appendix II, Para No. 112 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply :  This Para needs no reply as it only contains observations of the
Committee.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
With a view to ensure that the States raise realistic indents, the Ministry of
Finance have decided that from 2004 onwards, 30 per cent cost of the indented material
should be deposited as an advance by the indenters. Indents received without
advance money  would be treated as unconfirmed indents and ISP will not  accord
any priority to such indents from 2005-06. However the Committee find the new system
to be a non-starter which can be gauged from the fact that only12 States/UTs have
remitted the advance payment during the Financial Year 2005-06 and the remaining
16 States Viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Punjab,
Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh  have not yet complied with the new system.
According to the Ministry of Finance, the major reason for non-compliance to States
to the new arrangement is the reported non-availability of budget in some States for
release of advance payment. While some States have asked for proforma invoice for
the advance payment other States have not responded to their request so far.
[Sl. No.4, Appendix II, Para No. 114 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

18
Action Taken
Reply : After introduction of the system of 30% advance along with the indents,
the indents are being raised as per the realistic needs. For the year 2006-07, 28 States/
UTs have made advance payments and the remaining are also being persuaded for
payment of advance. Moreover, with the introduction of the  30% advance payments,
the States/UTs have started collecting stamps regularly form the Central Stamps
Depot.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee are dismayed to note that no survey was conducted by the
Ministry to analyze as to how the indentors were able to meet their requirements of
stamps and stamp papers when ISP was unable to fulfill the entire demand raised in
the indents so much so that 54 per cent of the total demand raised in the indents
had remained unfilled. Explaining the reasons for not conducting the survey by ISP,
The Ministry have stated that under Section 10(b) of Indian Stamps  Act, State
Governments are empowered to take recourse to alternate mode of Stamp duty
collection in the event of shortage of stamps/stamp papers. The Committee do not
accept  the Ministry's argument which appears to be hypothetical and presumptuous
and is not   backed by any evidence suggesting that States/UTs have been invoking
the provisions under the Indian Stamps Act to meet their requirements. The  Committee
cannot but deplore the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry to such an important
and sensitive issue, which have grave implication for the economy. Far from being
alive to the inherent dangers implicit in the shortage of stamps and  stamp papers
that could be exploited by the unscrupulous elements to their advantage, the Ministry
have sought to take refuge in the provision of Indian Stamp Paper Act, which betrays
a total lack of seriousness and insensitivity on the part of the Ministry to their
sovereign function of printing and supply of stamps and stamp papers in adequate
quantities.
[Sl. No.7, Appendix II, Para No. 117 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply : It is the responsibility of the respective State Governments/UTs and
not of the Union Finance Ministry, to invoke the provisions under the Indian Stamp

19
Act, if they foresee any shortage. However, whenever shortages were reported to
ISP, the supplies  were made without delay. The Ministry has the evidence that several
States/UTs including UP , MP, Meghalaya & Pondichery invoked the provision of
Section 10B  under the Indian Stamp Act authorizing alternative ways of duty
collection.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F.No. 9/8/2006-CY -I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee are informed that dandy roll, a device used for introduction of
security watermark on to the paper during the course of its manufacture is designed
by ISP but manufactured by  private  producers. The paper mills rather that ISP is
responsible  for manufacture of dandy rolls through private sources. The
manufacturers of dandy rolls are small scale industrial units and do not have a separate
licence  for their manufacture from ISP. In this deposition  before the Committee the
Secretary (Economic Affairs), Ministry of Finance had clarified that only low  value
security paper is allowed to be manufactured by the private paper mills using dandy
rolls. For High Value security paper, ISP procures paper from the security paper mill,
Hoshangabad. However, the review of Control Systems in ISP over dandy rolls
disclosed disregard for  security procedures of this high risk devise in as much as
ISP did not maintain control of the dandy rolls and their use through the means of
their custody, verification and legal backing of agreement/oath by the private users.
The inspections by ISP officials were infrequent and follow up actions were non-
existent. At no time, ISP assured itself that dandy rolls were not misuse. The Ministry
have informed the  Committee, that the physical custody of dandy rolls remain with
the mills as it is their property. Obtaining dandy rolls for  manufacture of paper is the
responsibility of paper manufacturer and ISP does not enter into any  agreement
with the unit manufacturing dandy rolls. In the agreement entered with the Supplier
of paper, there are precluding clauses whereby the Paper Supplier is restrained to
use dandy rolls for any other purpose other than stated in the agreement. As a further
measure to improve the control on dandy rolls, paper manufacturers  are being asked
to obtain an undertaking from the  dandy roll of the water mark used by ISP for any
other organization without the express approval of ISP.
[Sl. No.10, Appendix II, Para No. 120 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

20
Action Taken
Reply :  This para needs no reply as it only contains observations of the
Committee.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F.No. 9/8/2006-CY -I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee were concerned to note that far from dismantling the
equipment and machinery used for printing and other operations in printing of
stamp papers, on 'as is where is basis', with a view to eliminating any risk of
their re-assembly for counterfeit operation, and precluding the same person/
firm from buying the condemned machinery of different types used in printing
and other associated operations etc., ISP had actually facilitated knowledge of
assembly of the machines by permitting up to 10 representatives of the
successful bidder, M/s. Unique Enterprises to witness the dismantling of the
machines before their disposal for two months, in two spells, during June-
September, 1998, ISP was also negligent in the sale of the condemned printing
machine and perforating machine to the same firm  at different points of time
between June 1998 and September 1998. The Committee were informed that only
bigger machines  were dismantled so that it can be taken out from the doors of
the shop and other machines have been sold at it is. The machines such as
perforating Machines were already available  with private security printers in
India, who were supplying commemorative postage stamps to Department of
Posts, Government of India. In this connection the Ministry have tried to explain
that as per the terms and conditions of the Tender Notice No. 5/97(S.No. 11,12
and 13) the firms' representatives were permitted to witness  the dismantling of
the machines to ensure that firm satisfies itself that all the parts of machine are
made available to them. The Ministry have contended that procedure prescribed
in General Financial Rules had been followed for the disposal of machinery.
However, they have added that keeping in view the sensitivity and security
involved a new procedure had since been introduced where under disposal of
machines is done after converting them into scrap. The Committee are perplexed
at the casual and negligent approach adopted by ISP  towards the high risk
function of dismantling of printing machines, which is totally devoid of any
threat/risk perception. Far from being alive to the possible risk associated with
such operation such as chances of misuse of machinery, the tender documents
were designed in such a manner that the knowledge of  assembly of machines
was unwittingly passed on to the bidder. The issue had become all the more

21
serious and alarming and the motive of ISP behind incorporation of certain
clauses in the tender notice questionable after  the Fake Stamp Paper Scam
came into light. It is only after the Scam broke out that ISP had become wiser
and decided to adopt a new procedure where under the obsolete machinery is
disposed  after converting into scrap. The Committee are of the firm view that
had this new procedure  been put inplace earlier, the possibility of alleged
misuse of the machinery by the bidders would have been completely eliminated.
Suitable deterrent action should be taken  against all those who are found guilty.
[Sl. No. 17, Appendix II, Para No. 127 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: The case was investigated by CBI and charge sheets have already been
filed in competent courts. Suitable action will be taken in accordance with court's
orders.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee are of  the considered view that there is an urgent
need of revamp/overhaul the functioning of ISP. This has attained paramount
importance particularly in the wake of recent fake stamp paper scam that has rocked
the country. For this an Expert Committee comprising of eminent personalities/
professionals drawn from different fields  with experience relevant to the functioning
of ISP should be set up to examine the entire gamut of activities relating to ISP. The
Expert Committee should examine all the existing procedures/rules in relation to indent,
production, supply and dispatch from the standpoint of threat/risk perception. Risk
analysis with respect to all activities pertaining to production of stamp and stamp
papers viz. procurement, short-listing of private paper mills, dandy rolls, ink, security
etc. should be conducted so that the scope for error and lapses in these processes
are minimised to a large extent.
[Sl. No. 19, Appendix II, Para No. 129 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

22
Action Taken
Reply: The issue regarding revamp/overhaul the functioning of ISP will
now be decided by the Board of the Security Printing & Minting Corporation
of India Limited (SPMCIL), since the ISP, Nashik is now under the management
of SPMCIL.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
Apart from dematerialization of stamp papers, the Committee are of the
considered view that in the  present age of information technology other alternative
methods should be explored so as to completely to away with the physical form of
Stamp Papers. The Ministry of Finance  may examine the feasibility of implementing
various ways and means to achieve these objectives.
[Sl. No. 21, Appendix II, Para No. 131 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: Though it is a totally State subject, the issue of completely doing away
with the physical form of the stamp papers and implementing various ways and means
to this end, was discussed in the meeting of State Revenue Secretaries held on
04.03.2004. The present status of the step taken for Dematting  of Stamps is already
given in the previous paragraph.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation and Recommendation
According to the Ministry, with the introduction of procedure of calling 30 per
cent advance amount against the indents, the indents have come down very drastically
from around 50 crore to 14 crore sheets in a year which seems to indicate that State
Government used to submit inflated and unrealistic indents. Though the Committee
appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry of curb erratic indents by way of
introduction of a system of payment of advance of the material to be indented, the
fact remains that it is only after  Audit have taken up the review of ISP, the Ministry
has become alive to the problem and decided as late as in 2004 to introduce the
system. With a view to curtail and curb erratic indents by various indenting agencies,
the Committee recommend that India Security Press should set up an institutional
mechanism to rationalise the indents received from various entities and also introduce
a system of coordination with indenters to adderess the issue of erratic and inflated
indents by setting up a printing and supply plan consistent with the indents. However,
at the same time it should also be ensured that for want of payment of 30 percent
advance, States do not place low indents so that it could lead to situation of scarcity
in the market which could be exploited by the unscrupulous elements. The  Committee
also urge upon the Ministry to examine the feasibility of introducing a comprehensive
and transparent information system  in coordination with the State Government and
other indenting entities on one hand and the Finance Ministry on the other for
exchanging/sharing the information relating to indents so that the possibility of
shortage of stamp papers could be eliminated.
[Sl. No. 5, Appendix II, Para No. 115 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: Apart from introduction of the 30% advance payment system which
has rationalized the indents to a large extent, the ISP, Nashik has devised the proforma
of indent requiring indenters to indicate reasons for any abnormal variation of more
than 10% over the last indent to ensure that indents are strictly according to the
requirements.
It has already been submitted in reply to para 114 that most of the States/UTs
(28) have started paying advance  payment of 30% at the time of placing their indents
with the ISP. Moreover, with the introduction of this system the indentors have started
collecting stamps regularly from the ISP. The remaing six States/UTs who have not
yet adopted this system are supplied stamps after meeting the requirements of those
23

24
who have made the advance payment. However, the ISP ensures that no artificial
scarcity of stamps arises as a result of the system. Any urgent requirement of stamps
reported by such States is given urgent  attention to ward off any untoward situation.
The issue of feasibility of introducing a comprehensive and transparent
information system is being included in the agenda for discussion in the next meeting
of State Revenue Secretaries organized by the National Institute of Public Finance
and Policies, scheduled in April, 2007.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F.No. 9/8/2006-CY -I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
Generally, paper manufactures produce paper for supply to ISP as per the
quantity stipulated in the supply order. Excess paper produced, if any, is re-pulped
by the paper mills. As per the agreement entered into by ISP with the paper mills
which produce  paper for printing, the mills should not produce and supply security
papers to other agencies. However, Audit review revealed that ISP did not exercise
any control regarding actual quantities produced by these mills against its supply
orders, including the wastage. The Committee apprehend that absence of control on
the production of paper entails risk of diversion  for counterfeit operations. In support
of their contention that the extant system of private paper  mills producing paper as
per the quantity stipulated in the supply order of ISP has been  working well, the
Ministry have stated that the examiniation reports in respect of the fake  stamp paper
cases that were sent by State Police, CBI and other Investigating Agencies to Forgery
Detection Cell of ISP, for examination, had revealed that there are no forged  stamps/
stamp papers wherein genuine paper supplied to ISP by private mills has been used.
On the other hand, the Ministry have conceded that ISP is not in a position to have
full control over private paper manufacturers with respect to the quantity of paper
produced since they supply different kinds of papers not only to ISP but also to
many other users. The Committee are of the view that despite the contractual
obligation whereunder the paper mills cannot produce more than the quantity
ordered  by ISP without their permission there is no guarantee that paper mills will
not violate this condition. Further ISP do not have any mechanism to find out
whether the mills have been strictly adhering to this condition. Under these
circumstances it is naive on the part of the ISP to repose confidence in the private
paper mills. Though the Ministry can find solace from the fact that in none of the
cases where forgery has been detected   by the investigating agencies, genuine paper
manufactured by private mills are used the Committee however, caution the ISP not

25
to become complacent. The Ministry should take extra caution and have a strict
vigil and constant monitoring on the functioning of the private paper mills so that
they do not  divert the stamp paper to unscrupulous persons for counterfeit
operations. The Committee further  recommend that the  ISP should ensure that the
paper mills do not produce papers more than the quantity ordered  and also to evolve
a mechanism by which ISP can detect production of excess paper by the paper mills.
[Sl. No. 9, Appendix II, Para No. 119 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: It is submitted that there are sufficient safeguards in the contract with
the paper suppliers that ensure that paper mills do not produce more paper than the
quantity ordered. The above position stands vindicated by the fact that no genuine
paper was found in any of the counterfeit stamps detected by the intelligence
agencies. However, system of periodic inspections would be instituted for more
effective  monitoring.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F.No. 9/8/2006-CY -I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee apprehend that duplicate production or theft/diversion of the
dandy rolls in fraught with serious risk of these being misued to produce paper for
counterfeit production. The Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of
Finance while deposing before the Committee shared the apprehension of the Committee
that the private mills can make more paper than what is required by virtue of their
possession of the Dandy Rolls. The Secretary mooted a suggestion that the only fool
proof mechanism for  prevention of misuse of  Dandy Rolls is that all the papers should
come from Government controlled presses. For this either another Press should be set
up or a new manufacturing line  be added  to the existing Government press. The Committee
cannot but over emphasize the critical role played by Dandy Rolls and any missue of
this critical input would have a serious repercussion on the economy in as much as it
could not only lead to production of counterfeit stamp paper but also loss of revenue to
the Central and State Government exchequers. The Committee regret to note that there
was a total lack of threat perception on the part of ISP towards the high risk involved in
the use of Dandy Rolls in the production of stamp papers. Far from carrying out a risk
assessment on the probable misuse of Dandy Rolls by the private paper mills  for excess
production of papers than the indented quantity for counterfeit production of stamp papers,
ISP had chosen to rely upon the contractual obligation entered with them. It is only after
discovery of large scale counterfeit stamp papers in the recent past  followed by

26
Audit review on their functioning that ISP had become alive to the problem and has
since decided that hence forth Dandy Rolls will be defaced/destroyed after the ordered
quantity of paper is fully supplied by the mills. The Committee recommend that with
a view to prevent misuse of Dandy Rolls, the custody and use of dandy rolls should
be controlled by ISP  by way of retaining the same with them and released only for
the duration of production of security paper. Possibility of automatic embedding of
the number of sheets of use with each dandy roll, may also be explored. The
Committee also recommend that the feasibility by completely doing away with the
system of engagement of private paper mills for production of paper and entrusting
the job of producing all the papers required for security paper production—both
high and low value security paper to the Government Security Press should be
explored. This can be done either by augmenting the production capacity of the
Government Press or setting up a second line of production.
[Sl. No. 11, Appendix II, Para No. 121 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: The Ministry appreciates  the concern of the committee for preventing
misue of Dandy Rolls by the paper manufactures. Because of its huge size, weight
and fragility leading to difficulty in transportation to and fro ISP and the paper mills,
it is not practicable for ISP to retain Dandy Rolls with them and release only for the
duration of production of security paper. Therefore, it will be appropriate to seal  the
Dandy Rolls during the period when it is not in use and deface/destroy them in the
presence  of representatives of ISP at once after the contract is fully executed. The
Committee's recommendation for exploring the possibility of automatic embedding
of the number of sheets has been examine and it has not been found feasible due to
technical constraints since  Dandy Roll are used to produce paper in reels and not
in sheets, which is a continuous process. Regarding setting up a second line of
production, decision would now be taken by the Board of Security Printing & Minting
Corporation of India Limited.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F.No. 9/8/2006-CY -I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee note that as per the documents maintained by India Security
Press, 53 dandy rolls were in the custody of nine paper mills, many of which are
not  manufacturing paper for ISP for years. ISP had not carried out physical
verification of 21 dandy rolls that were lying with seven paper mills after  1988-89.
The last physical inspection was conducted by ISP in Titagarh Paper  Mills, Kolkata
in 1996, in which only 12 dandy rolls  out of 26 were available. Neither the 14 missing

27
dandy rolls were traced nor  the 12 that were  available, had been taken over by ISP
despite no business with this mill for about 20  years. According to the Ministry the
physical custody of dandy rolls remained with paper mills as  they belonged to them.
While conceding that the physical verification of dandy rolls had not  been conducted
on a  regular basis, the Ministry, however, stated that the same was carried out  in
the year 1987-88, 1991, 1996, 2003 and 2005. The Ministry have now  informed that a
mechanism has since been put in place whereby inspection would be carried out on
half-yearly basis and  effective verification of dandy rolls would be done eliminating
the  possibility of their misuse. Henceforth, dandy rolls will be defaced/destroyed
after ordered quantity is supplied by the mills. The Committee are distressed to not
that ISP could not give  any plausible explanation for the irregular/infrequent physical
verificatins of dandy rolls. No  periodicity or interval appears to have been fixed for
the physical verification, which is borne  by the fact that verification was sometimes
carried out after a yawning gap of more than 7  years, which betrays lack of
seriousness and most importantly sensitivity to this important  function which is
fraught with the risk of counterfeit production. It is only after the  Committee were
seized of the matter  that ISP had now decided to conduct physical  verification of
dandy rolls at half-yearly intervals. What has surprised the  Committee is that facto
the some paper mills, which are no longer producting paper for ISP are still in
possession of dandy rolls rather than destroying them. ISP had justified the
possession of dandy rolls by these paper mills on the ground that they lie  with the
peper mills since they belonged to them,  which is anything but inexplicable. The
Committee expect that at least in future ISP would carry the physical inspection at
regular intervals. They also expect ISP would strictly ensure that as soon as the
mills produce the ordered quantity, the dandy rolls  are defaced/destroyed. The
Committee recommend that ISP should set up a monitoring  mechanism both in
headquarters as well at each private paper mill which produce papers for ISP to
oversee that the dandy rolls are completely destroyed.
[Sl. No. 12, Appendix II, Para 122 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: The figures of dandy  rolls with various paper mills as per India Security
Press records have been reconciled and the figures have been certified by a Committee
of officers  specially constituted for this purpose. After this, the discrepancy noted
regarding the dandy rolls held at Titagargh Paper Mill, Kolkata has also been rectified
and all the dandy rolls held by this mill have been defaced on 10th  June, 2006 in the
presence of India Security Press representative.
During the verification, all the mills have been located and verified except two
mills viz. (1) M/s. J.B. Paper Mills, New Delhi (2) M/s. Circar Paper Mills Ltd., Nellore
(A.P.),  which could not be located as they are no more in existance at their sites. In
view of this, the concerned Govt. authorities have been requested to locate their
present whereabouts so that the dandy rolls held by these two mills could be located
and  defaced.
Regarding  the observation of the Committee about carrying out physical
inspection of Dandy Rolls at regular interval and ensuring that they are defaced/

28
destroyed, a mechanism has been put in place at ISP to ensure that Dandy Rolls are
completely destroyed/defaced on conclusion of the contract for production of
security paper.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint  Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry  of Finance (Department  of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-
CY-I, dated 2nd March, 2007]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee were concerned to note that the physical security within India
Security Press, which ought to  have  multi-level reinforced security system, had
been lax. While Maharashtra police managed the security at the gates, the
departmental security  personnel were responsible for security at the shop floor.
Though Central Industrial Security  Force (CISF) replaced the Maharashtra police at
the gate as late as October, 2002 and the  departmental security personnel at the
shop floor with effect from September, 2004,  the  Committee regret to note that still
some of the security related recommendations made by the  Intelligence Bureau were
yet to be  implemented as of March 2004. The Committee have been  subsequently
informed that out of a total of 38  recommendations, 35 have already been
implemented. The remaining 3  recommendations that are pending implementation
relate to  installation of Watch Tower, CCTV system and the shifting of Trade Union
Offices. The  Ministry have informed that Watch Tower and CCTV system would be
installed by  December, 2005.  The Committee would like to be apprised as to how far
the implementation of recommendations  made by Intelligence Bureau has helped in
beefing/strengthening the security set up on ISP. They also expect that the Ministry
of finance would ensure that the remaining recommendations are implemented at the
earliest.
[Sl. No. 16, Appendix II, Para No. 126 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: Out of  38  recommendations by IB, all were complied with  except the
following two recommendations:
1. Installation of CCTV.
2. Shifting of Trade Union Offices away from Main Gate.
The present status of the above two recommendations is as under:
1. CCTV—under installation.
2. Shifting of Trade Union Offices—New  building where the offices will be
shifted is nearing completion.

29
As regard the observation about the effectiveness of recommendations of IB
in beefing/strengthening of security is concerned, it is submitted that the
recommendations  have strengthened the security to a significant extent.
Sd/-
Signature  of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT  HA VE FURNISHED  INTERIM REPLIES
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee  understand that several cases  relating to take stamp papers
scam are currently under investigation by CBI. The Committee were  informed that
as on 12th  September, 2005 CBI had registered and filed charge sheets in 64 cases
in the fake stamp  paper scam. Out of these 39  were related to Abdul Karim Telgi,
the kingpin of the scam and  the remaining 25 cases were stated to be not directly
linked to Telgi.  As  regards ISP's role in  the fake stamp papers scam, the
representative of CBI during evidence had deposed that CBI had focussed on three
allegations relating to ISP namely—(i) physical verification of Dandy  Rolls
(ii) negligent disposal of machinery and (iii) artificial suppression of supply of stamps.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Finance should periodically review
the  progress made in the cases relating to ISP and urge upon the CBI to expedite
the  investigation/examination of the cases. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the  findings of CBI in the matter  of ISP related cases together with suitable
remedial Action  Taken by the Government to obviate recurrence of such instances.
[Sl. No. 18, Appendix II, Para No. 128 of Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Reply: CBI has stated that there are two cases in which allegations pertaining
to ISP, Nashik were investigated by them. In the case against A.K.L. Telgi, Ganga
Prakash,  N.A. Bhusare, Mahender Singh, P.P. Konkane, D.S. Salig Ram, they have
filed a  Closure Report in the court of Special Judge, Nashik which is pending for
acceptance. The next date of hearing in the Nashil Court is 18-10-2007. In the other
case, the  accused Shri R.R.  Reddy,  Shri M.T. Kulthey, Shri S.T. Sharma, all ISP
officials are facing trail alongwith  65  other accused persons for having abetted the
unlawful  activities of AKL Telgi.
Regarding  the investigation by CBI into three allegations concerning ISP,
Nashik  namely (1) physical verification of Dandy Rolls; (2) negligent disposal of
machinery; and (3) artificial suppression of supply of stamps, it is submitted that for
physical verification  of Dandy Rolls a mechanism has already been put in place as
given in reply to para 122. Regarding  disposal of machinery, a new procedure for
disposal of obsolete/old machinery has already been put in place as mentioned by
the Committee in the preceding para. A mechanism has been put in place to analyze
30

31
the indents received from  the State/UT Governments and  delivery of stamps are
ensured strictly in accordance with the confirmed indents raised by the indenters.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary (Infra)
[Ministry of Finance, (Department of Economic Affairs) F. No. 9/8/2006-CY-I,
dated 2nd March, 2007]
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
7th November, 2007 Chairman,
16 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

PART-II
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008) HELD ON 2nd NOVEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs.  to 1250 hrs.  in Committee Room 'C'
Parliament  House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra —Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Raghunath Jha
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Brajesh Pathak
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Shri N.K. Jha — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller  and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri A.N. Chatterji — DG (PA)
3. Shri K.R. Sriram — PD (ESM)
4. Shri Jayanti Prasad — PD (INDT)
5. Shri R.B. Sinha — PD (AF&N)
32

33
* * * * * *
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the sitting of
the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following
Draft Reports:
(a) * * * * * *
(b) Draft Action Taken Report on 28th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
‘‘Control systems in India Security Press, Nashik’’.
(c) * * * * * *
After  brief discussion, the Committee adopted the draft Reports without
any modifications/amendments and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present
the same to the Parliament in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.
(3) * * * * * *
(4) * * * * * *
(5) * * * * * *
6. A copy  of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.
MGIPMRND—14877LS—15-12-2007.