75
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT BY
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2008-2009
SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT BY MINISTRY OF
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
[Action Taken  on 51st Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
Presented to Lok Sabha on ........................................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ...............................................
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
August, 2008/Sravana, 1930 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2008-2009) ................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
PART I
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by Government ................................................................... 10
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government ........................................................................ 32
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  replies to  which   have
 not  been  accepted by the Committee and which require
 reiteration ........................................................................... 33
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in  respect  of  which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies ..... 36
PART II
Minutes  of  the  sitting  of  Public  Accounts  Committee
(2008-09) held on  14.08.2008 .......................................... 37
APPENDIX
Statement of  Observations and Recommendations .......... 39

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
15. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Raashid Alvi
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Prof. P.J. Kurien
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
5.   Smt. Anju Kukreja — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Seventy-fifth Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 51st Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Property Management by Ministry of External Affairs”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 14th August, 2008. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have
also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable assistance
rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
21 August, 2008 Chairman,
30 Sravana, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

6
©  2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by the  General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002
PAC No. 1877
Price: Rs. 45.00

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Fifty-first Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Report of the C&AG of India (Entire
Report) for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 17 of 2005), Union Government
(Civil-Performance Audit) relating to ''Property Management by Ministry of External
Affairs''.
2. The Fifty-first Report (14th Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha on
24th August, 2007 contained 17 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken
Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from
the Ministry of External Affairs and are broadly categorized as follows:
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by Government:
Sl. Nos. 1-7, 9,10, 12-16 and 17
(Paragraph Nos. 77-83, 85,86,88-92 and 93)
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of Government replies:
-NIL-
(iii) Observations/Recommendations replies to which have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 8 and 11
(Paragraph Nos. 84 and 87)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
3. In their 51st Report on the subject, the Committee had examined the
performance of Ministry of External Affairs with regard to various property
management issues such as acquisition of land, construction of projects, renovation
of built-up properties, upkeep of properties as also their disposal. The Committee's
scrutiny had revealed that the entire system of management of properties by the
Ministry of External Affairs was characterized by delays both in acquisition and
construction of properties abroad as well as in India which resulted in expenditure
on rentals continually increasing over the years. The Ministry of External Affairs
had not utilized the capital outlay for public works and housing in full and funds
remained under-utilized under both the heads. Ministry of External Affairs could
not commence construction on 14 plots of land abroad and six in India for years
together owing to delay in finalization of pre-construction requirements. In a few

2
places, Government owned properties were lying vacant awaiting disposal, in some
other places, properties were purchased but their titles were not got transferred in
the name of the Government of India even after a lapse of more than 10 years.
Gist of Committee's Observations/Recommendations
4. The Committee have made the following important Recommendations in their
51st Report on the subject:
(i) The Committee have asked the Ministry of External Affairs to streamline
their project planning mechanism in regard to property management and
budgetary provisions.
(ii) The Ministry of External Affairs have been urged to expedite all the pre-
construction activities in regard to their projects, such as finalisation of design
brief, appointment of consultants etc. and ensure execution of these projects
at all the stations within the targeted time-frame through a specific monitoring
plan for each project.
(iii) The Committee have desired the Ministry to put in place appropriate systems
under their Project Division so that avoidable delays for re-development/
re-construction of properties do not recur and the Missions are also galvanized
to make every possible effort to minimize the rental outgo on leased
accommodation.
(iv) The Committee have recommended to list out all the properties lying vacant
for long periods and prioritize the same for prompt disposal. Besides, they
should formulate an action plan for timely disposal of properties in order to
avoid further deterioration in their condition and possible reduction value.
(v) The Ministry of External Affairs should exercise more effective supervision
over the Missions/Posts abroad to ensure that irregular expenditure on rented
accommodations in excess of prescribed rental ceilings did not become a
regular feature.
(vi) The Committee, while taking a serious view of the retention of vacant leased
accommodation beyond the stipulated period recommended that the Ministry
of External Affairs should conduct a thorough enquiry into instances of such
delinquency by the Missions, particularly the role of the Heads of Missions.
(vii) The Ministry have been urged to chalk out a time-bound action plan to ensure
optimum utilization of their residential complex in Pappankalan (Dwarka)
and also to ask the Directorate of Estates to allot the vacant flats to Government
employees of other Departments/Ministries.
(viii) The Ministry of External Affairs have been urged to revamp their inspection
machinery so that the working of Indian Missions/Posts abroad in regard to
property management is supervised in a more effective manner.
(ix) The Committee have recommended the Ministry to streamline and revitalize
their Project Division for better control over their Missions so that they do
not incur unauthorized and imprudent expenditure on rentals, repairs,
maintenance etc.

3
The Government have accepted most of the recommendations made by the
Committee. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the various
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. Action Taken by the Government
on some of the recommendations have been discussed in detail in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Under-utilisation of funds
(Sl. No. 3, Paragraph 79)
5. The Committee had noticed that while substantial expenditure was incurred on
rentals, funds to the extent of 53.9% to 75.7% remained unutilised under capital outlay
on Housing-Government Residential Buildings during the years 1999-2000,
2001-2002, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005. Similarly, percentage of non-utilization of
funds under capital outlay on Public Works-Construction was also as high as 54.5 to
82.5 during the period 2001-2002 to 2004-2005. Recurring unspent provisions under
the capital head clearly indicated that the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) had
been hiring more and more properties abroad, entailing large rentals, instead of investing
in construction/acquisition of new properties as budgeted. While disapproving of such
an alarming trend, the Committee had recommended that the MEA should take their
project and planning mechanism more seriously and make the projections meaningful
and purposeful.
6. Specifying the Action Taken in this regard, the MEA stated in a note:
"The budget estimation process has been streamlined to make it more realistic.
Following measures have been adopted for realistic estimation of funds:
l Preliminary estimates prepared by the Consultants and the time-line
proposed by them are carefully and expeditiously examined;
l Phasing of expenditure on a project during a particular financial year
and following years is carefully planned, in consultation with all
concerned, and taking into account various processes and time-lines
involved;
l Monitoring of expenditure by getting monthly progressive statements of
expenditure, from Missions/Posts abroad and spending units in India,
has been introduced, for constant monitoring of actual budget utilization,
thereby facilitating necessary adjustments at  Revised Estimates and Final
Estimates stages; and
l Every effort is made to ascertain carefully local procedures, requirements
of authorities in charge of local approvals, service connections etc. so
that problems could be anticipated, to the extent possible, and advance
action taken as necessary to avoid or minimize time and cost over-runs."
7. The Committee note that in  pursuance of their recommendation, the
Ministry of External Affairs have initiated several measures to streamline their
buget estimation process and to make it more realistic and meaningful such as
careful and expeditious examination of preliminary estimates, phasing of

4
expenditure on a project by way of careful planning, monitoring of expenditure
by getting monthly progressive statements of expenditure from the Missions/Posts
abroad and spending units in India etc. The Committee desire that these measures
should be constantly reviewed so that incident of under/non-utilisation of funds
particularly under the capital heads of the Grant does not recur. The Missions
should be instructed to invest these funds in construction/acquisition of new
properties instead of showing unspent provisions year after year under these
heads and continue hiring more and more properties. The Ministry of External
Affairs must overcome their laxity and ensure timely receipt of the monthly
progress statements of expenditure from Missions/Posts abroad to facilitate
realistic estimates at revised estimates and final estimates stages. The Committee
would like to be apprised about the utilization of budget allocation for the years
2007-08 and 2008-09.
Steadily increasing rentals
(Sl. No. 4, Paragraph 80)
8. In their original Report, the Committee had noted that the delays in construction
of owned buildings on the part of MEA/Missions/Posts resulted in rental expenditure
increasing from Rs. 163.85 crore in 1999-2000 to Rs. 215.37 crore in 2004-2005.
While deploring the delay and laxity on the part of the MEA to take corrective steps,
the Committee had accepted that the action plan formulated by the MEA now would
result in making the property management process more organized and systematic
with significant reduction in the rental outgo.
9. As regards the steps taken to reduce the rental liability, the MEA stated as under:
"The Ministry has taken several concrete steps to acquire properties abroad, in
order to reduce rental liabilities.
l Enhanced delegated powers, for purchases and for construction abroad
including renovation, have been obtained from the Ministry of Finance.
l Ministry has circulated detailed guidelines for purchase of property to
all the Missions to enable them to send viable proposals.
l To expedite purchase decisions, the Ministry sends empowered teams
from Headquarters, for inspection of properties short-listed by Mission,
and to make recommendations for purchase.
l These recommendations are then processed for urgent approvals.
l As a result, four built-up properties were purchased in 2005-06 (two in
Ulaan Baatar, and one each in Paris and Bareilly) and six properties
have been purchased in 2006-07 [In Buenos Aires (2 properties), Beirut,
Caracas, Thane and Raipur]. In 2007-08, one property has been purchased
in Bogota, and purchase of another property in Tripoli has been approved
(registration underway).

5
l Purchase proposals for properties at following stations are currently under
consideration:
Hamburg — Residence for Consul General
Sofia — Embassy Residence
Milan — Chancery, Embassy Residence and staff residences
l The process of acquisition of additional properties will contribute to
reduction of rental liability."
10. The Committee note that as a result of the steps taken to reduce the rental
liability, the MEA had purchased four built-up properties in 2005-06, six in
2006-07 and one property in 2007-08. The Committee have also been informed
that purchase proposals for properties at Hamburg, Sofia and Milan stations are
currently under consideration. The Committee hope that MEA would take
immediate steps to finalise the purchase proposals at the earliest at these stations.
They should also monitor the compliance of the guidelines issued by them for
purchase of property  by all missions so that these are not treated in a routine
manner but are strictly adhered to with concrete results.
Delays in construction on acquired land
(Sl. No. 6, Paragraph 82)
11. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that the Ministry was not able
to commence construction at 14 stations abroad for years together owing to delays in
acquisition of land, appointment of consultants, finalisation of designs, cost estimates,
obtaining approval of local authorities etc. Such delays resulted in recurring expenditure
of Rs. 11.80 crore per annum on rentals and idling of capital of Rs. 13.81 crore on
properties lying unutilized besides entailing increase in the cost of construction with
time. The Committee had asked the Government to apprise them about the progress of
work in all these projects, and had stressed the need for expediting all the pre-
construction activities such as finalisation of design brief, appointment of consultants
etc., and execution of these projects within the targeted time-frame through a specific
monitoring plan for each project.
12. In their Action Taken Note submitted to the Committee, the MEA stated as
under:
"Since its setting up in February, 2005, Projects Division of the Ministry has
exclusively focussed on construction/renovation/purchase and property
management. Substantial progress has been made, as elaborated below, including
on 23 construction/renovation projects reviewed by the august Committee:
l The Embassy complex at Muscat has been completed in November, 2007.
The Foreign Service Institute Complex and the AALCO Building in
New Delhi have also been completed in December, 2006 and December, 2007
respectively. The renovation of Permanent Representative's Residence
in Geneva was completed in May 2007, and that of Embassy Residence
in Tokyo has also been completed in October, 2007.
l Construction of eight projects at a total cost of Rs. 606 crores has
commenced. Work at Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan (MEA Headquarters)

6
commenced in November, 2006 and expected date of completion is
July, 2009. Work at Canning Lane (Hostel), and Chanakyapuri Officers
residential projects in New Delhi is also in progress and is  likely to be
completed in the next financial year. Construction at the Embassy and
Residences complexes in Kathmandu commenced in November, 2007
with an expected completion period of 30 months. Construction at the
Chancery and Residences project in Beijing commenced in
October, 2007 and is likely to be completed by October, 2008.
Construction work at the Chancery and Residences redevelopment project
in Tokyo started in July, 2007 and is expected to finish in July, 2009.
The reconstruction project in Singapore started in August, 2007 and is
likely to be completed by October, 2008.
l Some major construction/renovation projects are expected to be awarded
for construction in the coming months. These include the projects in
Islamabad, Kabul, London, Brasilia, Dhaka, Budapest, Tashkent and
Warsaw.
l In Abuja, due to exorbitant bids, the tender would have to be recalled. In
order to achieve economy of scale and to get more competitive bids, the
Chancery project is being combined with the Residences project.
l The projects in Port Louis, Paramaribo, Dar-es-Salaam, Doha, Port of
Spain and Nicosia are under different stages of pre-construction activity.
Every possible effort is being made to bring these projects also to tender/
construction stage at the earliest."
13. The Committee are constrained to observe that construction of eight
projects at a total cost of Rs. 606 crore has commenced only after being pointed
out by the Committee in their Report. The Committee would expect the MEA to
keep strict watch over these projects to ensure their timely completion and to
apprise the Committee about the progress made thereon.
Disposal of GOI owned properties
(Sl. No. 8,  Paragraph 84)
14. The Committee in their earlier Report had observed that four Government owned
properties at Bangkok, Damascus, Dar-es-Salaam and Bonn were awaiting disposal
which resulted in idling of capital of Rs. 1.30 crore, besides reduction in sale value.
While taking a serious note of this situation, the Committee had recommended that the
MEA should now list out all the properties lying vacant for long periods and prioritise
the same for prompt disposal. The Ministry should also formulate an action plan for
timely disposal of properties in order to avoid further deterioration in their condition
and possible reduction in value.
15. While informing about the action taken for disposal/use of vacant properties,
the MEA stated in their Action Taken Note as under:
"The Ministry is taking expeditious action for disposal/use of vacant properties.
The position on the properties reviewed by the Committee is as under:
l The property in Bonn was sold in December, 2006.

7
l A new title deed for the vacant property in Dar-es-Salaam has been
obtained, and Ministry has finalized the sale of this property. The
transaction is likely to be completed within a month.
l The title deed for the land in Kyiv was obtained in March, 2007 and
agreements with the Consultant and local government agency  are  under
negotiation.
l After a detailed assesment by a property team, the Ministry has decided
not to sell the vacant property   in Damascus as it is located in a prime
area of the city, but to convert it into residences for the use of Mission's
officers. Action for selection of a local architect for the project has already
been initiated.
l The property  in Bangkok will be utilized for construction  of the Embassy
Residence  and a Cultural Centre. The consultancy  agreement  has been
signed. The scope of the project is  being  finalized  in consultation  with
the Architect, local  authorities and the Mission."
16. The Committee note that MEA  is taking expeditious action with  regard to
disposal/use of vacant properties, as a result of which they have obtained title
deed for the vacant property in Dar-es-Salaam and Kyiv.  However, the MEA
have not informed about the formulation of action plan  for timely disposal of
vacant properties as desired by the Committee in their earlier Report. Since
retaining vacant accommodation  in violation of the rules for long periods results
in infructuous expenditure as well as deterioration in their condition,  the
Committee while reiterating their  earlier recommendation on the subject desire
that MEA should not further  dither in the matter and should formulate an action
plan forthwith for timely disposal of vacant properties.
Irregularities in maintenance of Properties abroad
(Sl. No. 11, Paragraph  87)
17. The Committee's examination of the subject had revealed that  though the
responsibility  of normal maintenance and repairs of the buildings rested with  the
lessor, the Missions at Islamabad (Pakistan), Nairobi (Kenya) and Maputo
(Mozambique) were not able to enforce the same resulting in avoidable expenditure
of Rs. 66.09 lakh in violation of the provisions. Even the expenditure incurred on
carrying out normal maintenance work in these cases was not recovered from the
lessor. As the lease deeds in these cases had  clearly stipulated that the lessor is liable
for normal maintenance and repairs of the building, the Committee had recommended
that MEA should strictly enforce  the lease agreements and in the event of the Missions
having to carry repair  and maintenance work, the expenditure incurred should be
deducted from   rent payable. The Ministry should also consider including a specific
provision for  this in the format of the lease deeds and put in place an effective
enforcement mechanism.

8
18. In their Action Taken Note, the MEA specified as under:
"In most countries, for rented properties, while the major repairs are the
responsibility of the landlord, minor day-to-day repairs  have to be carried
out by the lessee (tenant). This standard practice is followed and invariable
incorporated in the lease deeds. The position in respect of the three Missions
stated above is as follows:
High Commission of India, Islamabad: Our Mission in Islamabad has limited
its obligation only to minor day-to-day maintenance and repairs of rented
properties. According to the calculations provided by HCI,  Islamabad, their
total expenditure on repairs was Rs. 7.23 lakhs for 32 rented properties for a
period of two years from April, 2002 to March,  2004. This expenditure on
32 rented properties appears quite reasonable and is covered under the delegated
financial powers. The expenditure  was also within the allocated budget of the
Mission. In places  like Islamabad, for security reasons, the local landlords
cannot be given free  access to the rented properties. If we try to force minor
repairs on them,  they would obviously need to be provided greater access.
Under such a situation there could be breach of security and moreover the
landlords would also seek higher rent for taking care of day-to-day maintenance.
High Commission of India, Nairobi: According to the terms of the lease, our
Mission in Nairobi is responsible for minor day-to-day maintenance  as well as
the interiors of the Chancery building. Given the importance of our Mission in
Nairobi and the presence of a large Indian Diaspora,  the  Mission's premises
have to be maintained well in keeping with India's  image. Over a period of five
years, the Mission has incurred a total amount of Rs. 14.80 lakhs for this purpose.
Given the size of the  property, this appears quite reasonable and is  covered
under the  delegated financial powers.
Embassy of India, Maputo: The properties under reference have been hired
from the local Government agency since early 1970s.  Because of  the
prolonged civil unrest in Mozambique and extremely poor economic
condition, the local agency was not able to undertake any maintenance
inspite of repeated requests from the Mission. This situation was faced by all
the diplomatic Missions there. Under these circumstances, the Mission had
no option but to carry out the essential repairs and maintenance work under
delegated powers in these properties to keep them habitable. In return, the
Mission has not agreed to the increases in  rent demanded by the local agency."
19. The Committee are constrained to point out that the MEA have not
responded convincingly to their earlier observation regarding deduction of
expenditure incurred on the repairs and maintenance work from the  rent payable
to the lessor. The Ministry have also not informed about the  setting up of an
enforcement mechanism in this regard as desired by the  Committee. While  taking
a serious view of the lack  of action by the  Ministry, the Committee would like
the Ministry to fix responsibility  in the matter and include forthwith a specific
provision in the these agreements   executed by Missions for deducting the
expenditure  incurred on  maintenance and repairs from the rent payable. The
Committee should be apprised about  the action taken in  the matter.

9
Properties/Projects in India
(Sl. No. 14, Paragraph 90)
20. The Committee  had expressed their unhappiness to note the non-completion of
pre-construction formalities in the case of construction projects in India resulted in
blocking of huge funds to the tune of Rs. 6.28 crore. This also  resulted in cost escalation
in construction of projects by another Rs. 2.87 crore  besides recurring rental liability.
In Pappankalan (Dwarka) residential quarters  projects in Delhi, out of 230 flats
constructed after  investing Rs. 21.17 crore,  180 flats were  lying vacant. This clearly
indicated the absolute lack of planning  on the part of the Ministry in not making
suitable arrangements in advance for  basic amenities like water supply and
transportation, which could have greatly  expedited allotment of the quarters and made
it possible  for them to profitably  utilise their assets. With regard to the slow rate of
occupancy, the Committee  had urged the Ministry to chalk out a time-bound action
plan to ensure optimum utilization of the residential complex and had also  asked the
Directorate of   Estates to allot the vacant flats to Government employees of other
Departments/Ministries.
21. Apprising the Committee of the latest position in their regard, the MEA in their
Action Taken Note stated as under:
"The occupancy in the government-owned residential complex in Dwarka
has improved substantially as a result of several positive steps taken by  the
Ministry. The  policy of offering accommodation only at Dwarka to officers
up to the level of Deputy Secretary, and efforts to improve the  availability of
water in the complex, standby power for lifts, security and  internal
communication, have resulted in  this improvement. 176  flats  out  of a total
of  230  flats are now occupied. Efforts are continuing to improve  occupancy
by improving further  availability of water in the complex,  particularly during
summer months. However, it would be appreciated that the success of
Ministry's  efforts in this regard depends to a large extent on the measures
taken by the local authorities to  improve water supply in Dwarka as a whole."
22.  As  regards the under-utilisation of the residential quarters in Pappankalan
(Dwarka),  the Committee have been informed that as a result  of several  positive
steps taken by the MEA, the occupancy in the  Government-owned residential
complex in Dwarka has improved substantially. According to the Ministry out of
total 230 flats, 176 flats have now been occupied and efforts are continuing to
improve occupancy by improving further availability of water in the complex
particularly  during summer months. In their earlier Report, the Committee had
noted that as on 20th  September, 2006,  124 flats were occupied out of 230 flats.
They are unhappy to observe that from September, 2006 to February, 2008 only
52  more flats have been occupied, which indicates very slow rate of occupancy. It
is also evident from  the Action Taken Note that the Ministry have not considered
the Commmittee's  earlier recommendation regarding chalking out  a time-bound
action plan including allotment of vacant flats  to Government employees of other
Ministries/Departments since a substantial number of quarters are still lying vacant.
The Committee would now like the Ministry to take up this issue on priority.

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY GOVERNMENT
Observation
In the course of discharging its functions, the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA)
is, inter-alia, responsible for acquisition and maintenance of properties owned by the
Government of India (GOI) in India and abroad. Out of 164 Indian Missions/Posts
abroad, there are GOI owned Chancery buildings at 77 stations, residence for the
Ambassadors/Heads of Missions (Embassy Residences or ER) at 83 stations, 159
flats for officers at different levels at 37 stations and 451 other residences at 30 stations.
Other Chanceries, residences of Ambassadors and other staff residences are located in
rented buildings. The MEA also oversees the construction, maintenance and rentals of
19 properties housing its headquarters and subordinate offices within India.
[Sl. No. 1, Para 77 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The observation is factual. However, the number of government-owned buildings
abroad at present is as under:
Chancery buildings: 79
Residences of Heads of Missions/Posts: 87
Residences for Officers: 162
Residences for other officials 462
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
Recommendation
The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed that there were delays
both in acquisition and construction of properties abroad as well as in India which
resulted in expenditure on rentals continually increasing over the years. MEA did not
utilize the capital outlay for public works and housing in full and funds remained
under-utilised under both the heads. MEA could not commence construction on
14 plots of land abroad and six in India for years together owing to delay in finalization
of pre-construction requirements. MEA also could not re-develop/re-construct
properties at three stations abroad.  In a few places, Government-owned properties
were also lying vacant awaiting disposal. Properties were purchased but their titles
10

11
have not been got transferred to the Government of India even after a lapse of more
than 10 years. Further, out of 230 flats constructed in India after investing Rs. 21.17
crore for housing the officers and the staff of MEA, over 100 flats are still lying
vacant. The Committee have dealt with these deficiencies in detail in the succeeding
paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 2, Para 78 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry has benefited immensely from the observations and recommendations
of the Committee. As explained in the following paragraphs, corrective action has
been taken as necessary; utilisation of the Capital Outlay budget for public works and
housing has been improved; work on construction projects and purchases has been
streamlined to a great extent; renovation of properties has been expedited; vacant
properties have either been disposed of, or decisions have been taken to utilize them
for our needs and action has been initiated for their conversion/renovation; titles of
properties have been registered; utilization of government housing has been improved.
l The budget estimation process has been streamlined to make it more realistic.
Following measures have been adopted for realistic estimation of funds:
(a) Preliminary estimates prepared by the Consultants and the time-line
proposed by them are carefully and expeditiously examined;
(b) Phasing of expenditure on a project during a particular financial year
and following years is carefully planned, in consultation with all
concerned, and taking into account various processes and time-lines
involved;
(c) Monitoring of expenditure by getting monthly progressive statements of
expenditure, from Missions/Posts abroad and spending units in India,
has been introduced, for constant monitoring of actual budget utilization,
thereby facilitating necessary adjustments at Revised Estimates and Final
Estimates stages; and
(d) Every effort is made to ascertain carefully local procedures, requirements
of authorities in charge of local approvals, service connections etc. so
that problems could be anticipated, to the extent possible, and advance
action taken as necessary to avoid or minimize time and cost over-runs.
l There has been a turnaround in the utilisation of the Capital Outlay budget.
As against under-utilisation upto 2005, in the financial year 2005-06, the
Ministry spent Rs. 91 crores as against the initial budget allocation of Rs. 66
crores. In 2006-07, the Ministry utilised more than Rs. 140 crores from the
budgetary allocation of Rs. 160 crores, and could have utilized the entire
allocation, if some purchase proposals under process could have been finalized
by the end of the financial year. In the current financial year, the Ministry
expects of fully utilise the increased budgetary allocation of Rs. 250 crores.

12
l Since the setting up a separate Projects Division, in February, 2005, exclusively
focussed on construction/renovation/purchase and property management,
substantial progress has been made, as elaborated below, including on
23 construction/renovation projects reviewed by the august Committee:
à 13 major construction projects have been approved at an estimated cost
of Rs. 817 crores.
à The Embassy complex at Muscat has been completed in November, 2007.
The Foreign Service Institute Complex and the AALCO Building in
New Delhi have also been completed in December, 2006 and December,
2007 respectively. The renovation of Permanent Representative's
Residence in Geneva was completed in May, 2007, and that of Embassy
Residence in Tokyo has also been completed in October, 2007.
à Construction of eight projects at a total cost of Rs. 606 crores has
commenced. Work at Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan (MEA Headquarters)
commenced in November, 2006 and expected date of completion is
July, 2009. Work at Canning Lane (Hostel), and Chanakyapuri Officers
residential projects in New Delhi is also in progress and is likely to be
completed in the next financial year. Construction at the Embassy and
Residences complexes in Kathmandu commenced in November, 2007
with an expected completion period of 30 months. Construction at the
Chancery and Residences project in Beijing commenced in
October, 2007 and is likely to be completed by October, 2008.
Construction work at the Chancery and Residences redevelopment project
in Tokyo, started in July 2007 and is expected to finish in July 2009. The
reconstruction project in Singapore started in August 2007 and is likely
to be completed by October, 2008.
à Some major construction/renovation projects are expected to be awarded
for construction in the coming months. These include the projects in
Islamabad, Kabul, London, Brasilia, Dhaka, Budapest, Tashkent and
Warsaw.
l Of the four renovation projects reviewed by the Hon. Committee, the Embassy
Residence renovation in Geneva was completed in May, 2007; the Embassy
Residence renovation in Tokyo was completed in October, 2007; the
redevelopment work of Chancery and Residences in Tokyo commenced in
July, 2007 and is expected to be completed by the scheduled date of
July,  2009; and renovation of Embassy Residence with additional construction
of two residences at Singapore commenced in August, 2007 and is expected
to be completed in October, 2008.
l Of the four vacant properties, which had been lying unutilised, the property
in Bonn was disposed of in December, 2006 and the sale of property in
Dar-es-Salaam has been approved and the transaction is expected to be
completed within a month. A decision has been taken to utilize the property
in Damascus by converting it into residential units for India-based-officers,

13
and the process for selecting an architect has been initiated. The plot in
Bangkok would also be used for construction of a Residence for the
Ambassador and a Cultural Centre.
l The registration of the Embassy Residence property in Harare has been
completed and the registration certificate obtained in December, 2007.
Likewise, the title deed of the vacant property in Dar-es-Salaam has been
obtained facilitating its sale. The title deed of the property in Kyiv was finalized
in March, 2007.
l The occupancy in the government-owned residential complex in Dwarka has
improved substantially as a result of several positive steps taken by the
Ministry. The policy of offering accommodation only at Dwarka to officers
up to the level of Deputy Secretary, and efforts to improve the availability of
water in the complex, standby power for lifts, security and internal
communication, have yielded results. 176 flats out of a total of 230 flats are
now occupied. Efforts are continuing to improve occupancy further.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
The Committee note that while substantial expenditure had been incurred on rentals,
funds to the extent of 53.9% to 75.7% remained un-utilised under capital outlay on
Housing-Government Residential Buildings in the year 1999-2000, 2001-2002,
2003-2004 and 2004-2005. Similarly, percentage of non-utilization of funds under
capital outlay on public works—Construction was also as high as 54.5 to 82.5 during
this period 2001-2002 to 2004-2005. One of the main reasons for such high under-
utilization of capital budget over the period 2000-2001 to 2004-2005, as attributed by
the Ministry of External Affairs, has been that a number of property acquisitions
envisaged during this period did not materialize. Obviously, this is indicative of poor
budgeting, planning and also inadequate scrutiny of estimates at various levels. The
continuous increase in unspent funds under the capital head year after year clearly
indicates that the Ministry has been hiring more and more luxurious properties abroad
entailing large rentals instead of investing in construction/acquisition of new properties
as budgeted. The Committee, while disapproving of such an alarming trend, recommend
that the MEA should take their project and planning mechanism more seriously and
make a projections meaningful and purposeful. The estimation should be made carefully
after taking into account all the contingent factors. The Committee trust that with a
streamlined budget estimation process, MEA will be in position to fully utilize the
grants under the capital head and also monitor closely the acquisition of property.
[Sl. No. 3, Para 79 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

14
Action Taken
Renting of properties abroad is done in accordance with clearly defined space
entitlements, coupled with functional needs in terms of representational obligations of
officers. There are checks and balances in deciding the cases of initial hiring. Each
new hiring proposal, which is not within the rental ceilings already sanctioned by the
Ministry or Mission's delegated powers, needs the approval of the Establishment and
Finance Divisions of the Ministry. Where required, Property Teams are also sent from
the Ministry for the purpose.
As reported to the Committee earlier, one of the main reasons for under-utilization
of Capital Outlay budget over the period 2000-2001 to 2004-2005 has been that, till
the beginning of 2005, property management was a subsidiary function of Ministry's
Establishment Division which looks after all the housekeeping activities and service
functions of Headquarters as well as Missions abroad. Delays in obtaining approvals
were also caused by inadequate financial powers of the Ministry to purchase or construct
properties.
To correct these systemic deficiencies, a separate Projects Division was created in
2005. Enhanced delegated powers, for purchases and for construction abroad including
renovation, have already been obtained from the Ministry of Finance. In addition,
Ministry has circulated detailed guidelines to all the Missions to enable them to send
viable proposals. To expedite purchase decisions, the Ministry sends empowered teams
from Headquarters. The creation of Projects Division has also brought greater and
continuous focus to the work of construction on our plots of land.
The Ministry has purchased the following built-up properties since April 2005:
2005-06
(1) Chancery in Ulaan Baatar
(2) Embassy Residence in Ulaan Baatar
(3) Additional Building for Chancery in Paris
(4) Office Building for  RPO, Bareilly
2006-07
1. Chancery in Buenos Aires
2. Embassy Residence in Buenos Aires
3. Chancery in Beirut
4. Embassy Residence in Caracas
5. Office Building for RPO, Thane
6. Office Building for RPO, Raipur
2007-08
1. Chancery in Bogota
2. Embassy Residence in Tripoli (Approved; title registration underway)

15
Following purchase proposals are under consideration of the Ministry:
Hamburg—Residence for Consul General
Sofia—Embassy Residence
Milan—Chancery, Embassy Residence and staff residences.
The budget estimation process has been streamlined to make it more realistic.
Following measures have been adopted for realistic estimation of funds:
l Preliminary estimates prepared by the Consultants and the time-line proposed
by them are carefully and expeditiously examined;
l Phasing of expenditure on a project during a particular financial year and
following years is carefully planned, in consultation with all concerned, and
taking into account various processes and time-lines involved;
l Monitoring of expenditure by getting monthly progressive statements of
expenditure, from Missions/Posts abroad and spending units in India, has been
introduced, for constant monitoring of actual budget utilization, thereby facilitating
necessary adjustments at Revised Estimates and Final Estimates stages; and
l Every effort is made to ascertain carefully local procedures, requirements of
authorities in charge of local approvals, service connections etc. so that
problems could be anticipated, to the extent possible, and advance action
taken as necessary to avoid or minimize time and cost over-runs.
As a result of all these steps, there has been a turnaround in the utilization of the
Capital Outlay budget in the last two years. In 2005-06, expenditure was Rs. 91 crores
as against the initial budget allocation of Rs. 66 crores. In 2006-07, expenditure was
Rs. 140.22 crores, as against the budget allocation of Rs. 160 crores. Fuller utilization
would have been possible, if one or two property purchase proposals in process, could
have been finalized before the end of the Financial Year.
In 2007-08, the Ministry expects to fully utilize the budget allocation of Rs. 250
crores.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
The Committee note with concern that even thought the Committee in their earlier
Reports had recommended as back as in 1988 that the MEA should take steps to
minimize the expenditure on rentals, the delays in construction of owned buildings on
the part of MEA/Mission/Posts resulted in rental expenditure increasing substantially
over the years  ire  from Rs. 163.85 crore in 1999-2000 to Rs. 215.37 crore in
2004-2005. The reasons for the increase in rental liability of the Missions have been
stated to be the depreciation of Indian Rupee vis-a-vis US Dollar, opening of new

16
Mission/Posts in eight places since 2002 and surge in rentals particularly in the Gulf,
East Europe and Central Asia. The Ministry have further informed the Committee that
with a view to reducing rental liabilities, they have prepared a five year comprehensive
action plan to acquire built up properties and construct own buildings for residences/
offices at high rental and other stations. While deploring the delay and laxity on the
part of the MEA to take corrective steps, the Committee hope the action plan formulated
by the MEA now will result in making the property management process more organized
and systematic with significant reduction in the rental outgo.
[Sl. No. 4, Para 80 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action taken
In line with the Hon. Committee's recommendations, the Ministry has taken several
concrete steps to acquire properties abroad, in order to reduce rental liabilities.
l Enhanced delegated powers, for purchases and for construction abroad
including renovation, have been obtained from the Ministry of Finance.
l Ministry has circulated detailed guidelines for purchase of property to all the
Missions to enable them to send viable proposals.
l To expedite purchase decisions, the Ministry sends empowered teams from
Headquarters, for inspection of properties short-listed by Mission, and to
make recommendations for purchase.
l These recommendations are then processed for urgent approvals.
l As a result, four built-up properties were purchased in 2005-06 (two in Ulaan
Battar, and one each in Paris and Bareilly) and six properties have been purchased
in 2006-07 [in Buenos Aires (2 properties), Beirut, Caracas, Thane, and Raipur].
In 2007-08, one property has been purchased in Bogota, and purchase of another
property in Tripoli has been approved (registration underway).
l Purchase proposals for properties at following stations are currently under
consideration:
Hamburg—Residence for Consul General
Sofia—Embassy Residence
Milan—Chancery, Embassy Residence and staff residences.
l The process of acquisition of additional properties will contribute to reduction
of rental liability.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to observe that though the Vienna Convention made
reciprocity the cornerstone of diplomatic relations between countries, MEA failed to

17
acquire plots of land from the Governments of Ethiopia and Algeria on reciprocal
basis even after a lapse of 46 years and 20 years respectively. This resulted in the
Mission continuing to incur annual expenditure of Rs. 60.52 lakh on rentals for its
Chancery, Embassy Residence (ER) and other residences at Addis Ababa(Ethiopia)
and Rs. 1.23 crore in Algiers (Algeria). The Committee have been informed that
pursuant to the directive dated 9th July, 1998 from PMO, the practice of allotting land
to foreign missions in India on a nominal rent on long lease was discontinued, except
where firm commitments had been made before the directive for gift/exchange/sale of
land. The allotment of land to the Government of India is still being pursued with
countries whose Mission had been allotted land in India based on a nominal rent on
the basis of reciprocity. The Ministry have stated the Ethiopia and the Russian Federation
are two countries where land has not yet been allotted on reciprocal basis and the plot
earlier earmarked for the Algerian Mission in New Delhi has now been allotted to
another Mission, since Algeria has not been able to reciprocate.What is surprising is
the fact the Ministry pursued the matter with these countries only after the Committee
took up the matter. The Committee cannot but deprecate the casualness and the
lackadaisical approach displayed by MEA and would like to know the current status
of acquisition of plots of land from the Governments of Ethiopia and Russian Federation
on reciprocal basis. They would also like to be apprised about the countries to which
firm commitments for allotment of land on a nominal rent on long lease had been
made before issue of the directive dated 9th July, 1998 and the status of land allotment
in these countries on similar reciprocal basis. Needless to emphasize that MEA would
take immediate steps of identify the stations where land had not been allotted to Indian
Missions on reciprocal basis and take effective measures at the highest level to acquire
the land. Alternatively, they should actively consider charging commercial rates in
respect of the land allotted to those countries in India.
[Sl. No. 5, Para 81 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
While reciprocity is the basic principle in conduct of diplomatic relations, the Vienna
convention on Diplomatic Relations does not contain any specific provision on
reciprocal exchange of properties. Moreover, it would not be in our interest to observe
reciprocity in exchange of properties, since the commercial value of land in the
diplomatic enclave in New Delhi is higher than corresponding land values in most
capitals of the world. As stated earlier, pursuant to a directive dated 9th July, 1998
from the Prime Minister's Office, the practice of allotting land to foreign Missions in
India on a nominal rent on long lease was discontinued (except where firm commitments
had been made before the directive, for gift/exchange/sale of land). Allotments of
prime land in the diplomatic area of Chanakyapuri are now made at commercial value
fixed by the Ministry of Urban Deveopment.
The Ministry had been pursuing reciprocal allotment of land with the Governments of
Ethiopia and the Russian Federation through diplomatic channels. In the last two years,
these efforts have been intensified, and Property Teams have been sent to these countries
to hold bilateral discussions with the respective Governments in order to get suitable
properties for our Missions in Addis Ababa and Moscow, Saint Petersburg and Vladivostok.

18
Ethiopia
The Mission had been authorized to obtain the plot of land of about 18000 sq. mts.
in which the Chancery is located in addition to about 2000 sq. mts. in the UN area in
Addis Ababa. The Mission had also been asked to identify plots for the balance
3000 sqm., so as to bring the area of our land in Addis Ababa at par with that allcoated
to Ethiopia in India. The matter was also taken up with the Ethiopian delegation led by
their Prime Minister, which visited India in November, 2007. The Ambassador has
now informed us of a number of options for obtaining our balance requirement of
about 5,600 Sq. Mts. A property team is being deputed to visit Addis Ababa shortly to
consider these options.
Russian Federation
The Russian Federation, as the state-continuator of the erstwhile Soviet Union, has
to allocate suitable land/properties for Indian Missions/Posts in Moscow, St. Petersburg
and Vladivostok. After the Russian Government cancelled allocation of a plot of land
earlier allotted to the Indian Mission in Moscow, it offered another plot near
Mosfilmskaya Street in Moscow. A property team inspected the plot. Following this, a
number of details were sought from the Russian Government to facilitate a decision
on acceptability of the plot. On the basis of information available so far, the plot does
not seem to be suitable for our construction requirements. Further information is awaited
from the Russian authorities, before a final decision is taken.
Simultaneously, the Ministry has worked out its land requirements in St. Petersburg
and Vladivostok, since no suitable built-up properties are on offer in these cities for
our Consulates. The land requirements in Moscow have also been re-assessed in
conformity with the present size and activities of the Mission. The requirements have
been communicated to the Russian Government and they have been requested to identify
and allot suitable plots of land in these three cities. The matter is being pursued
vigorously.
Commitment for allotment of land to other countries
No commitments for allotment of land on a nominal rent on long lease had been
made to any other country, before issue of the PMO direct dated 9th July, 1998. The
policy of the Ministry is to allot land in New Delhi at commercial rates and also to buy
land in stations abroad at the prevalent rates.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
The Committee are dismayed that the Ministry was not able to commence
construction at 14 stations abroad for years together owing to delays in acquisition of
land, appointment of consultants, finalization of designs, cost estimates, obtaining
approval of local authorities etc. Such delays led to continuous recurring expenditure

19
of Rs. 11.80 crore per annum on rentals and idling of capital of Rs. 13.81 crore on
properties lying unutilized. Besides, such delays also entailed increase in the cost of
construction with time. The reasons stated by the Ministry for the languid pace of pre-
construction activities were plots being taken back by the local Government, political
instability, unforeseen circumstances like the Gulf War and the foreign exchange crisis
of early 1990s. Further, they have added that funds available for construction abroad
were meager. The Committee cannot accept such a vague justification and do not find
it tenable especially when there were persistent savings under capital head indicating
that availability of funds has not been a constraint.
With regard to the monitoring of the execution and timely completion of these
projects, the Committee note that after the matter was taken up by the Committee the
MEA has now belatedly energized themselves and all the 14 projects are now stated to
be constantly monitored by their Project Division. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the progress of work in all these projects. In this regard, the Committee
would like to stress the need for expediting all the pre-construction activities such as
finalization of design brief, appointment of consultants etc., and ensure execution of
these projects within the targeted time-frame through a specific monitoring plan for
each proejct.
[Sl. No. 6, Para 82 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As reported earlier, since its setting up in  Feb. 2005, Projects Division of the
Ministry has exclusively focused on construction/renovation/purchase and property
management. Substantial progress has been made, as elaborated below, including on
23 construction/renovation projects reviewed by the august Committee:
(a) The Embassy complex at Muscat  has been completed in November, 2007.
The Foreign Service Institute Complex and the AALCO Building in
New Delhi have also been completed in December, 2006 and December,
2007 respectively. The renovation of Permanent Representative's Residence
in Geneva was completed in May, 2007, and that of Embassy Residence in
Tokyo has also been completed in October, 2007.
(b) Construction of eight projects at a total cost of Rs. 606 crores has commenced.
Work at Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan (MEA Headquarters) commenced in
November, 2006 and expected date of completion July 2009. Work at Canning
Lane (Hostel), and Chanakyapuri Officers residential projects in New Delhi
is also in progress and is likely to be completed in the next financial year.
Construction at the Embassy and Residences  complexes in Kathmandu
commenced in November, 2007 with an expected completion period of
30 months. Construction at the Chancery and Residences project in Beijing
commenced in October, 2007 and is likely to be completed by October, 2008.
Construction work at the Chancery and Residences re-development project
in Tokyo, started in July 2007 and is expected fo finish in July, 2009. The
reconstruction project in Singapore started in August, 2007 and is likely to
be completed by October, 2008.

20
(c) Some major construction/renovation projects are expected to be awarded for
construction in the coming months. These include the projects in Islamabad,
Kabul, London, Brasilia, Dhaka, Budapest, Tashkent and Warsaw.
(d) In Abuja, due to exorbitant bids, the tender would have to be recalled. In
order to achieve economy of scale and to get more competitive bids, the
Chancery project is being combined with the Residence project.
(e) The projects in Port Louis, Paramaribo, Dar-es-Salaam, Doha, Port of Spain
and Nicosia are under different stages of pre-construction activity. Every
possible effort is being made to bring these projects also to tender/construction
stage at the earliest.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
Another disquieting instance observed by the Committee is that the MEA did not
finalize consultants, scope of work, design briefs, preliminary drawings and estimates
for re-development/re-construction of properties at Singapore, Tokyo and Geneva
resulting in expenditure of Rs. 2.38 crore per annum on rentals and blocking of capital
of Rs. 6.19 crore and increase in cost of re-development and re-construction. In the
view of the Committee, such instances of indecision and laxity only point towards
inherent bottlenecks in the decisions-making process of the MEA. Although Ministry
have now informed that the construction  in respect of Singapore project would be
completed by April, 2008 and the Tokyo re-development project had already been
approved by the cabinet and was scheduled to be completed by May, 2007, the
Committee are constrained to conclude that the decision-making process at the MEA
as far as management of properties is concerned has been very tardy. The Committee,
therefore, recommend  that the MEA should put in place appropriate systems under
the Project Division so that such avoidable delay do not recur and the Mission are also
galvanized to make every possible effort to minimize the rental outgo on leased
accommodation.
[Sl. No. 7 Para 83 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The renovation project in Geneva was completed in May, 2007. The renovation/re-
development project in Tokyo is in construction phase since July, 2007 and is likely to
be completed by the scheduled date of July, 2009. The renovation/construction project
in Singapore started in August, 2007 and is likely to completed by October, 2008.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)

21
Recommendation
The Committee find that the Embassy of India, Kyiv acquired a dilapidated built
up property in September, 1995 at a cost of Rs. 2.53 crore without title of land. As a
result, renovation or reconstruction of the property was not possible and the entire
investment of Rs. 2.53 crore was infructuous. As the proposed construction of residential
flats did not take off, the Mission was incurring Rs. 1.14 crore per annum towards rent
of residential apartments for its India based staff. The Committee have been informed
that the property was purchased on the basis of the report by "Ministry of Housing and
Municipal Services of Ukraine Kyiv Project Reconstruction Institute" which stated
that "the building is in satisfactory technical state." This clearly indicates that the
Ministry has purchased the property without conducting inspection on its own and by
relying only on the Report of an external agency. This does not constitute good property
management practice. The Committee are dismayed that the Ministry has not elaborated
the reasons for not carrying out the mandatory comprehensive assessment of the
structure or for not preparing any detailed estimates of the cost of renovation before
acquiring the property in  September, 1995. The Committee, therefore, would like the
Ministry to conduct on inquiry into the matter to find out as to how far the officials
entrusted with this job failed to discharge their responsibilities. The Committee should
be apprised of the outcome of the enquiry.
[Sl. No. 9, Para 83 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is clarified that before purchase of a property, Structural Evaluation Report are
invariably commissioned from a prominent and professional evaluation agency in the
country concerned, since visual inspections by Ministry/Mission's officials would not
suffice for this purpose. As per the above standard practice, the structural evaluation
was got done by the Ukraine Govt. "Ministry of Housing and Municipal Services of
Ukraine, Kyiv Project Reconstruction Institute". There was no reason to doubt the
technical report of the local government agency. The expenditure approved on repairs
and renovation of the property, at the time of purchase, was based on estimates for
renovation obtained from two independent firms. The Ministry is, therefore, of the
view that there was no failure to discharge responsibility in this case.
The title to the land of the above property has been obtained from the Government
of Ukraine. The Ministry has also revised the scope of the project to add construction
of Chancery to the project besides residences of Mission officials. For this purpose,
permission for change of land use would also be obtained. Revised agreements with
the consultant and with the local government agency GDIP are under negotiation and
will be finalized soon.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)

22
Recommendation
The Committee note that MEA purchased the Embassy Residence in Harare in
March, 1987 at Rs. 43.69 lakh with a plot area of 17.8604 acre without formal approval
of the local Government and without ensuring transfer of the title to the property to its
name after a lapse of 18 years, resulting in excess land lying unutilized, putting the
investment itself at stake. The Committee have been informed that on observing that
the area of the plot was more than the requirement they have decided to retain only 7.8
acres and dispose of balance 20 acres on commercial terms. They have been further
informed that MEA offered a plot of land to Zimbabwe in Chanakyapuri in February,
on 2006 on the principle of reciprocity and it has been conveyed to the Government of
Zimbabwe that the title of the entire plot of land in Harare should be registered in the
name of Government of India, but their response is till awaited. However, the Ministry
has not mentioned its views on the main objection of the Government of Zimbabwe
that the area of property in question was much higher than what could be acquired by
the diplomatic mission. The Committee would like to be apprised about that latest
status of the case and as to whether the title of the entire plot of land has since been
transferred to the Government of India. MEA should make vigorous efforts to resolve
the dispute with the Government of Zimbabwe at an early date.
[Sl. No. 10 Para 86 of Fifty-first Report of PAC(2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The matter was taken up with the Government of Zimbabwe at the level of External
Affairs Minister and all the steps leadings to registration were vigorously pursued and
completed. The registration certificate for the property (entire plot of land) has been
obtained in December, 2007.  The Ministry will now examine the possibility of
additional construction on this plot, for its optimum utilization.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
The Committee find that in four Missions — Ulaan Baatar (Mangolia), Wellington
(New Zealand), Kuwait and Dar-es-Salaam (Tanzania) the expenditure of Rs. 95.50
lakh was incurred in excess of the prescribed rental ceiling without the approval of
MEA. The Committee have been informed that detailed date justifying the rental
increases have been received from the concerned Missions. In case of Dar-es-Salaam
the rental increases have been regularized. In the case of Ulann Baatar, the case is
under investigation with the vigilance cell, while in the case of Kuwait, the Ministry
have not accepted the Audit 's contention. According to Audit, Ministry's reply regarding
embassy of Kuwait is in contravention of the facts furnished by the Mission at Kuwait
in July, 2004 wherein it had been intimated that they were taking up the matter with the
MEA  for obtaining necessary sanctions. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the factual position in this matter. The Committee would also await the latest position
on the expenditure incurred in excess of delegated powers by Missions at Ulaan Baatar

23
and Wellington. Since a substantial amount of expenditure was incurred in excess of
the ceiling in these Missions, the Committee, recommended that MEA should exercise
more effective supervision over the Missions/Posts abroad to ensure that irregular
expenditure on rented accommodation in excess of prescribed rental ceilings did not
become at regular feature.
[Sl. No. 12, Para 88 of Fifty-first Report of PAC(2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The rent paid by Embassy of India, Kuwait were covered under the delegated powers
of the Mission as no rental ceilings were fixed by the Ministry. Under the Rules, the
HOMs/HOPs have been delegated financial power to raise the rentals by upto 10%
for continued retention of a residence and upto 15% for renting an alternative property
on conclusion of the agreement/lease. Ministry's approval is required only for increase
in rentals of properties for which rental ceilings have been fixed. Since there were no
rental ceilings fixed for Kuwait, the Mission rightly exercised its powers.
The two other Missions, namely Wellington and Dar-es-Salaam appear to have
exceeded their powers due to incorrect interpretation of the financial  powes delegated
to the mission. The necessary approval regarding ex-post facto regularization of the
expenditure in respect of property in Dar-es-Salaam has been issued. In the case of
Embassy of India, Ulaan Baatar, a First Secretary level officer with a rental ceiling of
US$ 1600 was replaced by a Second Secretary who found an alternative property at a
much lower rental of US$ 1100, which was still higher than the delegated powers.
However, the case in under investigation. As for HCI-Wellington, the Mission has been
asked to provide explanation of the circumstances for payment of rental  beyond approved
ceilings and the matter will be examined and resolved shortly as per standard procedures.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
The Committee find that that ten Missions incurred unauthorized expenditure of
Rs. 1.24 crore on retention of vacant quarters in contravention of MEA's order vide which
vacant leased residential accommodation cannot be retained for more than 90 days without
its prior approval. The Ministry in their reply have not specified the reasons for retention of
vacant leased accommodation by the Missions. While informing about the measures taken
to curb the tendency on the part of Missions to routinely violate instruction/order issued by
MEA, the Ministry have merely stated that Missions/Posts are regularly cautioned and
sensitized for not retaining the vacant accommodation beyond their delegated powers. The
Committee find to their dismay that retention of vacant leased accommodation beyond the
stipulated period illustrates a glaring instance wherein the orders and instruction of the
Ministry have been taken very casually by the Missions abroad. The Committee, while
taking a serious view of such an alarming trend of financial and administrative indiscipline
recommend that the MEA should conduct a thorough enquiry into instances of such
delinquency by the Missions, particularly the role of the Heads of Missions and apprise the
Committee about the findings and the follow-up action taken thereon.
[Sl. No. 13, Para 89 of Fifty-first Report of PAC(2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

24
Action Taken
With a view to providing greater stability and for keeping the rentals under check,
the Ministry encourages signing of long-term. It is not in the overall interest of the
Government to terminate the lease agreements on each occasion an officer is transferred
out or replaced. Generally,  such change overs take place without any gap. However,
in a few cases, the Missions experience a small gap between the departure of the
incumbent officers and the arrival of their successors, more so in case of Heads of
Mission, requiring greater coordination and lenthy approvals etc. The principal causes
for such delays are the long chains of postings or administrative exigencies.
For addressing the above problem, the delegated financial powers allow the
Missions/Posts abroad to retain vacant accommodations for upto 90 days. Any
retention beyong this period needs to be approved by the Ministry taking into
account the overall situation and the government's interest. The Ministry tries
its best to keep such gaps to the minimum. However, in some cases for reasons
beyond the Ministry's control, it becomes difficult to keep the gap within the
powers vested with the Missions. In such cases, the Missions normally write to
the Ministry in advance for seeking approval. However, in a few cases, the
Missions are genuinely not in a position to anticipate delays till the last minute,
requiring ex-post-facto  regularization. Most of the cases pointed out by the audit
belong to this category and include our Missions/Post in Ulaan Baatar, Beijing,
Abu Dhabi, Kabul, San Francisco, Luanda, Khartoum, Antananarivo, Munich
and Kandy. If the Missions had been able to take up these Cases in advance, the
Ministry would have approved vacant retention, which was in government
interest.
As  intimated, objections pertaining to Kandy and Munich have already been settled
by the audit authorities Meanwhile, Ministry after due consideration of Missions'
explanations have issued ex post facto sanction No. Q/Prop. 1/745/12/06 dt. 20.12.06
to the remaining 8 Missions for retention of vacant accommodation.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
In yet another  instance of faulty planning, delay and wasteful expenditure by the
MEA, the Committee observe that non-completion of pre-construction formalities in
the case of construction projects in India resulted in blocking of huge funds to the tune
of Rs. 6.28 crore, escalation in cost of construction of projects by another Rs. 2.87
crore besides recurring rental liability. In Pappankalan (Dwarka) residential quarters
project in Delhi, out of 230 flats constructed after investing Rs. 21.17 crores, 180 flats
were lying vacant. The Ministry have stated that the residential complex in Dwarka
was based on their assessment of the demand for residential accommodation. Specifying
the reasons for under-utilization of the residential  quarters, the Ministry have attributed
it to lack of infrastructure, problem of water supply and availability of cheaper

25
accommodation in Dwarka outside the MEA housing complex. The MEA's explanation
on this issue can only point towards the absolute lack of planning on the part of the
Ministry in not making suitable arrangements in advance for basic amenities like water
supply and transportation, which could have greatly expedited allotment of the quarters
and made it possible for them to profitable utilize their assets. Now the Ministry have
stated to have made it mandatory to allot flats in Dwarka Complex as the first option
for all the officers applying for residential accommodation under category Type-II to
Type-V. As a result, the occupancy is stated to have gone up substantially and as on
20th September 2006, 124 flats have been occupied out of 230 flats. As the rate of
occupancy is still not adequate, the Committee would like the Ministry to chalk out a
time bound action plan to ensure optimum utilization of the residential complex
including asking Directorate of Estate to allot the vacant flats to Government employees
of other Departments/Ministries.
[Sl. No. 14, Para 90 of Fifty-first Report of PAC(2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Every effort is being made to complete the construction projects in India
expeditiously, including Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan (MEA Headquarters) and
Chankyapuri Residences project and Canning Lane in New Delhi.
Work at Jawaharlal Nehru Bhawan (MEA Headquarters) commenced in November,
2006 and the scheduled date of completion is July 2009. Work at Canning Lane (Hostel),
and Chankayapuri Officers residential projects in New Delhi is also in progress and is
likely to be completed in the next financial year.
Work at the Foreign Service Institute Complex in New Delhi was completed in
December 2006 and at the AALCO complex in December, 2007.
The construction project of the Regional Passport Office at Bangalore was completed
in March 2007.
The construction project of the Regional Passport Office at Jaipur was completed
in January, 2008.
The construction project of the Regional Passport Office at Lucknow is at completion
stage and the office is expected to shift there in March 2008.
The project for the Regional Passport Office at Bhubaneshwar entered construction
phase in December 2007, with a completion schedule of 18 months.
Dwarka — MEA Residential complex
The occupancy in the government-owned residential complex in Dwarka has
improved substantially as a result of several positive steps taken by the Ministry. The
policy of offering accommodation only at Dwarka to officers up to the level of Deputy
Secretary, and efforts to improve the availability of water in the complex, stand by
power for lifts, security and internal communication, have resulted in this improvement.
176 flats out of a total of 230 flats are now occupied. Efforts are continuing to improve
occupancy by improving further availability of water in the complex, particularly during
summer months. However, it would be appreciated that the success of Ministry's efforts

26
in this regard depends to a large extent on the measures taken by the local authorities
to improve water supply in Dwarka as a whole.
Sd/-
 (K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
The Committee note that though the MEA had changed the system of inspections
since 1998 and had set up a separate Directorate of Inspection in February 2004, no
visible results seem to have yielded in purchase/construction and maintenance of
Government properties in India and abroad, as there were comprehensive delays in
acquisition of land, appointment of consultants, award of construction work and its
execution and processing of proposals for disposal of propertieis, as a result of which,
substantial expenditure continued to be incurred on rentals. MEA also could not prevent
unauthorized expenditure from being incurred by the Missions/Posts on leased and
Government owned properties and hiring of properties exceeding rental ceilings.
Several instances have also been highlighted wherein the instructions of the MEA
have been flouted by the Missions. Such flagrant violations of norms and acts of
omission by the Missions makes a mockery of the inspection set-up of the MEA. The
Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry must review the situation and
completely revamp their inspection machinery so that the working of Indian Missions/
Posts abroad in regard to property management are supervised in a more earnest and
systematic manner.
[Sl. No. 15, Para 91 of Fifty-first Report of PAC(2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Directorate of Inspection of the Ministry has been constituted to undertake
periodic inspection of all mission/posts abroad. It is Ministry's endeavour that every
mission is inspected at least once in five years. Fifteen Missions/Posts have been
inspected in 2007-08 so far. Senior officers of the Ministry are deputed to lead the
inspection teams. The reports submitted after the inspection are examined at the highest
level and follow up action wherever needed is taken. Instances of violation of rental
ceilings and other property related issues are examined by the inspectors as also by the
Establishment Division of the Ministry from time to time. Necessary corrective actions
are taken whenever instances of violation of instructions are noticed. It would not be
out of place to mention that out of over 2500 properties hired abroad by the Ministry,
instances of violation of rental ceilings are sixteen.
It is clarified that purchase of properties is not done through visits by Directorate of
Inspection, but by dedicated Property Teams including officers from Projects and
Finance Divisions of the Ministry.
As regards property purchase at stations abroad, the Ministry sends empowered
teams to inspect properties short-listed for purchase abroad, and finalizes transactions
after obtaining structural evaluation report, market evaluation report and clear legal
title report, and administration/financial approval of competent authorities. The Ministry

27
constantly endeavours to improve property management through timely finalization
of proposals for  purchase, construction as well as renovation of Government properties
both in India and abroad. Since the setting up of a new Projects Division in February,
2005, the following results have been achieved in terms of purchase of built-up
properties and construction/renovation:
Properties purchased:
2005-06
1. Chancery in Ulaan Baatar
2. Embassy Residence in Ulann Baatar
3. Additional Building for Chancery in Paris
4. Office building for RPO, Bareilly.
2006-07
1. Chancery in Buenos Aires
2. Embassy Residence in Buenos Aires
3. Chancery in Beirut
4. Embassy Residence in Caracas
5. Office building for RPO, Thane
6. Office building for RPO,  Raipur
2007-08
1. Chancery in Bogota
2. Embassy Residence in Tripoli (Approved; title registration underway)
Purchase Proposals under Consideration:
Hamburg — Residence for Consul General
Sofia — Embassy Residence
Milan — Chancery, Embassy Residene and Staff residences.
Construction/Renovation projects
l 13 major construction protects have been approved at an estimated cost of
Rs. 817 crores.
l The Embassy complex at Muscat has been completed in November, 2007.
The Foreign Service Institute Complex and the AALCO Building in
New Delhi have also been completed in December, 2006 and December,
2007 respectively. The renovation of Permanent Represenative's Residence
in Geneva was completed in May 2007, and that of Embassy Residence in
Tokyo has also been completed in October, 2007.
à Construction of eight projects at a total cost of Rs. 606 crores has
commenced. Work at Jawahar Lal Nehru Bhawan (MEA Headquarters)

28
commenced in November, 2006 and expected date of completion is
July 2009. Work at Canning Lane (Hostel), and Chanakyapuri Officers
residential projects in New Delhi is also in progress and is likely to be
completed in the next financial  year. Construction at the Embassy and
Residences complexes in Kathmandu  commenced in November, 2007
with an expected completion period of 30 months. Construction at the
Chancery and Residences project in Beijing commenced in October,
2007 and is likely to be completed by October, 2008. Construction work
at the Chancery and Residences redevelopment project in Tokyo, started
in July 2007 and is expected to finish in July 2009. The reconstruction
project in Singapore started in August 2007 and is likely to be completed
by October, 2008.
l Some major construction/renovation projects are expected to be awarded for
construction in the coming months. These include the projects in Islamabad,
London, Brasilia, Dhaka, Budapest, Tashkent and Warsaw.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
As regards the action plan for better property management, the Committee have
been informed that during the course of examination of the subject, the Ministry
have initiated a number of corrective measures such as establishment of a Project
Division and preparation of two separate five year action plans for acquisition of
built-up properties. The focus of these  plans is stated to be  on high rental stations
and construction on the plots of land lying vacant. Besides, the Government have
also developed a computerized asset register and copies of title deeds of all the
Government-owned properties are being compiled. It is quite evident that the
Ministry have become alive to the problems rather late and only when the facts
were brought to light by Audit review and the issues taken up by the PAC for
detailed scrutiny. It is surprising that MEA  decided to set up a Project Division as
late as in February 2005.
Also, the Ministry's contention that the long term action plans have started yielding
results does not hold good as the replies furnished by the Ministry reveal that no
significant progress has been recorded so far in various projects even after
establishment of the Project Division in February, 2005. This underscores, the
necessity for a comprehensive review and for identification of bottlenecks in the
present system of Property Management and for exercising more effective monitoring
and control.
[Sl. No. 16, Para 92 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

29
Action Taken
The Ministry would like to bring to the Hon. Committee's notice that substantial
progress has been achieved on a number  of projects since the establishment of Projects
Division in February 2005, as detailed below:
Budget utilisation
l With the long term action plans starting to yield results, utilization of budgetary
resources has improve. As against under-utilization up to 2005, in the financial
year 2005-06, the Ministry spent Rs. 91 crores as against the initial budget
allocation of Rs. 66 crores. In 2006-07, the Ministry utilized more than
Rs. 140 crores from the budgetary allocation of Rs.160 crores, and could
have utilized the entire allocation, if some purchase proposals under process
could have been finalized by the end of the financial year. In the current
financial year, the Ministry expects to fully utilize the increased budgetary
allocation of Rs. 250 crores.
Construction/Renovation
l The Embassy complex at Muscat has been completed in November, 2007.
The Foreign Service Institute Complex and the AALCO Building in
New Delhi have also been completed  in December, 2006 and December,
2007 resepctively. The renovation of Permanent Representative's Residence
in Geneva was completed in May, 2007, and that of Embassy Residence in
Tokyo has also  been completed in October, 2007.
l Construction of eight projects at a total cost of Rs. 606 crores has commenced.
Work at Jawahar Lal Nehru Bhawan (MEA Headquarters) commenced in
November, 2006 and expected date of completion is July 2009. Work at
Canning Lane (Hostel), and Chanakyapuri Officers residential projects in
New Delhi is also in progress and is likely to be completed in the next financial
year. Construction at the Embassy and Residences complexes in Kathmandu
commenced in November, 2007 with an expected completion period of
30 months. Construction at the Chancery and Residences project in Beijing
commenced in October, 2007 and is likely to be completed by October, 2008.
Construction work at the Chancery and Residences re-development project
in Tokyo, started in July 2007 and is expected to finish in July 2009. The
re-construction project in Singapore started in August 2007 and is likely to
be completed by October, 2008.
l Some major construction/renovation projects are expected to be awarded for
construction in the coming months. These include the projects in Islamabad,
Kabul, London, Brasilia, Dhaka, Budapest, Tashkent and Warsaw.
l In Abuja, due to exorbitant bids, the tender would have to be recalled. In
order to achieve economy of scale and to get more competitive bids, the
Chancery project is being combined with the Residences project.
l The projects in Port Louis, Paramaribo, Dar-es-Salaam, Doha, Port of Spain
and Nicosia are under different stages of pre-construction activity. Every
possible effort is being made to bring these projects also to tender/construction
stage at the earliest.

30
Purchase of properties
Following built-up Properties have been purchased since April, 2005:
2005-06
1. Chancery in Ulaan Baatar
2. Embassy Residence in Ulaan Baatar
3. Additional Building for Chancery in Paris
4. Office building for RPO, Bareilly
2006-07
1. Chancery in Buenos Aires
2. Embassy Residence in Buenos Aires
3. Chancery in Beirut
4. Embassy Residence in Caracas
5. Office building for RPO, Thane
6. Office building for RPO,  Raipur
2007-08
1. Chancery in Bogota
2. Embassy Residence in Tripoli (Approved; title registration underway)
Disposal of surplus properties
l Progress on disposal of surplus properties has been made:
à The property in Bonn was sold in December, 2006.
à Sale of vacant property in Dar-es-Salaam has been finalized. The
transaction is likely to be completed within a month.
Registration of properties
Pending registration of properties has been completed:
l Title Registration of the Embassy Residence property in Harare was completed
in December, 2007.
l The title deed for the land in Kyiv was obtained in March 2007 and agreements
with the Consultant and local Government agency are under negotiation.
l A new title deed for the vacant property in Dar-es-Salaam has been obtained
and Ministry has finalized the sale of this Property. As stated above, the
transaction is likely to be completed within a month.
Monitoring of projects
l Construction and renovation projects are under constant monitoring by the
Projects Division headed by a Joint Secretary.
l The projects are also being monitored on a regular basis by the Additional
Secretary/Foreign Secretary.
Sd/-
(K.S.  Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)

31
Recommendation
The foregoing Paragraphs reveal several irregularities/shortcomings in the
maintenance of properties by the MEA in India and abroad which inter-alia include
inability to acquire land  on reciprocal basis, delays in construction on acquired land,
non-utilization of properties abroad for many years for want of re-construction/re-
development, properties awaiting disposal, acquisition of dilapidated property without
a title to land, title to property purchased not transferred by Foreign Government,
rental  paid in excess of ceilings etc... There  were occasions when the Missions had
retained vacant accommodation in violation of the Rules. There were also clear instances
where the Heads of the Missions had exceeded their delegated powers and made
irregular/unauthorized  payments. The Ministry further failed to fully utilize the newly
constructed residential quarters in Dwarka, New Delhi. The Committee while deploring
such  an unsatisfactory state of affairs in the MEA with regard to management of
Government properties, desire that the facts brought out in this report should be
thoroughly looked into and urgent steps taken to manage properties in a prudent manner.
In this regard, the MEA should streamline and revitalize their Project Division while
exercising effective control over Missions so that they avoid incurring unauthorized
and imprudent expenditure on rentals, repairs, maintenance etc.... The Committee would
await the MEA's reply on the following measures taken and the results achieved
therefrom.
 [Sl. No. 17, Para 93 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry  has benefited immensely from the observations and recommendations
of the Committee and strives constantly to improve the quality and speed of project
implementation and overall property management. As explained in preceding
paragraphs, corrective action has been taken as necessary, the work on construction
projects and purchases has been streamlined to a great extent, and continued efforts
are being made to improve monitoring, response time and effective control over
spending by Missions.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT REPLIES:
—NIL—
32

CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HA VE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE
REITERA TION
Recommendation
The Committee observe that four Government owned properties at Bangkok,
Damasucs, Dar-es-Salaam and Bonn were awaiting disposal  which resulted in idling
of capital of Rs. 1.30 crore, besides reduction in sale value. From the replies furnished
by the Ministry, the Committee find that they have failed to sign the consultancy
agreement despite lapse of more than a year   in Bangkok. In respect of disposal of
properties at Damascus, the MEA was still undecided about the course of action in
respect of old chancery building, As regards the Mission at Dar-es-Salaam, the non-
availability of the original sale agreement and lease deed with the Mission/Ministry
has kept matters pending. These cases are ample proof  of the poor state of affairs in
the Ministry in regard to property Management, particularly the disposal of Government
of India owned properties. While taking a serious note of the inaction on the part of
the Ministry in all these  cases for an unduly long period, the Committee recommend
that the MEA should now list out all the properties lying vacant for long periods and
prioritize the same for prompt disposal. Besides they should formulate an action plan
for timely disposal of properties in order to avoid further deterioration in their  condition
and possible reduction in value.
[Sl. No. 8, Para 84 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry is taking expeditious action for disposal/use of vacant properties.
The position on the properties reviewed by the Committee is as under:
l The property in Bonn was sold in December, 2006. This was reported to the
Committee in the oral evidence in January 2007 and in written submission
thereafter.
l A new title deed for the vacant property in Dar-es-Salaam has been obtained,
and Ministry has finalized the sale of this property. The transaction is likely
to be completed within a month.
l The title deed for the land in Kyiv was obtained in March 2007 and agreements
with the Consultant and local government agency are under negotiation.
l After a detailed assessment by a property team, the Ministry has decided not
to sell the vacant property in Damascus as it is located in a prime area of the
city, but to convert it into residences for the use of Mission's officers. Action
for selection of a local architect for the project has already been initiated.
33

34
l The property in Bangkok will be utilized for construction of the Embassy
Residence and a Cultural Centre. The consultancy agreement has been signed.
The scope of the project is being finalized in consultation with the Architect,
local authorities and the Mission.
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)
Recommendation
 The Committee find that though the responsibility of normal maintenance and
repairs of the buildings rested with the lessor, the Missions at Islamabad  (Pakistan)
Nairobi (Kenya) and Maputo (Mozambique) were not able to enforce the same resulting
in avoidable expenditure of Rs. 66.09 lakh in violation of the provisions. It is surprise
that even expenditure incurred on carrying out normal maintenance work in these
cases was not recovered from the lessor. The various factors stated by the Ministry
responsible for this are security, urgency, the lessor not attending to the request for
carrying out urgent repair and  maintenance work etc.... The Committee are not inclined
to accept the explanation given by the Ministry as the lease deeds made by the Missions
by natural  agreement with lessor clearly stipulate that the lessor is liable for normal
maintenance and repairs of the building. The Committee would therefore like the MEA
to  strictly enforce the lease agreements and in the event of the Missions having  to
carry repair and maintenance work, the expenditure incurred should be deducted from
the rent payable. The Ministry should also consider including a specific provision for
this in the format of the lease deeds and put in place an effective enforcement
mechanism.
[Sl. No. 11, Para 87 of Fifty-first Report of PAC (2007-08) (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In most countries, for rented properties, while the major repairs are the  responsibility
of the land lord, minor day-to-day repairs have to be carried out by the lessee (tenant).
This standard practice is followed and invariably incorporated in the lease deeds. The
position in respect of the three Missions stated above is  as follows:
High Commission of India, Islamabad: Our Mission in Islamabad has limited its
obligation only to minor day-to-day maintenance and repairs of rented properties.
According to the calculations provided by HCI, Islamabad, their total expenditure on
repairs was Rs. 7.23 lakhs for 32 rented properties for a period of two years from
April, 2002 to March, 2004. This expenditure on 32 rented properties appears quite
reasonable and is covered under the delegated financial powers. The Expenditure was
also within the allocated budget of the Mission. In places like Islamabad, for security
reasons the local landlords cannot be given free access to the rented properties. If we
try to force minor repairs on them, they would obviously need to be provided greater
access. Under such a  situation there could be breach of security and moreover the
landlords would also seek higher rent for taking care of day-to-day maintenance.

35
High Commission of India, Nairobi:  According to the terms of the lease, our
Mission in Nairobi is responsible for minor day-to-day maintenance as well as the
interiors of the Chancery building. Given the importance of our Mission in Nairobi
and the presence of a large Indian Diaspora, the Mission's premises have to be
maintained well in keeping with India's image. Over a period of five years, the Mission
has incurred a total amount of the Rs. 14.80 lakhs for this purpose. Given the size of
the property, this appears quite reasonable and is covered under the delegated financial
powers.
Embassy of India, Maputo: The Properties under reference have been hired from
the local Government agency since early 1970s. Because of the prolonged civil unrest
in Mozambique and extremely poor economic condition, the local agency was not
able to undertake any maintenance in spite of repeated requests from the Mission.
This situation was faced by all the diplomatic Missions there.  Under the circumstances,
the Mission had no option but to carry out the essential repairs and maintenance  work
under delegated powers  in these properties to keep them habitable. In return, the
Mission has not agreed to the increases in rent demanded by the local agency
Sd/-
(K.S. Bhardwaj)
Joint Secretary (Projects)

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
21 August, 2008 Chairman,
30 Sravana, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
36

PART II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2008-2009) HELD ON 14TH AUGUST, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. on 14th August, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘‘C’’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Prof. M. Ramadass
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
8. Shri Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Raashid Alvi
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri B. K. Hariprasad
12. Prof. P. J. Kurien
13. Dr. K Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3.  Shri M. K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary-II
Officers of the office of the  Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Thakur — DG ACR
37

38
2. Shri Nand Kishore — Pr. Director (RC)
Representatives of Ministry of Health and  Family welfare (Department of Health
and Family Welfare)
1. Shri Naresh Dayal — Secretary
2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava — Director General of Health Services
3. Shri Naved Masood — Additional Secretary & Financial
Adviser
4. Shri Vineet Chawdhry — Joint Secretary
5. Smt. Shakuntala Gamlin — Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman PAC welcomed the Members and Audit officers to
the sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the following
draft Action Taken Reports:
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken on 51st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating
to "Property Management by Ministry of External Affairs"; and
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken on 48th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Functioning of Employees' State Insurance Corporation (ESIC)".
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports with some
minor changes and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the same to
Parliament in the light of factual verification doen by Audit.
3. *** *** *** ***
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS  AND OBSERVATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Recommendations/Observations
No. No. Department
12 3 4
1 7 External Affairs The Committee note that in pursuance of
their recommendation, the Ministry  of
External Affairs have initiated several
measures to streamline their budget
estimation process and to make it more
realistic and meaningful such as careful
and expeditious examination of
preliminary estimates, phasing of
expenditure  on a project by way of
careful planning, monitoring of
expenditure by getting monthly
progressive statements of expenditure
from the Missions/Posts abroad and
spending units in India etc. The
Committee desire that these measures
should be constantly reviewed so that
incident of under/non-utilisation of funds
particularly under the capital heads of the
Grant does not recur. The Missions
should be instructed to invest these funds
in construction/acquisition of new
properties instead of showing unspent
provisions year after year under these
heads and continue hiring more and more
properties. The Ministry of External
Affairs must overcome their laxity and
ensure timely receipt of the monthly
progress statements of expenditure from
Missions/Posts abroad to facilitate
realistic estimates at revised estimates
and final estimates stages. The
Committee would like to be apprised
about the utilization of budget allocation
for the years 2007-08 and 2008-09
39

40
2. 10 External Affairs The Committee note that as a result of
the steps taken to reduce the rental
liability, the MEA had purchased four
built-up properties in 2005-06, six in
2006-07 and one property in 2007-08.
The Committee have also been informed
that purchase proposals for properties at
Hamburg, Sofia and Milan stations are
currently under considerations. The
Committee hope that MEA would take
immediate steps to finalise the purchase
proposals at the earliest at these stations.
They should also monitor the compliance
of the guidelines issued by  them for
purchase of property by all missions so
that these are not treated in a routine
manner but are strictly adhered to with
concrete results.
3. 13 -do- The Committee are constrained to
observe that construction of eight projects
at a total cost of Rs. 606 crore has
commenced only after being pointed out
by the Committee in their Report. The
Committee would expect the MEA to
keep strict watch over these projects to
ensure their timely completion and to
apprise the Committee about the progress
made thereon.
4. 16 -do- The Committee note that MEA is taking
expeditious action with regard to
disposal/use of vacant properties, as a
result of which they have obtained title
deed for the vacant property in Dar-es-
Salaam and Kyiv. However, the MEA
have not informed about the formulation
of action plan for timely disposal of
vacant properties as desired by the
Committee in their earlier Report. Since
retaining vacant accommodation in
violation of the rules for long periods
results in infructuous expenditure as well
as deterioration in their condition, the
12 3 4

41
Committee while reiterating their earlier
recommendation on the subject desire
that MEA should not further dither in the
matter and should formulate an action
plan forthwith for timely disposal of
vacant  properties.
5. 19 External Affairs The Committee are constrained to point
out that the MEA have not responded
convincingly to their earlier observation
regarding deduction of expenditure
incurred on the repairs and maintenance
work from the rent payable to the lessor.
The Ministry have also not informed
about the setting up of an enforcement
mechanism in this regard as desired by
the Committee. While taking a serious
view of the lack of action by the Ministry,
the Committee would like the Ministry
to fix responsibility in the matter and
include forthwith a specific provision in
the lease agreements executed by
Missions for deducting the expenditure
incurred on maintenance and repairs from
the rent payable. The Committee should
be apprised about the action taken in the
matter.
6. 22 -do- As regards the under-utilisation of the
residential quarters in Pappankalan
(Dwarka), the Committee have been
informed that as a result of several
positive steps taken by the MEA, the
occupancy in the Government owned
residential complex in Dwarka has
improved substantially. According to the
Ministry out of total 230 flats, 176 flats
 have now been occupied and efforts are
continuing to improve occupancy by
improving further availability of water in
the complex particularly during summer
months. In their earlier Report, the
Committee had noted that as on 20th
September, 2006, 124 flats were
occupied out of 230 flats. They are
12 3 4

42
unhappy to observe that from September,
2006 to February 2008 only 52 more flats
have been occupied, which indicates very
slow rate of occupancy. It is also evident
from the Action Taken Note that the
Ministry have not considered the
Committee's earlier recommendation
regarding chalking out a time bound
action plan including allotment of vacant
flats to Government employees of other
Ministries/Departments since a
substantial number of quarters are still
lying vacant. The Committee would now
like the Ministry to take up this issue on
priority.
12 3 4
GMGIPMRND—2883LS-22-9-2008