5
NON-ADJUDICATION OF DEMANDS
AND INORDINATE DELAY IN THE
RECOVERY OF CONFIRMED
DEMANDS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2004—2005
FIFTH REPORT
Fourteenth Lok Sabha
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FIFTH  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
NON-ADJUDICATION OF DEMANDS AND
INORDINATE DELAY IN THE RECOVERY
OF CONFIRMED DEMANDS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action taken on 39th Report of P AC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on .................................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on .......................................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)

PAC No. 1756
Price: Rs. 24.00
     2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.
©

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2004-2005)................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I. Report............................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government........................................................................
CHAPTER III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in the light of replies received from
Government....................................................................................
C
HAPTER IV. Observations/Recommendations replies which have  not been
accepted by the Committee and requires reiteration...............
CHAPTER V . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies. .............................
PART II
Minutes of the seventh sitting of Public Accounts Commit-
tee held on 27.10.2004..................................................................
APPENDIX
Conclusions and Recommendations.........................................
(i)
6
42
43
44
45
47

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. V acant*
3. Shri Ramesh Bais
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Dr. M. Jagannath
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
(iii)
*Shri A.R. Antulay, MP has resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f.
27th August, 2004.

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
5. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this Fifth Report on action
taken by Government on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in their 39th Report (13th Lok Sabha) on ''non-adjudication of demands and
inordinate delay in the recovery of confirmed demands".
2. The Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 27th October, 2004. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in thick type in the body  of the Report and have also been repro-
duced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
2 November, 2004 Chairman,
11 Kartika 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report deals with the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations
of the Public Accounts Committee (2002-2003) contained in their 39th Report (13th Lok
Sabha) on paragraphs 2.5 and 2.6 of the Report of the C&AG of India for the year
ended 31st March, 1998 (No. 11 of 1999), Union Government (Revenue Receipts—
Central Excise) relating to “Non-adjudication of demands and inordinate delay in the
recovery of confirmed demands.”
2. The 39th Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 17th December, 2002
contained 11 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes in respect of
all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Government.
These have been broadly categorised as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by Government—
Paragraph Nos. 14.1, 14.2, 14.3, 14.4, 14.5, 14.6, 14.8, 14.9, 14.10 and 14.11
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the  Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government—
Paragraph No. 14.7
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect which replies of Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration—
NIL
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies—
NIL
3. The action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee
will now deal with the action taken by the Government on their Observations/
Recommendations, which need reiteration or merit comments.
Need for better monitoring and control
(i) Adjudication and Disposal of Demand Cases
 (Paragraphs 14.1, 14.3,14.4,& 14.5)
4. The Public Accounts Committee in their 84th Report (7th Lok Sabha) pertaining
to "Customs, Receipts and Union Excise Duties” had recommended that the Government
should find out the basic reasons for inordinate delays in adjudication of proceedings
relating to demand of duty on excisable goods and devise effective measures to ensure
that the adjudication proceedings are not allowed to drag on unnecessarily. Pursuant
to this recommendation, the Central Board of Excise and Customs issued administrative
instructions in May, 1984 for expeditious adjudication of demand cases, fixing inter-alia

2
a time-lmit of six months from the date of issue of show-cause-cum demand notices for
the finalisation of adjudication proceedings. Notwithstanding these instructions, Audit
scrutiny has revealed that the pendency of adjudication of demands has been increasing
over the years resulting in mounting arrears of duty and interest. In the light of the
Audit findings and the examination of the subject, the Committee in paragraph 14.1 of
their 39th Report (13th Lok  Sabha) had  recommended that the Central Board of Excise
and Customs (CBEC) should ensure that the cases of adjudication particularly those
relating  to willful mis-statement of duty, fraud, collusion or suppression of facts etc.
are finalized well within the stipulated period so that Government dues are recovered
promptly. In this regard, the Committee had also asked the CBEC to consider the
desirability of reflecting the overall disposal rate and the revenue secured by
adjudicating officers in their Annual Performance Appraisals. In view of the wide gap
between  the targets fixed for adjudication and the actual disposal of cases, the Committee
had recommended in Paragraph 14.3 of this Report, that the targets should be so fixed
that they were realistic, hard and yet achievable. In Paragraph 14.4, the Committee had
further observed that majority of the cases pending for adjudication related to those
transferred to "call book", which was found to be a purely administrative arrangement
for bunching similar/linked cases, which are postponed for adjudication, together to
avoid multiple appeals. The Committee had found that the manner of disposal of “call
book cases” hardly inspired confidence eventhough the CBEC had issued instructions
to Commissioners of Central Excise to review the cases transferred to “call book” on a
monthly basis. The Committee, had therefore recommended that in order to protect the
interest of revenue and to avoid needless litigation, the Commissioners should examine
and approve before the cases are transferred to “call book”, that is, postponed for
adjudication. The Committee had also desired that such cases should be scrupulously
reviewed and the progress of linked cases in litigation also monitored. In Paragraph
14.5 of the Report, the Committee had also emphasized the need for ravamping the
Legal Cells in the Department so that cases are pursued vigorously and successfully.
5. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) have stated that in compliance with the Committee's
Observations/Recommendations to expedite adjudications and progressively reduce
pendencies, as well as to strengthen and fine-tune the monitoring mechanism, necessary
instructions have been issued to the field  formations. The Ministry have further
stated that keeping in view PAC's recommendation to fix realistic targets, CBEC has
revised the target of adjudication of cases by the adjudication authorities from 75 to
100 cases per annum through which they hope to considerably wipe out the existing
pendency within a year. The Ministry have added that the Board has also accepted the
need for reflecting overall disposal rate and the revenue secured thereby in the Annual
Performance Appraisals of the adjudicating officers and issued necessary directions
to all its field formations. The CBEC has also issued a circular re-emphasising the need
for effective presentation of the cases in various courts and for further follow up
action that may arise upon receipt of court decisions and the need for strengthening
and energizing the legal cells in the Commissionerates. The jurisdictional Commissioners
have also been advised to work in close coordination with the newly formed Directorate
of Legal Affairs.

3
(ii) Functioning of Recovery Cells, field formations and the CBEC
(Paragraphs 14.8, 14.9 & 14.10)
6. In regard to the recovery of confirmed demands of central excise duty, the
Committee, in paragraphs 14.8 and 14.9 of their Report, had expressed anguish over the
fact that a staggering amount of Central excise duty together with interest running into
several crores of rupees was pending for recovery despite an amendment in the Act to
provide specially empowered "Recovery Cell" in every Commissionerate. The
Committee had, therefore, recommended that the "Recovery Cells" constituted in every
Commissionerate should be energized to accelerate the recovery process and their
work closely monitored regularly by higher formations. In paragraph 14.10 of the
aforesaid Report, the Committee had further desired that the field formations should be
properly sensitized and made accountable for their failure to keep a close vigil particularly
on the habitual or potential defaulters. In this regard, the Committee had recommended
that the anti-evasion and intelligence wings of the Department should be strengthened
and their performance measured in terms of the foolproof and timely leads provided by
them.
7. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have informed the Committee that as
regards recovery of confirmed demands of duty, the Board has reiterated to its field
formations the importance of scrupulously following the guidelines issued on the
subject and has further directed that the departmental officers should exercise the
powers conferred on them by law to ensure expeditious recovery of confirmed demands
of duty and make efforts to energize the "Recovery Cells". The Committee has been
intimated that progress on this count shall be monitored by the Board on a 1-month
periodicity. Further, the Ministry have informed that instructions have been issued by
the Board to the effect that besides reporting by each jurisdictional Commissioner the
arrears of revenue in the Monthly Technical Report, the Chief Commissioners in their
respective Zones should also monitor the performance of each of the Commissionerates
under their charge on a periodic basis. It has also been directed that, wherever necessary,
responsibility on the erring officers should be fixed.
8. In response to a query, the Ministry in their communication dated 21 October,
2004 have furnished the following information on the pendency of adjudication and
recovery cases involving Central excise duty:
As on 31.3.1999 As on 31.3.2004
No. of demand cases pending adjudication 21042 5552.00
beyond six months
Total amount of Excise Duty involved in all 7063 9612.39
pending cases (Rs. Crore)
Arrears of Excise Duty involving confirmed 7906 12612.60
demands (Rs. Crore)

4
(ii) Total amount of Excise Duty involving confirmed demands recovered during the
period 1st April, 1999 to 31st March, 2004:
2001-2002 Rs. 326.72 Crore
2002-2003 Rs. 245.37 Crore
2003-2004 Rs. 387.80 Crore
9. While examining the issue of non-adjudication of demands and inordinate delay
in the recovery of confirmed demands, the Committee in their Original Report had
recommended, inter alia, that the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC)
should ensure effective monitoring and control over field formations so as to finalise
cases of adjudication within stipulated time and review the fixation of targets for
adjudication process. The Committee had also urged the Ministry to energise the
"Recovery Cells" in every Commissionerate and to closely monitor their work to
accelerate the recovery process. In their response to these suggestions, the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) have stated that necessary instructions have
been issued to the field formations to expedite adjudications and progressively reduce
pendency. It has also been informed by the Ministry that the Central Board of Excise
and Customs (CBEC) has revised the target of adjudication of cases by the concerned
authorities to 100 from 75 cases per annum. The Ministry have added that they agree
with the recommendations of the Committee for reflecting the overall disposal rate
and the revenue secured thereby in the Annual Performance Appraisals of the
adjudicating officers and have accordingly issued directions to all its field formations.
As regards recovery of confirmed demands of duty, the Ministry have informed that
the CBEC has reiterated to its field formations the importance of scrupulously
following the guidelines issued on the subject and has further directed that the
departmental officers should exercise the powers conferred on them by law to ensure
expeditious recovery of confirmed demands of duty. According to the Ministry, the
progress on this count shall be monitored by the CBEC on a 1-month periodicity. The
Committee would however like to point out that on an earlier occasion, the Committee
in their 84th Reports (7th Lok Sabha), while examining a similar issue, had observed
that the Government should find out the basic reasons for inordinate delays in
adjudication of proceedings relating to demand of duty on excisable goods and must
ensure that the adjudication poceedings are not allowed to drag on unnecessarily.
Pursuant to this recommendation of the Committee, the CBEC had even then issued
administrative instructions in May, 1984 for expeditious adjudication of demand
cases. However, these did not bring about any perceptible improvement in the disposal
of demand cases as is evident from the successive Audit findings and steady increase
in pendency of adjudication cases and delay in recoveries of confirmed demands.
10. In this connection, it is pertinent to note that, as per the information furnished
by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), the total amount of excise duty
involved in cases Pending adjudication has increased from Rs. 7063 crore as on
 31st March, 1999 to Rs. 9612.39 crore as on 31st March, 2004, although the number
of demand cases pending adjudication beyond six months has drastically come down
from 21042 to 5552 cases, thereby suggesting increase in pendency of "high revenue"

5
cases. Similarly, it also reveals an increasing trend with regard to recovery of
confirmed demands of duty, which stood at Rs. 12612.60 crore as on 31st March,
2004 as compared to Rs. 7906 crore as on 31st March, 1999. Furthermore, the total
amount of excise duty involving confirmed demands recovered in each of the years
during the period 2001-2002 to 2003-2004 has been given as Rs. 326.72 crore,
Rs. 245.37 crore and Rs. 387.80 crore respectively, which again goes to suggest that
significant recoveries of duty have not been effected when compared to the mounting
arrears. The Committee are, therefore, apprehensive as to whether the instructions
and guidelines issued once again now to tackle this lingering problem would yield the
desired results. In fact, the main concern of the Committee permeating through their
entire Original Report [39th Report (13th Lok Sabha)] had been the ineffective
monitoring and control system prevailing in the Board which, so far, has resulted in
lack of seriousness among its field formations towards various Instructions/Circulars.
In the opinion of the Committee, mere issue of instructions will not suffice and
concrete measures ought to be taken to speed up the adjudication and recovery
processes, which in fact should have been spelt out in the Ministry's Action Taken
Notes. The Committee would, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) should thoroughly analyse the reasons for the pendency in
adjudication cases and the excessive delay in recovery of confirmed demands and
should devise effective methods of control and supervision such as surprise
inspections/field visits, constant monitoring of pending cases, deterrent action against
erring officials etc. In this regard, the Committee expect the Chief Commissioners
in their respective Zones to monitor the performance of each of the Commissionerates
under their charge on a periodic basis with a view to eliminating the pendency of
adjudication and recovery cases.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Para 14.1—Recommendation
The Public Accounts Committee in their 84th Report (7th Lok Sabha) had
recommended that the Government should find out the basic reasons for inordinate
delays in adjudication of proceedings relating to demand of duty on excisable goods
and devise effective measures to ensure that the adjudication proceedings are not
allowed to drag on unnecessarily. Pursuant to this recommendation, the Central Board
of Excise and Customs issued administrative instructions in May 1984 for expeditious
adjudication of demand cases, fixing, inter-alia, a time-limit of six months from the date
of issue of show cause-cum-demand notices for the finalization of adjudication
proceedings. Notwithstanding, these instructions, Audit scrutiny has revealed that
the pendency of adjudication of demands has been increasing over the years resulting
in mounting arrears of duty and interest. The Committee were informed that delay in
adjudication was attributable to the assessees seeking repeated adjournments and
often furnishing their replies late, transfer of adjudicating officers and the time consumed
in seeking clarifications by adjudicating officers from higher formations. The Committee
take due cognizance of the fact that following their examination of the subject, the
Government have amended the Central Excise Act by providing for time limit of one
year from the date of service of show cause-cum-demand notice for determination of
amount of duty in respect of cases of willful evasion of duty and six months in respect
of rest of the cases. While appreciating the statutory amendments made by the
Government, albeit belatedly, incoporating a time-limit for finalizing adjudication, the
Committee hardly emphasise the role of the Board in strictly enforcing the time limit
through effective monitoring and control. The Committee would specifically like the
Board to ensure that the cases of adjudication particularly those relating to wilful
mis-statement of duty, fraud, collusion or suppression of facts etc. are finalized well
within the stipulated period so that Government dues are recovered promptly before
such assessees get their assets alienated, leaving nothing to recover the duty from.
The Committee would also like the Board to consider the desirability of reflecting the
overall disposal rate and the revenue secured by adjudicating officers in their Annual
Performance Appraisals.
Action Taken Note
The Board accepts the need for strengthening and further fine-tuning the monitoring
mechanism particularly in respect of key result areas including adjudications. Therefore,
drawing attention to sub-section (2A) of Section-IIA of the C.E. Act, all Chief
Commissioners & Commissioners of Central Excise in the country have been directed
to do the analysis of the reasons of pendency, particularly where the pendencies are
6

7
unduly high and the disposals are not so good. The Chief Commissioners &
Commissioners have also been directed to suggest corrective/remedial measures for
early disposal of pendencies. Progress made in this regard will be monitored by the
Board on a monthly periodicity through the mechanism of Monthly Technical Reports
(MTRs). Directorate General of Inspection, Customs & Central Excise and the Directorate
General of Systems (C&CE) will assist the Board in such monitoring and control.
Copy of instructions issued to the field formations vide F. No. 296/2/2003-CX-9
dated 23rd May, 2003 (Circular No. 716/32/2003-CX) is enclosed (Annexure "A").
1. Keeping in view the need to expedite adjudications and progressively reduce
pendencies, as recommended by the PAC, the Board has revised the target of
adjudication of cases by the adjudication authorities to 100 cases per annum; Board's
Circular No. 712/28/2003-CX dt. 5th May, 2003 raising the target for disposal of
adjudication cases to 100 per annum is enclosed (Annexure "B").
2. In this, the Board has made it clear to the field formations that the target of
adjudicating 100 cases per annum is considered achievable and that this should ensure
against mounting pendencies in future. The need to adhere to the revised target by all
adjudicating officers has also been emphasized by the Board.
3.  As recommended by the PAC, the Board also accepts the need for reflecting in
the Annual Performance Appraisals of the adjudicating officers the overall disposal
rate and the revenue secured thereby. Since review and disposal of the call book cases
too is important area of work to be attended to in this very regard, the Board has
directed all its field formations that, henceforth, while carrying out annual performance
appraisal of the officers, the statistical information relating to disposal of call book
cases too, be included in the resume of the officers.
4. The Board has also reiterated the earlier instructions of 15th January, 1988
specifying 'Adjudication' as one of the areas of work to be specifically covered in the
Annual Confidential Reports of the officers. With this, performance of the officers in
17 specified areas of work will be required to be reviewed and reflected in the annual
performance appraisal of the officers, apart from any other non-specified, other relevant
item of work. Copies of Board's instructions issued to its field formations,  vide
F. No. A-28012/1/2003-EC/Per. Dated 12th May, 2003 and the earlier instructions, D.O.F.
No. A-28012/71/87-EC/SO(P) dt. 15th January, 1988 are enclosed (Annexure "C").
C&AG's Vetting Comments
No comments
Ministry's Further Response
-NIL-
(APPROVED BY ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F. No. 234/3/2002)

ANNEXURE 'A'
Most Immediate
F. No. 296/2/2003-CX.9
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
New Delhi, the 28th May, 2003.
To
DGICCE,
DG(Systems)
All Chief Commissioners/Commissioners of Central Excise
Sub: Furnishing of data in relation to adjudication of cases.
Sir,
I am directed to refer sub-section (2A) to Section 11A of the Central Excise Act, 1944
which was inserted with effect from 11-5-2001 regarding determination of the excise duty
(adjudication of the cases) within a period of one year and 6 months in cases any duty of
excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or short-paid or erroneously
refunded, by reason of fraud, collusion or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of fact
or contravention of the provision of this Act or of the rules made thereunder with intent
to evade payment of duty and determination of the amount of duty of excise and in any
other case respectively. In this connection, the Board has observed that no analysis of
the pending adjudication cases is being done, nor corrective/remedial measures
suggested/conveyed to the Chief Commissioners of Central Excise in cases where the
pendencies are unduly high and the disposal not so prompt. Therefore, the Board has
decided that the monitoring mechanism, particularly in key result areas which include
pending adjudication cases needs to be further fine-tuned.
2. All Chief Commissioners of Central Excise may do the analysis of the reasons of
pendency, particularly where the pendencies are unduly high and the disposals are
not so prompt. They may also suggest corrective/remedial measures for early disposal
of those pendencies.
3. Above entries should, invariably be included as part of the MTRs.
8
Circular No. 716/32/2003-CX

9
4. All the Commissioners/Chief Commissioners are requested to submit the MTRs
accordingly.
5. Receipt of this letter may be acknowledged.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/
(R.N. KIRTANIA)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India

ANNEXURE 'B'
 Circular No. 712/28\2003-CX
F.No. 208/17/2003-CX-6
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
Central Board of Excise & Customs
New Delhi, the 5th May, 2003.
To
All Chief Commissioners of Central Excise & Customs
All Commissioners of Central Excise & Customs
All Commissioners of Central Excise (Appeals)
The Director General of Central Excise Intelligence
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Webmaster@cbec.gov.in
Subject: Central Excise—Disposal of adjudication cases—Fixation of
targets—regarding.
Sir,
I am directed to say that PAC in its 39th Report has given certain
recommendations on para 2.5 and 2.6 of C&AG Report for the year 1998-99 relating to
inordinate delay for recovery of confirmed demands and non-adjudication of demands.
Simultaneously Board is also deeply concerned about the large number of cases pending
adjudication at various levels.
2. In this connection, your attention is invited to Board's Circular No. 50/88-CX.6
dated 17th June, 1988 in which Board has fixed a minimum target of adjudicating 75
cases per annum for each of the adjudicating authority separately. Now taking into
account the number of cases pending adjudication and in the background of
recommendations of PAC, Board has revised the target of adjudication for each
adjudicating authority separately from 75 cases per annum to 100 cases per annum
with immediate effect. Board is of the view that the target of adjudicating 100 cases per
annum is achievable and this should ensure against mounting pendencies in the
future. Accordingly, Board desires that the revised target should be adhered to by all
adjudicating officers without fail.
10

11
3. Field formations may please be informed suitably.
4. Receipt of the same may be acknowledged.
5. Hindi version will follow.
Yours faithfully,
(Vijay Mohan Jain)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India

ANNEXURE 'C'
F.No. 28012/41/2003-EC-Per.
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
Central Board of Excise & Customs
New Delhi, Dated the 12th May, 2003.
To
All Chief Commissioners of Customs,
All Chief Commissioners of Central Excise,
All Chief Commissioners of Customs and Central Excise,
All Director Generals,
Subject: Desirability of reflecting the overall disposal rate and revenue secured
by adjudicating officers in their annual Performance Appraisals— Reg.
Sir,
I am directed to say that Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in one of its
recommendations contained in its 39th Report on "Non-adjudication of demands and
inordinate delay in recovery of confirmed demands" has suggested that the annual
performance appraisal of an officer should reflect the performance of the officers in the
five identified Key Result Areas i.e. (1) Revenue realization, (2) Realization of arrears of
revenue, (3) Disposal of adjudication cases. (4) Disposal of Call Book Cases and
(5) Disposal of Provisional Assessment cases.
2. In this regard, attention is invited to D.O.F. No. A-28012/71/87-EC/SO(P), dated
15.01.1988 (copy enclosed) issued on a related subject in which it was requested that
while carrying out the annual performance appraisal of IC&CES officers, the statistical
information relating to 16 items of work, mentioned in the aforesaid d.o. letter, may be
included in the resume of the officers. The items of work at (1), (2) & (3) referred to in
para 1 above are already included in the aforementioned d.o. letter.
3. In view of the Public Accounts Committee's recommendations mentioned in para
1 above, it is requested that 
henceforth, while carrying out annual performance appraisal
of IC&CES officers, the statistical information relating to the following two items of
work, 
in addition to 16 items of work circulated vide aforesaid d.o. letter, may also be
included in the resume of the officers:
(1) Disposal of Call Book Cases
(2) Disposal of Provisional Assessment cases
12

13
4. This may please be brought to the notice of all the IC&CES officers under your
charge for immediate compliance.
(R.S. MEENA)
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India
Encls. As above.

T.V. NAY AR D.O. F.No. A 28012/71/87-EC/SO(P)
JOINT SECRETARY GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
CENTRAL BOARD OF EXCISE & CUSTOMS
NEW DELHI, THE 15th January, 1988.
Dear Shri,
The Confidential Reports for the year 1987 (1.1.1987 to 31.12.1987) are to be recorded
by 31st January, 1988. To avoid delay, I am sending to you a copy of the confidential
report form with the request that Parts I & II thereof may be filled in during the first
fortnight of January, 1988, and submitted to your Reporting Officer i.e. the Member of
the Board by the 20th January, 1988.
2. In regard to item(2) of Part II, you may kindly include in your resume statistical
information on the items of work listed at the end of this paragraph, which are applicable
in your charge. This information should be given in two parts: that pertaining to your
own performance and that pertaining to the performance of officers working under
you. In each of these Sections, information should be given indicating (a) the position
at the time you took over charge of your present assignment, (b) the position at the
beginning of the period of the report and (c) the position at the end of the period of the
report.
(1) Revenue Collection
(2) Arrear of Revenue
(3) Adjudication
(4) Refunds
(5) Inspections
(6) Disbursement of rewards
(7) Acquisition of land and construction of office Building/residential
quarters.
(8) Anti Smuggling
(9) Anti Evasion
(10) Public relations
(11) Narcotics
(12) Staff Welfare activities
(13) Holding of D.P.Cs
(14) Settlement of Audit objections
(15) Training imparted
(16) Any other relevant item.
14

15
3. You are also requested to ensure that the Confidential Reports for 1987 of officers
under your charge are completed in accordance with the prescribed time schedule and
those which require review/counter signature by the Member/Chairman Central Board
of Excise & Customs are sent to us without delay.
With regards,
Yours Sincerely,
Sd/-
Directors of Customs and Central Excise. (T.V . NAY AR)

16
Para 14.2—Recommendation
The Committee note that as per the information received from the Ministry the total
number of cases pending adjudication for over six months as on 31st December, 1999
was 63,782 cases including call book cases involving an amount of Rs.11218.98 crore.
According to the Ministry as on 31st December, 1999, there were 48300 cases involving
an amount of Rs. 11865.00 crore relating to call book only. The Committee are surprised
to note that the Ministry furnished different figures on three different dates. On
28.04.2000, the Ministry stated that there were 39423 cases pending adjudication
involving an amount of Rs.6545.84 as on 31st December, 1999.  As per their letter
dated 4th May, 2000, there were 37523 cases pending adjudication involving an amount
of Rs. 6431.14 crores. Yet again, the Ministry informed vide their letter dated 27 October,
2000 that there were 63782 cases involving an amount of Rs.11218.98 crore pending
adjudication as on 31st December, 1999. These serious discrepancies in the data relating
to pending cases and the revenue involved need to be satisfactorily explained by the
Government. The Committee would like the Board to pay full and proper attention
to the need or maintaining such a basic and crucial data methodically.
Action Taken Note
The Board has taken a serious view of the lapse and the Director General (Systems)
and Director General (Inspection), Customs & Central Excise, and all Chief
Commissioners/Commissioners of Central Excise have been directed to take utmost
care while furnishing data in their Monthly Technical Reports. Circular No. 717/33/
2003 - CX dated 23rd May, 2003 has been issued for the purpose and copy thereof is
enclosed. (Annexure "D")
C&AG's Vetting Comments
No Comments
Ministry’s Further Response
-NIL-
(APPROVED BY ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F.No. 234/3/2002)

ANNEXURE 'D'
Most Immediate
File No. 296/2/2003-CX-9
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
New Delhi, the 23rd May, 2003
To
DGICCE
DG (Systems)
All Chief Commissioners/Commissioners of Central Excise.
Subject: Furnishing of data in MTR, relating to pending cases and revenue
involved.
Sir,
I am directed to refer to this Department's letter No. 288/1/2001-CX-9, dated
the 23rd August, 2001 regarding submission of MTRs. In this connection, the Board
has noted that many a times there are serious discrepancies in the data relating to
pending cases of adjudication and revenue involved. As a result, figures mentioned in
the MTR and the figures obtained by the Board directly from the field formations are
not tallied. It leads to ineffective use of the information in the Ministry and may
sometimes also result in furnishing of wrong information to the Parliament.
2. All Chief Commissioners/Commissioners are requested to take utmost care in
compiling the data, particularly relating to pending case and revenue involved, while
sending the reports (MTRs).
3. Receipt of this letter may be acknowledged.
Yours Faithfully,
Sd/
(R.N. Kirtania)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India.
17

18
Para 14.3—Recommendation
The Committee's examination of the records of the cases pending adjudication
reveals that in 37 out of 60 Commissionerates, 28989 cases involving duty of Rs. 2038.08
crore were pending for the period prior to 1995-96. The pendency went on increasing
and rose upto 36,868 cases with duty involvement of Rs. 3,387.33 crore till September,
1997 and non-collection of revenue by way of interest upto March, 1998 amounted to
Rs.1696.75 crore. Enquired about the percentage of cases decided within the period of
six months from the date of issue of show cause notice (SCN) from 1 April 1994 to
31 December, 1999, the information furnished by the Ministry reveals that in 25% of
Commissionerates, the adjudication of cases within six months was below 20% during
the said period. The Ministry claims to have taken remedial measures for speeding up
the adjudication process and also to have fixed a target of a minimum of 75 cases per
officer which comes around 36000 cases per year on an All India basis. The Committee's
examination reveals that the disposal rate, on an average, for the last five years is
62,470 cases whereas the corresponding fresh addition is 62,846 cases per year. The
collective target of 36,000 cases per year as against the disposal of 62,470 cases per
year, in the opinion of the Committee, renders ludicrous and hollow the manner in
which targets are fixed by the Board. In view of the yarwning chasm between the target
fixed and the actual disposal of cases, the Committee are of the consider view that the
targets fixed are not only exceedingly soft but also fixed in a perfunctory manner. The
Committee, therefore recommend that the targets are so fixed that they are realistic
hard and yet achievable. The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures
taken on the methodology and the rational of target fixing in due course.
Action Taken Note
As on 28-2-2003 a total number of 25,709 cases were pending adjudication with
Additional/Joint/Deputy/Assistant Commissioners. The total number of such officers
in the field is 634. The average disposal per month was 3908 (for the period November,
2002 to March, 2003) which translated to disposal of 74 cases during a year. For
adjudication at the level of Commissioners, the total disposal in the last 5 months was
2295 which means around 60 cases per annum per commissioner—level officer, for 92
Commissioners.
To further improve the position, the Board has revised adjudication targets vide
Circular No. 712/28/2003-CX dated 5th May, 2003, to 100 cases per annum meaning
thereby 8 cases per month or less than 2 cases per week for each adjudicating authority.
It is felt that this target is sufficiently hard, but achievable, and if adhered to, shall very
considerably wipe out the existing pendency within a year.
Board shall monitor the action taken by the field formations on this front as one of
the five identified Key Result Areas, i.e.:-
(1)  Revenue realization
(2)  Realisation of arrears of revenue
(3)  Disposal of adjudication cases
(4)  Disposal of call book cases and
(5)  Disposal of provisional assessment cases.

19
Copy of the Board's Circular No.712/28/2003-CX dated 5th May, 2003 is at Annexure
"B".
C&AG's Vetting Comments
No comments
Ministry’s Further Response
-Nil-
(Approved by Additional Secretary to the Govt. of India)
(F.No. 234/3/2002)

20
Para 14.4—Recommendation
The Committee are astounded to find that the majority of the cases pending for
adjudication relate to the call book cases. The Secretary (Revenue) conceded that
there was nothing statutory about the call book cases it being purely an administrative
arrangement for bunching similar cases together to avoid multiple appeals. According
to a circular dated 14 December, 1995 of CBEC and reiterated on 30th March, 1998 only
those cases can be transferred to Call book (i) in which the Department has gone in
appeal, (ii) where injunctions has been issued by the Supreme Court/High Court/
CEGAT etc., and (iii) where the Board has so ordered. The Committee observe that the
manner of disposal of call book cases, hardly inspires confidence and the Board has
issued instructions to Commissioners to review the cases transferred to call book on a
monthly basis scrupulously. In order to protect the interest of revenue and to avoid
needless litigation, the Committee desire that the Commissioners of Central Excise
should examine and approve before the cases are transferred to Call book/postponed
for adjudication. Such cases should be scrupulously reviewed regularly and the progress
of linked case’s in litigation also monitored.
Action Taken Note
The Board has examined the matter in detail in the light of PAC's recommendation
and has issued Circular No. 719/35/2003-CX dated 26th May, 2003 in this regard
(Annexure "E").
The Board has reiterated the importance of scrupulously following the guidelines
issued in the various Circulars and taken a stern view of the fact that the pendency of
the call book cases continues to be very high. Therefore, the Board while reiterating its
earlier instructions, has directed that the respective Chief Commissioners should
monitor the progress of disposal of call book cases specifically to see whether—
1. Call Book cases have been reviewed by the CCEs.
2. Any appreciable progress is noticed.
3. Any avoidable delays are there.
Further, a one time comprehensive review has also been ordered (to be done by the
respective CCEs). The Chief Commissioners have been required to monitor such review
in their respective zones. The progress in respect of the call book cases would be
mentioned in the Monthly Technical Reports (MTRs), as well as in the monthly
statements of the progress achieved in the identified Key Result Areas viz.,
(1) Revenue realization;
(2) Realisation of arrears of revenue;
(3) Disposal of adjudication cases;
(4) Disposal of call book cases; and
(5) Disposal of provisional assessment cases.

21
C&AG's Vetting Comments
No comments
Ministry's Further Response
-Nil-
(APPROVED BY ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F.No. 234/3/2002)

ANNEXURE 'E'
Circular No.  719/35/2003-CX
F.No. 101/2/2003-CX 3
Government of India
Ministry of Finance & Company Affairs
Department of Revenue
Central Board of Excise and Customs
New Delhi, the 26th May, 2003
To
All Chief Commissioners of Central Excise,
All Chief Commissioners of Customs,
All Chief Commissioners of Central Excise and Customs,
All Commissioners of Central Excise,
All Commissioners of Central Excise and Customs,
All Commissioners of Customs,
All Commissioners of Central Excise (Appeals),
All Commissioners of Central Excise (Judicial)
All Commissioners of Customs (Judicial)
Subject: Checks on delays—Maintenance of 'Call Book' instructions regarding
Sir/Madam,
Kindly refer to Board's Circular No. 53/90-CX3 dated 6.9.1990 specifying the
circumstances under which a pending case can be transferred to call book that if a
current case has reached a stage where no action can or need be taken of expedite its
disposal for at least 6 months (eg. cases held up in law courts) it may be transferred to
the call book with the approval of competent authority and instructions issued vide
Board's D.O. letter F.No. 101/2/92-CX 3 dated 4.3.1992' directing that a case should be
transferred to the Call Book with the approval of Commissioner/Commissioner (Judicial/
Director General etc. as the case may be. It was further clarified vide Circular No. 162/
73/95-CX dated 14.12.1995 that only following type of categories of cases can be
transferred to Call Book—
(i) Cases in which the Department has gone in appeal to the appropriate authority.
(ii) Cases where injunction has been issued by Supreme Court/High Court/
CEGAT, etc.
(iii) Cases where audit objections are contested.
(iv) Cases where the Board has specifically ordered the same to be kept pending
and to be entered into the call book.
2. The matter has again been examined with reference to PAC's recommendation on
para 2.5 and 2.6 of the C&AG Report for the year 1998-99 relating to inordinate delay
22

23
for recovery of confirmed demands and non adjudication of demands respectively
contained in 39th report. In this regard it is found that the existing instructions of the
Board on the issue are not being scrupulously followed by the field formations. The
pendency of call book cases continues to be very high. Therefore, the Board while
reiterating its earlier instructions, has decided that the respective Chief Commissioner
should monitor progress of disposal of call book cases specifically to see whether—
1. Call Book cases have been reviewed by the CCEs.
2. Any appreciable progress is noticed.
3. Any avoidable delays are there.
3. It is further directed that a one-time comprehensive review of all the pending call
book cases will be done by respective CCEs. The Chief Commissioner may monitor
such review periodically in their respective zones. The progress report of the call book
cases should continue to mention in the MTR as well as XXXX in the monthly
statements of the progress achieved in ''Key Result Areas.''
Yours faithfully
Sd/-
(SURAKSHA KATIYAR)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India
23092829

24
Para 14.5—Recommendation
The Public Accounts Committee in their 9th Report (8th Lok Sabha) recommended
setting up of a separate Directorate in the Central Board of Excise and Customs to
pursue and keep a watch on all cases of litigation relating of excise and customs. The
Ministry informed the Committee that though no Legal Directorate has been set up, a
Special Cell (Litigation) has been created in the Board to deal with cases of litigation.
The Secretary (Revenue) informed the Committee during evidence that there were 6551
cases pending involving a total amount of Rs. 2536 crore in the Supreme Court and
various High Courts of the country. While taking a serious note of the proliferating
litigation and mounting arrears of revenue blocked in such cases and the obvious
inadequacies of the Special Legal Cell to cope with the cases of litigation, the
Committee reiterate the need for revamping the Legal Cell so that the cases are
pursued vigorously and successfully.
Action Taken Note
Circular No. 275/4/2003-CX8A dated 12th May, 2003 has been issued by the Board,
re-emphasising the need for effective presentation of the cases in various courts and
for further follow up action that may arise upon receipt of the Court decisions and the
need for strengthening and energizing the Legal Cells in the Commissionerates. The
Jurisdictional Commissioners have also been advised to work in close co-ordination
with the newly formed Directorate of Legal Affairs, Customs & Central Excise, New
Delhi (Annexure “F”).
C&AG's Vetting Comments
No comments.
Ministry’s Further Response
-NIL-
(APPROVED BY ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F.No. 234/3/2002)

ANNEXURE 'F'
F. No. 275/4/2003-CX 8A
Government of  India
Ministry of Finance and Company Affairs
Department of  Revenue
Central Board of  Excise & Customs
New Delhi, the 12th May, 2003
To
1. All Chief Commissioners of Customs.
2. All Chief Commissioners of Central Excise.
3. Director Generals of Revenue Intelligence.
4. Director Generals of Anti-Evasion.
Subject: Handling of court matters relating to Customs and Central Excise before High
Courts and Lower Courts—Re.
Sir,
 You may be aware that vide D.O. F.No. 275/60/97-CX 8A dated 22nd September,
1997, the then Member (L&I) had addressed a letter explaining the need for creation of
a Special Cell to monitor the cases relating to Customs and Central Excise before High
Courts and Lower Courts. A copy of the same is enclosed for ready reference.
2. Consequent to the restructuring of the Department, a Directorate of Legal Affairs
has been constituted and is presently functioning from 1, Krishna Menon Bhawan,
Bhagwan Dass Road, New Delhi. The said Directorate is entrusted with the work of
monitoring of cases relating to Customs and Central Excise pending in the High Courts,
Tribunals and in the Supreme Court. In order to create a centralized data base, the
Jurisdictional Commissioners may be advised to consult the Director (Legal Affairs)
and to provide with the list of cases that are pending as on date in respect of their
jurisdiction. Further, they should also provide a quarterly report to the Director, Legal
Affairs as to the status of cases in order to update the data. Such a system should
evolve an effective method of monitoring the court cases which could go a long way
in reducing the litigation.
3. In spite of the creation of such cells in the Commissionerates, reports received
from Courts, and the Counsels from time to time indicate that the directions issued by
various Courts have not been complied in time and substantial assistance are not
being provided to the Counsels for effective presentation of the cases before the
Courts. The Board has already issued appropriate instructions in this regard vide
F.No:280/37/2002-CX8A, dated 20th March, 2003 and the contents are reiterated. In
effect, the Special Cell constituted in the Commissionerates needs strengthening and
energizing.
25

26
4. Action taken in this regard may kindly be communicated and what steps have
been initiated in this regard and names of the officers constituting the Legal Cell
should be sent to us.
5. This issues with the approval of Member (L&J).
Yours faithfully
Sd/-
(Lakhinder Singh)
Joint Secretary (Legal)
Tele. No. 2309 2747
Encl. As above

D. CHAKRABORTY GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MEMBER  (JUDICIAL) Hkkjr ljdkj
CENTRAL BOARD OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS
dsUnzh; mRikn 'kqYd rFkk lhek 'kqYd cksMZ
D.O. F. No. 275/60/97-CX.8A
New Delhi, the 22nd September, 1997
Dear Shri
Sub: Handling of court matters relating to Customs and Central Excise before High
 Courts and Lower Courts— regarding.
You are well aware that the Jurisdictional Commissioner of Central Excise and/or
Customs are nominated as nodal agency for pursuing the litigation in respect of Central
Excise and/or Customs matters before the Lower Courts.
2.  It has been brought to my notice that Central Government Standing Counsels
from various High Courts are addressing letters directly to the Secretary (Revenue)
who invariably is impleaded as one of the respondent on behalf of the Union of
India. In such communications addressed to the Secretary (Revenue), the Secretary
is being requested by the advocates to appear before them with all the relevant
documents in order to file counter affidavit etc. This causes not only embarrassment
but also delay and could be well avoided. This office has already taken up the
matter with the Law Ministry to issue a circular to all the Branch Secretariats as
well as Central Government Standing Counsels to the effect that they should
contact only the Jurisdictional Commissioner of Customs or Central Excise, as the
case may be, in order to pursue the matters. It has also been categorically emphasised
that this Ministry comes into assistance only at the request of the field formations.
A copy of the letter addressed to the Addl. Legal Adviser is enclosed for ready
reference.
3. In this connection, may I request you to advise the Commissioners under your
charge to nominate an officer by name in the rank of an Assistant Commissioner to
liase with the Branch Secretariat and/or the Central Government Standing Counsels
in the High Courts. It would be advisable that the officer so nominated may be
advised to attend the court daily to monitor the various proceedings before the
court as well as to brief the Central Government Standing Counsels apart from
receiving urgent notices etc. This arrangement will result in better coordination in
handling various litigations.
4. In order to monitor the cases effectively in the Supreme Court, the Board has
constituted a Special (Litigation) Cell with the compliment of two officers in the rank of
a Deputy Commissioner and an Assistant Commissioner. A copy of the O.M. issued
assigning the functions of the Cell is enclosed for ready reference. In a similar manner,
27

28
work may be assigned to the officer nominated to handle litigation before the High
Courts also. Jurisdictional Commissioners may also advised to communicate the name,
designation and the telephone number of the officers assigned to monitor the litigation
matters before the High Courts to this office in order to maintain a proper liason.
With best wishes,
Yours sincerely
Sd/
Encl: As above.  (D. CHAKRABORTY)
All Chief Commissioners/DGRI/DGAE
Copy to Shri S.K. Malhi, D.G.I., New Delhi for information.
Sd/
(D. CHAKRABORTY)
MEMBER (L&J)

29
Para 14.6—Recommendation
The Committee have been informed that according to a decision of Mumbai High
Court, even if an appeal is filed with a stay application, until the stay application is
disposed of, the department cannot proceed to recover the Government dues.
Surprisingly, the judgement of the High Court has not yet been challenged in the Apex
Court even after a lapse of three years. The Secretary (Revenue) during evidence
assured the Committee that they will consult the Law Ministry in the matter. Such an
inordinate delay and dithering on the part of the Department betrays lack of earnestness
in safeguarding the interest of revenue even when the stakes are so high and have
apparent all India implications. The Committee are therefore, of the considered view
that the setting up of a Legal Directorate or effectively empowered and independent
institutionalized mechanism will go a long way in pursuing all cases under litigation.
Action Taken Note
A Directorate of Legal Affairs under the Board was created during 2002. The functions
assigned to it are as follows:—
(a) To function as the nodal agency to monitor the legal and judicial work of the
Board.
(b) To create a data bank of all the cases decided by various benches of the
Tribunal and monitor cases effectively in order to ensure that the field
formations recommending filing of appeals only in deserving cases and not
on the issue already decided by the Supreme Court or High Courts and
accepted by the Department.
(c) To ensure that all orders of the Tribunal are examined by the field formations
and timely proposal for filing appeal are sent to the Board, wherever necessary
and the report about acceptance of an order is sent to the Chief Commissioner.
(d) To intimate the field formations about important decisions of the various
High Courts, which are finally accepted by the Department, and about the
important decisions of the Supreme Court so that unnecessary litigation
work on the issues already settled is not created by the Field formations.
(e) To create a database pertaining to the cases pending in various High Courts.
The appellant/respondent Commissioners will assist the Directorate in creating
and updating the database pertaining to the High Court cases.
(f) To prepare panels of Standing Counsels/Panel Counsels for various High
Court on the basis of feedback received from the field formations. However,
the role of the Directorate is restricted to only recommend, and the final
decision regarding approval of the panel/appointment of the Standing
Counsels rests with the Ministry and,
(g) To keep an approval panel of  eminent lawyers well-versed with Customs and
Central Excise laws as well as administration matters, who may not be on the
regular panel of the Government but may be engaged by the Department for
handling important cases.

30
A copy of F.No. A-11019/34/2001-Ad. IV dt. 27-6-2002 issued by the Board in this
regard is enclosed. (Annexure "G").
C&AG's Vetting Comments
No comments
Ministry's further Response
-NIL-
(APPROVED BY ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F.No. 234/3/2002)

ANNEXURE ‘G’
F. No. A-11019/34/2001-Ad. IV
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Dated: 27th June, 2002
To
All Chief Commissioners of Customs & Central Excise
All Directorates General/Directorates—Customs and C. Excise
All Commissioners of Customs & Central Excise
Sirs,
Subject: Setting up of a Directorate of Legal Affairs
I am directed to say that pursuant to cadre restructuring of Central Excise and
Customs Department, in order to provide more focused approach  in the area of Legal
Affairs and to strengthen the handling of legal matters pertaining to CBEC it has been
decided to set up  a Directorate of Legal Affairs with its headquarters at New Delhi
under the control of a commissioner rank officer to be designated as Director of Legal
Affairs.
2. The Directorate shall be the nodal agency to monitor the legal and judicial work
of the CBEC, and its field formations. It will work in close co-ordination with CBEC,
CDRs' Office, Law Ministry, Directorate of Systems, Chief Commissioners, Central
Agency Section of the Supreme Court of India, Senior Law Officers and Government
Counsels etc. It will also maintain and monitor the database on the cases decided by or
pending with the CEGAT, CAT, High Courts and the Supreme Court. Some of the
important items of work of this Directorate are enumerated hereunder:—
(a) The Directorate will take up the monitoring  of cases decided by various
benches of the tribunal. The Directorate will create a data bank of all the cases
decided by various benches of the Tribunal and effectively monitor cases in
order to ensure that field formations recommend filing of appeals only in
deserving cases and not on the issue already decided by the Supreme Court
or High Court and accepted by the department. On the other hand, the
directorate will ensure that all orders of the Tribunal are examined by field
formation and timely proposals for filing appeals are sent to the Board wherever
necessary and a report about acceptance of an order is sent to the appropriate
higher authorities.
(b) The Directorate will intimate the field formations about important decisions
of Supreme Court of India and of various High Courts, which are finally
accepted by the Department in consultation with the various nodal ministries.
31

32
(c) The newly created Directorate will create a database pertaining to the cases
pending in various High Courts/Supreme Court. The appellant/respondent
Commissioners will assist the Directorate in creating and updating the database
pertaining to the High Court Cases as well as those pertaining to Supreme Court.
(d) The preparation of panels for Standing Counsel/Panel Counsels for various
High Courts can also be taken up by the Directorate on the basis of feedback
received from field formations. The role of the new directorate will be only to
recommend, and final decisions regarding approval of panel/appointment of
Standing Counsels will rest with the Ministry. The Directorate shall also keep
an approved panel of eminent lawyers well-versed with the Customs & Central
Excise Laws as well as the administration matters, who may not be on the
regular panel of the government but may be engaged by the department for
handling important cases.
3. This directorate shall report to Member (L&J), CBEC and function in coordination
with the JS. (Legal) and JS. Review. It shall provide necessary inputs pertaining to the
litigation work to the field formations or the Board's  office in all possible manner so as
to take necessary action within the prescribed period of limitation.
4. The Directorate shall come into force on the date notified by the Central Board of
Excise & Customs for such purpose.
5. The expenditure involved should be met from within the budget grant of DGICCE
for the financial year 2002-2003 or by reappropriation of the Central Excise and Customs
grant or by supplementary grant, if necessary.
6. Hindi version of this letter will follow.
7. Please acknowledge receipt of this letter.
Yours faithfully,
(Y.P. Vashishat)
UNDER SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Copy Forwarded to :—
1. P.S. to Finance Minister
2. P.S. to MOS(R)
3. PPS to Secretary
4. PPS to Chairman, CBEC
5. PPSs to all Members, CBEC
6. All Joint Secretaries in CBEC & all DS/US and Sections dealing with
Administration in CBEC.
7. FA(F)
8. Principal CCA, CBEC.
9. Guard File.
(Y.P. Vashishat)
UNDER SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

F.No.280/37/2002-CX,8A
Government of India
Ministry of Finance and Company Affairs
Department of Revenue
Central Board of Excise & Customs
Legal Cell
New Delhi, the 20th March, 2003.
To,
1. All Chief Commissioners of Central Excise & Customs.
2. All Director Generals.
3. All Commissioners (Appeal), Central Excise.
4. All Commissioners (Appeal), Customs.
Subject: Maintenance of records/files relating  to adjudications, appeals,
 court matters etc.
Sir,
During the proceedings in a writ petition, before the Bombay High  Court
directions were issued to the Board to enquire  into the lapses of the departmental
officers on certain irregularities in the administration of quasi-judicial functions besides
non-compliance of the directions of the Court on time. The observations made by the
court on the conduct of the officers give rise to an immediate need to strengthen the
organisation. The Board took a serious note on the irregularities reported in the
administration of quasi-judicial functions and attendant non-compilance of the
administrative instructions.
2. In view of the above, the Board desires  that  suitable directions may be issued to
the officers under your jurisdiction for strict compliance of the administrative
instructions in matters relating to adjudication, appeals and prompt compliance of the
directions of the Court/Tribunal. Lapses in furture shall be viewed strictly and
appropriate disciplinary proceedings shall be initiated against the erring officials.
 3. Kindly acknowledge receipt and report compliance.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Lakhinder Singh)
Joint Secretary (Legal)
Tele. No. 2309 2747
33

34
Para 14.8 Recommendation
Section 11 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 provides for recovery of dues by the
officer empowered by the Central Board of Excise and Customs. It is further provided
that if the amount is not so recoverable, he may prepare a certificate signed by him
specifying the amount due from the person and send it to the Collector of the district
where such person resides or conducts his business, for recovery of dues as "arrears
of land revenue". These empowering provisions notwithstanding. Audit has observed
that Central excise duty amounting to a whopping Rs. 5270.51 crore together with
interest of Rs. 2317.62 crore was pending recovery as on March 1998 which constituted
about 17% of the central excise receipts for the year 1996-97. The Department of
Revenue have subsequently furnished the up-dated arrears on this count as Rs. 7516.21
crore together with interest of Rs. 1277.26 crore involving 9216 cases as on
May 31, 2001. The Committee were also informed that the Department have referred to
the District Collectors for "certificate action" for recovery of duty amounting to Rs.
21.17 crore in respect of 216 cases during 1998-99 and Rs. 62.05 crores in respect of
7236 cases during the period April—December 1999. The Committee are perturbed that
such a whopping amount of central excise duty together with interest running into
several crores of rupees in pending for recovery even though the Central Excise Act
was amended in 1997 providing for specially empowered "Recovery Cells" in every
Commissionerate. The Committee are also dismayed that the Department continues to
refer a large number of cases to the District Collector for recovery of duty as land
revenue despite the amendment Act, 1997, empowering the Central Excise Officers to
proceed with recovery of duty. The Committee are not impressed with the plea advanced
by the Department that reference to District Collectors for recovery has been retained
as a supplement to departmental action. The Committee, however, note that the
Department have in the same breath conceded the ineffectiveness of this course in
view of past experience. The Committee recommend that the Department should
exercise the authority bestowed upon them by law and ensure expeditious recovery
of confirmed demands of duty. The "Recovery Cells" constituted in every
Commissionerate should be energized and their work closely monitored regularly
by higher formations.
Action Taken Note
The Board has reiterated to its field formations, the importance of scrupulously
following the guidelines issued on the subject and in particular, Circular No. 365/81/
1997-CX-9 dated 15-12-1997 and the Performa for reporting of the pendency as
prescribed by DGICCE's D.O.F.No. 585/7/2000 dated 13-9-2000.
The Board has directed that the departmental officers should exercise the powers
conferred on them by law to ensure expeditious recovery of confirmed demands of
duty and also make out efforts to energise the recovery cells in the field formations.
Progress on this count shall be monitored by the Board on a one-month periodicity
with the help of Directorate General of Inspection functioning under its control and
supervision.

35
Copy of Board's Circular No. 296/2/2003-CX-9 (Circular No. 718/34/2003-CX dated
23rd May, 2003 on the issue is enclosed  (Annexure "H").
C&AG's Vetting Comments
No comments
Ministry's Further Response
-NIL-
(APPROVED BY ADDITONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F.No. 234/3/2002)

ANNEXURE 'H'
F.No. 296/2/2003-CX 9
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
CBEC
New Delhi, dated 23rd May, 2003
To,
All the Chief Commissioners of Central Excise
DGICCE
DG (Systems)
All the Commissioners of Central Excise
Subject: Observations contained in 39th Report of Public Accounts Committee
presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2002 on "Non adjudication of demands
and inordinate delay in recovery of confirmed demands"
Sir,
In the 39th report presented to Lok Sabha, the Public Accounts Committee has
observed that the performance of recovery cells constituted in the Commissionerates
is far from satisfactory and also noticed that a large number of cases are being referred
to the District Collector for recovery of duty as land revenue despite the Amendment
Act 1997 which empowers the Central Excise Officers to proceed with recovery of duty
in accordance with Circular No. 365/81/97-CX dated 15.12.1997.
It has also been recommended by the Committee that one time-review of the cases
referred to Recovery Cell in Commissionerates/Divisions and review of all the cases
referred to District Authorities may be done by CCEs/Divisional AC/DC. For this
purpose, DGICCE may prescribe a performa in the MTR to all the Commissioners to
report these cases with immediate effect so that the same are reviewed and monitored
at the Board level.
It was earlier desired by the Board that information as regards efforts made by the
Tax Recovery Cell (created in the Commissionerate) to realise the arrears of revenue
should be furnished by the Commissioner as part of MTRs. However, these instruction
are not being complied with and even the MTR compiled by the DGICCE does not
indicate this vital information. Therefore, it is once again reiterated that all the
Commissioners should furnish the requisite information in the MTR and compliance in
this regard may please be monitored and ensured by DGICCE. Further, the Board also
desires that the departmental officers should exercise the powers to ensure the
expeditious recovery of confirmed demands of duty and make all out efforts to energise
the recovery cells. Further where recovery cell has not yet been created, the same may
be created urgently.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/
(R.N. KIRTANIA)
UNDER SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA
36

37
Para 14.9—Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that the instructions and circulars relating to
recovery of duty issued by the Board from time to time are not being strictly complied
with due to prevailing laxity and for want of effective accountability procedures. The
Committee believe that a system of cash rewards could be devised to motivate the
officials for timely recovery of Government dues. Concurrently, there should also be a
built-in and fail-safe system of fixing individual responsibility if official responsible for
effecting recovery of revenue are found to be lax or wanting in the due discharge of
their duties. Keeping in view the mounting revenue arrears and the yawning revenue
deficit of the Government, the Committee feel that it is high time to devise a multi-
pronged strategy to expedite recovery of huge Government dues.
Action Taken Note
In line with the PAC's recommendations, internal control system and monitoring
mechanism have been further fine tuned. With a view to timely monitor the outstanding
pendencies, and to curb the laxity and enforce accountability, the Board has also
issued Circular No. 723/39/2003-CX dated 10th June, 2003 (Annexure "J") wherein the
jurisdictional Commissioners are to report the outstanding arrears of revenue in the
respective Commissionerate in the monthly report to the Board. The Chief
Commissioners have also been required to monitor performance of each of the
Commissionerates under his charge on a periodic basis, the arrears of revenue so
blocked and also take steps, if necessary, to fix responsibility on the erring officers.
C&AG's Vetting Comments
No comments
Ministry’s Further Response
-NIL-
(APPROVED BY ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F.No. 234/3/2002)

ANNEXURE ‘J’
F. No. 234/3/2002-CX-7
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
Dated the 10th June, 2003
To,
All Chief Commissioners of Central Excise
All Commissioners of Central Excise
All Commissioners of Central Excise & Customs
Subject: PAC (39th Report)—Recommendations on paras 2.5 and 2.6 of C&AG
Report for the year 1998-99 relating to inordinate delay for recovery of
confirmed demands and non-adjudication of demands—regarding
Sir,
In the 39th Report presented to the Lok Sabha, the Public Accounts Committee after
certain instances of non-recovery of arrears of revenue because of Departmental
inaction, notwithstanding favourable decisions from the courts and the cases being
free from litigation, were brought to its notice, has observed that a situation of absence
of property or insufficient bank balance of the assessee which arise owing to failure of
the department to enforce the demands in right earnest, can be tackled by the Department
if the field formations are properly sensitized and made really accountable for their
failure to keep a close vigil on habitual or potential defaulters.
2. The Board has accepted the recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee
and accordingly directs that during visits to the field formation for  inspections or any
other purpose as well as the periodic review meetings, the senior officers should take
necessary steps to properly sensitise the field officers, especially those at the  cutting
edge level, as to the imperativeness and necessity of keeping a watch on the overall
financial health of the entities from whom Govt. dues are recoverable but can't be
immediately recovered for one reason or the other, and also take necessary steps to
ensure that Govt. dues don't become unrecoverable for want of timely action by them.
Cases of deliberate default need to be dealt with very strictly and in such cases,
responsibility be fixed on the erring officials. Simultaneously, Anti-evasion and
intelligence machinery of the field may also be strengthened and they too may also
keep such a watch. Even their performance may be measured taking into consideration
the fool proof and timely leads provided by them.
3. The Board has also directed that though each jurisdictional Commissioners is
expected to report outstanding arrears of revenue in his Commissionerate in the MTR
to the Board, the Chief Commissioners in their respective Zones should monitor
performance on this count of each Commissionerates under his charge on a periodic
basis and take all necessary steps to ensure that realization of arrears of revenue gets
38

39
utmost attention and no arrears become bad or unrealizable for want of timely action
by the departmental officers.
4. Hindi version will follow.
5. Kindly acknowledge the receipt.
Yours faithfully
Sd/
(G..N. CHANDRASEKARAN)
DEPUTY SECRETARY (PAC)

40
Para 14.10—Recommendation
Audit has pointed out certain specific cases in various Commissionerates of Central
Excise wherein confirmed demands of duty were not recovered by the Department
notwithstanding favourable decisions from the courts and the cases being free from
litigation. Departmental inaction has been pointed out by Audit as the only reason for
non-recovery. When queried by the Committee, the Department stated that when duty
becomes due, the manufacturing premises of the assessee remains in existence and the
department tries "persuasive" methods to recover duty. However, at a later stage the
Department find themselves in a position where they do not have anything to recover
the money from. They have cited instances where they had to go to the Debts Recovery
Tribunal for recovery of duty as the assessee did not own any property at that  moment
and there was negligible balance in the bank account of the assessee. The Committee
feel that a situation of absence of property or insufficient bank balance of the
assessee which arise owing to failure of the department  to enforce the demands in
right earnest, can be tackled by the Department if the field formations are properly
sensitized  and made really accountable for  their failure to keep a close vigil on
habitual or potential defaulters. Similarly, the anti-evasion and intelligence wings
of the Department also require to be strengthened and their performance measured
in terms of the foolproof and timely leads provided by them.
Action Taken Note
In line with the recommendations of the PAC, the Board has issued Circular No. 723/
39/2003-CX dated 10th June, 2003 to its field formations. (Annexure "J")
The Board has made it clear that though each jurisdicational Commissioner is
required to report the outstanding arrears of revenue in his Commissionerate in the
Monthly Technical Report (MTR), the Chief Commissioner in their respective zones
should, monitor the performance of each of the Commissionerates under his charge on
a periodic basis, the arrears of revenue so blocked and take necessary remedial steps.
It has also been directed that, wherever necessary, responsibility on the erring
officers should also be fixed.
C&AG's Vetting Comments
No comments
Ministry's Further Response
-NIL-
(APPROVED BY ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F. No. 234/3/2002)
Para 14.11— Recommendation
Considering the fact that litigation was being resorted to by the assessees in order
to "buy time", the Committee in their 170th Report (7th Lok Sabha) had recommended
that there is a strong case for making a provision for charging interest on the arrears.

41
Audit has suggested that interest could be levied from the relevant date of clearances
of excisable goods. The Committee are pleased to note that the Department have
realized the necessity of levying interest retrospectively in respect of cases of wilful
evasion of duty or suppression in as much as the Central Excise Act has been amended
providing for levy of interest from the first date of the month succeeding the month in
which duty ought to have been paid. The Committee hope that such a statutory
provision would act as a good deterrent against non-payment or deferring the payment
of duty. They would also like to be informed of the total number of cases and amount
collected by way of interest wherein this deterrent provision has been invoked by the
department since its enactment.
Action Taken Note
The required data is as follows:—
No. of cases Amount of Recovery up to 31.12.2002
2130 Rs. 1205.14 lakh
C&AG's Vetting Comments
Latest position of the cases and recoveries thereof may be intimated.
Ministry's Further Response
The data is being collected and further reply will follow.
(APPROVED BY ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F. No. 234/3/2002)

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE  IN THE LIGHT OF REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Para 14.7— Recommendation
The Committee are happy to note that while the matter was still under their scrutiny,
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) have made amendments in Central
Excise Law to reduce the time-limit for taking decisions at the first level of appeal,
namely, Commissioner (Appeals). The Committee further note that as regards the
waiver of pre-deposit of duty demanded or penalty levied before the Appeals is
considered by Commissioner (Appeals) newly introduced proviso injoins upon the
Commissioner (Appeals) to decide the application filed for dispensing with the deposit
of duty demanded or penalty levied within thirty days of its filing, where it is possible
to do so. In order to ensure that such a salutory provision is not misused, the
Committee would like the Department to consider the desirability of issuing suitable
guidelines/criteria providing for exceptional circumstances in which pre-deposit of
duty or penalty levied can be waived.
Action Taken Note
Under Section 35F of the Central Excise Act, Commissioner (Appeals) & the CEGAT
are empowered, if they deemed fit, to dispense with, subject to such conditions as
deemed fit, the deposit of duty demanded or penalty levied on a person, if in their
opinion the said deposit would cause undue hardship to the appellant.
Appellate authorities under the Central Excise Act, Act as quasi-judicial authorities.
As such, it may not be desirable to issue any guideline/criteria providing for
circumstances in which pre-deposit of duty or penalty levied can be waived as this
may tantamount to interfering with the independence of the said authorities given
their quasi-judicial nature. The law itself specifies that such pre-deposits can be
dispensed with, with due regard to the interest of revenue, if it causes undue hardship
to the person. Law on the point is very clear & issue of any instructions on the issue
may not be desirable in view of the quasi-judicial nature of these appellate authorities.
C&AG's Vetting Comments
Ministry may reconsider the matter and issue guidelines/criteria providing for
circumstances in which pre-deposit of duty or penalty can be waived, thereby
implementing the PAC recommendation.
Ministry’s Further Response
Ministry's Action  Taken Note is reiterated.
(APPROVED BY ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVT. OF INDIA)
(F.No. 234/3/2002)
42

CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  REPLIES  WHICH  HAVE  NOT  BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  AND  REQUIRES REITERATION
-NIL-
43

CHAPTER  V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES:
-NIL-
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR  MALHOTRA,
2 November, 2004 Chairman,
Kartika 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
44

PART II
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2004-2005) HELD ON 27 OCTOBER, 2004
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 27 October, 2004 in Committee
Room "53", Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
6. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
8. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
9. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Dr. K. Malaisamy
14. Shri V . Narayanasamy
15. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
45

46
Officers of the Office of C&AG of India
1. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General of Audit (CR)
2. Smt. Meenakshi Ghosh — Pr. Director
3. Ms. Parama Sen — Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to this sitting of the Committee.
The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports:-
(i) Action taken on the Recommendations contained in 39th Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha) relating to "Non-adjudication of demands and inordinate
delay in the recovery of confirmed demands."
(ii) ****      ****      ****
3. The Committee adopted the above mentioned draft Reports and authorized the
Chairman to finalise these draft Reports in the light of verbal and consequential changes
arising out of factual verification by audit or otherwise and present the same to the
House.
4. The Committee decided to hold oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Urban Development and Delhi Development Authority on the subject on "Allotment
of land to Private Hospitals and Dispensaries by Delhi Development authority (DDA)"
on 8th November, 2004 (afternoon) and 9th November, 2004 (forenoon).
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Conclusions and Recommendations
No. No. Department
concerned
12 3 4
1. 9 Finance While examing the issue of non-adjudication of
(Department demands and inordinate delay in the recovery of
of Revenue) confirmed demands, the Committee in their
Original Report had recommended, inter alia, that
the Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC)
should ensure effective monitoring and control
over field formations so as to finalise cases of
adjudication within stipulated time and review the
fixation of targets for adjudication process. The
Committee had also urged the Ministry to energise
the "Recovery Cells" in every Commissionerate
and to closely monitor their work to accelerate
the recovery process. In their response to these
suggestions, the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue) have stated that necessary
instructions have been issued to the field
formations to expedite adjudications and
progressively reduce pendency. It has also been
informed by the Ministry that the Central Board
of Excise and Customs (CBEC) has revised the
target of adjudication of cases by the concerned
authorities to 100 from 75 cases per annum. The
Ministry have added that they agree with the
recommendations of the Committee for reflecting
the overall disposal rate and the revenue secured
thereby in the Annual Performance Appraisals of
the adjudicating officers and have accordingly
issued directions to all its field formations. As
regards recovery of confirmed demands of duty,
the Ministry have informed that the CBEC has
reiterated to its field formations the importance of
scrupulously following the guidelines issued on
the subject and has further directed that the
47

48
departmental officers should exercise the powers
conferred on them by law to ensure expeditious
recovery of confirmed demands of duty.
According to the Ministry, the progress on this
count shall be monitored by the CBEC on a 1-
month periodicity. The Committee would however
like to point out that on an earlier occasion, the
Committee in their 84th Report (7th Lok Sabha),
while examining a similar issue, had observed that
the Government should find out the basic reasons
for inordinate delays in adjudication of
proceedings relating to demand of duty on
excisable goods and must ensure that the
adjudication proceedings are not allowed to drag
on unnecessarily. Pursuant to this
recommendations to the Committee, the CBEC had
even then issued administrative instructions in
May, 1984 for expeditious adjudication of demand
cases. However, these did not bring about any
perceptible improvement in the disposal of
demand cases as is evident from the successive
Audit findings and steady increase in pendency
of adjudication cases and delay in recoveries of
confirmed demands.
2. 10 Finance In this connection, it is pertinent to  note that, as
(Department per the information furnished by the Ministry of
Finace (Department of Revenue), the total amount
of excise duty involved in cases pending
adjudication has increased from Rs. 7063 crore as
on 31st March, 1999 to Rs. 9612.39 crore as on
31st March, 2004, although the number of demand
cases pending adjudication beyond six months
has drastically come down from 21042 to 5552
cases, thereby suggesting increase in pendency
of "high revenue" cases. Similarly, it also reveals
an increasing trend with regard to recovery of
confirmed demands of duty, which stood at
Rs. 12612.60 crore as on 31st March, 2004 as
compared to Rs. 7906 crore as on 31st March,
1999. Furthermore, the total amount of excise duty
involving confirmed demands recovered in each
of the years during the period 2001-2002 to
 2003-2004 has been given as Rs. 326.72 crore, Rs. 245.37
12 3 4
  of Revenue)

49
crore and Rs. 387.80 crore respectively, which
again goes to suggest that significant recoveries
of duty have not been effected when compared
to the mounting arrears. The Committee are,
therefore, apprehensive as to whether the
instructions and guidelines issued once again
now to tackle this lingering problem would yield
the desired results. Infact, the main concern of
the Committee permeating through their entire
Original Report 39th Report (13th Lok Sabha) had
been the ineffective monitoring and control
system prevailing in the Board which, so far, has
resutled in lack of seriousness among its filed
formations towards various Instructions/Circulars.
In the opinion of the Committee, mere issue of
instructions will not suffice and concrete measures
ought to be taken to speed up the adjudication
and recovery processes, which in fact should
have been spelt out in the Ministry's Action Taken
Notes.The Committee would, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry of Finace
(Department of revenue) should thoroughly
analyse the reasons for the pendency in
adjudication cases and the excessive delay in
recovery of confirmed demands and should
devise effective methods of control and
supervision such as surprise inspections/field
visit, constant monitoring of pending cases,
deterrent action against erring officials etc. In this
regard, the Committee expect the Chief
Commissioners in their respective Zones to
monitor the performance of each of the
Commissionerates under their charge on a
periodic basis with  a view to eliminating the
pendency of adjudication and recovery cases.
12 3 4
MGIPMRND—2703LS—23-10-2004.