42
ALLOTMENT OF LAND TO
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
BY DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-2007
FORTY-SECOND REPORT
FOURTEENTH   LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FORTY-SECOND REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ALLOTMENT OF LAND TO
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
BY DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28 April, 2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 03 May, 2007
LOK  SABHA   SECRETARIA T
NEW   DELHI
April, 2007/Chaitra, 1929 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1827
Price:  Rs. 81.00
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007) ...................  (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
REPORT PART – I Background Analysis
I. Introductory ....................................................................  1
II. Failure to ensure adequacy of funds before  approving
allotment ..........................................................................  3
III. Allotment of more than a plot of land to a  society ........ 8
IV . Non-enforcement of conditions relating to reservation
for weaker sections of society ........................................  9
V. Non- existence of established mechanism for identifying
breaches of terms of allotment ........................................   11
VI. Action  Taken  against  defaulting  societies  following
judicial intervention ......................................................... 15
VII. Appointment of  Government representatives  on  the
Governing bodies of the schools .................................... 22
VIII. Enhancement of tuition fees in disregard of the terms
of allotment ......................................................................  23
IX. Outstanding dues of Ground Rent and License Fees ..... 26
X. Land allotment to Educational Institutions through
Auction ............................................................................ 28
XI. Amendment to Delhi School Education Act, 1973 .......... 29
XII. Lapses in inspection of schools by the Directorate of
Education ......................................................................... 30
XIII. Donation Fee ................................................................... 31
PART – II Observations and Recommendations................... 33
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 30th September, 2005 .......................................... 44
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 14th November, 2005 .......................................... 46

III. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 12th December, 2005 .......................................................... 48
I V . Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 19th April, 2007 .................................................................. 50
APPENDICES
I. Paragraph 4.1 of  Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 4 of  2005),
Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies) relating to
“Allotment of Land to Educational Institutions by Delhi
Development  Authority”............................................................ 52
II. Statement  showing  financial  status  of  Societies  to  whom  the
plots were allotted but construction not completed.  . . . . . . . . . 57
III. List of 17 societies, which were granted permission to mortgage
the allotted land........................................................................... 59
IV . List of defaulting schools ........................................................... 60
V. Statement showing the recovery of outstanding dues in respect
of Institutional Societies for the period of 1997-98 to 2003-04 ... 72
P
AGE NO.
(ii)

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra   —   Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri. Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya  Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy  Secretary-II
5. Shri S. Lakshmikanta Singh — Senior Executive Assistant

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee as authorised by the Committee,
do present this Forty-second Report (14th Lok Sabha) relating to "Allotment of
Land to Educational Institutions by Delhi Development Authority" on Paragraph 4.1
of Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2004 (No. 4 of 2005), Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies).
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year
ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 4 of 2005) Union Government (Civil—Autonomous
Bodies) was laid on the Table of the House on 6th May, 2005.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Urban Development, Delhi Development Authority and Department of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi on the subject at their sittings held on 30th September,
2005, 14th November, 2005 and 12th December, 2005. The Committee considered and
finalised this Report at their sitting held on 19th April, 2007. Minutes of the sittings
form Annexures to the Report.
4 . For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the Officers of the
Ministry of Urban Development, Delhi Development Authority and Department of
Education, Government of NCT of Delhi for the cooperation extended by them in
furnishing information and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance ren-
dered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India.
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with
the Committee.
N
EW DELHI;  PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
19 April, 2007 Chairman,
29 Chaitra, 1929 (Saka)  Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
ALLOTMENT OF LAND TO EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BY
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
PART I
Background Analysis
I. Introductory
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) was constituted under section 3 of the
Delhi Development Act, 1957 with the objective of promoting and securing the
development of Delhi according to plan and for that purpose the Authority has the
power to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of land and other property, to carry out
building, engineering, mining and other operations to execute works in connection
with supply of water and electricity, disposal of sewage and other services and
amenities and generally to do anything necessary or expedient for purposes of such
development and for purposes incidental thereto. Besides, other main functions of
DDA relate to preparation of Master Plan, Zonal Development Plan, Development of
land, Acquisition and disposal of land etc.
Organization
2. DDA consists of Chairman, who is the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi,
Vice-Chairman appointed by the Central Government, Finance & Accounts Member
and Engineer Member appointed by the Central Government, two representatives
from Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) and three elected representatives from
the Delhi Legislative Assembly.  It also comprises of three other members appointed
by the Central Government having experience of town planning and architecture.
Commissioner, MCD is ex-officio member of the Authority. A Principal Commissioner
and Secretary-cum-Principal Commissioner assist Vice-Chairman, DDA. Land Disposal
Wing of DDA is headed by a Commissioner, who is responsible for allotment of land
to Private/Government Bodies for institutional purposes.
Allotment of Land to Educational Institutions
3. The DDA (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981 provides for
allotment of Nazul lands to educational institutions, i.e. schools, colleges and
universities at concessional rates with the primary objective of serving a public
purpose of facilitating establishment of or extending educational facilities particularly
for the weaker sections of society. Rule 20 stipulates inter-alia that allotment of land
at concessional rates may be made to a society, which is registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860, is of a non-profit making character and is sponsored or

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  2
2
recommended by a Department of the Delhi Government or a Ministry of the Central
Government. From the year 1990 onwards such allotments have been made subject
to certain terms and conditions which stipulate that the beneficiary schools will ensure
admission to students belonging to weaker sections of the society to the extent of
25 per cent and grant freeships from the tuition fees in accordance with the rules
prescribed by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) from
time to time.
Allotment Procedure
4.    Applications for allotment of land at concessional rates for setting up educational
institutions are considered initially by the Land Allotment Advisory Committee
(LAAC) of the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi, in accordance
with the extant guidelines. The Committee is headed by the Commissioner–cum-
Secretary (Education) of the GNCTD. The recommendations of this Committee are
submitted to the Institutional Allotment Committee (IAC) of DDA, which is headed
by the Commissioner (Lands) DDA. Once an allotment is approved by the IAC, land
allotment letters are issued by the Institutional Branch of DDA. The entire procedure
of allotment is to be completed within a period of three months from the date of
application to handing over of possession. The societies are thereafter required to
complete the construction of the school buildings and commence functioning within
two years from the date of taking possession of the land. It is the responsibility of
these Committees to ensure that the applicant society fulfills the prescribed conditions
before approving the allotment.
5. This Report is based on paragraph 4.1 of Report of the C &AG of India for the
year ended March 2004, Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies), No. 4 of
2005 relating to “Allotment of Land to Educational Institutions by Delhi Development
Authority” (Appendix I) .
Audit Review
6.     Audit scrutinized the records of the Institutional Land Branch of DDA relating
to allotment of land to educational institutions during the period 1990-91 to 2003-04
and relevant linked records from the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT
of Delhi from April to July 2004 to review the compliance with the terms and conditions
of the allotment and assess the extent to which the stated public objective of allotment
of land at concessional rates to educational institutions was achieved. The review
has highlighted inter-alia that as of March 2004, 133 of the 381 registered societies
failed to fulfill their obligation of providing admission to students belonging to weaker
sections of society to the extent of 25 per cent and grant freeships from the tuition
fees in accordance with the rules prescribed by the Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) from time to time.
7. The Committee have dealt with the Audit findings and observations and the
position explained by the Ministry of Urban Development, Delhi Development
Authority and Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi thereto, in the
succeeding paragraphs.

II. Failure to ensure adequacy of funds before approving allotment
8. Rule 20(d) of Nazul Land Rules, 1981 inter-alia stipulates that no allotment
shall be made unless the institution is in possession of sufficient funds to meet the
cost of land and the construction of building. This provision was aimed to ensure
that construction of buildings by the institution is completed within a reasonable
time so that the purpose of the allotment is achieved. Despite this clear stipulation,
Audit review has revealed that, DDA failed to ensure the financial status of the
societies to meet the cost of land and construction of buildings, before allotting the
land.  As a result, the following irregularities occurred in the land allotment:
(a) Out of the 90 selected cases, the declared financial resources of 27 societies
were not enough to even meet the cost of land (Appendix  II) .  The
stipulated two-year period had lapsed in 15 of these 27 cases;
(b)  On grounds of inadequacy of funds, 27 societies sought and were granted
time extensions;
(c) 17 societies were granted permission to mortgage the allotted land to raise
loans to meet the cost of construction (Appendix III); and
(d) In 11 cases extension of time was permitted beyond five years.
According to Audit, land was allotted at concessional rates to societies, which
were otherwise ineligible, as they did not possess the necessary resources.
9. On being asked as to why DDA had failed to check the financial condition of
the Societies/Institutions before allotment of land, the Ministry of Urban
Development, in a note stated as under:—
“There is a basic dichotomy between sub rules (c) and (d) of Rule 20 of the
Nazul Rules, Sub Rule (C) states that allotment is to be made only to non-
profit making i.e. charitable societies but Sub Rule (d) states that it should
be in possession of sufficient funds to meet the cost of land and
construction of buildings for its use. DDA follow the principle that if the
society has a sponsorship or recommendation by a Government Department,
it is a registered society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and it
has a non-profit making character, then it can be considered for allotment if
it is in possession of sufficient funds to meet at least the cost of land. The
presumption that non-construction of some of the schools listed by audit
is due to lack of funds may not be correct in all the cases.  Non-construction
is at times due to the other factors such as delay in development of services
in the area, delay in sanction of plan by the concerned local bodies, litigation
arising out of other extraneous factors etc.  The very fact that most of the
societies who were allotted land made the required payment towards cost
of land proves that they have funds for making the initial investment.  To
expect that society should ab-initio, have in its bank balance, not only
sufficient funds to meet the cost of land which is substantive (varying from
Rupees one and a half crore to Rs.2.2 crore per acre) but also substantial
funds for meeting the cost of construction would be expecting too much
3

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  4
4
from a charitable society.  Therefore, in the normal course, taking a broader
administrative view; DDA have been following the practice that a society
which has sufficient funds in its bank balance to meet the cost of land and
has been sponsored/ recommended by a Government Department can be
considered for allotment of land if it meets the other criteria prescribed under
the Rule 20 of the Nazul Rules.”
10. Elaborating further in this regard the Secretary, the Ministry of Urban
Development stated during evidence as under:—
“I must at this juncture without advancing any justification mention that
for purchase of land itself about Rs. 2 crore or Rs. 2½ crore are needed
today. There is a contradiction in terms.  We are expecting a charitable
institution to come in. We are expecting a charitable institution to have in
its kitty Rs. 2½ crore for land, another Rs. 5 crore for building and Rs. 7½
crore even before they have been allotted land.  I do not think it is possible.
Everywhere funds can be raised only when there is certainty of land. You
know it that institutions keep waiting and they do not get land. Who will
give charity?  Who will advance money?  So, it has been a standard practice
not done in one or two cases that you see the bank account over a period
of time. If they have sufficient funds for purchase of land, then the land is
allotted. It is not known whether it is right or wrong but rules say so. I am
not running away from the rules.  I have my doubts whether it is practicable
or not. What to talk of schools, even to a commercial entity when it goes to
the market to raise capital the first question that is asked is: “Do you have
land”. You do not yet collaboration; you do not get even funds unless there
is land available. So, I think there is contradiction. Rules need to be
amended”.
11. Justifying the action of DDA in allotment of land without ensuring adequacy
of funds, the Vice-Chairman, DDA during evidence stated as under:—
“What DDA was seeing was how much fund they (institutions) were having
with them in the accounts. Basically we were seeing whether they had
sufficient funds for the land. So, once we thought that they have sufficient
fund for the land, then it was allotted. As has been said, most of the societies
have taken up construction. Half of them have already completed
construction and they have started working. The remaining ones are in the
process of construction. Already the rules regarding extension of time are
quite liberal for these types of institutions. Up to five years, there is no
levy for completing the construction.
So, as far as the issue relating to lack of funds is concerned, there is some
dichotomy between our rules. One rule says that they have to be charitable
institutions. The other rule says that they should have sufficient fund for
both land and building.  Since this was a question of education, especially
for different areas, which were having, lack of education facilities, the DDA
had adopted this that if they have sufficient fund for land, it went ahead
with the allotment.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  5
5
Extension of time for construction of school buildings
12. Explaining the rationale for grant of extension of time for 27 societies, which
could not construct school building within the stipulated 2 years period, the Ministry
stated that as per policy guidelines, extension of time could be granted on payments
of composition fee. The first two years is allowed as per the terms of the allotment
and another three years as a grace period. Permission to mortgage is granted to the
societies to enable them to construct their buildings. All the allotments were made
with the approval of the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi.
13. The Ministry of Urban Development in a written note stated that 22 societies
have since constructed school buildings, one is under construction and two plots
are vacant. Allotment of one society is cancelled and one is under litigation.
14. The Committee desired to know the reasons for failure of as many as 15 out of
the 27 societies to construct school buildings within the stipulated period of two
years from the date of possession. In response, during evidence, the Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development explained as under:—
“Audit had pointed out 27 schools, which had not completed construction
in less than five years. I would only like to submit that under the terms and
conditions of allotment and lease terms, one of the conditions is that the
school building is required to be completed within two years or after that
they can be given extension for construction on payment of a compounding
fee. This is in the lease conditions duly authorised by the Lieutenant
Governor as the Chairman of the Authority. These are the rules.”
15. In a note submitted to the Committee, the Ministry have informed that out of
17 societies, which had been given permission to mortgage, 16 societies have since
constructed their buildings while allotment of land in respect of Kailash Memorial
Education Society has been cancelled.
16 Asked about the latest position regarding follow up action taken in respect of
11 Societies/cases where extension of time was permitted beyond 5 years, the
Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“DDA has reported that Societies are permitted to construct within 5 years
from date of possession without any composition fee. Thereafter extension
of time is given on payment of composition fee. Earlier, maximum period
allowed for construction in respect of institutional plots on payment of
composition fee was 20 years.  As per latest policy, the maximum period for
construction allowed is 10 years for all new allotments.  Further, for all
surviving leases where construction has not been undertaken even after 10
years period, the allottees have been given time limit upto 31.12.2007 to
complete the construction.”
17. When asked whether any system has been devised by DDA to ensure that
the Societies, which were allotted land, make the schools functional at the earliest,
the Ministry in their note stated as under:—
“The lease terms prescribe that construction be completed within two years
of allotment. DDA provides for a further grace period of three years to

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  6
6
account for delays due procedural formalities in pre-construction period.
Thereafter, the policy for extension of time on payment of penalty itself acts
as a deterrent to delays in construction as it involves a penalty in the shape
of composition fee for delay of every year, after the permissible period.  It
would, therefore, not be in the interest of the Society to keep the school
un-constructed. However, sometimes, schools do remain un-constructed, if
the land allotted to the Society is not available for construction due to
litigation or for other unavoidable reasons such as double allotments,
resistance by public etc. If the school does not undertake the construction
without justifiable reasons, action for cancellation of allotment is also taken.”
18. The rate of composition fee per square metre for Institutional plots of different
sizes charged from the allottees for delay in construction of school buildings was as
under:—
(In Rupees per Sq.m.)
Year Institutional plots Institutional plots above 500 Sq. mtrs.
upto 500 Sq. mtrs. [Subject to minimum as per Column (2)]
1. Nil Nil
2. Nil Nil
3. Nil Nil
4. 5.00 Nil
5. 10.00* Nil
6. 15.00* 10.00
7. 20.00 10.00
8. 35.00 10.00
9. 40.00 20.00
10. 45.00 20.00
11. 50.00 30.00
12. 55.00 35.00
13. 60.00 40.00
14. 65.00 45.00
15. 70.00 50.00
16. No extension 55.00
17. No extension 60.00
18. No extension 65.00
19. No extension 70.00
20. No extension 75.00
*Note — These rates would be applicable only in respect of built up area of the institution. Play
ground, green area etc., are not to be counted towards calculation of the composition
charges.

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  7
7
19. The Committee pointed out that composition fee charged by DDA for late
construction of school buildings by the societies, which was supposed to act as a
deterrent for delay in construction of school buildings was very nominal and the
societies could easily meet the fee by way of sub-letting/misuse of plots thereby
defeating its very purpose. Asked whether DDA propose to enhance composition
fee, the Ministry in their reply submitted as under:—
“It is true that the composition fee as prescribed at present is not a serious
financial burden and therefore, deterrent for the societies. …. In any case,
DDA is examining/considering a proposal for enhancement of composition
fee and reduction of maximum period of extension for cases of delayed
construction.”
20. In their post evidence reply, the Ministry have informed the Committee that
rates of composition fee for delay in construction in institutional plots have been
revised as under:—
                                                                           (In Rupees per Sq.m.)
Year Institutional plots Institutional plots above 500 Sq. mtrs.
upto 500 Sq. mtrs. [Subject to minimum as per Column (2)]
1. Nil Nil
2. Nil Nil
3. Nil Nil
4. 10.00 Nil
5.  20.00 Nil
6. 100.00 100.00
7. 110.00 110.00
8. 120.00 120.00
9. 130.00 130.00
10. 140.00 140.00
11. 160.00 160.00
12. 170.00 170.00
13. 180.00 180.00
14. 190.00 190.00
15. 200.00 200.00
16. No extension 250.00
17. No extension 260.00
18. No extension 270.00
19. No extension 280.00
20. No extension 290.00

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  8
8
21. Asked about the action taken by DDA in cases where the beneficiary societies
have misused the land after getting extension of time for construction of school
buildings, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:—
“DDA has reported that whenever any such violation is brought to the notice
of DDA, it has taken prompt action.  Few such instances are the demolition
of structures in the playfield of various schools like Goenka School, Ryan
International School, Nutan Vidya Mandir, Greenfield Public School etc.
Many societies have also put on notice for various violations that are
cognizable under DDA rules and if they do not remove the breaches, further
action under lease terms will be taken.  However, other than instance of
unauthorized construction in playfield or misuse of basement etc.; no cases
of misuse of school building for other purposes have come to light.”
22. Asked whether DDA reviewed or propose to review their policy of granting
extension of time to the Societies for construction of school buildings, the Ministry
offered the following explanation in their note:—
“...the policy with regard to extension of time is at present under review. In
any case, it is submitted that this extension policy is not only for schools
but also applicable to allotment of land for all the prescribed types of
institutional purpose. The policy has been framed taking into account the
fact that most of the allottees operate as charitable organizations with
constraints of funds and an obligation to meet the procedural formalities
prescribed in Statutes governing them.”
23. In a subsequent note, the Ministry have informed the Committee that the policy
has since been revised, under which maximum period allowed for construction in
respect of institutional plots on payment of composition fee which was 20 years,
has been reduced to 10 years for all new allotments.  Further, for all surviving leases
where construction has not been undertaken even after 10 years period, the allottees
have been given time limit upto 31.12.2007 to complete the construction.
III. Allotment of more than a plot of land to a society
24. The Committee have been given to understand that 15 societies have been
allotted more than one plot of land at concessional rates by DDA.  On being enquired
the rationale behind this practice, the Ministry stated in their note as under:—
“The rationale behind such a practice is that the Societies having proven
track record and experience in running schools should not be barred from
additional allotment for setting up a chain of schools in various parts of
Delhi. In any case, there are no restrictions in the Nazul Rules against
allotment of more than one plot of land to an eligible organization.”
25. Enquired whether DDA propose to amend the Nazul Rules to restrict allotment
of land to one plot each for an Educational Institution, with a view to minimizing
delays in construction of buildings, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“Neither the Nazul Rules nor the Societies Registration Act, puts a bar on
double allotment.  There is no logical justification for any such restriction,

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  9
9
since some Societies due to their long experience, expertise and resources
necessary to run schools may be in a position to run more than one school.”
IV . Non-enforcement of conditions relating to reservation for weaker sections of
society
26. One of the primary conditions stipulated in the terms of allotment of land at
concessional rates is that they will ensure admission to students belonging to weaker
sections of society to the extent of 25 per cent and grant freeships from the tuition
fees in accordance with the rules prescribed by the Government of NCT of Delhi
from time to time. However, Audit review pointed out that as of March, 2004, 133 out
of 381 societies, which had been allotted land at concessional rates failed to provide
the stipulated 25 per cent reservation for children from the weaker sections. The details
of these schools have been given in Appendix IV.
27. Further, out of the 24 functional schools examined by the Audit, it was found
that no reservation or freeship was provided by 19 schools to the students belonging
to the weaker section while five schools had provided reservation/freeships only to
the extent of three per cent to 20 per cent against the mandatory 25 per cent.
According to Audit, none of these functional schools complied with the conditions
and as a consequence, not only was the social objective of allotment of land at
concessional rates to provide educational opportunities to the weaker sections
defeated, but the DDA also had to unnecessarily forgo additional revenue of Rs. 125.15
crore in these 24 plots which it could have earned had the plots been allotted at
commercial rates.
28. According to Audit, in addition to the above 24 cases, the Directorate of
Education had identified another 109 cases where the condition of reservation of
seats for the weaker sections was violated. No reservation had been provided in 69
cases while it varied from one per cent to twenty four per cent in the remaining 40
cases. Thus, 88 schools (19 detected by audit + 69 identified by the Directorate of
Education) i.e. 66 per cent of the total of 133 functional schools were not adhering
to the terms and conditions of the allotment relating to reservation for the weaker
sections as of March 2004.
29. In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development deposed before
the Committee as under:—
“It is only after 1989, that it was indicated that there would be reservation
for economically weaker sections of society and this condition was
quantified. The reservation for economically weaker sections was quantified
in the allotments made after 1989.  An analysis has been carried out by the
DDA in consultation with the Directorate of Education of Delhi. It shows
that out of 266 schools, roughly about 88 schools have complied with the
condition stipulated in letter of allotment. There are around 160 schools,
which have not complied with this condition. Some have done it in part
because they have provided reservations ranging between 1 per cent to
10 per cent or 10 per cent to 25 per cent but it is true that the number of
schools not complying the instructions to the full is roughly two-third of
the total allotments made.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  10
10
30. The Ministry, in a note submitted to the Committee have stated that DDA have
so far allotted land to various Societies for setting up 266 Senior Secondary Schools.
In 184 cases which were given land after 1990, the numerical quantum of freeship
was mentioned and in remaining 82 cases which were given land prior to 1990, the
numerical quantum of freeship was not mentioned but only a commitment for freeship
is mentioned.
31. In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during evidence
deposed as under:—
 “ ... I have no defence for the non-compliance of the conditions imposed.
I am not trying to put any alibi, it is on recor d...... there has been
undoubtedly a failure of enforcement. Due to lack of co-ordination or
enforcement perse, but it is there.”
32. The Committee enquired as to why the Ministry of Urban Development and
DDA could not ensure compliance of the condition of providing reservation or
freeships to the students from the weaker sections by all the beneficiary schools. In
response, the Ministry in a note submitted as under:—
“ ... DDA disposes of land for various institutional purposes, including
schools as per the planning norms and keeping in view the social and
community needs and requirements, in accordance with Nazul Rules
prescribed by the Govt.  While DDA as the lease-administering agency, has
the responsibility for enforcement of  the freeship condition, it has
constraints of organizational and administrative resources to monitor
compliance of this condition. DDA issues notices to the allottees wherever
information and complaints of violations are received.
Thus it is true that there was no established mechanism for monitoring and
ensuring compliance of the condition of freeship to students. The Directorate
of Education who sponsors the cases, however, monitored the extent of
compliance of the freeship condition and on receipt of reports from them,
DDA initiated action by invoking the allotment/lease terms.
The institutional Branch in DDA comprises one Dy. Director and two Asstt.
Directors, assisted by 17 officials in the clerical staff.  Basically, this set up
is only dealing with the processing of institutional allotment cases and work
pertaining to lease administration.  In this system, as and when violations
of any conditions are brought to notice by any enforcement agency or through
any other source, show cause notices are issued for rectification of breaches/
lease determination.  Till very recently, there was no dedicated field staff in
the branch except 4 JEs who were being shared with the Industrial Branch
of DDA. Therefore, any proactive field level inspection/monitoring was not
possible.  A separate set up of 4 AE’s and 1 JE has been deployed recently
in the Institutional Branch to strengthen it in the above context.  However,
as mentioned earlier, there will be limitations in monitoring the operational
aspects of functioning of a large number of schools in view of the existing
organizational structure and expertise of DDA.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  11
11
The Ministry have further added:—
“ ... The ensuring of adherence to the land allotment terms has not always
been possible in DDA due to lack of manpower etc.  However, in accordance
with the directions of the High Court, monitoring of these schools is now
being done by Deptt. of Education, GNCTD and further steps for
enforcement of lease terms is being taken by DDA.”
33. Asked about the corrective action taken in this regard, the Ministry stated in
a note as under:—
“The allotments were made at zonal variant rates in accordance with Nazul
rules. In the context of CWP No 3156/2002  in the High Court in Social Jurist
vs. GNCTD and others, DDA has taken various measures including issuing
of final show cause notice for cancellation of lease in respect of societies
that have been identified as defaulter by the Deptt. of Education.  The matter
is however, sub-judice before the Division Bench of High Court and during
last hearing on 25.8.05, the court was of the view that the matter was a serious
one with many policy implications and that the society concerned as well
as the Deptt. must take measures to ensure compliance but in cooperative
manner without resorting to summary action such as cancellation, de-
recognition of school etc.  since that would not solve the problem.”
34. In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, during evidence,
deposed as under:—
“It is true that enforcement action with regard to violation has not been
effective. This has come out because many schools have not been observing
the free-ship condition. But we have now tried to plug these loopholes as
a result of this exercise for the last two years – whether before the court or
the CAG Report – and also suggested amendments to the rules.”
V . Non-existence of established mechanism for identifying breaches of terms of
allotment
35. Audit review has revealed that no established mechanism existed for identifying
breaches of terms of allotment so as to enable remedial action. According to Audit,
it was clearly the joint responsibility of both the DDA as the land owning and allotting
agency as well as of the Directorate of Education as the sponsoring department to
ensure adherence to the terms of allotment of land at concessional rates, forgoing
possible revenue, in order to achieve a public purpose.
36. Enquired about the reasons for not establishing a mechanism for monitoring
compliance of the conditions of concessional land allotment by the beneficiary
schools, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“The allotment of land at Zonal variant rates which is lower than market
rate is with a social objective of setting up schools. The introduction of
freeship condition by DDA in allotment terms has the further objective of
facilitating and ensuring the educational facilities to poorer sections of

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  12
12
societies. The Schools being under administrative jurisdiction of Directorate
of Education, GNCTD, the freeship conditions can be best monitored by
that department for ensuring compliance. DDA has initiated action in respect
of those schools which have been reported to have violated the conditions
of allotment, based on monitoring done by Directorate of Education,
GNCTD.”
37. On being asked why DDA, being the nodal agency did not have coordination
with the Directorate of Education, GNCT of Delhi for proper implementation of terms
and conditions of land allotment by societies, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“ ... Allotment is done based on various inputs from the sponsorship agency
viz. Directorate of Education, GNCTD, which include essentiality and
freeship conditions. DDA has been taking action on violation of terms of
allotment, when detected.  As far as coordination is concerned,
representatives of DDA attend meetings of GNCTD at the time of
consideration of sponsorship of schools.  However, as already admitted the
issue of compliance of freeship had not earlier come up in these interactions.
Now in any case the High Court of Delhi has clearly defined the roles of
DDA and GNCTD in the matter.”
38. When asked how the Ministry/DDA  expect Directorate of Education, GNCT
Delhi to ensure enforcement of terms and conditions of land allotment in the absence
of any institutional mechanism for coordination between the two organizations, the
Ministry in their note submitted as under:—
“The schools are governed by Delhi School Education Act and the
Directorate of Education, GNCTD is armed with provisions of law which
enable take over of management/de-recognition of schools in certain
circumstances.”
39. The Committee enquired about the demarcation of responsibilities between DDA
and the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi with regard to
enforcement of the terms of allotment of land at concessional rates. In response, the
Ministry in a note submitted as under:—
“GNCTD is of the view that the process of allotment of land, and demarcation
of responsibilities between DDA and the Directorate of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi is clear.  While the Directorate of Education is
bound by the provisions of the DSE, 1973 and Rules, 1973, DDA is bound
by its own rules that have been framed under their relevant Act.  The
Directorate sponsors cases of educational societies/trusts for allotment of
land, while the land-allotting agency has to enforce the terms and conditions
of allotment.
The Directorate of Education enforces rules with regard to its recognized
schools.  As per High Court Order in CWP No 3156/2002 Dte. of Education is required
to monitor the extent of compliance by various school societies with the freeship
condition.  The land allotting agencies like DDA have been given the task of enforcing
compliance in case of any violation/default noticed through the inspection mechanism

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  13
13
that the Deptt. of Education has.  Regular meetings are being held by DDA with the
Deptt. of Education to ensure that the mechanism as mentioned above works in a
coordinated manner. Furthermore, DDA has asked the GNCTD to appoint its
representatives in the governing bodies of all school societies to ensure compliance
with the allotment terms.”
40. In this regard the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi in a
note submitted as under:—
“Although the demarcation between DDA and the Directorate of Education
is that Directorate sponsors the cases of societies seeking land from DDA
for purposed of schools and DDA actually allots the land to the society
after satisfying themselves, well defined duties for enforcement of terms
and conditions of land allotment do not exist. A clear mechanism for
coordination between DDA and the Directorate of Education for monitoring
compliance of terms and conditions by beneficiary societies has also not
been there.”
41. When enquired about the reasons for failure of the Directorate of Education,
GNCTD to monitor the adherence of schools to the terms and conditions of land
allotment till judicial intervention on the issue, the Directorate of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi in their note stated as under:—
“It is absence of an effective mechanism for coordination between DDA
and Directorate of Education to jointly monitor the adherence of the terms
and conditions of allotment.”
42. Elaborating the reasons for failure of coordination between DDA and the
Directorate of Education, GNCT of Delhi in ensuring adherence to the terms of
allotment, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“The roles of Directorate of Education, GNCTD & DDA are separate, in
respect of allotment of land to educational institutions. Educational
Societies/Trusts seeking allotment of land for setting a school have to follow
certain procedures prescribed by the Directorate of Education.  According
to the procedures, the application has to be made in a prescribed proforma
and has to be submitted with various prescribed documents/conditions. All
such cases are placed before the Land Allotment Advisory Committee
(LAAC) constituted by the Lt. Governor, Delhi, under the chairpersonship
of Secretary (Education) comprising representatives from DDA, MCD etc.
The LAAC depending on merits of the case, either recommends or rejects
the case.  In case of former, educational societies have to apply to DDA as
per procedure prescribed by DDA and allotment of land is to be made to
Societies by DDA as per individual merits and fulfilment of criteria for
allotment.
The schools are also governed by Delhi Schools Education Act,
1973 which is administered by Directorate of Education, GNCTD.  However,
to ensure coordinated working of the two agencies, regular meetings are
now being held so that such problems do not recur in future.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  14
14
43. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during evidence deposed as
under:—
“Every time allotment is made for any land, the clear understanding is that
a copy of the allotment letter will also be marked to the sponsoring authority.
But then, as you very rightly said, there is a problem of coordination.
Somebody has to have a proper coordination. Normally, between one
department and the other, there has to be a periodical meeting or a structured
and check up as to how many lands have been given. In the case of Delhi,
it has been found missing. Earlier, it happened in the case of hospitals. Now
we are noticing this lack of coordination in the case of educational
institutions.”
44. During evidence, the Secretary (Education), Government of NCT of Delhi
admitted that it was obviously the joint responsibility of both DDA and Directorate
of Education.
45. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development also admitted during evidence
that it was both a failure of the enforcement mechanism on the part of the Directorate
of Education and DDA and lack of institutionalized coordination between the
Directorate of Education, which is the sponsoring Department and DDA which is
the land allotting agency.
 46. Explaining the mechanism that has recently been put in place for coordination
between DDA and Government of NCT of Delhi for monitoring compliance of the
terms and conditions of concessional land allotment by the beneficiary schools, the
Ministry stated in a note as under:—
“ ... The Hon’ble High Court in its order dated 20th January, 2004 has also
clarified the roles of DDA and GNCTD in this matter by its observation that
it is the responsibility of the GNCTD to frame the rules if any required for
ensuring compliance of condition of freeship and monitor the same and that
it would be the duty of DDA, to take action against any school committing
breach of the condition, after receiving intimation from GNCTD of the such
violations.   It may also be submitted that DDA has issued show cause
notices for action under lease terms against the schools reported by GNCTD
to DDA, for non-compliance of freeship condition. This mechanism is in
line with the above observation of the High Court.”
The Ministry added:—
“The mechanism which has been put in place is that the Directorate of
Education will forward the list of violators against whom the DDA serves
the show cause notices and initiates action under terms of allotment/lease.”
47. On being enquired about the efforts now made by DDA to ensure co-ordination
with the GNCT of Delhi, the Ministry stated as under:—
“An institutionalized mechanism has recently been set up where DDA
officers are regularly interacting with GNCTD for coordinated action in
enforcing the terms and conditions of allotment.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  15
15
The Ministry further stated:—
“DDA and the GNCTD are coordinating with each other for the purpose of
ensuring compliance of freeship by the respective schools through meetings
and regular correspondence.  Adherence to the freeship condition is
monitored by Directorate of Education and violations brought to DDA’s
notice for action under lease terms.”
48. The Ministry have also stated that during the course of a meeting with officers
of GNCTD, which was held in pursuance to the directions of High Court, it was
informed that the GNCTD is shortly coming up with a Bill on education incorporating
20 per cent freeship to the poor and weaker sections in all schools.  Monitoring of
schools will have to be done by Directorate of Education but it would be for DDA to
ensure prompt and effective action under lease terms.
VI. Action Taken against defaulting societies following judicial intervention
(a)  Issue of show cause notices by DDA
49. The Committee are given to understand that a Civil Writ Petition (No. 31561 of
2002) was filed in the High Court of Delhi in the case of Social Jurist vs GNCTD &
others. In pursuance of the directions of the Delhi High Court issued on 20 January
2004 in this case, the Directorate of Education had forwarded in April 2004 a list of
133 schools to DDA for taking necessary action. Subsequently, DDA issued show
cause notices to 55 defaulting societies in June 2004 and to 76 societies in September
2004 directing them to respond within 15 days from the date of issue of notice failing
which the allotments would be liable to be cancelled. Audit has pointed out that, no
further action had been taken in the matter despite none of the 131 defaulting schools
responding to the notices (November 2004). Hence, neither the DDA nor the
Directorate of Education initiated any action to enforce the terms of allotment till
compelled to take notice of the breaches by the Hon’ble High Court.
50. During evidence the Secretary, the Ministry of Urban Development admitted
that violation of terms and conditions of concessional land allotment by the
educational societies came to their notice only after Public Interest Litigation was
filed in the Delhi High Court in 2004. Considering the fact that the allotments under
reference date back to as early as 1990 and re-allotments were even made without
verifying adherence to the prescribed terms and conditions, the Committee asked
the Ministry/DDA to explain for their lapses and the responsibility fixed in this regard.
The Ministry in their note stated as under:—
“The issue of non-compliance of freeship was not earlier reported to DDA.
The fact that this aspect has been neglected area is admitted.  However, as
the failure in this regard is systemic rather than such that can be attributed
to individuals; it is not feasible to fix individual responsibility in the matter.”
51. When asked as to why DDA failed to act against the defaulting societies even
after receiving information from the Delhi Government for non-compliance, the
Ministry stated in a note as under:—
“DDA had not been actively monitoring the compliance of freeship condition
due to the organizational and administrative constraints. It is also observed

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  16
16
by High Court that the GNCTD would have the responsibility of monitoring
compliance and should report defaulters to DDA. Accordingly, DDA has
issued show cause notices to the defaulters referred to it by GNCTD.  Further
action after issue of show cause notice is being guided by the overall
directions given by the High Court to work out a mutually agreed solution
between DDA, GNCTD and Schools.
52. Enquired about the course of action that was supposed to be taken by DDA
in cases of non-compliance of the conditions of land allotment, the Ministry in a
note submitted as under:—
“In case of violation, the allotment can be cancelled and lease determined
which will have a subsequent effect like de-recognition of the school by
GNCTD. After cancellation of allotment, further action has to be taken under
the Public Premises Eviction Act, 1973.  Such cancelled cases/files are to be
sent to the Estate Officers appointed by the DDA for initiating eviction
proceedings under PPE Act.  In practical terms, carrying out evictions may
be difficult due to the interpretation of the High Court in the case of Express
Newspapers vs. Govt. of India (A-8) wherein it has been held that in respect
of such leases; recovery of land by the public authority can only be done
by instituting civil suit, a process which is so long drawn out that
enforcement action by public authorities like DDA has been seriously
compromised.”
53. Asked as to why the Directorate of Education, GNCTD had failed to take action
against the defaulters until Public Interest Litigation was filed in the High Court, the
Directorate in a note stated as under:—
“There was no coordinated arrangement in this regard”.
54. Subsequently in a note furnished to the Committee, the Directorate of Education,
GNCTD explained the action taken by Delhi Government and DDA for enforcing the
terms and conditions of land allotment as under:—
“The department is considering devising appropriate and coordinated
measures so that enforcement of the terms conditions of land allotment could
be monitored.
Subsequent to the direction issued by the Hon’ble High Court in the matter,
the Education Department, Government of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi, has been co-coordinating with DDA. Director identified 133 schools,
which had committed a breach in the condition of allotment in 2003-04 and
sent the list to DDA for taking necessary action.
A list of defaulting schools for the academic session 2004-05 has been given
to DDA to initiate appropriate action, and the Department too initiated action
against these schools under the provisions of the Act but further action
has been stayed by the Hon’ble Court.
This year again, the department has compiled the admission figures in private
recognized schools under freeship quota for the academic session 2005-06
and the names of defaulting schools has been given to DDA.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  17
17
55. When asked about the specific action that had been taken/proposed to be
taken against the schools which did not adhere to the terms and conditions of land
allotment by DDA in cooperation with (GNCTD) of Delhi, the Ministry submitted in
a note as under:—
 “The terms of allotment and lease of land prescribe cancellation of allotment
and determination of lease in the case of non compliance of the conditions
of the allotment of land. For taking such action, DDA has been following a
set of procedures including issue of show cause notice and affording
opportunity to the allottee/lessee to present their version/reasons for non-
compliance. The decision for cancellation is thereafter taken at the level of
Lieutenant Governor, Delhi who is also the Chairman, DDA.
GNCTD has provided DDA with the following lists of schools that are not
complying with the condition of freeship:—
1. ‘April 2004: list of 133 defaulters for Academic session 2003-04
2. September 2004: list of 102 defaulter schools for 2003-04
3. June 2005: 93 defaulter schools for academic session 2004-05
4. August 2005: 178 defaulter schools for academic session 2005-06
DDA has issued show cause notices in the cases referred to at Sl. No 1
above. While the replies were being received from the concerned allottee
schools, GNCTD sent another list referred to in Sl. No 2 above for the same
academic session. DDA issued show cause notices to these defaulters also.
The replies received from the schools had been sent by DDA to Directorate
of Education, GNCTD for scrutiny and comments in April 2005. DDA also
issued show cause notices in respect of schools referred to in Sl. No 3 above
and having examined the replies, referred their cases as well to GNCTD in
August 2005 for verification/comments. Meanwhile, the High Court of Delhi
which had already been seized of the issue of freeship in schools in CWP
3156/ 2002, issued directions to GNCTD and DDA in its orders of 18th
August 2005 and 25th August 2005 for taking certain course of action.”
56. The Ministry in a subsequent note informed the Committee that the High Court
which is seized of the issue of freeship in schools in CWP No. 3156/02 had instructed
that serious defaulters whose freeship for 2005-06 academic session was less than
10 per cent should be put on notice by High Court Registry at the cost of GNCTD.
Accordingly, the notice was issued in the News Paper by the Registrar of the High
Court.
57. When asked about the action taken against the 131 defaulting schools which
failed to respond to the notices issued by DDA in pursuance of Delhi High Court’s
direction of 20th January, 2004, the Ministry stated as under:—
“All these schools except the list received on 25.8.05 have been issued show
cause notices for violation of freeship condition and are the replies received
in response to show cause notices have been forwarded to GNCTD to report
and verify the claims of these societies to enable DDA to take further action.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  18
18
(b) Verification of replies received from defaulting schools
58. The Committee learnt that DDA forwarded the replies furnished by the defaulting
schools to their show cause notice to the Directorate of Education for verification, as
many of these schools have taken a plea that they are fulfilling the mandatory terms
and conditions. Elaborating on the issue, the Vice-Chairman, DDA during evidence
stated as under:—
“The DDA had issued notices on the list provided by the Education
Department. Their reply had come. Some said they are complying. Some said
they are complying partly. The DDA does not have a mechanism to verify
their claims how much free-ships they are offering to the students.  It is being
done and monitored by the Education Department.  Even the High Court has
said so that the Education Department will monitor the percentage of free-
ships being granted. So, this has been sent to the Education Department for
verification.  Once we get their recommendation and if the recommendation is
for cancellation, then we will go in for cancellation.
59. Asked whether DDA had received the verification report from the Delhi
Government in respect of those defaulting schools, which have responded to their
show cause notices issued by them, the Ministry stated in a note as under:—
“DDA has referred the replies received from the schools in response to show
cause notice, for verification by GNCTD.  Meanwhile, as per the Court order
dated 13th September, 2005, the High Court itself has put those schools
under notice, that have only complied with less than 10% freeship.  However,
in respect of schools, which have committed blatant violation, and have not
even met 1% of the freeship condition and did not give any type of facilities/
concession for poor students; DDA has already initiated action for cancellation
of lease. However, it is examining further action in the light of the proceedings
in High Court in 3156/2002.
Moreover, in terms of the latest orders of Hon’ble High Court dated 13th
September, 2005, GNCTD at the level of CM, Delhi has held discussions with
the schools and is examining the matter. After the final outcome is intimated
to the High Court by GNCTD, the next course of action could be considered.”
60. In this regard, the Directorate of Education in a note stated as under:—
“The list of defaulting schools was provided to DDA on the basis of data
compiled by district after obtaining written information from each school.
Therefore, revised verification was not done by the department.”
61. As regards issue of show cause notices against the remaining defaulting schools,
the list of which was submitted by Government of NCT of Delhi to DDA on 25.8.2005,
the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“No show cause notices have been issued to the defaulting schools on the
basis of the list submitted by GNCTD on 25.8.2005, since as per the latest
orders of the High Court dated 13.9.2005, the schools have already been put
on notice by the High Court itself.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  19
19
(c) Action taken against the defaulting schools by the Directorate of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi
62. The Committee enquired about the number of defaulting schools, which have
been de-registered, and their management taken over for violation of Delhi School
Education Act, 1973. In a note, the Ministry of Urban Development have stated that
the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi had issued an order on
27.4.2004 making it necessary for all recognized unaided schools in Delhi to provide
20 per cent freeship to the students of Economically Weaker Section of the society
irrespective of whether the land has been allotted at concessional rate or not.  As
per this order, 601 schools were found to be defaulting for the academic year
2004-05.  Show cause notices were issued to 81 schools with a stipulation that their
recognition will be withdrawn on account of this default.  However, Hon’ble
High Court of Delhi issued stay order on 4.2.2005 restraining the Department to take
any punitive action against these schools for their default.  As a result, further
action could not be taken by the Department against the defaulting schools under
DSEAR, 1973. The Department has already filed LPA against the stay order in
August 2005.
(d)  Cancellation of land allotment to defaulting schools by DDA
63. In case of violation of terms & conditions by the beneficiary schools, the
actions that can be taken against the schools by DDA/GNCTD are — de-recognition
of the school as provided in the Delhi School Education Act; take over of the
management of the school as provided in the Delhi School Education Act; and
cancellation of the land as per the terms and conditions of the allotment letter.
64. The Ministry of Urban Development have informed the Committee that in
respect of violation of freeship condition by the schools, the Delhi Government had
forwarded a list of 178 defaulters to whom land was allotted by the DDA. Out of
these, 10 schools namely - (1) Bal Bharti, (2) Rukmani Devi, (3) Gyan Mandir,
(4) Pinnacle School, (5) Ram Krishan Sr. Sec. School, (6) DPS Vasant Kunj, (7) Delhi
Police Public School, and (8) Montfort, (one school belongs to Delhi Police), have
been identified as the worst offenders and action for cancellation of allotment in
respect of these schools had been initiated by DDA.
65. In a subsequent note submitted to the Committee, the Ministry of Urban
Development have stated that DDA had issued show cause notices to defaulting
schools, based on the lists provided by the GNCTD, till the Hon’ble High Court of
Delhi decided to issue notices directly to the 178 defaulter schools for academic
year 2005-06. Further DDA has cancelled the allotment of land to 4 of the most
serious defaulters i.e. Bal Bharti, Rukmani Devi, Gyan Mandir and Pinnacle School,
and initiated proceeding under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act.
66. Subsequently, the Ministry submitted that DDA had cancelled land allotment
to the aforesaid 4 schools for 0 per cent compliance of freeship, but eviction orders
could not be issued since the Court had issued stay orders.

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  20
20
67. On being asked why action had been taken against 4 schools only, the
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during evidence explained as under:—
“DDA had proceeded to first action against those schools, which had not
at all fulfilled the condition of free-ship, numbering about eight. Out of
them four cases have been finalised for cancellation. After serving notice,
etc., they have taken approval of the Lieutenant Governor, who is also the
Chairman of the DDA and orders have been issued in respect of one
school on the last working day and in respect of three others today.
As regards the action taken by the Directorate of Education, there were
81 show cause notices given by them in respect of schools which had violated the
condition of free-ship, but after these first 81 show causes notices which asked
them to explain as to why these schools should not be derecognised, they went
to the court of law. The interim orders for stay have been granted. They have put
in application for vacation of the stay.”
68. In this regard, the Vice-Chairman, DDA during evidence stated as under:—
“Whenever we received list of institution which were not complying, we
issued show cause notices and they have replied to us.  We have sent that
reply to the Education Department of the State and once we get feedback
from them, we will take action because under our rules we have a stringent
condition that either we can cancel the lease which will have wider
ramifications and the hon. Chief Minister of Delhi had held a meeting and
we were also present there. The representatives of schools were also
present. They have been asked to submit their proposals about the possible
solution. So, this is the current stage of the writs.”
He added:—
“DDA has only got the power to determine the lease deed, which is a harsh
outcome. But lately we have cancelled the lease deed of four institutions.
This will have a salutory effect on the institutions that are not complying
with the free-ship condition, and they will definitely fall in line. It requires
a lot of coordination between DDA and the Education Department of the
State Governments to ensure it. It also requires willful participation by the
institutions themselves. This issue is also before the court, and the court
had directed the hon. Chief Minister of Delhi to sort it out. Basically, we
feel that the conditions laid-down in the allotment letters should be fulfilled
by the institutions. Otherwise, we have recently taken a harsh decision to
cancel the lease deed. This would mean de-recognition, and such other
action by the Education Department, which will have a solitary effect. All
our efforts are to see that the free-ship condition is fulfilled by the
institutions.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  21
21
(e) Problems in large scale cancellation of land allotment to schools
69. Explaining the problems that may arise out of large-scale cancellation of land
allotments, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during evidence stated as
under:—
“The difficulty is that de-recognition of a school or cancellation of its lease
is against public interest because so many schools, if they are de-recognized
or if their lease is cancelled, then it is harassment of the children who are
studying there. The more practical approach for taking action has been to
take over of the management. I had been the Director of Education in Delhi
almost 25 years ago and I can say with experience that one notice for take
over of the management will make other private management to fall in line.
Unfortunately, taking action under the Delhi School Education Act is not
feasible till the terms and conditions of allotment become a part of the rules
where they have to also follow this. Failing this, it will be construed as a
violation of the Act. It is only the violation of the terms and conditions of
allotment. Therefore, cancellation action, which can be taken, has already
been communicated to the Delhi Government almost a month and a half
ago, on October 26, 2005 to consider this and bring about amendments in
the rules. It is our view that it will fill up the gap in the enforcement action.
The witness further stated:—
With regard to the cancellation and resumption of land, ultimately, we face
this difficulty as to how to resort to this action because there are schools
and there are students in it.
70. To a query whether the erring schools will be allowed to continue violation of
the provisions of  freeship with impunity on the ground that cancellation of land
allotment may affect future of the students, the Ministry in a note  stated as under:—
“At present the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi is insisting that the compliance
of freeship by all the schools should be amicably resolved through
negotiations failing which the High Court will suggest further course of
action. GNCTD is pursuing the issue of compliance as per the High Court
directions.”
71. On being asked about the measures taken by DDA to ensure compliance by
schools to the terms and conditions of land allotment in the backdrop of PIL filed in
the High Court of Delhi,  the Ministry in their note stated as under:—
“High Court of Delhi vide order dated 13th September, 2005 in CWP
3156/2002 has accepted the proposal of the petitioners for convening a
meeting of the action committee of schools with the GNCTD at a high level
for working out a mutually agreed solution for enabling the scheme of
freeship to be complied with to some extent or to the extent agreed upon in
the said meeting.  As per the said order, GNCTD by way of consultation
with all the parties in CWP No.3156/2002 is required to examine their
proposal and accordingly, intimate the Court.  Meanwhile, the serious

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  22
22
defaulters who have achieved less than 10% freeship have been already
put on notice by the High Court itself.  GNCTD accordingly convened a
meeting under the chairmanship of Chief Minister, Delhi on 24.9.2005, which
was attended by DDA and Action Committee of schools. GNCTD is now
examining a proposal submitted by the action committee of schools pursuant
to the meeting. Along with this, DDA has also initiated the process for
cancellation of leases of those schools that have achieved only 0-1%
freeship. Further course of action in the light of Court’s orders of 13th
September 2005 is under examination with legal consultation.”
72. In this regard, the Vice-Chairman, DDA during evidence deposed as under:—
“The High Court has asked the Committee headed by Hon. Chief Minister
to look into it. One meeting has already taken place. The school
representatives have been asked to put up their suggestions whereby they
can implement these conditions.  I think they were given two week’s time.
It has not yet lapsed. So, this matter is under consideration.  We are hopeful
that some solution will be worked out.”
73. Explaining the reasons for not taking effective action against all the defaulting
societies for non-compliance of the conditions of concessional land allotment, the
Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“This is a complex issue and has implications for thousands of school
students.  The Hon’ble High Court was also not in favour of any summary
action such as cancellation of leases; evictions; de-recognition etc. Instead
court has ordered that a mechanism for finalizing the norms of what
constitutes freeship; whether evening classes for poor students can be
considered as part of the freeship quota etc. be worked out. Meetings of
GNCTD, L&DO and DDA are to be held for this purpose.  Meanwhile;
through issue of show cause notices and by appointing GNCTD
representatives on the governing bodies of the school societies; schools
are being persuaded to ensure compliance with the freeship condition.”
VII. Appointment of Government representatives on the Governing bodies of the
schools
74. The Ministry of Urban Development have informed the Committee that as a
part of revamping the existing mechanisms for effective monitoring of schools for
strict adherence to the terms of concessional land allotment, DDA have proposed
that Delhi Government may appoint two Government representatives on the Governing
Body of the societies administering the schools.
75. Enquired about the action taken by the Government of NCT of Delhi for
appointing Government representatives on the Governing Body of the societies for
ensuring compliance of freeship condition, the Directorate of Education in their note
stated as under:—
“The Directorate of Education has issued orders in respect of those schools
whose names were forwarded by the DDA that the Government nominee in

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  23
23
the Management Committee of the schools would also be the Government
representatives in the Governing body of the Societies, which established
the school.”
VIII. Enhancement of tuition fees in disregard of the terms of allotment
76. As per the terms and conditions of allotment of land at concessional rates, no
increase in the rates of tuition fees would be effected without the prior approval of
the Director of Education, GNCTD. The institutions were also to follow the provisions
of the Delhi School Education (DSE) Act, 1973 and the rules framed thereunder in
this regard. Audit however ascertained that 11 schools had increased their tuition
fees by 10 per cent to 13 per cent without the prior approval of the Directorate of
Education. As a consequence of the PIL filed in the Delhi High Court, the Directorate
of Education identified 332 additional schools in March 2004, which had similarly
hiked their tuition fees without the prior approval of the Directorate or had violated
the provisions of the DSE Act by levying higher fees and other charges. The quantum
of hike ranged from 5 per cent to 44 per cent.  However, according to Audit, show
cause notices could be issued in May 2004 to only 185 out of the total of
343 defaulting schools, by the Directorate of Education and their further reply was
awaited till December 2004. Hence, neither DDA nor the Directorate monitored the
adherence of the terms of the allotment and the provisions of the DSE Act by the
societies.  Further, even after receiving information from the Delhi Government of
non-compliance, DDA did not take effective action.
77. The Committee enquired about the action taken against the remaining
158 schools out of 343 schools, in respect of which show cause notices were not
issued. In response, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“The Directorate of Education had issued an order-dated 15.12.1999 which
according to GNCTD has more or less put a check on certain heads of fee-
structure. If any school violates these instructions, appropriate action,
including the action of withdrawal of recognition can be taken under the
provisions of the Act.”
78. Asked to state the number of defaulting schools which have responded to the
show cause notice issued and the status of follow up action taken thereon, the
Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi in their reply submitted as
under:—
“Out of 185 defaulting schools, 42 schools responded to the show cause
notice issued and submitted their compliance report.  District authorities
were directed to take action against defaulter schools, which issued reminder
notices to them.  However, no compliance report could be compiled.
Meanwhile, Hon’ble Court issued directions in CA-2699-2710 of 2001 in
matter pertaining to fee-structure directing the schools to file their fee
pertaining to fee-structure   and financial statement on the basis of
accounting principles applicable to non-business organizations.
Accordingly, the department issued order-dated 10.2.05  to all unaided
recognized schools.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  24
24
79. The Committee sought an explanation from the Directorate of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi regarding their failure to prevent unilateral increase of
tuition fee by the schools the matter reached High Court of Delhi. In response,  the
Directorate of Education in their note stated as under:—
“Under the provision of Section 17(3), the manager of every recognized
school shall, before the commencement of each academic session, file with
the Director a full statement of the fees to be levied by such school during
the ensuing academic session, and except with the prior approval of the
Director, no such school shall charge, during the academic session, any fee
in excess of the fee specified by its manager in the said statement.
The Directorate of Education can take action against the schools only if it
increases the fee during the academic session in excess of the fee structure
submitted under section 17(3). However, the Department has been issuing
circulars/orders to the private recognized unaided schools in this regard
from time to time. Order dated 9th April 1997 and another order dated 15.12.99
has been issued which more or less has put a check on certain heads of fee
structure. If nay school violates these instructions, appropriate action,
including action of withdrawal of recognition can be taken under the
provisions of the Act.
It is denied that the Directorate of Education had abdicated its responsibility
of ensuring compliance with terms of allotment. It depends on DDA for
appropriate feedback on societies to which the latter actually allots the land
and finalized terms of allotment and lease. The allotment is done by the
DDA and hence enforcement of conditions of allotment had to be carried
out by DDA.’’
80. To a query, whether there is any mechanism in DDA as well as in the Directorate
of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi, to ensure that the Societies do not turn
into profit making commercial organizations deviating from the main objectives of
imparting education, particularly to the weaker sections of the society, the Ministry
in their note submitted as under:—
“The administration of recognized schools is governed by GNCTD under
provisions of Delhi Schools Education Act, and the administration of lease
of land by DDA is governed by terms of allotment and lease deed.  The
penalties for default and non-compliance that are available include
recognition and take over of management by GNCTD under DSE Act and
cancellation of allotment and determination of lease by DDA under the terms
of the lease deed. It is, however, submitted that these actions can only be
resorted to in a few cases and not en masse, since that may result in wide-
scale disruption of the educational system. Therefore compliance of
conditions of recognition and grant of land must be ensured only by a
system of frequent and effective inspections followed by deterrent action
in cases of non-compliance. Secondly in the larger perspective, a move away
from allotment of land at concessional prices towards a system of disposal
of land to private organizations which is market oriented and auction based

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  25
25
will also counter the fundamental inadequacies and weaknesses in the
administration of such leased properties, whether at the stage of scrutiny
of applications or during subsequent monitoring of compliance, or at the
stage of determination of lease and resumption of land.”
81. In this regard  the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi in
their note submitted as under:—
 “Section 17 of the Delhi Schools Education Act, 1973 provides that:—
(i) No aided schools shall levy fee or collect any other charge or receive
any other payment except those specified by the Director.
(ii) Every aided schools having different rates of fees or other charges
or different funds shall obtain prior approval of the prescribed
authority before levying such fees or collecting such charges or
creating such funds.
(iii) The manager of every recognised schools shall, before the
commencement of each academic session, file with the Director a
full statement of the fees to be levied by such school during the
ensuing academic session, and except with the prior approval of the
Director, no such schools shall charge, during the academic session,
any fee in excess of the fee specified by its manager in the said
statement.
Sub-section (1) and (2) relate to the aided schools, and since the aided
schools are funded by the Govt., fees are not levied on students.  Therefore,
there is no issue with respect to fees of the aided school.  Sub-section (3)
applies to all recognised private schools – in other words, all the private
unaided schools.
Under Rule 180 of Delhi School Education Rules, 1973, the schools are
required to submit the details of their annual financial statements.  Rule 180
provides that:—
(i) Every unaided recognized private school shall submit returns and
documents in accordance with Appendix XII.
(ii) Every return or documents referred in sub-rule (i) shall be submitted
to the Director by the 31st day of July of each year.
    (iii) The account and other records maintained by an unaided private
school shall be subject to examination by the auditors and inspecting
officers authorised by the Director in his behalf and also by officers
authorised by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
These financial statements are scrutinized and examined to check whether
schools are making profits or are indulging in transfer/diversion of funds to
society.  Wherever such diversion is found, action is taken against such
schools as per the provisions of the Act so as to desist the societies running
these schools from turning into commercial organization.”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  26
26
IX. Outstanding dues of Ground Rent and License Fees
82. The Director (Land Costing) in DDA is responsible for maintaining proper
records of recoveries due on account of premia, ground rent and license fee in respect
of land allotted to educational societies for establishing schools. The ground rent
and license fee are payable by the allottee in advance failing which interest at the
rate of 10 per cent per annum is leviable. Arrears of ground rent and license fee may
be recovered as arrears of land revenue under the DDA Act, 1957. Audit pointed out
that an amount of Rs.1.88 crore (Rs. 1.70 crore ground rent and license fee + Rs.18.05
lakh interest) was outstanding against 89 societies as on 31 March 2004. The
outstanding ground rent, license fee and interest thereon related to the period
1997-98 to 2003-2004.  No action had been initiated by the DDA to recover these
dues (July 2004).
83. Contesting the Audit observation, the Ministry in a note furnished to the
Committee stated that recovery of Ground Rent and Licence Fee were being done on
regular basis even before the Audit observations and DDA recovered Rs. 72.53 lakhs
relating to the period 1997-98 to 2003-04 (Appendix – V).
84. Enquired about the action taken by DDA against concerned officials for not
collecting in time the ground rent and license fee from the defaulting schools, the
Ministry in their note replied as under:—
“This is a continuous process and also depends on the response of the
allottees.  However, the concerned officials and staff has been directed to
monitor closely the process of recovery of arrears.”
The Ministry added:
“Due to continuous efforts to realize the outstanding Ground Rent by issuing
defaulter notices and Non-Recovery Certificate (NRC) under Punjab Land
Reforms Act, 1887, now only a sum of Rs.44.60 lakhs on account of ground
rent remains to be recovered from 10 societies out of 26 defaulting
Educational Societies pointed out by audit.”
85. In a subsequent note the Ministry informed the Committee that the outstanding
amount recoverable as on 31-12-06 stood at Rs. 22.17 lakh.
86. The Ministry have further stated that in 21 cases DDA had issued non-recovery
certificates under Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 for recovery of arrears.
87. Asked whether DDA had overhauled/proposed to overhaul the existing
mechanism to ensure proper collection of Ground rent and licence fee so as to avoid
accumulation of arrears in future, the Ministry submitted in their note as under:—
“To ensure effective improvement of the recovery of G .R. in respect of
allotment of land to Educational societies, the following remedial steps have
been taken:
1. The defaulter notices have been issued to all the lessees of Educational
Societies during the period October 2004 to December 2004 with follow
up by issue of reminders in January, 2005 and June, 2005.

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  27
27
2. As a result of effective steps taken for improvement of recovery of the
G.R. discussed above, increase in the recovery of G .R. during the year
2004-05, 2005-06 have been noticed. It is also stated that an amount of
Rs.105.00 lakhs has since been recovered towards G.R./ Licence Fee
from the Educational societies after audit against the recovery pointed
out.
3. The following mechanism is being implemented to deal with the problem
of outstanding amounts of Ground Rent:
(i) The Computerization of D&C Ledgers in respect of Institutional
Property have been taken up. D & C ledgers are also being updated
on manual basis.
(ii) The work of recovery of G.R. has been outsourced by deploying
in agency for this purpose in respect of Commercial, Industrial and
Institutional Properties.
(iii) A post-dated cheque scheme is being launched to facilitate
payment of arrears of Ground Rent by allottees in easy installments,
which has been approved in principle.
(iv) A special drive was undertaken in October 2005 to issue notices
to all defaulter lessees.
(v) Action under Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887 is being taken for
recovery as land revenue. Non-recovery certificates are being
issued to the Asstt. Collectors to take further action.”
88. However, on being asked to furnish the latest total amount of outstanding dues
pending recovery from the beneficiaries of DDA’s allotment of land for schools at
concessional rates, the Ministry in a note submitted as under:—
“DDA has reported that as per demand and collection registers maintained
in Institutional Accounts Branch, the total number of schools allotted
land at concessional rates is 566.  As on 31-12-06, the total amount of
ground rent and licence fees outstanding against these schools is Rs.11.25
crore.’’
89. Explaining the status of computerization in DDA for ensuring timely collection/
recovery of ground rent and license fee from the allottees, the Ministry in a note
stated as under:—
“DDA has reported that notices are being sent manually for recovery of
ground rent and licence fees.  Data base in respect of a large number of
allottees has been prepared and for remaining properties, this work is in
progress.  Further it may also be informed that the computerization of Land
Costing Wing will form a part of over all computerization of DDA termed as
Integrated Management System (IMS).  System Branch of DDA has already
initiated steps in this regard .”

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  28
28
X. Land allotment to Education Institutions through Auction
90. The Ministry have informed the Committee that due to the fact that existing
provisions under the Nazul Rules can be exploited by the unscrupulous societies,
DDA has in the last 4 years carried out a complete reform of its institutional allotment
policy.  Accordingly, DDA has now initiated efforts in shifting the process from
allotment of concessional land to the auction mode of disposal, which is more
transparent, prevents circumvention of the allotment conditions and also rules out
possible collusion in carving out plots for particular society etc. in respect of land
for hospitals, higher/technical education institutes, clubs and partly for Community
Halls. Even in respect of schools, proposal for changing the mode of disposal from
allotment to auction is pending consideration in the Authority.
91. Elaborating on the issue of land allotment through Auction, the Ministry in a
note stated that DDA’s concessional land allotment policy in respect of various types
of institutions is under review and out of 7 categories of institutions, 4 have already
been put in the auction mode of disposal.  The only categories that remain in the
allotment mode are religious sites, schools and misc./residual institutions.  Even for
schools, a proposal to review the mode of disposal is presently under the
consideration of the Authority.  Separately, the issue of enhancement in the zonal
variant rates for allotment of such land is being considered in order to ensure that
the differential between the zonal variant rate and the market rate is reduced.
92. The Ministry have further stated that a decision has already been taken by
DDA to provide land by way of auction in respect of institutes of higher and technical
education.  In respect of schools, however, various options for ensuring how the
objective of allotting land to school at concessional rates can be best met are under
consideration and no decision has yet been taken in this regard.  Allotments have
also been put on hold till a final decision is taken in consultation with the GNCTD in
the matter of mode of allotment of land to schools in Delhi.
93. Asked whether exploitation of the loopholes in Nazul Rules by unscrupulous
societies can be rectified by revamping the existing criteria for selection of
beneficiaries for concessional allotment of land so, that only the genuine societies
are selected, the Ministry in a note submitted as under:—
“The existing criteria are required to be revamped.  However, in this context,
it is mentioned that howsoever stringent eligibility criteria may be, it is only
in the post allotment stage and during the actual operation of the school that
problems relating to violations of conditions such as compliance of freeship
which are now being surface faced.  Hence, it would be desirable to change
the mode of disposal of land allotment, and to strengthen the monitoring by
GNCTD in case of schools that have already been allotted land.”
94. On being asked about the current status of the proposal for switching over to
auction system, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during evidence
deposed as under:—
“I am only mentioning about one of the suggestions that have come.  I am
not saying so from my side. The other contradiction, which we are trying to

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  29
29
manage, is this. A charitable institution takes land because that is what the
Nazul Rules say. Nazul Rules say that there should be a charitable institution.
In due course of time the charitable institution starts acquiring wings and
then it becomes a huge commercial machine and it becomes an industry. If
that is the experience, then would it not be better that let there be a
percentage of schools which are in the public domain, which are in the
Government and municipal bodies, and let there be schools in the private
domain as happens everywhere in the world, which buy at the market prices?
Their fee structure and everything else is driven by the market. Let them
just follow that.
It is obtaining everything in the world.  There are schools funded by the
public. I have been suggesting that we should have 45 to 50 per cent of the
total plots reserved for Government schools, municipal bodies, corporations,
Kendriya Vidyalayas and all other organisations of the State Government
etc. and the remaining 50 percent plots should be auctioned. There is also
a view as to why they should be auctioned, and as to what will happen to
the poor students. The moment you try and compromise this, to begin with,
it may start with charity and poor but in due course of time everybody gets
tempted and they start making money. They become only-spinning
machines. All these schools which came up initially and which had these
conditionalities, I am sure, initially must have fulfilled them. I am only
referring to the contradiction, which needs to be sorted out.
A question was asked as to whether we have resorted to auction not only
in hospitals and such institutions but also whether we are doing it in schools.
As of now, schools are not on auction mode. Although I had pleaded that
after giving the first right of refusal to the public bodies in the Government
we should keep schools in private domain and let there be no subsidy
element involved so that there are no conditionalties. It is because
conditionalities under the best of circumstances get subverted over a period
of time. If they do not get subverted institutionally they get subverted in
terms of individual being subverted.  They will start giving all kinds of false
certificates etc.    The system gets spoiled.  In my view it is a neat and clean
arrangement but it is a debatable issue.”
The witness added:—
“The auctioning proposal was put up to the Authority.  It was discussed
but no final decision could be taken but it was not in this formulation which
I have now suggested informally to the Lieutenant Governor that you give
first right of refusal to the public bodies.”
XI. Amendment to Delhi School Education Act, 1973
95. The Ministry of Urban Development have made a suggestion to the Directorate
of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi for amending the Delhi School Education
Act and Rules, 1973 to incorporate a provision stipulating adherence to the condition
of freeship as a necessary pre-condition for grant of recognition and if any school

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  30
30
fails to comply with the same, it would attract de-recognition and/or taken over of
the management of the school. This would provide legal backing to the enforcement
of the condition of freeship in addition to taking action in terms of the lease
conditions.
96. Elaborating the matter, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during
evidence stated as under:—
“There is no linkage between the Education Act’s provisions and the terms
and conditions of the allotment letter that is given here. Under the Education
Act, the action that can be taken by the Department, which is the regulatory
Department, is either to derecognise the school or to take over the
management of the school, if certain conditions are not fulfilled. Therefore,
I had submitted in my last appearance before the hon. Chairman of the PAC
that we need to establish this linkage by amending the Delhi School
Education Rules whereby one of the condition should be that any school
which would continue to impart education will also have to subscribe to
the terms and conditions of the allotment of land by DDA and any violation
thereof would constitute a violation under the Act and Rules. This is the
missing link.”
97. The Committee sought to know the views of the Government of NCT of Delhi
on the Ministry of Urban Development’s suggestion for amendment to DSE Act,
1973 regarding de-recognition of erring schools and taking over their management.
The Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi in their note stated  that
the  matter is under their examination.
98. To a related query, the Secretary (Education), Government of NCT of Delhi
during evidence stated:—
“We have already initiated action to amend the Delhi School Education Act
and over a period of time this rule also will come into force.”
XII. Lapses in inspection of schools by the Directorate of Education
99. As regards compliance of directions of the Delhi High Court by the public
schools in the matter of providing freeships to the students from weaker section, the
Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi, in a note have informed the
Committee that the Department had issued orders on 27.04.2004 and also had issued
public notices to make general public aware of the freeship quota available in unaided
recognized schools. The Deputy Directors of Education of the districts were declared
Liaison Officers to facilitate monitoring the process of admissions sought under
freeship quota. The department is compiling information regarding such admissions
for every academic year and instructions have been issued to Education Officers
also directing them to verify the details of such admissions at the time of inspection
of the school.
100. Asked about the number of inspections carried out jointly by DDA and
Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi to check the deviations/non-
compliance of schools to the condition of providing freeship as also of the level of

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  31
31
coordination between DDA and Directorate of Education, Government of the NCT
of Delhi in this regard, the Ministry submitted in their note as under:—
“So far, no joint inspection of schools has taken place.  Inspections are
done by the Directorate of Education as far as adherence to the freeship
condition is concerned and breach of condition, if detected, is then reported
to DDA for action under lease terms. For this purpose, DDA and GNCTD
are currently coordinating by way of discussions and correspondence.”
101. The Committee enquired about the details of the inspections of schools carried
out by the Directorate of Education, under the provisions of Delhi School Education
Act, 1973 including their main findings along with the follow up action taken by the
Directorate of Education. In response, the Ministry submitted in a note as under:—
“Under the provisions of Delhi School Education Act, 1973, during the
academic session 2005-06, panel inspections were carried out in respect of
nearly 126 schools under Rule 190 read with section 24(2). Findings in respect
of each school are different for each individual school. However, one can
broadly say that some of the main irregularities observed pertain to improper
maintenance of service records of employees, employing over-aged staff in
violation of RRs. As follow-up action, these irregularities are communicated
to the school and directions are issued to rectify these in a stipulated period.
In case of non-compliance, action under provision of Delhi School Education
Act & Rules, 1973 is initiated against the school.”
XIII. Donation fee
102. The Committee pointed out that huge amounts were being collected as donation
fee under various forms by the private schools from the parents of the children
seeking admission in Delhi which has assumed alarming proportions in the recent
years. Many of the beneficiary societies, which have availed land at concessional
rates from DDA on the condition of providing freeship to the underprivileged children
were also stated to be collecting huge money from admission seekers as donation
fee on one pretext or the other.
103. The Committee desired to know whether DDA/Directorate of Education have
taken a suo-motu case against such schools. In response, the Directorate in a note
stated as under:—
“Whenever such matters against schools are reported in the newspapers
or any complaint is received, the Department takes action against the
concerned school as per provisions of the Act. The department is not aware
of any case of evasion of income tax by such societies.”
104. Replying to a related query, the representative of Delhi Government stated
during evidence as under:—
“Regarding the issue of donation being charged by the schools in the
admission process, as per the Act, no school shall take donations linked to
admissions.  It is already there in the Act.  What is happening on the ground

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  32
32
is that most of the schools take these donations and show them as donations
to societies who are running the parent schools voluntarily. It is not shown
as money collected by the schools. So, we do not get any complaint in
writing as such that this school has charged the donation from me specifically
linked to admissions.  If we get those complaints, then we can always take
actions.   In any case, the independent nursery schools are not being looked
after by the Directorate.”

PART - II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
105. The Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules,
1981 popularly known as the Nazul Rules provide for allotment of Nazul lands to
educational institutions, i.e. schools, colleges and universities at concessional rates
with the primary objective of serving a public purpose of facilitating establishment
of or extending educational facilities particularly for the weaker sections of society.
Rule 20 stipulates inter-alia that allotment of land at concessional rates may be
made to a society, which is registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860,
is of a non-profit making character and is sponsored or recommended by a
Department of the Delhi Government or a Ministry of the Central Government. From
the year 1990 onwards such allotments have been made subject to certain terms
and conditions which stipulate that the beneficiary schools will ensure admission
to students belonging to weaker sections of society to the extent of 25 per cent and
grant freeships from the tuition fees in accordance with the rules prescribed by
the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi from time to time. During
the period 1990-91 to 2003-2004 DDA allotted land at concessional rates to 381
registered societies for establishing schools on such quantified terms and conditions.
106.      Audit conducted a review between April to July 2004 with a view to assess
the extent to which the stated public objective of the allotment of land at concessional
rates to educational institutions was achieved and to review compliance of schools
with the terms and conditions of concessional land allotment. For this Audit
scrutinized the records of the Institutional Land Branch of DDA relating to
allotment of land to educational institutions during the period 1990-91 to 2003-04
and relevant linked records from the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT
of Delhi, which was the sponsoring department for the allotment of land at
concessional rates. Audit selected 90 cases for detailed scrutiny out of 381
beneficiary societies, which were provided land at concessional rates during the
aforesaid period. Test check by Audit revealed that 46 out of 90 schools were yet to
be functional despite lapse of the stipulated period of two years, while as many as
133 out of the 381 beneficiary societies failed to provide the stipulated 25 per cent
reservation for children from the weaker sections as of March 2004. Worse still
343 schools hiked their tuition fees by 5 per cent to 44 per cent without the requisite
approval of the Directorate of Education in violation of the terms of allotment.
Further, there was no established mechanism for ascertaining breaches of terms
of allotment and consequently remedial action for ensuring adherence to the
freeship norms was conspicuously non-existent.  The Committee are constrained
to observe that though the policy of land allotment at concessional rates to
educational societies by DDA was introduced with the   primary objective of spreading
out quality education to the underprivileged children through private schools,
33

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  34
34
however, the scheme has not been able to achieve the intended objective due to failure
in its implementation in the right earnest, both by DDA as the implementing agency
and Government of NCT of Delhi as the sponsoring agency. This will be amply
corroborated by the Committees findings dealt with at length in the succeeding paras.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1)
107. Rule 20(d) of the Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of Developed Nazul
Land) Rules, 1981 stipulates that no allotment shall be made unless the institution
is in possession of sufficient funds to meet the cost of land and the construction of
buildings. This provision was made to ensure that construction of buildings by the
institution is completed within a reasonable time so that the purpose of the allotment
is achieved. The Committee regret to note that despite this clear stipulation, DDA
failed to ensure the financial status in respect of 27 societies to meet the cost of
land and construction of buildings, before allotting the land to these societies whose
declared financial resources were not enough to even meet the cost of land. Thus,
it is evident that DDA had allotted land at concessional rate to 27 societies which
were other wise ineligible. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development have
contended that there is a dichotomy between Sub Rules (c) and (d) of Nazul Rules.
While Sub Rule (c) says that allotment has to be made only to non-profit making
i.e., charitable societies, Sub Rule (d) says that the society should be in possession
of sufficient funds to meet the cost of land and construction of school building.
According to him, to expect that a society should ab-initio have in its bank balance
not only sufficient funds to meet the cost of land which is substantive but also
substantial funds for meeting the cost of construction would be expecting too much
from a charitable society. The Committee do not accept the contention of the
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development.  They are of the view that going by the
spirit of the Nazul Rules, it is clear that only those societies which have sufficient
financial resources and whose motive is not to make profit should be given land at
concessional rates. What is surprising is the fact that even assuming that there is
a contradiction between Sub Rules (c) and (d) of Nazul Rules, it is evident that the
Ministry of Urban Development have not taken any action to amend the Nazul Rules
with a view to remove the contradiction therein. What is intriguing is the fact that
it is only after the Committee have taken up the subject for examination that the
Ministry have woken up and realized that there is a contradiction in Nazul Rules.
Obviously there did not exist any mechanism in DDA to verify or cross check the
financial credentials of the society that has been sponsored by Delhi Government,
which is anything but regrettable. The Committee cannot but deprecate the
casualness and the lackadaisical approach displayed by DDA to such an importance
aspect, which in the ultimate analysis had led to failure of the scheme.  The
Committee recomend that necessary guidelines should be laid down by the Ministry
of Urban Development/DDA so that land at concessional rates could be allotted to
only such societies after ensuring that they have sufficient financial resources of
their own or have tied up with Banks & other financial institutions for securing
loans so that construction of schools building and their functioning is done within
a reasonable period.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2)

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  35
35
108.    As per the allotment letters issued by the Institutional Branch of DDA, the
beneficiary societies are required to complete the construction of the school buildings
and commence functioning of the schools within two years from the date of taking
possession of the land. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that DDA
granted extension of time for construction of school buildings to 27 societies on
the grounds of inadequacy of funds and gave permission to 17 societies to mortgage
the allotted land to raise loans to meet the cost of construction. Further, in 11 cases
extension of time was permitted beyond normally permissible five-year period. This
clearly shows that there were deficiencies in the selection process of beneficiary
societies both at Institutional Allotment Committee (IAC) level of Delhi Government
as well as at the Land Allotment Advisory Committee (LAAC) of DDA, which had
led to selection of inadmissible societies. The Ministry have informed the Committee
that earlier the maximum period allowed for construction of buildings on payment
of composition fee was 20 years, which has now been reduced to 10 years for all
new allotments. However, for all surviving leases where construction has not been
undertaken even after 10 year period, the allottees have been given time limit upto
31.12.2007 to complete the construction. The Committee are of the view that 10
years is too long a period for construction of school buildings which would not only
lead to a huge time lag between the demand and supply of number of seats for
admission, but also give enough scope for misuse of land by the beneficiary societies.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development
should examine the feasibility of further reducing the maximum period allowed for
construction of school building to six years, so that the social objective of
concessional land allotment can be achieved in a reasonable time period. They also
recommend that the guidelines/norms for allotment of land to societies needs to be
made more stringent as well as friendly to the cause so as to ensure selection of
only genuine charitable institutions, with sound financial resources and which can
adhere to clear cut time limit in the construction of school buildings as well as
operationalisation of the schools. They also desire that DDA should carry out
necessary amendment to the Nazul Rules so that societies which fail to complete
construction of school buildings and make schools functional within a maximum
period of six years of allotment, their allotment of land should be cancelled.  Provision
for prohibiting transfer or resale of the allotted land to a third party should also be
made to help prevent commercial oriented societies from applying for institutional
land at concessional rates.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3)
109. The rate of composition fee levied for non-construction of buildings by the
societies within the stipulated time limit was hitherto @ Rs. 5 per square metre for
plots measuring upto 500 square in the fourth year and Rs. 10 per square meter in
the fifth year. The Committee find that the composition fee being very nominal, the
same could have been easily paid by the societies. Thus the low rate of composition
fee hitherto levied had failed to serve as an effective deterrent for delayed
construction of buildings by societies. After taking up the matter by the Committee,
the composition rates have since been revised to @ Rs. 10 and Rs. 20 respectively
in the 4th and 5th years. The Committee consider that even the revised rates are

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  36
36
still very low and would not act as a deterrent against the erring societies. What is
surprising is the fact that in respect of plots measuring above 500 square metres,
no penal fee is charged after elapse of stipulated time, i.e., in the fourth and fifth
years of allotment thereby giving encouragement to the societies for delayed
construction of buildings. This loophole provides ample scope to certain societies
to misuse their vacant plots by way of subletting etc. by repeatedly obtaining
extension of time for constructing school buildings from DDA. With a view to ensure
that the Societies operationalise the schools at the earliest and do not put the plots
for misuse, the Committee recommend that DDA should also impose composition
fee in respect of institutional plots measuring above 500 square metres after elapse
of stipulated time i.e, in 4th and 5th years of allotment. The composition fee should
also be further increased so that it can act as a disincentive and effective deterrent
compelling the land allottees to expedite construction of school buildings at the
earliest. The Committee would also like DDA to apprise them of the measures taken
to identify those societies, which have misused their vacant plots after obtaining
extension of time.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4)
110.    The Committee note that 15 societies have been allotted more than one plot
of land by DDA at concessional rates for setting up of schools on the ground that
these Societies have proven track record and experience in running schools.
However, the Committee regret to note that out of these 15 societies, 13 societies
were found not adhering to the stipulated conditions of providing freeship to the
students from weaker sections. Obviously DDA had failed to verify the credentials
of these societies and their compliance of the terms and conditions of concessional
land allotment, which shows the utter callousness shown by the concerned DDA
officials in implementing the policy of concessional land allotment. The Committee
recommend that DDA should now evolve a policy to restrict allotment of more than
one plot strictly to those societies which not only have proven track record of being
genuine charitable institutions but also found adhering to the stipulated conditions
including freeship condition. Needless to point out that the Government agencies
should enforce strict compliance of the stipulated conditions.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5)
111. The Committee are concerned to note that out of 381 societies to which land
at concessional rates had been allotted by DDA, as many as 133 societies had failed
to fulfill their obligation of providing the stipulated reservation/freeship for children
belonging to weaker sections as of March 2004. Out of these societies, 88 schools
i.e. 66 per cent were not at all adhering to the condition of providing reservation to
the children of weaker sections, thereby defeating the primary objective of the
concessional land allotment policy. The number of defaulting societies rose to 178
as per an analysis jointly carried out by DDA and Directorate of Education,
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. The Ministry of Urban
Development have attributed their failure in monitoring the compliance of the schools
to the terms and conditions of allotment, to the organizational constraints and lack
of administrative resources. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development also

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  37
37
submitted before the Committee that there would be limitations in monitoring the
operational aspects of functioning of a large number of schools in view of the existing
organizational structure and expertise of DDA. The Committee find the explanation
given by the Ministry of Urban Development as totally untenable since DDA being
the nodal agency for implementation of the scheme was supposed to have anticipated
their organizational constraints and taken measures for removal of the same well
before introducing the policy of concessional land allotment to education institutions.
That this has not been done is inexplicable.  What is more surprising is that DDA
had woken up to the fact that they did not possess the necessary mechanism to
enforce the conditions of land allotment only after a writ petition was filed in the
Delhi High Court in the matter.  The Secretary (Urban Development) was candid in
his admission that violation of terms and conditions of concessional land allotment
came to their notice only after a case was filed in the Delhi High Court in 2004.
This only shows the degree of apathy and lackadaisical attitude exhibited by DDA
in discharging its duties as well as failure of the administrative Ministry in
monitoring the functioning of DDA. Thus in the absence of proper supervision and
effective remedial action in monitoring the compliance of schools to the reservation
and freeship conditions, either by DDA or by the Delhi Government, the social
objective of providing quality education to children of weaker sections of the society
through private schools could not be achieved.  The Committee recommend that
Ministry of Urban Development should constitute an expert Committee to examine
the implementation of Concessional Land Allotment Policy of DDA in its entirety,
with a view to analyse the reasons for the failure of the scheme and to suggest
corrective measures for its proper implementation.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6)
112. Another area of concern relates to non-existence of an established mechanism
in DDA for identifying breaches of terms of allotment so as to enable timely remedial
action and proper demarcation of responsibilities between DDA and the Directorate
of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi for enforcement of the terms of allotment
at concessional rates. While the Ministry were of the view that the Schools being
under administrative jurisdiction of Directorate of Education, Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi, the freeship conditions can be best monitored
by that department for ensuring compliance. The Directorate of Education, GNCTD
maintained that the instances of violations of terms and conditions, by the societies
has to be checked through inspections etc. conducted by the organization responsible
for allotment or lease conditions.  The Committee regret to observe that the replies
of both DDA and Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) were
evasive and try to cover up their shortcomings/failures in performing their
respective roles.  While DDA had tried to pass the buck to the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi obviously to cover up its failure in setting up an
institutional mechanism for monitoring the compliance of schools to the terms of
allotment, on the other hand, the Directorate of Education as the sponsoring agency
of societies and having been empowered by the Delhi School Education Act, 1973
which enable de-recognition of schools and taking over of their management in
certain circumstances, have sought to abdicate its responsibility and shift the blame

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  38
38
entirely on DDA.  As a result of this, the objectives of Nazul land Rules and the
purpose for which the same have been formulated could not be achieved. This situation
could have been avoided had DDA shown foresightedness and incorporated necessary
provision in the allotment letters issued to the beneficiary societies making the
Directorate of Education, GNCTD, as the nodal agency responsible for enforcing
the terms and conditions of concessional land allotment. The Committee find this
highly regrettable. The Committee note that Hon’ble Delhi High Court in its order
dated 20th January 2004 had directed that it is the responsibility of the Government
of NCT of Delhi to frame the required rules, if any, for ensuring/monitoring
compliance of condition of freeship and that it would be the duty of DDA to take
action against any society committing breach of the condition after receiving
intimation to this effect from GNCTD of such violations. The Committee expect that
both DDA and the Directorate of Education would take necessary steps in this regard
and put in place a suitable joint mechanism for identifying the breaches of freeship
norms by the beneficiary schools and take appropriate action against the delinquent
schools.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7)
113. The Committee have also been informed that the Directorate of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi had issued an order on 27th April, 2004 making it
necessary for all recognized unaided schools in Delhi to provide 20 per cent freeship
to the students belonging to Economically Weaker Sections  irrespective of whether
the land has been allotted at concessional rate or not.  Based on this order, 601
schools, which were allotted land at concessional rates by land owning agencies as
well as those, which are on the private land, were found to be defaulting for the
academic year 2004-05.  Show cause notices were issued to 81 schools with a
stipulation that their recognition will be withdrawn on account of this default.
However, further action could not be taken against the defaulting schools under
Delhi School Education Act, 1973 by the Department as the Hon’ble High Court of
Delhi issued stay order on 04.02.2005 restraining the Department to take any
punitive action against these schools for their default.  In response, the Directorate
of Education had filed a   Leave Petition Appeal (LPA) against the stay order in
August 2005. The matter is stated to be still pending before the Hon’ble High Court.
The Committee expect the Ministry of Urban Development and DDA to approach the
Court for early hearing  and disposal in the matter. They would await conclusive
action in the matter.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8)
114.   Pursuant to the Writ Petition filed in the Delhi High Court, Delhi Government
provided a list of 178 defaulters to DDA to whom land was allotted by the DDA.
Subsequently, Directorate of Education had identified 33 schools where it had found
zero compliance of freeship norm. Out of these, DDA had cancelled the land lease
of Bal Bharti School, Rukmani Devi, Gyan Mandir, and Pinnacle School which were
the biggest defaulters with zero per cent compliance to the freeship condition and
accordingly initiated proceedings for eviction under Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act. The Ministry, however, expressed a view that large-

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  39
39
scale cancellation of land allotment to the defaulting schools may not be desirable
or appropriate as it may jeopardize the careers of numerous children by not allowing
them to appear in the examinations. The Ministry suggested that a more practical
approach for taking action would be taking over of the management of schools by
the Directorate of Education, GNCTD in terms of Delhi School Education Act, 1973.
While taking note of the adverse impact of large scale cancellation of land allotment
to the defaulting schools on the careers of thousands of children, nevertheless the
Committee feel that this inexcusable act of breach of freeship norms by defaulting
schools warrants imposing of penalties by DDA and the Directorate of Education,
GNCTD. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of Urban Development/
DDA in coordination with the Directorate of Education, GNCTD should find ways
and means to penalise the defaulting schools including taking over of their
management so that this will act as a deterrent to the other schools from violating
terms and conditions of concessional land allotment.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9)
115. The Committee have been informed that DDA had made a request to the
Government of Delhi for appointing two Government representatives on the
Governing Bodies of the beneficiary societies with a view to ensuring compliance
of freeship condition. The Committee welcome this initiative, which if properly
implemented, would help in exerting pressure on the school management in
ensuring compliance of the Government directives including freeship norm. The
Committee express the hope that the Ministry of Urban Development would pursue
the matter with the Directorate of Education, GNCTD so that they take necessary
steps for amending the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 enabling the appointment
of Government representatives in the Governing bodies of all the beneficiaries
Societies.  The Committee also desire that they should be apprised of the progress
made in this regard.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10)
116. According to the terms and conditions of allotment of land at concessional
rates, no increase in the rates of tuition fees would be effected without the prior
approval of the Director of Education, Government of Delhi. The institutes were
also to follow the provisions of the Delhi School Education (DSE) Act 1973 and the
rules framed thereunder in this regard. The Committee are concerned to note that
as of March 2004, as many as 343 out of 381 schools had hiked tuition fees and
other charges without the prior approval of the Directorate of Education, GNCTD
in violation of the provisions of the DSE Act, 1973. The quantum of hike ranged
from 5 per cent to 44 per cent.  However, show cause notices could be issued to only
185 defaulting schools by the Directorate of Education in May 2004 and their further
reply was awaited as of December 2004.  While no action had been taken against
the remaining 158 erring schools, the so-called action taken in the cases of 42
defaulting schools, which have responded to the show cause notice, were limited to
directing the District authorities to take action against the defaulting schools, which
in turn issued reminder notices to them and no compliance report could be compiled.
What is surprising is the fact that even after receiving information from Delhi

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  40
40
Government for non-compliance of terms & conditions of land allotment by
beneficiary schools, DDA did not take any effective action, which is anything but
inexplicable. The Committee fail to understand as to why DDA and the Directorate
of Education, GNCTD chose to remain mute spectators and did not take action
against those schools which have unauthorisedly hiked their tuition fees till Delhi
High Court took cognisance of the matter through a Writ Petition. The Directorate
of Education, GNCTD have informed the Committee that under Section 17(3) of Delhi
School Education Act, 1973, the manager of every recognized school shall, before
the commencement of each academic session, file with the Director a full statement
of the fees to be levied by such school during the ensuing academic session, and
except with the prior approval of the Director, no such school shall charge, during
the academic session, any fee in excess of the fee specified by its manager in the
said statement. The Directorate of Education can take action against the schools
only if it increases the fee during the academic session in excess of the fee structure
submitted under section 17(3). What is intriguing is the fact that the reply of the
Directorate of Education is conspicuously silent with respect to the action taken
against the schools that have enhanced tuition fee without prior approval of the
Directorate of Education as pointed by Audit. The Committee cannot but conclude
that the Directorate of Education have miserably failed to implement the Delhi School
Education Act, 1973 in so far as tuition fee charged by private schools is concerned.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development/DDA in
consultation with the Directorate of Education should analyze the reasons for this
criminal negligence and apathy displayed by the concerned officials in the matter
and also fix responsibility on the officers found responsible for this grave lapse.
The Committee hope that the Ministry of Urban Development/DDA and GNCTD
would draw lessons from this episode and take suitable effective remedial measures
to prevent such grave lapses from recurring.
The Committee note that, though Section 17(3) stipulates that the private schools
cannot enhance the school fee except with the prior approval of the Director during
an academic session, however, no guidelines/norms appears to have been laid down
for deciding the quantum of increase of tuition fees as well as justification for the
same. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development
should impress upon the GNCTD to formulate guidelines/parameters for permitting
extent of hike in the tuition fee by the schools and this should be reviewed and
approved by a Committee setup for this purpose, so that schools do not resort to
hike in tuition fees every year as a matter of routine.
                                                                    (Recommendation Sl. No. 11)
117. The Committee note that as on 31 March, 2004, an amount of Rs.1.88 crore
(Rs. 1.70 crore as ground rent and license fee and Rs.18.05 lakh as interest accrued
thereon) was outstanding against 89 societies for the period 1997-1998 to 2003-
2004. The Ministry have informed the Committee that as on 31.12.2006, an amount
of Rs. 22.17 lakh was outstanding from the 89 beneficiary societies.  What is
surprising to the Committee is the fact that even after the work of recovery of dues
was assigned to M/s IndusInd Bank, the total amount of ground rent and licence

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  41
41
fees outstanding against all the 566 beneficiary societies to which concessional
land had been allotted still remained at Rs. 11.25 crore as on 31.12.2006. The
Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry that recovery of dues is
a continuous process and depends on the response of the allottees.  The Committee
are of the opinion that despite having adequate powers to recover the dues as arrears
of land revenue under the DDA Act, 1957 and the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887,
no urgent and appropriate/effective action had been initiated by DDA for collecting/
recovering the ground rent and license fee in time from the defaulting schools leading
to accumulation of huge outstanding arrears. The Committee desire that DDA should
take immediate measures whereby all the pending dues are recovered within 3
months from presentation of the Report failing which compound interest should be
charged against the defaulters. With the ongoing updation and computerization D&C
Ledgers in respect of Institutional property and outsourcing of the work of recovery
of Ground Rent, the Committee hope that DDA would not let accumulation of
outstanding dues on account of ground rent and license fee, in future.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12)
118. The Committee were informed that keeping in view the fact that existing
provisions under the Nazul Rules are prone to exploitation by the unscrupulous
societies DDA had initiated steps for a shift in the policy of land allotment to
Educational Institutions from the present concessional mode to the auction system
of disposal, which is stated to be more transparent and prevents circumvention of
the allotment conditions and also rules out possible collusion in allotment of plots
for a particular society etc. It has been stated that this policy had already been applied
in respect of land allotment for hospitals, higher/technical education institutes, clubs
and partly for Community Halls. In respect of schools, the proposal for changing
the mode of disposal from allotment to auction is stated to be pending for
consideration in the DDA and as a consequence, allotment of land to schools has
been put on hold till a final decision in the matter of mode of allotment is taken in
consultation with the Government of Delhi.  The Committee express their
apprehension that the proposed policy of allotment of land to schools through auction
would result in total commercialization of education as this would enable only
commercially oriented societies/corporate houses with profit motive to purchase
the land outbidding the genuine charitable societies with limited financial resources.
This would not only make the already expensive school education totally unaffordable
and beyond the reach of common people, but will also result in deprivation of quality
education to the poor children belonging to economically weaker section. The
Committee are of the considered view that the exploitation of the loopholes in the
existing Nazul Rules by the unscrupulous societies could be eliminated by carrying
out necessary amendments therein, besides revamping the existing selection process
to ensure selection of genuine charitable societies. The Committee are of the
considered opinion that providing education to socially disadvantaged and weaker
sections of the society is one of the primary responsibilities of the State, which
cannot be left to the market forces. They therefore, recommend that Government
should shelve their proposal to allot Nazul land to schools through auction.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13)

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  42
42
119. Under Delhi School Education Act, 1973 inspection of schools are carried
out by the Directorate of Education and breaches of conditions of land allotment
by beneficiary schools if any detected, are reported to DDA for taking action. The
Committee are however concerned to note that inspection of the schools had not
been carried out properly by the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of
Delhi so much so that the Directorate even could not furnish the number and
details of inspections carried out to check the deviations/non-compliance of schools
to the condition of providing freeship to poor children as well as to oversee the
overall functioning of the schools under its governance.  The Committee have been
informed that during the academic session 2005-06, panel inspections were carried
out in respect of nearly 126 schools under Rule 190 read with Section 24(2). The
main irregularities observed in these inspections pertained to improper maintenance
of service records of employees, employing over-aged staff in violation of Recruitment
Rules. However, there was no reference in the inspection reports about the status
of compliance of schools to the freeship/reservation condition, thereby revealing
a serious deficiency in the inspections carried out by the Directorate. This shows
that the inspection reports were not properly appraised in the Department, which
only points to the casualness and lackadaisical attitude displayed by the Directorate
of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi to such an importance aspect. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should impress
upon the Directorate of Education, Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi to completely revamp their inspection machinery so that inspection of schools
are carried out at regular intervals by the Directorate with a view to enforcing the
strict adherence to the freeship norms by the beneficiary schools. They further
recommend that DDA in consultation with  the Directorate of Education, Government
of National Capital Territory of Delhi should examine the feasibility of setting up
a mechanism where under inspections can be jointly carried out by DDA and the
Directorate of Education in so far as implementation of terms and conditions of
concessional land allotment is concerned.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14)
120.  The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Urban Development
had made a proposal to the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi
suggesting amendment to the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 and Rules framed
thereunder for incorporating a provision stipulating adherence to the condition of
freeship as a necessary pre-condition for grant of recognition and any school that
fails to comply with the same, would attract de-recognition and/or taking over of
the management of the school. As per this proposed amendment, any violation of
terms and conditions of allotment of land would constitute a violation under the
DSE Act and Rules framed thereunder and would provide legal backing to the
enforcement of the condition of freeship in addition to taking action in terms of
the lease conditions. The Committee welcome the proposed amendment and urge
upon the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to take necessary steps
for carrying out amendment to the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 expeditiously
so that enforcement of freeship norms and other conditions of concessional land
allotment are implemented in the right earnest.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15)

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  43
43
121. The Committee are perturbed to note that there is very little or no publicity
in the media informing the general Public about the availability of freeship for
students belonging to economically weaker sections in the schools set up under
the concession land allotment policy of DDA. As a result many a time parents do
not come to know about freeships available in these schools, thereby defeating the
very purpose of the objective for which the policy has been laid down.  The Committee,
desire that wide publicity should be given by DDA/ the Directorate of Education
GNCT of Delhi about the availability of freeships in schools in different newspapers/
media so that economically weaker sections of the society come to know about
availability of the freeships in the beneficiary schools. The beneficiary schools
should also be instructed to clearly specify their social obligation of providing
freeship to underprivileged children while notifying admission procedure to public.
A mention should be made in the brochure/prospectus for admission about the
availability of freeships and reservation to wards of weaker sections. It should be
made compulsory for the beneficiary schools to display signboards clearly stating
that they are the beneficiaries of the concessional land allotment policy of DDA for
the purpose of providing 25 per cent freeship to under privileged children along
with the total number of seats available in each class alongwith number of seats
reserved/earmarked for freeship to economically weaker sections.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16)
122. The obnoxious practice of charging huge money from admission seekers as
‘donation’ fee on one pretext or the other is widely prevalent amongst the private
schools in Delhi leading to widespread commercialization of education in the capital.
The Committee are of the considered view that these schools are not supposed to be
run on commercial lines and collect hefty ‘donation’ fee in the guise of various
forms of Development Charges etc. but act as charitable societies with the social
obligation to help less privileged sections of the society in the form of providing a
reasonable freeships. The Committee recommend that Government should take
necessary steps in consultation and cooperation of GNCTD to prohibit private
schools especially the ones which were allotted land at concessional rates by DDA
from accepting donation fee from admission seekers and take stringent action
against those schools indulging in such malignant practice.   The Committee also
recommend that Government in coordination with GNCTD should lay down criteria/
norms specifying clearly the limits of development charges and other charges that
can be collected by the various private schools from the parents.
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17)
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
19 April, 2007 Chairman,
29  V aisakha, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE 12th SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006) HELD ON 30th SEPTEMBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra - Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Dr. M. Jagannath
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
6. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Officers of the C&AG of India
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya — ADAI
2. Shri R.N. Ghosh — Pr. Director (AB)
3. Shri R.K. Ghose — Accountant General (Audit), Delhi
Representatives of Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri Anil Baijal — Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Pradhan — Joint Secretary
44

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  45
45
Representatives of Delhi Development Authority
1. Shri Dinesh Rai — Vice-Chairman
2. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Finance Member
3. Shri V .K. Sadhoo — Pr. Commissioner
Representative of Department of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi
Shri Vijay Kumar — Director (Education)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC, welcomed the Members and Audit Officers
to the sitting of the Committee. The Officers of the Office of C&AG of India briefed
the Committee on specific points arising out of the Audit Paragraph 4.1 of the Report
of C&AG of India for the year ended March 2004, Union Government (Civil –
Autonomous Bodies), No. 4 of 2005 relating to “Allotment of Land to Educational
Institutions by Delhi Development Authority”.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development, Delhi
Development Authority and Department of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi
were called in. At the outset, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, gave a
brief account of the factual position with regard to Audit findings. The Committee
then sought clarifications on some points, which were duly replied by the
representatives of Ministry of Urban Development, Delhi Development Authority
and Government of NCT of Delhi.
4. After some discussion, Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry
of Urban Development, Delhi Development Authority and Department of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi to apprise the Committee, within one month, of the
precise action taken by them against the defaulting schools such as derecognition
and taking over of their management, cancellation of land allotted to them for violation
of Delhi School Education Act, 1973 and terms and conditions of allotment of land
etc .  The Committee decided to meet again after a month to hear the views of the
concerned Ministries/Organisations in this regard.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE  THIRTEENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006) HELD ON 14TH NOVEMBER , 2005
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 14th November, 2005 in
Committee Room  ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Dr. M. Jagannath
4. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri R.K Dhawan
6. Dr. K. Malaisamy
7. Shri V . Narayanasamy
8. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya — ADAI (RC)
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — DG of Audit
3. Shri Roy Mathrani — Pr. Director (AB)
4. Shri R.K. Ghose — AG (Audit), Delhi
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri Anil Baijal — Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Pradhan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Neena Garg — Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
46

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  47
47
Representatives of Delhi Development Authority
1. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Finance Member
2. Shri V .K. Sadhoo — Pr. Commissioner
Representatives of Department of Education Government of NCT of Delhi
1. Ms. Rina Ray — Secretary (Edu.)
2. Shri Vijay Kumar — Director (Edu.)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers
to the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee observed silence for a minute in memory of Shri K.R. Narayanan,
former President of India as a mark of respect to the departed soul.
4 . ** ** **
5 . ** ** **
6. Before taking up the next item on the agenda, i.e. further evidence on Paragraph
4.1 of C&AG’s Report No.4 of 2005, Union Government (Civil- Autonomous Bodies)
on “Allotment of Land to Educational Institutions by DDA”, the Chairman informed
the Committee about a communication received from the Ministry of Urban
Development on the date of sitting i.e. 14 November, 2005 intimating about the
reported inability of Vice-Chairman, Delhi Development Authority to attend the sitting
of the Committee on account of his daughter’s wedding.
7.  The Committee discussed the matter and then called in the representatives of
the Ministry of Urban Development, Delhi Development Authority and Department
of Education, Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. The Chairman informed
the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development that Public Accounts Committee was
taken very casually by Vice-Chairman, Delhi Development Authority as he did not
bother to seek prior permission of Chairman, PAC for his reported absence from the
sitting of PAC particularly when the notice for the meeting had been given to him as
early as on 25th October, 2005. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development was
told to convey the displeasure of the Committee in this regard to the Vice-Chairman,
DDA.
8. The Committee then decided to postpone the evidence to a subsequent date.
9. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE-III
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006) HELD ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to 1735 hrs. on 12th December, 2005 in Room
No. "139", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. K. Malaisamy — in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
4. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
5. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
6. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri  S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
5. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
OFFICER OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri A.K. Thakur — DG of Audit
3. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Pr. Director (AB)
4. Shri R.K. Ghose — AG (Audit), Delhi
48

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  49
49
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
1. Shri Anil Baijal — Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Pradhan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Neena Garg — Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor
REPRESENTATIVES OF DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
1. Shri Dinesh Rai — Vice-Chairman
2. Shri P.K. Pattnaik — Finance Member
3. Shri P.K. Pradhan — Joint Secretary
REPRESENTATIVE OF DEP ARTMENT OF EDUCATION, GOVERNMENT OF NTC OF DELHI
1. Ms. Rina Roy — Secretary (Education)
2. As  the Chairman (PAC) was unwell and could not attend the sitting, the
Committee chose Dr. K. Malaisamy to act as Chairman for the sitting.
3. At the outset, the acting Chairman, welcomed the Members and the Audit
Officers to the sitting of the Committee.
*** *** *** *** *** ***
4. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development. Delhi
Development Authority, Department of Education and Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi, were called in. The acting Chairman informed the
Committee that the further evidence on the subject "Allotment of Land to
Educational Institutions by Delhi Development Authority" which was to be
held on 14th November, 2005 was postponed due to the absence of Vice-
Chairman. DDA from the sitting without seeking prior permission. As the Vice-
Chairman, DDA had since tendered his unconditional apology for his absence
from that sitting, the acting Chairman suggested that the matter might be treated
as closed. Members of the Committee concurred with the Chairman's view.
5. Thereafter, the Committee resumed the oral evidence on the Paragraph 4.1 of
C&AG's Report No. 4 of 2005, Union Government (Civil-Autonomous Bodies)
on "Allotment of Land to Educational Institutions by DDA". The Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development, the representatives of the Delhi Development
Authority and the Department of Education, Government of NCT Delhi
explained to the various points and queries raised by the Committee. To certain
queries, for which the witnesses could not give satisfactory replies, the Hon'ble
Chairman directed the concerned Ministry/Department to furnish the requisite
information in writing at the earliest.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE IV
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON 19TH APRIL, 2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 19th April, 2007 in Room
No. “53”, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Raghunath Jha
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri R.K Dhawan
9. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri  S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy  Secretary
5. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri P.K. Kataria — Pr. Director of Audit (RC)
2. Shri Nand Kishore — Pr. Director of Audit (AB)
3. Ms. Sudha Krishnan — Pr. Director of Audit (DT)
4. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director of Audit (INDT)
5. Ms. Subhashini Srinivasan — Pr. Director of Audit (Railways)
50

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  51
51
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the sitting of
the Committee. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following draft
Reports:—
(A) Draft original Reports on the following sunjects:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) Allotment of land to Educational Institutions by Delhi Development
Authority;
(iii) *** *** ***
( B ) *** *** ***
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
The Chairman invited suggestions of the Members on the Draft Reports After
discussing the contents of the draft Reports in brief, the Committee adopted the
same.
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the light
of Verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of factual verification
by the Audit or otherwise and present the same to Parliament.
4. As the term of the Committee ends on 30th April, 2007, the Chairman apprised
the Members of the work done by the Committee in their current term. He stated that
during the present term, the Committee have finalized twenty Reports (11 Original
and 9 Action Taken), out of which thirteen Reports have already been presented and
the remaining seven will be presented in the current Session of Parliament. He
expressed his thanks to all the Members for the co-operation extended by them in
making this possible and hoped that this momentum would be carried through to the
next Committee.
5. The Chairman specially expressed his thanks to the Members namely,
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy, Shri Madan Lal Sharma, Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
and Shri R.K. Dhawan, for their co-operation and contribution in the successful
working of the Committee. These Members will not be part of the Public Accounts
Committee in the next term beginning from 1st May, 2007.
6. On behalf of the Committee, the Chairman placed on record their appreciation
of the Officers/Staff of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the Committee for
their hard work and dedication in rendering Secretarial assistance to the Committee.
7. The Committee also expressed their thanks to the C&AG of India and his
team for providing assistance to the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX I
I. Paragraph 4.1 of Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for
the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 4 of 2005), Union Government
(Civil—Autonomous Bodies) relating to “Allotment of Land to
Educational Institutions by Delhi Development Authority”.
CHAPTER IV : MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Delhi Development Authority
4.1 Allotment of Land to Educational Institutions
DDA allots land to educational institutions at concessional rates for setting
up of educational institutions subject to certain mandatory terms and conditions.
The primary purpose of such allotment is provision of educational facilities
particularly to weaker sections of society. However, 133 out of the 381 societies
which had been allotted land at concessional rates failed to provide the stipulated
25 per cent reservation for children from the weaker sections as of March 2004 while
343 schools hiked their tuition fees by five per cent to 44 per cent as of March 2004
without the requisite approval of the Directorate of Education in violation of the
terms of allotment. Further, instructions of the Central Government for 25 per cent
reservation for wards of Central Government employees were ignored. Moreover,
46 out of 90 schools test checked in audit were yet to be functional despite lapse
of the stipulated period of two years. This was partly attributable to the failure on
the part of DDA to ensure sufficiency of funds by societies before allotting land
as required under the Nazul Rules. Lastly, DDA failed to initiate any action to
recover outstanding dues of Rs. 1.88 crore from 89 societies despite adequate
powers to recover the dues as arrears of land revenue. Both the DDA as the land
owning agency as well as the Directorate of Education as the sponsoring department
had failed to fulfill their joint responsibility of ensuring adherence to the terms of
concessional allotment of land. No established mechanism for ascertaining breaches
of terms of allotment existed so as to enable remedial action.
4.2 Introduction
The Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of Developed Nazul Land) Rules,
1981, provide for allotment of Nazul lands to educational institutions,  i.e. schools,
colleges and universities at concessional rates. Rule 20 stipulates inter alia that
allotment of land at concessional rates may be made to a society which is registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, is of a non-profit making character and is
sponsored or recommended by a Department of the Delhi Government or a Ministry of
the Central Government. Such allotment of land to educational institutions is made
subject to certain mandatory terms and conditions. The primary purpose of such
allotment of land at concessional rates is to serve a public purpose of facilitating
establishment of or extending educational facilities particularly for the weaker sections
of society.
52

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  53
53
4.3 Allotment Procedure
The allotment of land is looked after by the Land Disposal Department of DDA
which is headed by the Commissioner (Land Disposal). He is assisted by the Director
(Lands), the Deputy Director (Institutional Land) and other subordinate staff.
Applications for allotment of land at concessional rates for setting up educational
institutions are considered initially by the Land Allotment Advisory Committee of the
Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi, in accordance with the extant
guidelines. The Committee is headed by the Commissioner–cum-Secretary (Education)
of the Government of Delhi. The recommendations of this Committee are submitted to
the Institutional Allotment Committee (IAC) of DDA which is headed by the
Commissioner (Lands) DDA. Once an allotment is approved by the IAC, land allotment
letters are issued by the Institutional Branch of DDA. The entire procedure of allotment
is to be completed within a period of three months from the date of application to
handing over of possession. The societies are thereafter required to complete the
construction of the school buildings and commence functioning within two years from
the date of taking possession of the land. It is the responsibility of these Committees
to ensure that the applicant society fulfills the prescribed conditions before approving
the allotment.
4.4 Scope of Audit
An audit exercise was carried out from April to July 2004 to assess the extent to
which the stated public objective of the allotment of land at concessional rates to
educational institutions was achieved. The principal audit objective was to review
compliance with the terms of the allotment. For this purpose, audit scrutinized the
records of the Institutional Land Branch of DDA relating to allotment of land to
educational institutions during the period 1990-91 to 2003-04. Audit also called for and
examined relevant linked records from the Directorate of Education, Government of
NCT of Delhi, which was the sponsoring department for the allotment of land at
concessional rates. During the period 1990-91 to 2003-2004, DDA allotted land to 381
registered societies for constructing buildings to establish schools. Of these, audit
selected 90 cases for detailed scrutiny. In 70 cases the stipulated period of two years,
after taking possession of land by allottees, had elapsed. Forty six of these schools
were non-functional.
4.5 Deficiencies in allotment of land—failure to ensure sufficiency of funds before
approving allotment
Rule 20(d) of Nazul Rules stipulates that no allotment shall be made unless the
institution is in possession of sufficient funds to meet the cost of land and the
construction of buildings. This provision was made to ensure that construction of
buildings by the institution is completed within a reasonable time so that the purpose
of the allotment is achieved. Despite this clear stipulation, DDA failed to ensure the
financial status of the societies to meet the cost of land and construction of buildings,
before allotting the land. As a result, the following irregularities occurred:
(a) Out of the selected cases, the declared financial resources of 27 societies
were not enough to even meet the cost of land. The stipulated two year
period had lapsed in 15 of these 27 cases.

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  54
54
(b) On grounds of inadequacy of funds, 27 societies sought and were granted
time extensions.
(c) Seventeen societies were granted permission to mortgage the allotted land
to raise loans to meet the cost of construction.
Thus, land was allotted at concessional rates to societies which were otherwise
ineligible as they did not possess the necessary resources.
4.6 Non-enforcement of terms of allotment
4.6.1 Non-enforcement of conditions relating to reservation for weaker sections of
society
One of the primary conditions stipulated in the terms of allotment of land at
concessional rates is that they will ensure admission to students belonging to weaker
sections of society to the extent of 25 per cent and grant freeships from the tuition
fees in accordance with the rules prescribed by the Government of Delhi from time
to time.
Audit ascertained that of the 24 functional schools selected for audit, 19 schools
were extending no reservation or freeships to the students from the weaker section
while five schools had provided reservation/freeships only to the extent of three
per cent to 20 per cent  against the mandatory 25 per cent as of 31 March 2004.
Hence, none of these functional schools complied with the conditions. Consequently,
not only was the social objective of allotment of land at concessional rates to provide
educational opportunities to the weaker sections defeated, but the DDA also had to
unnecessarily forgo additional revenue of Rs. 125.15 crore in these 24 plots which it
could have earned had the plots been allotted at commercial rates.
In addition to the above 24 cases, the Directorate of Education identified another
109 cases where the condition of reservation of seats for the weaker sections was
violated. No reservation had been provided in 69 cases while it varied between one
per cent to twenty four per cent in the remaining 40 cases. Thus, 66 per cent of the
total of 133 functional schools were not adhering to the terms and conditions of the
allotment relating to reservation for the weaker sections as of March 2004.
Audit also ascertained that there existed no established mechanism for
identifying breaches of terms of allotment so as to enable remedial action. It was
clearly the joint responsibility of both the DDA as the land owning and allotting
agency as well as of the Directorate of Education as the sponsoring department to
ensure adherence to the terms of allotment of land which was being allotted at
concessional rates, forgoing possible revenue, in order to achieve a public purpose.
In pursuance of the directions of the Delhi High Court of 20 January 2004, the
Directorate of Education forwarded in April 2004 a list of 133 schools to DDA for
taking necessary action. Subsequently, DDA issued show cause notices to
55 defaulting societies in June 2004 and to 76 societies in September 2004 directing
them to respond within 15 days from the date of issue of notice failing which the
allotments would be liable to be cancelled. However, no further action had been taken
though none of the 131 defaulting schools responded to the notices (November 2004).

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  55
55
Hence, neither the DDA nor the Directorate of Education initiated any action
to enforce the terms of allotment till compelled to take notice of the breaches by the
Hon’ble High Court.
4.6.2 Enhancement of tuition fees in disregard of the terms of allotment
According to the terms and conditions of allotment of land at concessional
rates, no increase in the rates of tuition fees would be effected without the prior
approval of the Director of Education, Government of Delhi. The institutions were
also to follow the provisions of the Delhi School Education (DSE) Act, 1973 and the
rules framed thereunder in this regard.
Audit ascertained that 11 schools had increased their tuition fees by 10 per
cent to 13 per cent without the prior approval of the Directorate of Education. As a
consequence of the PIL filed in the Delhi High Court, the Directorate of Education
identified 332 additional schools in March 2004 which had similarly hiked their tuition
fees without the prior approval of the Directorate or had violated the provisions of
the DSE Act by levying higher fees and other charges. The quantum of hike ranged
from five per cent to 44 per cent. However, show cause notices could be issued in
May 2004 to only 185 out of the total of 343 defaulting schools, by the Directorate
of Education and their further reply is awaited as of December 2004. Hence, neither
DDA nor the Directorate monitored the adherence of the terms of the allotment and
the provisions of the DSE Act by the societies. Further, even after receiving
information from the Delhi Government of non-compliance, DDA did not take effective
action.
4.6.3 Non-inclusion of conditions relating to reservation of seats for children of
Central Government employees
In July 1990, the Central Government instructed DDA to evolve a policy to
allot land for public schools only to such organizations which were prepared to
reserve 25 per cent of seats for wards of Central Government servants posted in
Delhi. It was also directed that a Central Government representative should be
included in the board of management or admission committee of such schools. Both
these conditions were to be incorporated in the lease deed. In case the organization
failed to admit the required minimum percentage of children of Central Government
employees, the land allotted by the Government would be liable for resumption.
Audit ascertained that this stipulation had not been included in any of the
allotment letters issued nor incorporated in the lease deeds. Thus, Central Government
employees were deprived of the intended benefit.
4.7 Outstanding dues of Ground Rent and License Fees
The Director (Land Costing) in DDA is responsible for maintaining proper
records of recoveries due on account of premia, ground rent and license fee in respect
of land allotted to educational societies for establishing schools. The ground rent
and license fee are payable by the allottee in advance failing which interest at the
rate of 10 per cent per annum is leviable. Arrears of ground rent and license fee may
be recovered as arrears of land revenue under the DDA Act, 1957.

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  56
56
Audit noted that an amount of Rs.1.88 crore (Rs. 1.70 crore ground rent and
license fee + Rs.18.05 lakh interest) was outstanding against 89 societies as on
31 March 2004. The outstanding ground rent, license fee and interest thereon related
to the period 1997-98 to 2003-2004. No action had been initiated by the DDA to recover
these dues (July 2004).
4.8 Conclusion
The terms and conditions for allotment of land to educational institutions at
concessional rates were not enforced by either the DDA as the land owning agency
or the Directorate of Education as the sponsoring Department. Consequently,
133 out of 381 societies allotted land at concessional rates, failed to fulfill their
obligation of reservations for the weaker sections. Tuition fees were hiked in violation
of the extant rules without prior permission of the Directorate of Education while
instructions relating to reservation for wards of Central Government employees were
not even incorporated in the agreement. The allotments themselves were flawed in
as much as the pre-condition of ensuring sufficiency of funds for construction and
commencement of the school was not ensured before approving allotment. There
was no coordination between the Directorate of Education and the DDA to ensure
adherence by the allottees to the obligatory terms and conditions of the allotment of
the land nor was there any mechanism to detect deviations, monitor adherence or
take action against defaulters.
The matter was referred to the Ministry in August 2004; its reply was awaited
as of December 2004.

APPENDIX II
STATEMENT SHOWING FINANCIAL STATUS OF SOCIETIES TO WHOM THE
PLOT WERE ALLOTTED BUT CONSTRUCTION NOT COMPLETED.
Sl. Name of the School Amount asked Amount shown Cost as per
No. by DDA by Society Allotment letter
12 3 4 5
1. Laxman Dass Sachdeva Letter written 1,78,69,091.18 1,86,09,845
(Sr. Sec. School)
2. Rohini Edn.Society 90,00,000/- 86,39,628 1,37,17,104
(Sr. Sec. School)
3. Lord Krishna Letter Written 1,15,06,780 1,80,66,400
Education Society
4. Modern Charitable — 70,00,000 1,80,66,420
Foundation
5. Delhi Sanskar Bharti — 1,20,59,344 1,83,93,719
Shakti Samiti
6. Lakshmi Chand — 91,00,000 1,78,56,585
Charitable Society
7. Ganga Shiksha Samiti — 61,75,833,98 1,30,28,720
8. Late Shri Behari Lal — 60,99,975 66,49,081
Education Society
9. Sh. Venkateshwar — 1,00,21,378 1,78,56,585
Education Society
10. O. P. Suri Memorial — 1,01,04,170 1,86,09,845
Education Society
11. Babson (PSB) Education — 48,00,000 52,74,153
Society
12. Bahubali Education — 11,49,947 17,12,160
Society
13. St.Free Bell Education — 37,97,176 42,10,142
Society
14. Lord Chaitanya — 1,50,05,365 1,67,21,568
Educational Society
15. Glorious Education Letter written on 11,00,000 33,36,277
Society 31-10-1990 for
Rs. 19,00,000/-
16. Vaish Aggarwal 13,11,700 25,85,020
Educational Society
(Nursery)
57

SERVER5\REPORT\1954LS\1954LS.P65  58
58
17. S.Kripal Education — 88,54,741 99,09,108
Society
18. Good News in action — 17,19,100 26,10,332
(Nursery)
19. Shanti Janak Sachdeva — 16,27,831 22,26,883
Educational Society
20. Kailash Memorial — 1,23,00,000 1,969,18,045
Educational Society
21. H.D. Garg Memorial — 21,55,149 26,25,708
Educational Society
(Nursery)
22. Minocha Educational 6 Lakh 7,59,259 12,37,675
Society (Nursery)
23. New Krishna Educational — 25,00,000 30,64,661
Society (Nursery)
24. Mata Krishnawati 69 lakhs 34,95,273 67,71,600
Memorial Education
Society (Primary)
25. Virender Ghai 50 lakhs 42,09,509 75,55,432
Educational Society
26. South Delhi Educational — 16,21,990 25,17,710
Society (Nursery)
27. Bhagwan Educational — 30,08,000 61,35,257
Society
12 3 4 5

APPENDIX III
LIST OF 17 SOCIETIES WHICH WERE GRANTED PERMISSION TO MORTGAGE
THE ALLOTTED LAND
S.No. Name of Societies
1. Rohini Ed. Society (Sr.Sec.School)
2. Lord Krishna Ed. Society
3. Modern Charitable Foundation
4. Delhi Sanskar Bharti Shakti Samiti
5. Late Shri Behari Lal Ed. Society
6. Shri Venkateshwar Ed. Society
7. O.P. Suri Memorial Education Society
8. Babson (PSB) Education Society
9. S.Kripal Education Society
10. Good News in Action (Nursery)
11. Bhagwan Education Society
12. Glorious Education Society
13. Laxman Dass Sachdeva Ed. Society
14. Shanti Janak Sachdeva Ed. Society
15. Kailash Memorial Ed. Society
16. HD Garg Memorial Ed. Society
17. Bahubali Education Society
59

APPENDIX IV
LIST  OF  DEFAULTING  SCHOOLS
School/ID School NameAddressSociety
1617176BOSCO PUBLIC SCHOOL SUNDER VIHAR PASCHIM VIHARBOSCO EDUCATIONAL
NEW DELHIWELFARE  SOCIETY
1617179 ST . MARTINS PUBLIC SCHOOL A-2 PASCHIM VIHAR ST. MARTINS EDUCATIONAL
NEW DELHI-110063SOCIETY
1617180LITTLE ANGELS SR. SEC. PUBLIC SCHOOL B-5 BLOCK PASCHIM VIHARLITTLE ANGELS PUBLIC
NEW DELHI-110063SCHOOL  SOCIETY
1617181SARASWATI BAL MANDIR A-2 PASCHIM VIHAR SAMARTH SHIKSHA SAMITI
ASHOKA APARTMENT
1617184 ST . FROEBEL SCHOOL A-3 BLOCK PASCHIM VIHAR ST. FROEBEL EDUCATION
NEW DELHI-110063SOCIETY B-1/111
1617185DOON PUBLIC SCHOOL B-2 PASCHIM VIHARABHINAV SHIKSHA SANSTHAN
NEW DELHI-110063DEON PUBLIC SCHOOL BLDG.
1617186S.S. MOTA SINGH MODEL SCHOOL (SR. SEE) GURU HARKISHAN NAGAR S.S. MOTA SINGH (NILA)
PASCHIM VIHAR NEW DELHICHARITABLE TRUST
1617188JAGAT CONVENT SR. SEC. SCHOOL GURU HARKISHAN NAGAR S. JAGAT SINGH CHADHA
PASCHIM VIHAR, N. DELHICHARITABLE TRUST
1617189JAGAT CONVENT SR. SEC. SCHOOL GURU HARKISHAN NAGAR S. JAGAT SINGH CHADHA
PASCHIM VIHAR N. DELHICHARITABLE TRUST
1618175 DA V PUBLIC SENIOR SECONDARY SCHOOLA-BLOCK JANAKPURI DA V COLLEGE MANAGING
(CHANDER NAGAR)NEW DELHICOMMITTEE
1618177RAIN BOW ENGLISH SCHOOLC-3 JANAK PURI NEW DELHI DIWANCHAND MEMORIAL
EDUCA TIONAL SOCIETY
(RGD.)
60

1618178 ST . MARKS SENIOR SEC. PUBLIC SCHOOLJANAKPURI MARG JANAKPURI ST. MARKS CHRISTIAN
NEW DELHI EDUCA TIONAL SOCIETY
1618179RICH HARVEST PUBLIC A-1 BLOCK JANAK PURI LA TE SMT. KAVSHALAYA
NEW DELHIDEVI MEMORIAL
EDUCATION SOCIETY
1618183MAMTA MODERN SR. SEC. SCHOOLVIKAS PURI NEW DELHIMAMTA MODERN
EDUCATION SOCIETY
1618184ADARSH PUBLIC SCHOOL C BLOCK VIKAS PURI NEW DELHIB.R. MEMORIAL SOCIETY
1618185BANASTHALI PUBLIC SCHOOL G-16 VIKAS PURI NEW DELHI ANAND PRAKASH
CHARITABLE AND
EDUCATIONAL TRUST
(REGD.)
1618193COLUMBIA FOUNDATION SCHOOL D-BLOCK VIKAS PURI NEW DELHILALA AMAR NATH VERMA
ED. AND HUMAN WELFARE
SOCIETY
1618194KAMAL PUBLIC SR. SEC. SCHOOL D-BLOCK VIKAS PURI NEW DELHIKAMAL EDUCATIONAL AND
WELFARE SOCIETY
1618199PUSA PUBLIC SCHOOLM-BLOCK BEHIND DDA COMMUNITYVIDYA EDUCATIONAL
CENTRE VIKAS PURISOCIETY
1618208SACHDEVA INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL WZ-49, OPP. DG-II BODELLA ALL INDIA KATARIA
VIKAS PURI NEW DELHI EDUCATION  SOCIETY
1618231 ST . PETER CONVENTBLOCK-C VIKAS PURI NEW DELHIVIKAS EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY
1618232 HOL Y INNOCENTS PUBLIC SCHOOL PLOT PS/09 VIKAS PURI N-DELHISARASWA TI EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY
61

School/ID School NameAddressSociety
62
1618223M.D.H. INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL C-1 JANAKPURI NEW DELHI MAHASHAY CHUNILAL
CHARITABLE TRUST
1720141 RY AN INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL SECTOR-C POCKET-8 VASANT KUNJ ST. SAVIERS EDUCATION
NEW DELHI-110070 TRUST
1720145 BHATNAGAR INTERNATIONAL SCHOOLSECTOR-B POCKET-10 VASANT KUNJVIRENDRA BHATNAGAR
NEW DELHI-110070SANSTHAN C/O BHATNAGAR
INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL
1413197ROCKFIELD PUBLIC SCHOOL SECTOR-3 ROHINI DELHIROCKFIELD EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY
1413198N.K. BAGRODIA PUBLIC SCHOOL AHINSA MARG SECTOR-9 ROHINI SETH SAGARMAL BAGRODIA
DELHICHARITABLE TRUST
1413207HIMALAYA PUBLIC SR. SEC. SCHOOL (RECOG .)D-12 SECTOR-VII ROHINI, DELHI TONDAN EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY
1413209VSPK INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL SECTOR-13 ROHINI DELHI GIRIRAJ EDUCATIONAL
AND WELFARE SOCIETY
1413211MOTHER DIVINE PUBLIC SCHOOL SECTOR-3 ROHINI DELHIM.D. MEMORIAL
CHARITABLE AND
EDUCA TIONAL SOCIETY
1413212PRINCE PUBLIC SCHOOL SECTOR-24 ROHINI DELHI PRINCE PUBLIC SCHOOL
SOCIETY
1413214MANVI PUBLIC SCHOOLBLOCK-C-SECTOR-7 ROHINI DELHI NAND LAL MALIA
MEMORIAL EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY
1413215ALOK BHARTI PUBLIC SCHOOL B-1 SECTOR-16 ROHINI DELHI AKHIL BHARATIYA SEWA SANGH

1413216MERRY INTERNATIONALH-19 SEC-7 ROHINIMERRY INTERNATIONAL
SENIOR SECONDARY PUBLIC SCHOOL EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY
1413217SACHDEV A PUBLIC SCHOOLSECTOR-13 ROHINI DELHISHRI LAXMAN DASS
SACHDEVA MEMORIAL
1413221DELHI PUBLIC SCHOOL ROHINI SECTOR-24 PHASE-3 ROHINI EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY
DELHIDPS SOCIETY
1413222 BAL BHARA TI PUBLIC SCHOOL SECTOR XIV ROHINI DELHICHILD EDUCATION SOCIETY
1413224VIDYA JAIN PUBLIC SCHOOLSECTOR-6 ROHINI DELHI VARDHMAN MAHA VIRA
EDUCATION SOCIETY
1413234C.R.P.F. PUBLIC SCHOOL SECTOR-XIV ROHINI DELHI DTE. GEN CRPF
CGO COMPLEX
1413239MOUNT ABU PUBLIC SCHOOLSECTOR-5 ROHINI DELHI-110005 MOUNT ABU EDUCATION
SOCIETY BUS STAND
SHALIMAR BAGH
1413247TITIKSHA PUBLIC SCHOOL SEC-11 ROHINI DELHI TITIKSHA ACADEMIC
SOCIETY (REGD.)
1413248 YUVASHAKTI MODEL SCHOOLSECTOR-3 ROHINI DELHI-110085 YUV ASHAKTI EDUCA TIONAL
SOCIETY
1514077SHIV MODERN SCHOOL WZ-68 SANT GARH, M.B.S. NAGARSHIV MODERN EDUCATIONAL
NEW DELHI-110018SOCIETY
1514085 TAGORE SCHOOL SR. SEC. 18 MAYAPURI MARG MAYAPURI RABINDRA EDUCATION
NEW DELHI-110064SOCIETY
1514093M.R. VIVEKANANDA MODEL SCHOOLWZ-79C MUKHRAM PARK EXTNSHISHU NAV NIRMAN SHIKSHA
TILAK NAGAR NEW DELHI 110018SAMITI
63

School/ID School NameAddressSociety
64
1515109GURU NANAK PUBLIC SCHOOL G-8 AREA RAJOURI GARDEN GURDWARA SRI GJURU SINGH
OPP HARI NGR SPORTS COMPLEXSABHA
NEW DELHI-110064
1617140NEO CONVENT SR. SEC. SCHOOL G-17 AREAPASCHIM VIHAR NEW DELHI-110063 NEO GURSIKH EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY C/O NEO CONVENT
SR. SEC. SCHOOL
1617169 G.S. CONVENTGH-9 NEAR TELEPHONE EXCHANGE ALL SAINTS EDUCATIONAL
PASCHIM VIHAR NEW DELHI-110087 SOCIETY
1617171JHABBAN LAL DA V PUBLIC SCHOOL J-BLOCK R.B. ENCLAVE D.A.V . COLLEGE MANAGING
PASCHIM VIHAR NEW DELHI-110063COMMITTEE
1617174WEST DELHI PUBLIC SCHOOLBG-7 BLOCK PASCHIM VIHAR NEW DIVINE EDUCATIONAL
NEW DELHI-110063SOCIETY
1617175 SAVJOUR CONVENT SR. SEC. SCHOOL A-2 BLOCK BALBEER SINGH MARGJ.N. EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY
PASCHIM VIHAR NEW DELHI-110063
1105208GREENFIELDS PUBLIC SCHOOL DILSHAD GARDEN GTB ENCLA VE GREENFIELDS PUBLIC SCHOOL
DELHI-110093
1105213HUDA MODERN PUBLIC SECONDARY SCHOOLBLOCK-A NEW ZAFARABADMADARSA SHAMA SAMITI
DELHI-110032
1106182KALA NIKETAN SENIOR SECONDARY SST-5 DURGAPURI EXTN SHIMLA EDUCATION &
BAL VIDYALAYADELHI-110093WELFARE  SOCIETY
1106191 NUTAN VIDYA MANDIR G .T.B. ENCLA VE DILSHAD GARDEN NUTAN VIDYA MANDIR
DELHI-110093SOCIETY (REGD.)
1106222GREENWAY MODERN SR. SEC. SCHOOLBETWEEN POCKETS A&DSHANTI JANAK SACHDEV A
DILSHAD GARDEN-110095DILSHAD GARDEN

1309173 ST . VY AS SCHOOLBK-1, SHALIMAR BAGH POORVIUNIQUE EDUCA TION
DELHI CULTURAL WELFARE
SOCIETY
1309175DARBARI LAL DA V MODEL SCHOOL BN-BLOCK SHALIMAR BAGH DA V COLLEGE MANAGING
DELHI-88COMMITTEE
1309182HAPPY PUBLIC SCHOOLAG-SHALIMAR BAGHBHAGWAN EDUCATIONAL
DELHI-110088SOCIETY
1309187NEW SHALIMAR PUBLIC SCHOOL BLOCK BM PASHCHIMISHALIMAR EDUCATION
SHALIMAR BAGH DELHI-110088 SOCIETY
1309189GURU TEGH BAHADUR PUBLIC SCHOOLD1/14 MODEL TOWNGURU SINGH SABHA
DELHI-110009MODEL TOWN DELHI
1309197GOODLEY PUBLIC SCHOOLB/D BLOCK SHALIMAR BAGH
DELHI-110088
1411180GURU ANGAD PUBLIC SCHOOLGURUDWARA COMPLEX PHASE-ISRI GURU SINGH SABHA
ASHOK VIHAR DELHI-110052
1411182MAHARAJA AGRASEN MODEL SCHOOL PITAMPURA  DELHI-110088SRI AGRASEN EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY (REGD.)
1411184APEEJAY SCHOOL PLOT NO-10, ROAD NO-42 SAINIK VIHAR PITAMPURAAPEEJAY EDUCA TION
DELHI-110034SOCIETY APEEJAY
STYA HOUSE NO. 14
1411186 D.A.V . PUBLIC SCHOOLASHOK VIHAR PHASE IV DAV COLLEGE MANAGING
DELHI-110052COMMITTEE
1411187MAHARAJA AGARSEN PUBLIC SCHOOL ASHOK VIHAR PHASE-IVAGARW AL WELFARE SOCIETY
DELHI-110052(REGD.)
65

School/ID School NameAddressSociety
66
1411188SPRING FIELD SCHOOLFD-BLOCK PITAMPURA SPRING FIELD EDUCATIONAL
DELHI-110088SOCIETY
1411192M.M. PUBLIC SCHOOL VASUDHA ENCLA VE PITAMPURA M.M. SCHOOL SOCIETY
DELHI-110034
1411195 ST . PRA Y AG PUBLIC SCHOOLZONE H-4/5 PITAMPURA ST PRAY AG EDUCATION
DELHI-110034SOCIETY (REGD.)
1411196ROSE MARRY PUBLIC SCHOOL PITAMPURA DELHI-110088SAMTA CRUZ ED SOCIETY
1411209RISING STAR ACADEMY 110 RAJ NAGAR PITAMPURARISING STAR ACADEMY
DELHI-110034EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY
1411212GURU NANAK PUBLIC SCHOOLPUSHPANJALI ENCLAVESRI GURU SINGH SABHA
PITAMPURA DELHI-110034PUNJABI  BAGH WEST
1411218 HAR VARD PUBLIC SCHOOL PARV ANA ROAD SARASWATI VIHAR J.K. SARASW ATI DEVI
PITAMPURA DELHI-110034MEMORIAL EDU. SOCIETY
1411219RUKMINI DEVI PUBLIC SCHOOL CD BLOCK PITAMPURA SETH POKHAR MAL
DELHI-110088 EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY
1411220 NEW ST A TE ACADEMY SR. SEC. SCHOOLZONE H/4 PITAMPURAVIDYAPATI SANSTHAN (REGD.)
NEAR TELEPHONE EXCH.
SARASWATI VIHAR
1411221SACHDEV A PUBLIC SCHOOL FP BLOCK MAURY A ENCLA VESHRI LAXMAN DASS SACHDEVA
PITAMPURA DELHI-110088MEMORIAL EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY (REGD.)
1411223 BAL BHARA TI PUBLIC SCHOOL PUSHPANJALI ENCLAVECHILD EDUCATIONAL
PITAMPURA DELHI-110034SOCIETY   C/O BAL BHARATI
PUBLIC SCHOOL

1411224 TYAGI PUBLIC SCHOOL B-3 KESHAV PURAM, DELHI M.S. EDUCATION SOCIETY
1411226LITTLE FAIRY PUBLIC SCHOOL ASHOK VIHAR PH-I, DELHI-110052 MOHAN MEMORIAL
EDUCA TIONAL SOCIETY
1413189 RY AN INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL SECTOR-25 ROHINI LAWRENCE EDUCATION
NEW DELHI-110085SOCIETY
1413196VIKAS BHARATI PUBLIC SCHOOLSECTOR-24 ROHINI, NEW DELHIGUGAN SOLANKI MEMORIAL
EDUCA TIONAL SOCIETY
1001161MODERN MONTESSORI SCHOOL RISHABH VIHAR, DELHI-110092AUDHUNIK BAL SHIKSHA
SAMITI
1001162ARUNODAY A PUBLIC SCHOOL 1-A KARKARDOOMAARUNODAYA EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONAL AREA SOCIETY
VIKAS MARG , DELHI
1001163BHARAT NATIONAL PUBLIC SCHOOLRAM VIHAR KARKARDOOMABHARAT NATIONAL
DELHI-110092EDUCATION SOCIETY
1001167 ST . JOSEPHS ACADEMY SAVITA VIHAR, DELHI ST. JOSEPHS ACADEMY
1001171VIVEKANAND INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL6/50 STREET NO-4, VISHWAS NAGARVIVEKANAND EDUCATIONAL
DELHIAND CULTURAL WELFARE
SOCIETY
1001175 DA V PUBLIC SCHOOLSRESHTA VIHAR, DELHI-110092 DA V COLLEGE AND
MANAGEMENT SOCIETY
1001181VIVEKANAND PUBLIC SCHOOL B BLOCK ANAND VIHAR NEW VIVEK EDUCATION
DELHI-110092SOCIETY
1001182VIVEKANAND SCHOOL D BLOCK, ANAND VIHAR, VIVEKANAND SHIKSHA
DELHI-110092SAMITI
67

School/ID School NameAddressSociety
68
1001183 DA V PUBLIC SCHOOL DAYANAND VIHAR, DELHI DA V COLLEGE MANAGING
COMMITTEE, NEW DELHI
1002268 SAL W AN PUBLIC SCHOOLKONDLI GHAROULI COMPLEX, SALWAN EDUCATION
MAYUR VIHAR, DELHI-96TRUST
1002269ANGEIS PUBLIC SR. SEC. SCHOOL3/33 TO 3/35 SAHDEV GALISHAHDARA ANGELS
VISHWAS NAGAR, SHAHDARA EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY
1002271NEW OXFORD PUBLIC SCHOOL B BLOCK (B-122A)MINOCHA EDUCATION
VIVEK VIHAR-1, DELHISOCIETY
1002273ASN SR. SEC SCHOOL MAYUR VIHAR, DELHI-110091SANATAN DHARAM ADARSH
SHIKSHA SANASTHAN
1002275 ST . ANDREWS SCOTS SR. SEC. SCHOOL I.P. EXTN. (P ATPARGANG) ST. ANDREWS
DELHI-92EDUCATION SOCIETY
1002276AHLCON PUB. SCHOOL MAYUR VIHAR, PHASE-I,SHANTI DEVI PROGRESSIVE
DELHI-91EDUCATION SOCIETY
1002277 BAL BHA V AN PUBLIC SCHOOL POCKET B, MAYUR VIHAR, LAGAN KALA UPVAN
PHASE-II, DELHI-91 SOCIETY
1002278 MOTHER TERESA PUBLIC SCHOOL C-BLOCK, PREET VIHAR,SECULAR EDUCATIONAL
DELHI-92SOCIETY
1002279EVERGREEN PUBLIC SCHOOL V ASUNDHARA ENCLA VE, JOTIRMOY BAL SHIKSHA
DELHI-96 SAMITI
1002281 STAREX INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL FC-26, DALLUPURA,EAST POINT EDUCATION
VASUNDHARA ENCLA VE, DELHI-110096SOCIETY
1003206S.L.S. D.A.V . PUBLIC SCHOOL MAUSAM VIHAR, DELHI D.A.V . COLLEGE MANAGING
COMMITTEE DARBARI
LAL MARG, NEW DELHI

1003235BHARTI PUBLIC SCHOOL SWASTHYA VIHAR, VIKAS MARG,BHARTI EDUCA TIONAL
DELHI-110092 TRUST
1003236BAL MANDIR SR. SEC. SCHOOL DEFENCE ENCLAVE, VIKAS MARG BAL HARIKAT SHIKSHA
DELHI-110092 SAMITI, DELHI
1003239SAAI MEMORIAL SCHOOL SAI BHAWAN GEETA COLONYSAI MEMORIAL EDUCATION
NEAR PETROL PUMP, DELHI-110031SOCIETY
1104309 GYANDEEP VIDYA BHAWANBLOCK C-10 YAMUNA VIHAR, GYANDEEP EDUCA TION
SECONDARY SCHOOLDELHI-110053SOCIETY
1104311LOVELY ROSE PUBLICC-9 YAMUNA VIHAR, DELHI-110053 LOVELY ROSE EDUCATIONAL
SECONDARY SCHOOLSOCIETY
1104312CANTERBURY PUBLIC SCHOOLYAMUNA VIHAR, DELHI-110053 CANTERBURY EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY
1105176 NA V JEEV AN ADARSH PUBLICGALI NO-7, GAUTAM PURI, NA V JEEV AN ADARSH
SR. SEC. SCHOOLDELHI-110053PUBLIC SHIKSHA SAMITI
1720148 DA V PUBLIC SCHOOL B-1 VASANT KUNJ, D.A.V. COLLEGE
NEW DELHI-110070 MANAGEMENT
AND TRUST SOCIETY
1720149DELHI PUBLIC SCHOOL SECTOR-C, POCKET-5, VASANT KUNJ,DELHI PUBLIC SCHOOL
NEW DELHI-110070SOCIETY DPS STAFF FLATS
1720150 GY AN MANDIR PUBLIC SCHOOL E-BLOCK NARAINA VIHAR,KHOSLA EDUCATION
NEW DELHI-110028FOUNDATION  (REGD.)
1720155MASONIC PUBLIC SCHOOL B-1 VASANT KUNJ, NORTHERN INDIA MASONIC
NEW DELHI-110070CHARITABLE SOCIETY
1720159THE HERITAGE SCHOOL D-II VASANT KUNJ,SHRI K.D. RAJPAL
NEW DELHI-110070 EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY
69

School/ID School NameAddressSociety
70
1821185DELHI PUBLIC SCHOOLPHASE-1, SECTOR-3 DWARKA,DELHI PUBLIC SCHOOL
NEW DELHI SOCIETY
1821186 ST . GREGORIOS SCHOOLPLOT NO. 12, SECTOR 11,THE GREGORIOS ORTHODOX
DW ARKA, NEW DELHI-110045CHURCH SOCIETY
1821188 ST . MAR Y SCHOOLSECTOR-19, DW ARKA, ST. MARY EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY
NEW DELHI-110075
1821189VENKATESHWAR INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL SECTOR-10 DWARKA,SRI VENKASESHWARA
NEW DELHI-110075 EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY
1821190 MODERN CONVENT SCHOOL SECTOR-IV DWARKA, MODERN CHARITABLE
NEW DELHI-110075FOUNDATION VISHWA
BHARATI WOMENS WELFARE
1822181VISHWA BHARTI PUBLIC SCHOOLSECTOR-6 DWARKA, NEW DELHIINSTITUTION
1923250BIRLA VIDYA NIKETAN PUSHP VIHAR IV , NEW DELHIBIRLA ACADEMY OF ART AND
CULTURE
1923255GENERAL RAJS SCHOOL BALBIR SEXENA MARG, P.C. RAJRATANAMS
HAUZ KHAS-110016INSTITUTIONS
1923285AMITY INTERNATIONAL SCHOOLROAD NO. 44, M. BLOCK, SAKET,RITNAND BALVED EDUCATION
NEW DELHI-110017 FOUNDATION
1924147THE WULDEN SCHOOL A-BLOCK NITI BAGH,GABDOOD SINGH MEMORIAL
NEW DELHI-110049 EDUCATIONAL TRUST
1925249DON BOSCO SCHOOLALAKNANDA, NEW DELHI-110019SALESIAN BROTHERS SOCIETY
OF DELHI
1925261KALKA PUBLIC SCHOOLALAKNANDA, NEW DELHI-110019 KALKA EDUCATION
SOCIETY

1925262 D.A.V . PUBLIC SCHOOL KAILASH HILLS, NEAR C-BLOCK, DA V COLLEGE MANAGING
EAST OF KAILASH, N. DELHI-110065COMMITTEE
1925263 ST . GEORGES SCHOOLALAKNANDA, N. DELHI-110019
1925264DAISY DALES SR. SEC. SCHOOLE-331 A, EAST OF KAILASH ADARSH SANGEET
NEW DELHI-110065VIDYALAY A NEW GREEN
FIELD  EDUCATIONAL
SOCIETY, NEW DLEHI
1925266NEW GREEN FIELDS SCHOOLALAKHANANDA-110019
1925287D.A.V . PUBLIC  SCHOOL SARITA VIHAR GAUHAN MARG DA V COLLEGE AND
OPP PKT-E MANAGING SOCIETY
1925291GLORY PUBLIC SCHOOLPOCKET-B, SARITA VIHAR,LAXMI SHIKSHA SOCIETY
NEW DELHI-110044
1925296 RY AN INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL KONDLI, GHLOULI COMPLEX, MOTHER INDIA
DELHI-110096 EDUCATION  SOCIETY
71

APPENDIX V
STATEMENT SHOWING THE RECOVERY & OUTSTANDING DUES IN RESPECT
OF INSTITUTIONAL SOCIETIES FOR THE PERIOD OF 1997-98 TO 2003-04
Sl. No. Y ear Amount received (in lacs)
1 1997-98 1.59
2 1998-99 11.42
3 1999-00 10.22
4 2000-01 11.01
5 2001-02 17.21
6 2002-03 16.70
7 2003-04 4.38
72
MGIPMRND—1954LS—5-6-2007.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING AUTHORISED AGENTS:—
Sl. No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle, V asavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006
(A.P.)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002 (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem House, Connaught Place, P.B. No.
1113, New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari Colony, Kingsway Camp, Delhi-
110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency, IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double Storey,
New Delhi-110024 (T.Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd. P-23, Connaught Circus, New
Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar, Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3, Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18, Ansari Road New Delhi-110002 (T.No.
23262515).
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80, Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054 (T. No. 23911966).
11. M/s. Seth & Co. Room No. 31 D, Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market, Delhi-
110006. (T.No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol Bagh, New
Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125, Municipal Market, Connaught Place, P .B. No.
708, New Delhi-110001 (T. No. 23411919).
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. A/15-17, Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C, Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
73

74
MADHYA PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28 Malviya Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-
462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No.
2621, Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India), 649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd Dhobi
Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PONDICHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative Assembly Department, Pondicherry-
605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies, 123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37, Royappettah High Road, Chennai-
600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P.).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair Building, Hazrat Ganj, GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.