    SEVENTIETH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE DUE TO DELAY IN TAKING
DECISION—CHENNAI PORT TRUST
[Action taken on 49th Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING, ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
(DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING)
Presented to Lok Sabha on  28.04.2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  28.04.2008
LOK  SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2008/Chaitra, 1930 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1871
Price: Rs. 33.00
© 2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi – 110 002.

C O N T E N T S
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008) ........................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................   (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations   which   have   been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 6
CHAPTER  III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government..................................................... 18
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Obser vations replies to  which have
not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ...................................................................... 19
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies..... 21
PART II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2007-2008) held on 07.04.2008...................................... 22
APPENDIX
Statement of Recommendations and Observations ..... 24

COMPOSITION OF  THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
 (2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Members
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
#6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
#16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
*19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
†20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Shri Brijesh Kumar — Committee Assistant
*Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Public Accounts w.e.f. 9th January, 2008 on his
resignation from Rajya Sabha.
† Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Public Accounts w.e.f. 2nd April, 2008 consequent to
expiry of his term of Rajya Sabha.
# Ceased to be Members of the Committee on Public Accounts w.e.f.  6th April, 2008 on their
appointment as Ministers.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman,  Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Seventieth Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 49th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Avoidable expenditure due to delay in taking decision—Chennai
Port Trust”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 7th April, 2008. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have also
been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
9th April, 2008 Chairman,
20th Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

1
CHAPTER-I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Forty-ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Paragraph 12.1 of the Report of the C&AG of
India for the year ended 31 March, 2005, No. 3 of  2006, Union Government (Civil—
Autonomous Bodies) relating to ‘‘ Avoidable expenditure due to delay in taking
decision—Chennai Port Trust".
2. The Forty-ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha on
22nd August, 2007 contained 10 Recommendations/Observations. The Action Taken
Notes have been received from the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways
(Department of Shipping) in respect of all the Recommendations/Observations and are
broadly categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which  have been accepted by the
Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 10 (Para Nos. 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48 and 50)
Total: 8
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
- NIL -
Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 3 and 9 (Para Nos. 43 and 49)
Total: 2
Chapter-IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
- NIL -
Nil
Chapter-V
3. In their 49th Report on the subject, the Committee had examined the issues
involved in the evaluation, selection, construction and procurement of dredger by the

2
Chennai Port Trust Authorities for dredging operations. The Committee had noticed
that the inconsistent decisions of the Port Trust and the Ministry, after placing a work
order for construction and supply of a dredger, led to belated delivery of the dredger
with consequent avoidable additional expenditure of Rs. 2.61 crore incurred on dredging
operation done through outsourcing. The scrutiny of the subject by the Committee
had brought out the following lacunae in the decision-making process in the Chennai
Port Trust, for the procurement of dredger:
(i) Shifting stands taken by the Ministry and Chennai Port Trust at various
points of time in respect of owning/outsourcing of the dredger;
(ii) T aking the decision to sell the dredger under construction to Dredging
Corporation of India (DCI) on cost basis and then to in-charter it for
dredging activities in the Port, without conducting feasibility study/cost
analysis;
(iii) Non-utilisation of new dredger during September 2003—March 2004;
(iv) Deficiencies in the cost evaluation method adopted by the Port Trust;
(v) Shortage of crew for dredging operations; and
(vi) Uncalled for interference from the Ministry in the internal working of the
Chennai Port Trust and that too in matters in relating to commercial decisions
such as owning vis-à-vis outsourcing of dredger.
A.  Gist of Committee's Recommendations/Observations made in 49th Report
4. The Committee had made the following important Recommendations/
Observations in their 49th Report on the subject:—
/circle6The Ministry should do a detailed study/analysis of the pros and cons involved
in the owning vs. outsourcing issue, keeping in view the emerging operational
requirements in the Ports.
/circle6 While deploring the all-round delay on the part of Chennai Port Trust in taking
crucial decisions concerning the procurement of the dredger, the Committee
have recommended that the Ministry should oversee and ensure setting up of
an in-built mechanism in the Port Trust to pre-empt such avoidable delays in
decision-making.
/circle6The Port Trust Authorities should review their internal processes for better
evaluation of financial decisions.
/circle6The Port Authorities should initiate early action for filling up vacant positions
so as to carry out dredging operations optimally.
/circle6A thorough cost-benefit analysis is required while taking major financial decisions
for better working of the Port Trust.
/circle6While viewing the interventions by the administrative Ministry in the internal
matters of the Port Trust, with particular reference to commercial and investment

3
decisions, the Committee have urged the Ministry to desist from such interference
and allow functional and operational autonomy to the management of all the
Port Trusts in the country.
5. The Government have accepted most of the recommendations made by the
Committee. The Action Taken Notes as furnished by the Ministry of Shipping, Road
Transport and Highways (Department of Shipping) on the various Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report have been reproduced in
the relevant chapters of this Report.
B.  Dredging Operations
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4)
6. In regard to the Committee's recommendation for conducting a detailed study/
analysis of the pros and cons involved in the owning vs. outsourcing of dredger and
dredging operations, the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways
(Department of Shipping) in their Action Taken Note have informed as under:—
‘‘As advised by the Public Accounts Committee, a Committee has been
constituted which has been entrusted with undertaking a detailed study/analysis
on the pros and cons involved in owning vs. outsourcing issues keeping in view
the emerging operational requirements in the Ports. The composition of the
Committee is as under:—
(i) Joint Secretary (Ports) — Chairman
(ii) Chairman, Chennai Port Trust
(iii) Chairman, Visakhapatnam Port Trust
(iv) Chairman, Cochin Port Trust
The terms of reference for the Committee is as under:—
(i) Detailed study of various aspects which may be taken into account to
analyse the pros and cons of the options of owning a dredger by the port
vs. outsourcing the same.
(ii) Apart from the financial and other criteria, the Committee will also keep in
view the emerging operational requirements of the Ports.
(iii) Formulate a policy for decision on owing  vs. outsourcing the dredger by
the Port.
The recommendations of the Committee will be examined and implemented without
delay.''
7. The Committee recommend that the study entrusted by the Ministry on issues
connected with taking decisions for in-house dredging or outsourcing should be
completed expeditiously and the Committee be apprised on the study findings and the
follow-up action taken thereon.

4
C.  Delays in decision-making
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5)
8. Regarding setting up of an in-built mechanism in the Port Trust in order to avoid
delays in decision-making, on crucial issues such as dredging, the Ministry have
informed:—
‘‘The delay in the procurement of dredger was due to re-invitation of the Global
Tender as the earlier tender had to be cancelled on technical grounds. Since the
Port has to follow the normal procedures while re-inviting the tender again, the
process took more time. However, as recommended by the Committee, in future,
efforts will be made to reduce the delay in the process of decision-making.
It is further informed that a Standing Committee under the Chairman with
Dy. Chairman, FA&CAO, the concerned Chief Engineer and Head of the Project
as Members of the Committee is in existence in the Channai Port Trust. The
Standing Committee considers the investment proposals of the Port Trust before
recommending the same for consideration of the Port Trust Board. The Standing
Committee has been requested to ensure that all efforts are made to reduce the
delay in process of decision-making. It shall also monitor the status of various
projects/proposals of the Port Trust and report the progress to the Port Trust
Board on a quarterly basis.''
9. Considering the fact that the delay in the procurement of a replacement dredger
by Chennai Port Trust was enormous, exceptionally long and beyond reasonable time
frame, the Committee would like to emphasize that the Ministry's request to the
Standing Committee of Chennai Port Trust to reduce the delays in the process of
decision-making should not be treated as a routine advice. The Committee would like
the Standing Committee of the Port Trust to function in a professional manner while
ensuring that important decisions are taken with alacrity. The Department of Shipping
should also remain pro-active and facilitate professional functioning of the Standing
Committee and the Port Trust through their nominees.
10.  Apprising the Committee about the specific action taken to review their internal
process for better evaluation of financial decisions, and for making cost-benefit analysis
while taking major financial decisions, the Ministry have stated as follows:—
‘‘Chennai Port has been advised that the Standing Committee should consider
the project viability, financial and technical viability, analysis of alternatives,
sources of financing, mode of execution of project, calculation of IRR/ERR,
phasing of expenditure and provision in the plan outlay and annual plan while
considering the investment proposals of the port trust. The Port has also been
advised to undertake due diligence studies, keeping in view all possible factors,
including anticipated scenarios. The Standing Committee of Chennai Port shall
consider the analysis and recommend the investment proposal for approval of
the competent authority.''
11. The Committee trust the Ministry's advice to the Chennai Port Trust and its
Standing Committee for better and more comprehensive evaluation of financial

5
decisions including investment proposals will be adhered to in letter and spirit for
efficient functioning of the Port Trust.
D.  Functional Autonomy of Port Trusts
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 3 and 9)
12. The Committee's examination of the subject has brought into sharp focus the
policy issue relating to the autonomy of the Port Trust and the larger role and
responsibility of the administrative Ministry vis-a-vis Port Trust Management. The
Committee had observed that since the Port Trust is in a better position to assess its
requirements relating to dredging and the various operational/functional difficulties
connected therewith, the Ministry should have left the matter regarding owning and
outsourcing of dredger to the commercial wisdom of the Port Trust. It was further
observed by the Committee that although the Dredging Corporation of India has
offered a very competitive rate to undertake dredging operations, the Ministry did not
accept the same for a long term agreement with them. Thus the Chennai Port Trust
could not take a decision which would have been prudent commercially.
13. The Ministry have stated in their Action Taken Note that during a meeting held
on 29th September 2001 to review the performance of Chennai Port Trust, then Secretary
(Shipping) suggested that Chennai Port may explore the possibility of selling the new
dredger under construction and in-charter the same on the lines of Jawaharlal Nehru
Port Trust. Accordingly, the Port explored the possibility of selling the Dredger under
construction to Dredging Corporation of India ''on cost plus basis''.
14. On the issue of allowing adequate functional and operational autonomy to the
management of all the Port Trusts, the Ministry have informed in their Action Taken
Note that with a view to optimizing the performance of major ports so as to contribute
to the development of the country's infrastructure and to remain globally competitive,
the Ministry issue directives to the organizations under their administrative control.
According to the Ministry, these directives may not be construed as an interference in
the internal affairs of the autonomous bodies/PSUs.
15. The Committee regret to note that the Ministry's reply is silent about
Committee's observation regarding the possibility of a long term agreement with the
Dredging Corporation of India at the first instance itself instead of initially deciding
to construct own dredger and then changing the position in favour of outsourcing by
way of in-chartering the same for the dredging operations at the Port. The Committee
expect that replies of the Government are point-wise and specific. The Committee
would accordingly, await specific reply from the Ministry on this issue. They would
also reiterate their viewpoint that the Ministry should desist from intervening in the
commercial/operational matters concerning the Port Trust, decisions on which should
be best left to the professional experts serving the Port.

CHAPTER-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Chennai Port being an artificial Port has to be dredged throughout the year to
remove the siltation/material spilled alongside the berths in order to maintain the
required depths in basin, berths and approach channels. The Chennai Port Trust
maintains the required depth in the Port with its own dredger Coleroon and by engaging
dredgers of the Dredging Corporation of India (DCI). The Port Dredger Coleroon had
completed its economic life of 20 years by 1996 and therefore required replacement.
The Port had decided in August 1996 to procure a dredger fork replacing Coleroon,
which was ultimately procured in 2004, after frequent shifting of stands between owning
and outsourcing during the years 2001 to 2004. Audit had pointed out that failure to
decide between outsourcing the Chennai Port's dredging requirements and owning a
dredger contributed to the delay in delivery of the dredger ordered by the port and
resulted in avoidable expenditure of Rs. 2.61 crore. The Committee's examination of the
Audit Para has revealed major flaws in the decision-making process in the Chennai
Port Trust which are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 1 Appendix............... Para 41 of 49th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It has been brought out that Chennai Port is an artificial Port and requires dredging
throughout the year to maintain the depth in the approach channel basins and the
alongside berths. The Port required a dredger in 1996 as replacement for the Trust's
old dredger Coleroon which had outlived its economic life of 20 years. The observation
of Audit that by deploying the new dredger for maintenance dredging, Port has
incurred an additional expenditure of Rs. 2.61 crores is  not correct. The Audit has
arrived at the above amount by applying the rate of Rs. 61.68/- cu.m on dredged
quantity of 891437 cu.m for the period from September, 2003 to March, 2004. It is
understood that Audit has taken into account the operating expenditure of
Rs. 2,63,54,560/- and depreciation of Rs. 2,86,30,478/- to arrive at the per unit cost of
Rs. 61.68/- cu.m. However, Audit has not considered the component of interest on
Capital which is also part of any costing exercise undertaken to arrive at the rate for
deployment of any equipment. Though TAMP has proposed a return on capital
@13.50% even assuming a conservative rate of interest of 6.50% and taking into
account the corresponding general administration expenses, the per unit cost of
dredging by deploying Port's own Dredger works out to Rs. 110.33 per cu.m. If the
above rate is applied on the dredged quantity of 891437 cu.m. the total dredging
expenditure works out to Rs. 9.83 crores, by deploying the Port's own dredger. As
against this, the Port had spent a sum of Rs. 7.58 crores only towards dredging by
6

7
DCI. (Owing to the large quantum of dredging, the rate offered by DCI was low for
that particular period). Thus, the Port did not incur any additional expenditure but
instead it saved an amount of Rs. 2.25 crores by outsourcing the dredging work to
DCI. However, recommendations of PAC will be taken into consideration for future
acquisitions.
Sd/-
(RAKESH SRIVASTAV A)
Recommendation
The Committee have noted that the Chennai Port Trust initially made a strong case
for procuring a new dredger, as the most economical option and decided in May 1996
to procure the dredger to replace the old dredger "Coleroon". After four years of
dithering, the work order was finally awarded to Cochin Shipyard only on 18.11.2000 to
construct and deliver the dredger within 24 months. The justification for procurement
of a new dredger was that the Dredging Corporation of India (DCI) was not able to
provide the dredger, whenever the Port required to carry out the maintenance dredging
on need basis or during emergency situation. However, noting the high cost of dredging
by the Port owned dredger, the Secretary (Shipping) suggested in September 2001 to
the Port Trust to examine the possibility of selling  the dredger under construction and
then to in-charter it for dredging activities in the Port. The factors attributed for the
higher unit cost of dredging by the Port dredger, due to which it had been decided  to
sell the dredger, were under-utilization of the dredger due to non-availability of a
dredger master and shortage of crew and the extra expenditure incurred on account of
the salaries etc. of crew members.
Subsequently, in December, 2001 the Chennai Port Trust constituted a committee to
examine the suitability and capacity of the proposed dredger for their operational
requirements. In its report submitted in January, 2002, the Committee inter-alia came
to the conclusion that the proposed dredger under construction was capable of catering
to the requirements of maintaining dredging to the requisite levels and to carry out all
maintenance dredging including sand trap dredging, which thus only re-inforced the
original decision taken by the Port Trust in 1996 that owning of a dredger was the most
economic option. Instead of taking  into consideration the Report of the Committee of
officers and bringing out the findings of the committee to the notice of the Ministry,
the Port Trust based  on the suggestion of the Secretary (Shipping), simply approached
Dredging Corporation of  India (DCI) in January, 2002, to buy the dredger under
construction, which speaks volume of the casual approach of the Port authorities in
the matter. The Ministry have however contended that Chennai Port Trust had compared
the cost of outsourcing only with respect to the rate of unit cost quoted by Dredging
Corporation of India (DCI) at that time which was very low during that period, which
led to their conclusion that outsourcing of dredging operation was more economical
than owning the dredger.
[SL.No. 2 Appendix………Para 42 of 49th Report of PAC, 14th (Lok Sabha)]

8
Action Taken
Observations of the Committee is noted.
Sd/-
 (RAKESH SRIVASTA VA)
Recommendation
The Committee  further note that as per the own admission of the Ministry, since the
dredging operations are essential and are required to be undertaken on a continuous
basis in order to maintain adequate depths, the Chennai Port Trust had decided to
procure a dredger of its own to meet the operational requirements under all circumstances.
The Committee are surprised that instead of taking into consideration all these factors
and bring to the notice of the Ministry the operation requirements in the long run, the
Chennai Port Trust simply obeyed the Ministry's diktat to sell the dredger ignoring the
cost effectiveness of owning a dredger at that given point of time. Even though the
Ministry and Chennai Port Trust have pleaded that the  dithering and delay in decision-
making did not lead to additional costs of the Port Trust, it is obvious the dredger which
should have been in place by the year 2002 actually came to be installed at the Port Trust
only in 2004, resulting in avoidable additional expenditure incurred on dredging operations
done through outsourcing. In this context, the Committee desire that the Ministry should
do a detailed study/analysis of the pros and cons involved in the owning vs. outsourcing
issue, keeping in view the emerging operational requirements in the Ports and apprise
the  Committee about the policies formulated as a result thereof.
[Sl.No. 4 Appendix………Para 44 of 49th Report of PAC, 14th (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As advised by the Public Accounts Committee, a Committee has been constituted
which has been entrusted with undertaking a detailed study/analysis on the  pros and
cons involved in owning vs. outsourcing issues keeping in view the emerging operational
requirements in the Ports. The terms of reference for the Committee is as under:
(i) Detailed study of various aspects which may be taken into account to analyse
the pros and cons of the options of owning a dredger by the port vs.
out-sourcing the same.
(ii) Apart from the financial and other criteria, the Committee will also keep in
view the emerging operational requirements of the Ports.
(iii) Formulate a policy for decision on owning vs. outsourcing the dredger by the
Port.
The recommendations of the Committee will be examined and implemented without delay.
Sd/-
(RAKESH SRIVASTAV A)

9
Recommendation
The Committee are astonished to note that Chennai Port decided in August, 1996 to
procure a replacement dredger, but floated a global tender only in 1998 for the same.
This tender was however, cancelled on technical grounds and the tender was
re-invited in 1999.  Subsequently, the work order was placed for the replacement dredger
on M/s. Cochin Shipyard Limited in 2000 with the scheduled delivery date in
December 2002. However, the new dredger could be delivered only in May 2004. It is
thus clearly evident that there was inexplicable delay at  every stage of decision-
making. In this regard, the Secretary (Shipping) during his deposition before the
Committee also conceded that there was indeed a delay in the process of acquisition of
new dredger and that the action for procurement should have been  initiated by the
Port Trust in  1993-94 itself. While deploring the all-round delay on the part of Chennai
Port in taking crucial decisions concerning their operations, the Committee would like
to emphasise that the Ministry should oversee and ensure setting up of an in-built
mechanism in the Port Trust to pre-empt such avoidable delays in decision-making.
[Sl.No. 5 Appendix………Para 45 of 49th Report of PAC, 14th (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The delay in the procurement of dredger was  due to re-invitation of the Global
Tender as the earlier tender had to be cancelled on technical grounds. Since the Port
has to follow the normal procedures while re-inviting the tender again, the process
took more time. However, as recommended by the Committee, in future, efforts will be
made to reduce the delay in the process of decision-making.
It is further informed that a Standing Committee under the Chairman with
Dy. Chairman, FA&CAO, the concerned Chief Engineer and Head of the Project as
Members of the Committee is in existence  in the Chennai Port Trust. The Standing
Committee considers the investment proposals of the Port Trust before recommending
the same for consideration of the Port Trust Board. The Standing Committee has been
requested to ensure that all efforts are made to reduce the delay in process of decision-
making. It shall also monitor the status of various projects/proposals of the Port Trust
and report the progress to the Port Trust Board on a quarterly basis.
Sd/-
(RAKESH SRIVASTAV A)
 Recommendation
The Committee further observe that the unit cost calculation for Dredging with
own dredger and outsourcing the operation varied over the period 2002-04. While
the initial calculations before the decision to sell the dredger indicated owning a

10
dredger as cheaper, the calculation made after the decision to sell the dredger was
taken concluded that outsourcing was cheaper. Then again, after taking over the
dredger finally, the Port Trust reported that dredging with newly owned dredger was
more economical than outsourcing. Such varying conclusions over a period of less
than three years i.e. from January 2002 to October 2004 would only point to serious
deficiencies in the cost evaluation method adopted by the Port Trust. Although the
Ministry have contended that the evaluation is based on the circumstances prevailing
during a particular period, contradictory conclusions arising out of cost evaluations
based on same assumptions only brings out the serious deficiencies in the financial
system obtaining in the Port Trust. The Committee cannot agree with the Ministry's
contention that decisions may vary according to circumstances, as the decision
relating to  owning a dredger is a major investment decision running into crores of
rupees and involving long term interests of the port and which thus cannot be left to
vagaries of time. The Committee are of the view that any cost evaluation between
two options viz. owning and outsourcing should have been based on all relevant
factors including futuristic scenario, so that a long term contract could be effected
for dredging works in the Port. Accordingly, appropriate parameters could have
been incorporated in the cost-evaluation system of the port. The Committee now
desire that henceforth, while taking such crucial financial decisions. "due diligence"
studies should be carried out, keeping in view all possible factors including anticipated
scenarios. Once a decision is taken, it should not be changed to the detriment of the
business interests of the Organisation. In the light of this experience, the Committee,
would like the Port Trust to review their internal processes for better evaluation of
financial decisions. The Committee would await specific action taken by the Ministry/
Port Trust in this regard.
[Sl.No. 6 Appendix………Para 46 of 49th Report of PAC, 14th (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As far as possible, the Port is taking investment decision after analyzing the pros
and cons of the proposal. Only after detailed evaluation, decision is taken about the
best option to be adopted. As advised by the Committee, Chennai Port has been
advised that the Standing Committee should consider the project viability, financial
and technical viability, analysis of alternatives, sources of financing, mode of execution
of project, calculation of IRR/ERR, phasing of  expenditure and provision in the plan
outlay an annual plan while considering the investment proposals of the port trust.
The port has also been advised to undertake due diligence studies, keeping in view all
possible factors, including anticipated scenarios. The Standing Committee of Chennai
Port shall consider the analysis and recommend the investment proposal for approval
of the competent authority.
Sd/-
(RAKESH SRIVASTAV A)

11
Recommendation
The Committee note with concern that there are shortage  in various categories of
the dredger's crew due to various reasons like Superannuation, VRS, non-availability
of certified/trained crew, restrictions imposed by the Government, higher
remuneration/salary given to the crew members in the open market etc. for optimal
utilization of the new dredger. When the dredger 'Cauvery' was inducted into the
Chennai Port Trust, there were shortages of crew  for dredge pipe operation,  winch
operation,  steering etc., even for a singled shift operation,  despite the crew of the
earlier dredger 'Coleroon' being also available for manning it. Presently, the new
dredger is dredging about 4 lakhs cu.m. per year only, which is about 1/3rd of its total
capacity, on account of shortages of certified/trained manpower in the officer as well
as crew categories. The Committee trust that Port authorities would initiate early
action for filling up vacant positions so as to carry out dredging operations optimally.
[Sl. No. 7 Appendix................. Para 47 of 49th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Action has already been initiated by the Port for outsourcing the manning  of the
dredger so that it could operate optimally.
Sd/-
(RAKESH SRIV ASTAV A)
Recommendation
The Committee are unable to understand as to why the Ministry/Chennai Port
Trust had purchased T.S.H.D. Cauvery costing about Rs. 52.24 crore having total
capacity of 12.00 lakhs cu.m. per year when they knew that they were unable to utilise
the full capacity. This factor assumes significance particularly in the backdrop of high
costs involved in the operation of Port dredger and which prompted the Ministry to
suggest to  the Port Trust to opt for outsourcing. Purchasing higher capacity dredger
and keeping it idle by utilizing its 1/3rd capacity, is evidently against the basic tenets
of financial propriety. The Committee thus would once against like to emphasize the
need for a thorough cost-benefit analysis while taking major financial decisions for
better working of the Port Trust.
[Sl. No. 8 Appendix................... Para 48 of 49th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Chennai Port Trust plans to outsource manning of the Dredger for its optimal
utilization.
Ministry has issued instructions to Chennai Port that while considering the
investment proposals of the Port Trust, the Standing Committee shall consider the
project viability, financial and technical viability, analysis of alternatives, sources of
financing, mode of execution of the project, calculation of IRR and EIRR, phasing of

12
expenditure and provision in the plan  outlay and annual plan. Ministry has directed
the Standing Committee to take decisions on investment proposals after going through
rigorous financial analysis of various options. The port has been advised to carry out
due diligence studies  keeping in view all possible factors including anticipated
scenarios. Such analysis shall show the benefits of the option chosen in clear terms,
both financially and operationally. The Standing Committee shall consider the analysis
and recommend the investment proposal for approval of the competent authority.
Sd/-
(RAKESH SRIVASTAV A)
Recommendation
Another issue which has come to fore is the role of Boards of Trusts. The Committee
are not sure whether the issue dealt with in this Report relating to acquisition of
dredger was placed before the Board of Chennai Port Trust which apart from various
experts, has nominees of the Central Government. The Committee would accordingly
await necessary clarification from the Government in this regard.
[Sl. No. 10 Appendix.................. Para 50 of 49th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Issue of acquisition was placed before the board at every stage starting from seeking
board approval to acquiring the dredger, to sell the dredger and finally to accept the
Dredger. Board was kept posted at all times of all developments. A statement giving
details of the dates on which the matter was placed before the Board of Chennai Port
is enclosed herewith.
Sd/-
(RAKESH SRIVASTAV A)

(Refer to Para 50 of 49th Report of PAC)
DATES ON WHICH THE MA TTER W AS PLACED BEFORE THE BOARD OF
CHENNAI  PORT TRUST
Sl. Board Date Decision Taken
No. Resolu-
tion No.
1. 107 23-08-1996 Approved the estimate for Rs. 70 crores for the procurement
of  New Dredger of 1700 cu.m. in replacement of Port's
Dredger Coleroon.
2. 124 30-10-2000 To award the Contract for the procurement of Dredger to
M/s Cochin Shipyard Ltd. @ cost of Rs. 52,24, 30, 243/-
3. 67 29-08-2002 In principle approval for selling the new Dredger under
construction to M/s Dredging Corporation of India.
4. 140 24-01-2003 Board approved disposal of new Dredger Cauvery under
construction in Cochin Shipyard Ltd., to M/s Dredging
Corporation of India subject to the condition that the
proposal for entering into a long term contract with the
Dredging Corporation of India for the annual maintenance
dredging needs of the Port, is approved by the Government.
5. 8 09-05-2003 (1) To sell the Dredger if required by Dredging Corporation
of India without long term maintenance dredging contract.
(2) If Dredging Corporation of India fails to buy the Dredger
 to invite Global tenders giving the option of selling the
Dredger Cauvery and rechartering it or just selling it.
6. 165 27-01-2004 (1) To dispose the Dredger from M/s. Cochin Shipyard
Ltd., or to identify a suitable buyer.
(2) If there are no possibilities for disposal M/s. Cochin
Shipyard  Ltd., be informed to deliver the Dredger to Chennai
Port.
7. 213 26-03-2004 To advise Cochin Shipyard Ltd., to deliver the Dredger
Cauvery immediately to Chennai Port, release payments to
Cochin Shipyard Ltd., and to negotiate charges towards
retention.
13

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING, ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING
 (PORTS WING)
No. PO- 28015/1/2005-DRG (V ol. III) New Delhi, the 24th January, 2008
To,
Chairman,
Chennai Port Trust,
Chennai-600 001.
Chairman,
Visakhapatnam Port Trust,
Visakhapatnam.
Chairman,
Cochin Port Trust,
Cochin.
Sub: Para No. 12.1 of C&AG Report No. 3 of 2006 regarding avoidable
expenditure due to delay in taking decision—Dredger Coleroon
Sir,
I am directed to refer to the above mentioned subject and to state that keeping in view
the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee, a Committee is hereby constituted
to undertake a detailed study/analysis of the issues involved in the owning vs.
outsourcing of the dredger.
2. The composition of the Committee is as under:
(i) Joint Secretary (Ports) — Chairman
(ii) Chairman, Chennai Port Trust
(iii) Chairman, Visakhapatnam Port Trust
(iv) Chairman, Cochin Port Trust
3. The terms of reference for the Committee is as under:
(i) Detailed study of various aspects which may be taken into account to analyse
the pros and cons of the options of owning a dredger by the port vs.
outsourcing the same.
(ii) Apart from the financial and other criteria, the Committee will also keep in
view the emerging operational requirements of the Ports.
14

15
(iii) Formulate a policy for decision on owning  vs. outsourcing the dredger by
the Port.
4. The Committee will submit a report to the Government at the earliest.
Yours faithfully,
 Sd/-
(RAJEEV KUMAR)
DEPUTY SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

GOVERNMEMT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF SHIPPING, ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS
DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING
No. PO-28015/1/2005-DRG New Delhi, the 24th Jan., 2008
To,
The Chairman,
Chennai Port Trust,
Chennai.
Sub: Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in its
49th Report.
Sir,
   I am directed to refer to paras 45 & 46 of the 49th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee and to reproduce the relevant extracts thereof:—
(i) Para 45: "While deploring the all-round delay on the part of Chennai
Port in taking crucial decisions concerning their operations, the
Committee would like to emphasise that the Ministry should oversee
and ensure setting up of an in-built mechanism in the Port Trust to pre-
empt such avoidable delays in decision-making."
(ii) Para 46: "The Committee are of the view that any cost evaluation between
two options, viz., owning and outsourcing should have been based on all
relevant factors, including futuristic scenario so that a long term contract
could be effective for dredging works in the Port. Accordingly, appropriate
parameters could have been incorporated in the cost evaluation system of
the Port. The Committee now desires that henceforth while taking such
crucial financial decisions, 'due diligence' studies should be carried out,
keeping in view all possible factors, including anticipated scenarios. Once a
decision is taken, it should not be changed to the detriment of the business
interests of the organization. In the light of this experience, the Committee
would like the Port Trust to review their internal processes for better
evaluation of financial decisions. The Committee would await specific action
taken by the Ministry/Port Trust in this regard."
2. It is noted that a Standing Committee under the Chairman with Dy. Chairman FA &
CAO, the concerned Chief Engineer and Head of the Project as Members of the
Committee is in existence in the Chennai Port Trust. The Standing Committee considers
the investment proposals of the Port Trust before recommending the same for
16

17
consideration of the Port Trust Board. The Standing Committee is requested to ensure
that all efforts are made to reduce the delay in process of decision-making. It should
also monitor the status of various projects/proposals of the Port Trust and report the
progress to the Port Trust Board on a quarterly basis.
3. The Ministry has noted that while considering the investment proposals of the
Port Trust, the Standing Committee considers the following aspects:—
(i) Project viability
(ii) Financial and technical viability
(iii)  Analysis of alternatives
(iv)  Sources of financing
(v)  Mode of execution of the project
(vi)  Calculation of IRR and ERR
(vii)  Phasing of expenditure
(viii)  Provision in the plan outlay and Annual Plan
The Ministry directs that the Standing Committee should take decisions on
investment proposals after going through rigorous financial analysis of various options,
'Due diligence' studies should be carried out keeping in view all possible factors,
including anticipated scenarios.  Such analysis must show benefits of the option
chosen in clear terms, both financially and operationally. The Standing Committee
shall consider the analysis and recommend the investment proposal for approval of
the competent authority.
4. You are requested to note the above instructions for compliance.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(RAJEEV KUMAR)
DEPUTY SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

CHAPTER-III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
18

CHAPTER-IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
However, the judgment of the Ministry and the Port Trust were belied when the DCI
refused to buy the dredger under construction unless the Port Trust entered into a
long term dredging contract (10 to 20 years). As the dredging policy was due for review
in 2004, the Government did not consider prudent for the Port Trust to enter into a long
term agreement with DCI. The Committee find it strange that having decided to go in
for outsourcing of dredging operation by Dredging Corporation of India on grounds
of cost efficiency, economy and trends in other major ports, the Ministry did not allow
Chennai Port Trust to enter into a long term agreement with the Dredging Corporation
for their dredging work. If the Ministry, in the first place, had wanted only a short-term
outsourcing arrangement, it is a matter of contradiction that they directed the Port
Trust to sell the dredger under construction and eventually in-charter it for dredging
operation at the port. Although the Ministry have tried to justify their shifting positions
as "decisions based in circumstances", it cannot escape logical conclusion that the
Ministry made an undesirable interference in the affairs of the Port Trust outside the
purview of policy. The Committee would like to be apprised about the precise
circumstances and the objective conditions behind the Ministry's directive to Chennai
Port Trust in the case in question and also about similar instances in the last three
years or so when the Ministry's directive ran contrary to the decisions/recommendations
of the Port Trust.
[Sl. No. 3 Appendix........Para 43 of 49th Report of PAC(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT), another major Port under the administrative
control of this Department did not own any dredger and was getting the dredging
done by in-chartering a dredger, apparently with good results. Therefore, during a
meeting held on 29.09.2001 to review the performance of Chennai Port Trust, the then
Secretary (Shipping) suggested that Chennai Port may also explore the possibility of
selling the new dredger under construction and in-charter the same on the lines of
JNPT. Obviously, the main consideration was the need to bring down the cost of
dredging in Chennai Port. Accordingly, the Port explored the possibility of selling the
Dredger under construction to another Government organization viz., Dredging
Corporation of India (DCI), "on cost plus basis".
This Department has always been striving at optimizing the performance of major
Ports, so as to contribute to the development of the country's infrastructure. In order
to achieve this objective and to remain globally competitive, Ministry after analyzing
all the prevailing conditions, issues directives to the organizations under its
19

20
administrative control. However, these directives may not be construed as an
interference in the internal affairs of the autonomous bodies/PSUs. It was with the
noble intention of reducing the costs of Chennai Port that Ministry suggested
in-chartering. Further a good example of JNPT had led the Ministry to give such a
suggestion.
Recommendation
The Committee's examination of the subject has brought into sharp focus the
policy issue relating to the autonomy of the Port Trust and the larger role and
responsibility of the administrative Ministry vis-a-vis Port Trust Management. Facts
discussed in the preceding paragraphs abundantly reveal that there has been uncalled
for interference from the Ministry in the internal working of the Chennai Port Trust
and that too in matters relating to commercial decisions such as owning vis-a-vis
outsourcing of dredger for meeting their operational requirements. Since the Port
Trust is in a better position to assess its varied requirements relating to dredging
and the various operational/functional difficulties relating thereto, the Ministry
should have left the matter relating owning and outsourcing of dredger to the wisdom
of the Port Trust rather than issue instructions preemptorily, which tantamounted to
erosion of the functional and managerial autonomy of the Port Trust. On the other
hand the Chennai Port Trust being in a better position to understand their dredging
requirements, should have brought to the notice of the Ministry the difficulties
faced by them in accepting the decision of the Ministry for outsourcing. What
perturbs the Committee is fact that though in December, 2003 the Dredging Corporation
of India had offered a very competitive rate of Rs. 96.63 per cu.m., the Ministry did
not accept the same for a long term agreement with them in view of the impending
change in the dredging policy in 2004. As a consequence thereof, the Port Trust
could not take a prudent commercial decision. Such interventions by the administrative
Ministry in the internal matters of the Port Trust, particularly those relating to
commercial and investment decisions, do not augur well for the healthy functioning
of the Port Trust as it has to operate and survive in the market and face fierce
competition from other ports, both public and private, in attracting traffic. The
Committee hope that the Ministry would desist from such interference in the internal
matters of Port Trusts and would allow adequate functional and operational autonomy
to the managements of all the Port Trusts in the Country.
[Sl. No. 9 Appendix..........Para 49 of 49th Report of PAC(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
This Department has always been striving at optimizing the performance of major
Ports, so as to contribute to the development of the country's infrastructure. In order
to achieve this objective and to remain globally competitive, Ministry after analyzing
all the prevailing conditions issues directives to the organizations under its
administrative control. However, these directives may not be construed as an
interference in the internal affairs of the autonomous bodies/PSUs.

CHAPTER-V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES
— NIL —
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
9th April, 2008 Chairman,
20 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
21

PART-II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 7TH APRIL, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. on 7th April, 2008 in Room No. "51"
(Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
7. Shri Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Janardhana Poojary
10. Shri K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4.  Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Shri Jayanta Chatterjee — Director General (AB)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC  welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. He mentioned that two of the Members of PAC have resigned/retired from
Rajya Sabha, namely, Shri Suresh Bhardwaj, resigned from membership of Rajya Sabha
22

23
on 9th January, 2008 after he was elected to Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly
and Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, who has retired from Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2008. He
also congratulated S/Shri Raghunath Jha and V. Narayanasamy Members of PAC, who
have become Ministers in the Union Government w.e.f. 6th April, 2008.
3. The Committee placed on record their appreciation for the valuable contribution
to the Committee made by these Members.
4. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports:—
(i) Draft Report on Para 6.8 of C&AG's Report No. 3 of 2007, Union
Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies) relating to "Injudicious release
of Grants" by the University Grants Commission (UGC);
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on 49th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating
to "Avoidable expenditure due to delay in taking decision—Chennai
Port Trust"; and
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on 50th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating
to "Delay in finalisation of demands".
5. The Chairman invited suggestions of the Members on the Draft Reports. After
discussing the contents of the draft Reports in detail, the Committee adopted the same
with some verbal changes and authorised the Chairman to finalise and present these
Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.
6. Further, it was decided that the Committee would hold their next sitting on
21st April, 2008.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS
Sl. Para No. Ministry/ Recommendations/Observations
No. Department
12 3 4
1. 7 Shipping, Road The Committee recommend that the study
Transport and entrusted by  the Ministry on issues connected
Highways with taking decisions for in-house dredging or
(Department of outsourcing should be completed expeditiously
Shipping) and the Committee be apprised on the study
findings and the follow-up action thereon.
2. 9 -do- Considering the fact that the delay in the
procurement of a replacement dredger by Chennai
Port Trust was enormous, exceptionally long and
beyond reasonable time frame, the Committee
would like to emphasize that the Ministry's request
to the Standing Committee of Chennai Port Trust
to reduce the delays in the process of decision-
making should not be treated as a routine advice.
The Committee would like the Standing Committee
of the Port Trust to function in a professional
manner while ensuring that important decisions
are taken with alacrity. The Department of
Shipping should also remain pro-active and
facilitate professional functioning of the Standing
Committee and the Port Trust through their
nominees.
3. 11 -do- The Committee trust that the Ministry's advice to
the Chennai Port Trust and its Standing
Committee for better and more comprehensive
evaluation of financial decisions including
investment proposals will be adhered to in letter
and spirit for efficient functioning of the Port Trust.
4. 15 -do- The Committee regret to note that the Ministry's
reply is silent about Committee's observation
regarding the possibility of a long term
India at the first instance itself instead of initially
deciding to construct own dredger and then
24

25
changing the position in favour of out-sourcing
by way of in-chartering the same for the dredging
operations at the Port. The Committee expect that
replies of the Government are point-wise and
specific. The Committee would accordingly, await
specific reply from the Ministry on this issue.
They would also reiterate their viewpoint that the
Ministry should desist from intervening in the
commercial/operational matters concerning the
Port Trust, decisions on which should be best
left to the professional experts serving the Port.
12 3 4
GMGIPMRND—1702LS—4-6-2008.