69
INJUDICIOUS RELEASE OF
GRANTS
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
INJUDICIOUS RELEASE OF GRANTS
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
(Department of Higher Education)
&
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
Presented  to Lok Sabha  on 28 April, 2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 April, 2008
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2008/Chaitra, 1930 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1870
Price : Rs. 26.00
© 2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok  Sabha (T welfth Edition) and  Printed by the Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008) ................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ (v)
REPORT PART - I Background Analysis ............................................... 1
PART - II Observations and Recommendations ..................... 8
ANNEXURES
I . Minutes  of  the  Sittings of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 11th June, 2007 and 30th July, 2007 ....................... 12
II. Minutes  of  the  Sittings of the  Public  Accounts  Committee
held on 7th April, 2008 ........................................................... 17
APPENDIX
Para 6.8 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended 31 March, 2006 (No. 3 of 2007), Union Government
(Civil — Autonomous Bodies) relating to "Injudicious release of
Grants."............................................................................................................ 19

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2007 - 2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
#6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
#16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
*19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
†20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Committee Officer
#Ceased to be Members of the Committee on Public Accounts w.e.f. 6th April, 2008 on their
appointment as Ministers.
*Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Public Accounts w.e.f. 9th January, 2008 on his
resignation from Rajya Sabha.
†Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Public Accounts w.e.f. 2nd April, 2008 consequent
to expiry of his term of Rajya Sabha.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Sixty-ninth Report relating to "Injudicious release of Grants" on Para 6.8
of the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2006 (No. 3 of 2007),
Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies).
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2006 (No. 3 of
2007), Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies) was laid on the Table of the
House on 14th May, 2007.
3. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) and University
Grants Commission on the subject at their sittings held on 11th June, 2007 and
30th July, 2007. The Committee considered and finalised this Report at their sitting
held on 7th April, 2008. Minutes of the sittings form Annexures to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations and
Observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the Officers of the Ministry
of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) and University
Grants Commission for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing information
and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with
the Committee.
 N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
9 April, 2008 Chairman,
20 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

REPORT
PART  I
BACKGROUND  ANALYSIS
Injudicious release of Grants
This Report is based on the Audit review contained in Para 6.8 of the Report of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31st March, 2006
No. 3 of 2007, Union Government (Civil-Autonomous Bodies) relating to "Injudicious
release of Grants" by the University Grants Commission (UGC).
I. Introductory
The University Grants Commission (UGC) was established under an Act of
Parliament in 1956 for the purpose of coordination, determination and maintenance of
standard of university education. The Act empowers the Commission, among other
things, to allocate and disburse grants to universities for their maintenance and
development. It continued to assist universities and colleges for development by
making budgetary plan provisions for various programmes. Development Assistance
Programme initiated by UGC is intended to improve infrastructure and basic facilities
in universities and colleges, so as to achieve at least the thresh-hold level of
infrastructure apart from bringing about qualitative development. Development grants,
including grants under special schemes, are being provided to all eligible State
Universities. Such grants facilitate creation, augmentation and upgradation of
infrastructural facilities that are not normally available from the State Government or
other sources of funds.
2. Keeping in view the disparities between Urban/Semi-urban and Backward
Areas, UGC formulated two schemes during the Xth Plan Period (2002-2007) entitled
'Special Development Grant to Young Universities' (SDGYU) and 'Special Development
Grant to Universities in Backward Areas' (SDGUBA). Details of these schemes are as
follows:—
(i) Special Development Grant to Young Universities (SDGYU)
The scheme is to create basic and bare minimum infrastructure and to improve/
expand the existing infrastructure of Young Universities so as to enable them to
attract more students and teachers and to help introduce new courses.
(ii) Special Development Grant to Universities in Backward Area (SDGUBA)
The Scheme is to focus attention on universities located in backward areas and
to improve infrastructure, to achieve optimum teaching equity and access at least to
the threshold level. This will help the universities to evolve to a level where they are
able to introduce innovations in academics and meet the challenges of globalization.

2
3. The prescribed norms as stated by the UGC for the eligibility of the universities
for getting financial assistance under these two schemes are as under:—
(i) The universities which have been included under Section 2(f) and declared
eligible to central assistance under Section 12(B) of the UGC Act of 1956
during VIII Plan onwards were eligible to receive grants from UGC under this
new scheme of Special Development Grants for Young Universities.
(ii) All eligible universities under section 2(f) and 12(B) of the UGC Act of 1956
and physically located in backward areas (an exhaustive list of backward
areas, made available by the Planning Commission) has been considered
under the scheme. Special Development Grant to Universities in Backward
Area, all Central and Deemed to be Universities getting 100% non-plan grant
are excluded from the purview of this scheme.
4. The Committee desired to know about the system existing in the UGC for
release of Grants to Universities. The UGC in a written reply stated as under:—
"The UGC takes decision based on the advice of the Expert Committee.
Generally in a plan period, the allocation is decided by the Expert Committee
and the grant is released in instalments on receipt of utilization certificate of
the earlier sanctioned grant. This procedure for release of grants is reviewed
in the beginning of each Five Year Plan and necessary improvements are
incorporated."
II. Audit paragraph/findings
5. Audit scrutiny of the subject has revealed that an Expert Committee of officials
of UGC met in March 2004 to assess the proposals received from different universities
under the above schemes and recommended 13 universities under SDGYU and 11
under SDGUBA for release of advance grant at the rate of Rs. 21 lakh and Rs. 25 lakh
respectively subject to condition that the grant may be used only after receiving item-
wise final approval of the UGC. The Expert Committee also recommended that the
eligible universities be called for presentation of their projects. Accordingly, UGC
released (March 2004) Rs. 5.48 crore as advance grant to these 24 universities with
the stipulated conditions.
6. Audit ascertained that UGC conveyed its approval for incurring the expenditure
on the said schemes to 20 universities after a lapse of time ranging between 8 and
23 months and approvals to three universities under Special Development Grant to
Young Universities (SDGYU) and one university under Special Development Grant to
Universities in Backward Area (SDGUBA) scheme were not conveyed till March 2006.
Thus pre-mature release of grant by UGC pending presentations from the universities
and subsequent delay in conveying the final approvals to 20 universities and non-
approval to four universities resulted in blocking of funds amounting to Rs. 5.48 crore
for a period ranging between 8 and 24 months and consequent loss of interest of
Rs. 59.02 lakh for the period from April 2004 to March 2006 computed at Union
Government's borrowing rate of 8.4 per cent per annum.

3
7. In response to audit observation, the Ministry of HRD endorsed (August
2006) the views of UGC that since the universities took very long time in sending their
presentations, it was decided by the latter to release an 'on account' grant to these
universities. It added that interest accured out of the grant would be treated as an
additional grant.
8. The Committee have dealt with the Audit findings and the position explained
by the Ministry of HRD (Department of Higher Education) and University Grants
Commission in the succeeding Paragraphs.
RELEASE OF GRANTS
9. When asked about the procedure for assessing the actual requirements of
funds by the universities, the UGC in a written note replied as under:—
"The proposals received by the UGC from universities are scrutinized and
representatives of universities are invited for interface meetings. On the
basis of the detailed discussion with representatives, Expert Committee,
recommends release of funds, and the UGC allocates within the ceiling of
scheme, keeping in mind the overall availability of funds."
10. While detailing the functioning of the Expert Committee further, the Ministry
of HRD (Department of Higher Education) stated as under:—
"The University Grants Commission decides institution-wise allocation of a
scheme with the help of an Expert Committee. The Expert Committee as was
constituted for these two schemes, was to interact with the representatives
of the universities and on the basis of interaction, was to recommend quantum
of assistance to be provided to the universities under these two schemes.
The Committee generally meets once in a year to consider the proposals and
thereafter the approval and grants are released. The frequency of meetings
of the Expert Committee is decided based on the proposals received under
the scheme."
11. On being asked as to why there was delay of 8 and 23 months in conveying
the approval for incurring the expenditure on the said schemes to the 20 universities,
the UGC explained:—
"It is true that the universities were asked to send their proposal which were
to be vetted by an Expert Committee of UGC and after Committee's approval
Universities were to be invited for presentation before Expert Committee.
Since the universities took very long time in presenting and preparing
documents for presentation, it was decided by the UGC on 31st 
 March, 2004
to release Rs. 21.00 lakh to each of 13 Young Universities and Rs. 25.00 lakh
to each of 11 universities in the Backward Area as first instalment to the
identified and eligible universities under the two schemes respectively."

4
12. The Committee asked as to whether any reminders were issued to the
concerned universities for making timely presentation of their projects. The UGC in
their written submission replied as under:—
"After allocating a generic sum to each of the universities identified under
both the schemes, these universities were invited on 13th & 14th September,
2004 to decide in consultation with the respective university, the item of
works to be taken up. The specific problems/queries of each university were
dealt with separately by way of correspondence, whenever necessitated."
13. To a query about the logic behind recommendations of the Expert Committee
of officials of UGC for release of advance grant of universities with the condition that
grant may be used only after receiving item-wise final approval of UGC, the UGC in a
written note furnished their comments as under:—
"The logic behind recommendations of Expert Committee of the officials of
UGC for release of grant to universities was to ensure early utilization of the
funds of the universities for the purpose it was meant. However, since the
proposal submitted by these universities were found incomplete and
ambiguous, the universities were requested to indicate their priority of
creating infrastructure. Till such time, it was considered appropriate to inform
the universities to hold back the amount thus released to ensure that
universities do not spend the funds on any other item not envisaged in the
schemes. This process led to delay in starting the item of works and
consequently resulted in slow utilization of funds by the universities."
14. Asked about the time limit, if any, prescribed with a view to ensuring that
presentation of their projects by the universities should be made with the prescribed
time schedule, the UGC in a written note submitted that they were streamlining the
procedure in the matter and a calendar of events i.e., inviting proposals, scrutiny,
interface meeting, approval and release of grant was being introduced in XI Plan.
15. Audit scrutiny also highlighted that blocking of funds amounting to Rs. 5.48
crore for a period ranging between 8 and 24 months also resulted in consequent loss
of interest of Rs. 59.02 lakh for the period from April 2004 to March 2006. Enumerating
about the system for adjusting the interest amount earned by the universities due to
gap between the time when the grant is received from the UGC and it is actually spent,
the UGC in a written note submitted as under:—
"The grantee institution has to ensure timely utilization of grants-in-aid for
the purpose for which it was sanctioned. Since there is a likely gap between
the amount received from the UGC and the time by which it is really spent,
the grantee institution may get simple interest on the amount that remains
unutilized during the gap period.
The UGC has taken conscious decision in this context to allow the grantee
institutions to utilize the interest earned by the university and such amount
is treated as additional grant. The grantee institutions are, however, required
to incorporate such amount of interest in the utilization certificate to be
submitted to the Commission."

5
16. In response to the above said explanation of the UGC, the Ministry of HRD
commented that they had advised the UGC that the practice of releasing funds in
excess of the capacity of grantee universities to absorb the same, should be
discontinued forthwith. The Commission should modulate its releases in such a manner
that there is no unnecessary parking of funds with the grantee institutions.
17. As regards the mechanism existing in the UGC to monitor that the budget
allocations made to the universities are utilized by them as per the prescribed norms,
the UGC stated:
"The Progress monitored on the basis of Utilization Certificate, statement of
expenditure and Progress Report received from the universities.
The UGC's approval is communicated to the Universities clearly indicating
the items covered under the scheme and allocation for particular items with
the ceiling approved. While submitting statement of expenditure, university
indicates item-wise expenditure. The Statement of Expenditure and utilization
certificate has to be signed by Registrar/Finance Officer/approved Chartered
Accountant."
18. Replying to a query about the amount of grant against whom the Utilisation
Certificates as on date are outstanding, the UGC in a written note stated that the
position of utilization of grants as on 30th June, 2007 is as under:—
Name of the Total Grant paid Total Grant Utilization
Scheme utilized Certificates
awaited
Special Development Rs. 1265.25 lakh Rs. 646.96 lakh Rs. 618.29 lakh
Grant to Y oung
Universities
Special Development Rs. 1172.18 lakh Rs. 508.49 lakh Rs. 663.69 lakh
Grant to Universities
in Backward Areas
19. As regards the system of obtaining Utilization Certificates (UCs) from the
universities on priority basis, the UGC informed the Committee as under:—
"After the release of grant under the two schemes, it is being ensured by
UGC that the funds are utilized and Utilization Certificates are furnished on
a priority basis. The matter is being regularly followed up with the concerned
universities, so that the Utilization  Certificates are expedited. In cases where
there is no progress despite follow up action by UGC, the concerned
universities have been asked to refund the grant with interest accrued
thereon."
20. The Committee asked the UGC about the measures taken to simplify the
procedures of allocation of grants, the UGC in a written note informed the Committee
that in order to make the process simplified, they are in the process of reducing the
number of its schemes and introducing 'Block Grants'.

6
21. On being asked about the benefit actually derived since introduction of the
scheme, the UGC replied:—
"The two schemes started in X Plan shall continue  in XI Plan with a view to
reduce the visible disparity between the universities situated in Metropolitan
cities and semi-urban areas, and the universities located in backward areas.
Similarly, the scheme of special development grant for young universities
will continue to help create basic and bare minimum infrastructure and to
improve/expand the existing infrastructure of young universities so as to
enable them to attract students and teachers and to help introduce new
courses."
22. The Committee desired to know as to whether the UGC/Ministry has reviewed
the implementation of the scheme; UGC in a written submission stated as under:—
"The UGC is sending the expert committees to all the universities with a view
to (i) review the implementation of the X Plan schemes, including these two
schemes, (ii) to assess the financial requirements for augmenting the existing
infrastructure and other developmental needs during XI Plan period."
They have further added:—
"In cases where there is no progress despite follow up action by UGC, the
concerned universities have been asked to refund the grant with interest
accrued thereon."
23. On being asked about the universities that have refunded the Grant the UGC
informed that in case of  'young' universities, there are three such universities and
one of them, namely Shri Guru Govind Singh Indraprastha University, Delhi, has
already refunded the  entire amount of the grant and has been asked to refund the
interest as well.
24. A statement indicating progress of utilization of grant released under the two
schemes as submitted by UGC is as follows:—
Name of No. of Out of Universities Out of Column 3 (a) Remarks
the universities in column 2, No. of No. of Universities
Scheme to which Universities from from which UC of
"On account which 1st Installation has
advance been
grant" was
released
Detailed A waited/ Received A waited
proposal Not
received/ approved
approved
and grant
released
1 2 3(a) 3(b) 4(a) 4(b) 5
Special 11 11 Nil 7 4 Out of
Development column 4(a),
Grant for project

7
Universities completed in
in Backward respect of
areas two
universities.
Refunds
sought in case
of four
universities in
column 4(b).
Special 13 11 2 8 3 Out of two
Development universities
Grant for in Column
'Young' 3(b), one has
universities refunded the
grant while
one other and
two univer-
sities in
column 4(b)
have been
asked to
refund the
grant. UC is
awaited in
case of one
university.
1 2 3(a) 3(b) 4(a) 4(b) 5

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
25. The University Grants Commission started the Development Assistance
Programme with the objective of improving infrastructure and basic facilities in
universities and colleges so as to achieve at least the threshold level of infrastructure.
Keeping in view the disparities between Urban/Semi-Urban and Backward Areas,
the UGC formulated two new schemes during the Xth Plan Period (2002—2007)
entitled, 'Special Development Grant to Young Universities' (SDGYU) and 'Special
Development Grant to Universities in Backward Areas' (SDGUBA) with the objective
of creating basic/minimum infrastructure and also to improve/expand the existing
infrastructure of universities to achieve optimum teaching equity. The universities
included under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act of 1956 and declared eligible for central
assistance  under Section 12(B) of the Act from VIIIth Plan onwards were considered
eligible to receive grants from the UGC under the scheme SDGYU and all eligible
universities under Section 2(f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act and physically located in
backward areas were considered for Grants under the scheme SDGUBA. Eligible
and desirous universities were required to submit their proposals in the prescribed
format to the UGC. Thereafter, selected universities were to be invited to give
presentation before an Expert Committee, based on whose recommendations
admissible grants were approved.
[Sl. No.1]
26. The Committee understand that the UGC take decisions for release of grants
to universities under any scheme/programme based on the advice of the Expert
Committee. Generally, in a plan period, the allocation is decided by the Expert
Committee and the grant is released in instalments on receipt of 'Utilization
Certificate' of the earlier sanctioned grant. The Expert Committee meets once in a
year to consider the proposals and after approval, the grants are released. According
to the UGC, this procedure for release of grants is reviewed in the beginning of each
Five Year Plan and necessary improvements are incorporated.
[Sl. No. 2]
27. The Committee's examination of the subject showed that an Expert Committee
of officials of the UGC met in March 2004 to assess the proposals received from
different universities and recommended 13 universities under 'Special Development
Grant to Young Universities' (SDGYU) and 11 under 'Special Development Grant to
Universities in Backward Area' (SDGUBA) for release of advance grant at the rate
of Rs. 21 lakh and Rs. 25 lakh respectively subject to condition that the grant may be
used only after receiving item-wise final approval of the UGC and the eligible
universities be called for presentation of their projects. Accordingly, the UGC
released (March 2004) Rs. 5.48 crore as advance grant to these 24 universities.
[Sl. No. 3]
8

9
28. The Committee find that UGC conveyed its approval to the universities for
incurring the expenditure on the said schemes after a lapse of considerable time
ranging between 8 and 23 months and approvals to three universities under SDGYU
and one university under SDGUBA scheme were conveyed well beyond this period.
Thus pre-mature release of grant by the UGC pending presentations from the
universities and subsequent delay in conveying the final approvals resulted in
blocking of funds amounting to Rs. 5.48 crore for a period ranging between 8 and 24
months and consequent loss of interest of Rs. 59.02 lakh for the period from
April 2004 to March 2006. While admitting the delay in conveying the approval for
incurring the expenditure on the said schemes, the UGC attributed this to the long
time taken in presenting and preparing documents for presentation by the
universities. The Committee find the reply of the UGC hardly convincing. Holding
the universities responsible for the delay cannot absolve the UGC of their
responsibility to expedite the approvals. The fact of the matter remains that no time
limit was prescribed by the UGC for ensuring that presentation of their projects by
the universities be made within a prescribed time schedule. On the one hand, the
UGC had shown hurry in releasing grants to the universities in the month of March,
while on the other they restricted them to use the  grants with the condition that
these may be used only after receiving item-wise final approval of the UGC. The
Committee find that this process itself was responsible for blocking of funds with
the grantee universities. Evidently, there was no proper system in UGC to ensure
early utilization of funds by the universities. The UGC have also conceded in their
deposition that the process followed by them led to delay in commencement of works
which consequently resulted in slow utilisation of the funds by the universities. The
Committee deplore the fact that till now no procedure has been evolved by the UGC
nor prescribed by the Ministry for management of grants. The Committee feel that
absence of sound procedures in the UGC for release of grants to the universities is
not a desirable situation for an organization responsible for the promotion and
regulation of university education. Since the universities were dependent on the
availability of funds for proper implementation of the schemes, the need for
streamlining the procedures for approval and release of funds warrants urgent
attention of the UGC. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the UGC should
review their system of approval and release of grants to universities under different
schemes so that funds are released judiciously based on the soundness of proposals
without needlessly blocking the funds released pre-maturedly on half-baked
proposals.
[Sl. No. 4]
29. With regard to prescribing a time limit in order to ensure that presentation
of their projects by the universities should be made within the prescribed time
schedule, the Committee have been informed during the course of examination of the
subject that the UGC is streamlining the procedures and a calender of events i.e.,
inviting proposals, scrutiny, interface meetings, approval and release of grants is
being introduced in XI
th Plan. It is only after taking up the matter by the Committee,
the UGC has now initiated certain measures for approval and release of grants. Had
these steps been initiated earlier, the situation of blocking of funds amounting to

10
Rs. 5.48 crore and consequent loss of interest of Rs. 59.02 lakh in respect of two
development schemes could well have been avoided. The Committee would now expect
the UGC to be more vigilant and prompt in attending to and rectifying matters which
have large financial implications.
[Sl. No. 5]
30. The Committee's examination also revealed that the UGC released grants
under both the schemes to the universities in the month of March in contravention of
the provisions of General Financial Rules according to which rush of expenditure
particularly in the closing month of the financial year would be regarded as a breach
of financial propriety. Considering the fact that universities could not incur any
expenditure out of the advance grant of Rs. 5.48 crore without receiving item-wise
final approval from the UGC, the urgency shown by UGC in releasing the grants to
universities in a mechanical manner before according approval to the proposals
proved to be pointless and rather infructuous. Further, such large scale rush of
expenditure in the closing month of the financial year clearly indicates lack of
financial discipline and accountability. The Committee, therefore, consider it
necessary that the Ministry of HRD should devise a mechanism making it mandatory
for the UGC and the heads of the universities to hold monthly review meetings to
monitor the expenditure and so far as practicable, ensure even flow of expenditure
throughout the year.
[Sl. No. 6]
31. The Committee note that in order to ensure that grants are properly utilized
by the universities for the purpose for which they were sanctioned, the certificate of
utilization of grants are required to be submitted by the universities to the UGC. The
Committee's scrutiny has revealed that Utilisation Certificates (UCs) amounting to
Rs. 618.29 lakh under the scheme of  'Special Development Grant to Young
Universities' (SDGYU) and Rs. 663.69 lakh under the scheme of 'Special
Development Grant to Universities in Backward Areas' (SDGUBA) were still
outstanding, which is approximately 50 percent of the total Grants paid to the
universities under those schemes. The Committee take a serious view of the inordinate
delay on the part of the universities concerned in furnishing the Utilisation Certificates
(UCs) of such a huge amount. The Committee, would like the UGC to enquire into the
matter and fix responsibility for such laxity. Needless to say, such delays in the
submission of Utilisation Certificates of the earlier released grants thwart the very
process of releasing further grants to the universities. The UGC should now galvanise
their machinery and take up this issue strongly with the State Governments/
Universities. Prolonged delay or failure on the part of the universities to furnish the
Utilisation Certificates should immediately invite stringent measures by the UGC
that would go a long way in eliminating the delay in submission of these utilization
certificates to the UGC. The Committee trust that necessary steps would be taken in
this direction.
[Sl. No. 7]

11
32. The Committee note that it was specifically mentioned to the universities by
the UGC that interest accruing on the funds allocated to them would be treated as
additional grant. The grantee institutions are also required to incorporate such
amount of interest in the utilization certificate to be submitted to the UGC. In this
context, the Committee would expect the UGC to avoid releasing grants in excess of
the capacity of grantee universities. The present practice of release of grants without
correctly estimating the obsorbing capacity of the universities should be discontinued
forthwith. Further, the UGC should modulate its releases in such a manner that
unnecessary parking of funds with the  grantee institutions is also avoided.
[Sl. No. 8]
33. To sum up, the facts narrated in the foregoing paragraphs reveal several
shortcomings in the existing system of the UGC for allocation of grants to the
universities. Considering the fact that the 'Special Development Grant to Y oung
Universities' and 'Special Development Grant to Universities in Backward Areas'
schemes were meant to create basic and minimum infrastructure and to achieve
optimum teaching equity, it is unfortunate that no mechanism was evolved by the
Ministry/UGC to assess the actual requirement of funds by the universities, their
capabilities and allocate them funds accordingly for proper implementation of these
schemes. Another disquieting aspect observed by the Committee is the absence of a
proper monitoring mechanism in the UGC to monitor whether the budget allocations
made to the universities have been utilized by them as per the prescribed norms or
not. Monitoring of progress of the universities is presently being done by the UGC
merely on the basis of the utilization certificates, statement of expenditure and
progress Report received from the universities. Considering the fact that a large
number of utilization certificates involving huge sums of money are pending for
submission by the concerned universities, the Committee urge upon the UGC to
make their regulatory mechanism more effective to enable purposeful utilization of
grants. The Committee recommend in this regard that the UGC should conduct a
thorough review of its functioning with particular emphasis on the release and
utilization of grants to universities. The Committee would like to be informed of the
conclusive action taken in the matter.
[Sl. No. 9]
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
9 April, 2008 Chairman,
20 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE-I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 11TH JUNE, 2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. on 11th June, 2007 in Committee
Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri R.L. Jalappa
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Brajesh Pathak
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Prof. P.J. Kurien
10. Shri Janardhana Poojary
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri A.K. Thakur — DG (CR)
3. Shri Nand Kishore — P r. Director (AB)
Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of
Higher Education) & University Grants Commission (UGC)
1. Shri K.M. Acharya — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Ray — Joint Secretary & Finance Advisor
12

13
3. Prof. Sukhadeo Throat — Chairman, UGC
4. Prof. Moolchand Sharma — Vice-Chairman
5. Ms. Anju Banerjee — Chairman & Managing
Director (Ed. CIL)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has
been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) and University
Grants Commission on Para Nos. 6.7 & 6.8 of the Report of C&AG of India for the year
ended March, 2006, Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies), No. 3 of 2007
relating to "University Grants Commission (i) Irregular award of construction work;
and (ii) injudicious release of grants" respectively. Thereafter, the Officers of the
C&AG of India briefed the Committee on the important points arising out of the audit
paragraphs.
3. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development
(Department of Higher Education) and University Grants Commission were called in.
The Chairman read out the contents of the Direction 58 by the Speaker regarding
secret nature of the proceedings of the Committee.
4. Since the Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department
of Higher Education) was unable to attend the sitting, for which prior permission of
Hon'ble Chairman was obtained, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of Higher Education) and the Chairman, University Grants
Commission after introducing their colleagues to the Committee made a brief
presentation on the points arising out of Audit paras. The witnesses also replied to
the queries raised by the Members. The CMD, Educational Consultants of India Ltd.,
also explained the position about the role of their organization on the audit findings
and the queries of the Members thereupon. As the witnesses could not give satisfactory
replies to certain queries raised by the Members, the Committee decided to hold
another meeting on the subject, after considering the written replies of the Ministry.
The Hon'ble Chairman also directed the Ministry to furnish the information as desired
by the Members in writing at the earliest particularly in regard to:
(i) Reasons for taking project back from CPWD;
(ii) Permission of the M/o HRD to award the work to Ed. CIL;
(iii) Reasons for delay in implementation of project;
(iv) Agreement/contract with Ed. CIL—safeguarding interests of UGC;
(v) Advance of Rs. 4 crore to Ed. CIL and its utilization;
(vi) Renewal of agreement with Ed. CIL;
(vii) Capacity of Ed. CIL to take up construction projects; and
(viii) Rationality in giving advance money to Universities without sanctioning
the schemes/projects.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 30TH JULY, 2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 30th July, 2007 in Committee
Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Raghunath Jha
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri K.S. Rao
5. Shri Mohan Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Prof. P.J. Kurien
9. Shri Janardhana Poojary
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri A.K. Thakur — DG (CR)
3. Shri Nand Kishore — P r. Director (AB)
14

15
Representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Human  Resource  Development
(Department of Higher Education), University Grants Commission
(UGC) and Educational Consultants India Limited
1. Shri R.P. Agrawal — Secretary (Higher Education)
2. Shri Sunil Kumar — Joint Secretary (Higher Education)
3. Shri S.K. Ray — Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
4. Prof. Sukhadeo Thorat — Chairman, UGC
5. Dr. T.R. Kem — Secretary, UGC
6. Dr. R.K. Chauhan — Additional Secretary & Financial
Adviser, UGC
7. Ms. Anju Banerjee — Chairman & Managing Director (Ed. CIL)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members of the Committee,
Audit Officers and representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development
(Department of Higher Education), University Grants Commission (UGC) and
Educational Consultants India Limited (Ed. CIL) to the sitting of the Committee. The
Chairman informed that the sitting of the Committee has been convened to resume
further evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of Higher Education), UGC and Ed. CIL on the issues
arising out of Paras 6.7 & 6.8 of C&AG's Report No. 3 of 2007 Union Government
(Civil—Autonomous Bodies), relating to "Irregular award of construction work"
and "injudicious release of grants", which had remained inconclusive on 11th
 June,
2007. The Chairman read out the contents of the Direction 58 by the Speaker regarding
secret nature of the proceedings of the Committee.
3. The Chairman further observed that the Officials could not satisfy with their
replies on the various points arising out of Audit Paragraphs and the queries made by
the Members during the earlier evidence on the subject. Certain key issues remained
to be resolved, such as the competence of the UGC to enter into a contract with
Ed. CIL in preference to CPWD, terms of agreement with Ed. CIL and their proposed
modification with adequate safeguards, inordinate delay in the execution of the project
and the inability of the UGC in ensuring timely completion of the project. He desired
a firm assurance from the Ministry, UGC as well as the Ed. CIL on the exact time period
by which the UGC building project will be eventually completed. He also desired to
know about the quantum of cost escalation that has occurred due to the delay and the
total estimated project cost which UGC will now have to bear.
4. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development
(Department of Higher Education), after introducing his colleagues to the Committee,
briefly explained the points raised by the Chairman. Subsequently, the Members of
the Committee sought clarifications on the points arising out of the Audit Paragraphs
and the Post-evidence Information furnished by the Ministry. The Secretary
(Department of Higher Education) assured the Committee that the project will be
completed by December, 2009. To certain queries, for which the witnesses' replies

16
were not readily available, the Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry
to furnish the requisite information at the earliest. The points on which clarification
was sought are as under:
(i) Problems faced in early finalisation of project;
(ii) Details regarding original estimated construction cost in 1991 and the
estimated cost as of today;
(iii) Details regarding cost escalation;
(iv) Renewal of agreement with Ed. CIL and Inclusion of penalty and liquidated
damages clause to safeguard the interests of UGC;
(v) Applicability of the General Financial Rules (GFRs) to UGC vis-a-vis framing
of specific rules for UGC as stipulated in UGC Act;
(vi) Steps taken to obtain clearance for construction of UGC Building from
Delhi Urban Arts Commission (DUAC), Delhi Development Authority (DDA)
and other agencies.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE-II
MINUTES  OF  THE  TWENTIETH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2007-08)  HELD  ON  7TH  APRIL,  2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. on 7th April, 2008 in Room No. "51"
(Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
7. Shri Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Janardhana Poojary
10. Shri K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Shri Jayanta Chatterjee — Director General (AB)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the sitting of
the Committee. He mentioned that two of the Members of PAC have resigned/retired
from Rajya Sabha, namely, Shri Suresh Bhardwaj, resigned from membership of
Rajya Sabha on 9th January, 2008 after he was elected to Himachal Pradesh Legislative
Assembly and Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, who has retired from Rajya Sabha on
2nd April, 2008. He also congratulated S/Shri Raghunath Jha and V . Narayanasamy
Members of PAC, who have become Ministers in the Union Government w.e.f.
6th April, 2008.
17

18
3. The Committee placed on record their appreciation for the valuable contribution
to the Committee made by these Members.
4. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following draft
Reports:—
(i) Draft Report on Para 6.8 of  C&AG's Report No. 3 of  2007. Union
Government (Civil-Autonomous Bodies) relating to "Injudicious release
of  Grants" by the University Grants Commission (UGC);
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on 49th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating
to "Avoidable expenditure due to delay in taking decision—Chennai Port
Trust" and
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on 50th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to
"Delay in finalisation of demands".
5. The Chairman invited suggestions of the members on the Draft Reports. After
discussing the conents of the Draft Reports in detail, the Committee adopted the
same with some verbal changes and authorised the Chairman to finalise and present
these Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.
6. Further, it was decided that the Committee would hold their next sitting on
21st  April 2008.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
Para 6.8 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the
year ended 31 March, 2006 (No. 3 of 2007), Union Government (civil-Autonomous
Bodies) relating to "Injudicious release of Grants".
The University Grants Commission released advance grant amounting to
Rs. 5.48 crore to 24 Universities in March 2004 in violation of the provisions
of the schemes as well as General Financial Rules resulting in blocking of
funds for a period ranging between 8 and 24 months and consequent loss of
interest of Rs. 59.02 lakh for the period from April 2004 to March 2006.
UGC formulated two new schemes for the Xth plan period (2002-2007) namely
(i) Special Development Grant for Young Universities (SDGYU) and (ii) Special
Development Grant for Universities in Backward Areas (SDGUBA). The main objectives
of these schemes were to create basic and bare minimum infrastructure in and to
improve/expand the existing infrastructure of young universities and in the case of
universities in backward areas, to improve infrastructure to achieve optimum teaching
equity and access at least to the threshold level. UGC prescribed norms for the
eligibility of the universities for getting financial assistance under these schemes
according to which eligible and desirous universities were required to submit their
proposals in the prescribed format to UGC. Thereafter, selected universities were to
be invited to give presentation before an expert Committee based on whose
recommendations admissible grants were to be approved.
Audit observed (October 2005) that an expert Committee of officials of UGC met
in March 2004 to assess the proposals received from different universities under the
above schemes and recommended 13 universities under SDGYU and 11 under SDGUBA
for release of advance grant at the rate of Rs. 21 lakh and Rs. 25 lakh respectively
subject to condition that the grant may be used only after receiving item-wise final
approval of UGC. The expert Committee also recommended that the eligible universities,
be called for presentation of their projects. Accordingly, UGC released (March 2004)
Rs. 5.48 crore as advance grant to these 24 universities with the above mentioned
conditions. Audit ascertained that UGC conveyed its approval for incurring the
expenditure on the said schemes to 20 universities after a lapse of time ranging
between 8 and 23 months and approvals to three universities under SDGYU and one
university under SDGUBA scheme were yet to be conveyed as of March 2006. Thus
pre-mature release of grant by UGC pending presentations from the universities and
subsequent delay in conveying the final approvals to 20 universities and non-approval
to four universities resulted in blocking of funds amounting to Rs. 5.48 crore for a
period ranging between 8 and 24 months and consequent loss of interest of Rs. 59.02
lakh for the period from April 2004 to March 2006 computed at union government's
borrowing rate of 8.4 per cent per annum. The release of grants by UGC was to avoid
19

20
lapse of funds which was against the provisions of the GFRs according to which rush
of expenditure particularly in the closing months of the financial year would be regarded
as a breach of financial propriety.
In response to audit observation, the Ministry endorsed (August 2006) the views
of UGC that since the universities took very long time in sending their presentations,
it was decided by the latter to release an 'on account' grant to these universities.It
added that interest accrued out of the grant would be treated as an additional grant.
The reply is not tenable as UGC failed to ensure that funds are not released on half—
baked proposals. The fact that universities themselves took long time in sending
their presentations and delay in approval in 20 cases and non approval in case of
remaining four universities put a question mark on the soundness of the initial
proposals based on which funds were released.