PROCUREMENT OF MEDICINES AND
MEDICAL EQUIPMENT
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Twenty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2012-2013
EIGHTY-FOURTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
84

EIGHTY-FOURTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
PROCUREMENT OF MEDICINES AND
MEDICAL EQUIPMENT
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Twenty-fourth Report
(15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY
WELFARE
Presented to Lok Sabha on  30.04.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2013
 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)


P.A.C. No. 1995
Price: ` 88.00
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha  (Fourteenth  Edition) and printed  by the General  Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF  THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE (2012-2013) ...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report................................ .................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government ............................................................. 18
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire  to pursue  in view of the replies  received from
the Government. .................................................................. 62
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of  the Government have not been accepted by  the Committee
and which require reiteration .............................................. 63
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies ........................ 76
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the Twenty-ninth Sitting of  Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 29.4.2013............................... 77
II. Analysis of  the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Twenty-fourth Report
 (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) ......................................................... 79
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Y esso Naik
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee*
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
13. Shri Takam Sanjoy†
14. Dr. Girija Vyas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected w.e.f . 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(iii)

SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Eighty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Twenty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Procurement of
Medicines and Medical Equipment'.
2. The Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
24th February, 2011. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Department of Health and Family Welfare) on 30th January, 2013. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Eighty-fourth Report at their sitting held on
29.4.2013. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have
also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix-II of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-III.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
29 April, 2013 Chairman,
9 V aisakha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Twenty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Procurement of Medicines and
Medical Equipment’  based on the C&AG Report No. 20 of 2007 (Performance Audit)
Union Government (Civil) for the year ended March, 2007 relating to the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare.
2. The Twenty-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.02.2011. It contained 25 Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been
received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which  have been accepted
by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1-4, 7, 9-10, 12-22 and 24-25
Total: 20
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
-NIL-
Total: NIL
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 5, 6, 8, 11 and 23
Total: 5
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
Total: NIL
Chapter-V

2
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed certain
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
which inter-alia included absence of uniform and comprehensive Procurement Policy
Guidelines and Purchase Manuals for procurement of medicines and medical
equipment; deficiency in the information management system of AIIMS; utter
dependence on local purchases which constituted  80 percent of the total purchase of
medicines for CGHS dispensaries in Delhi during the period 2002—06; no effective
monitoring mechanism and no data base regarding procurement, distribution and
inventory management of drugs; tendency of doctors to often prescribe expensive
medicines leading to large scale purchase of medicines outside the formulary; failure
of the Medical Store Organization (MSO) to meet its main objective of supply and
manufacture of drugs/medicines; evidence of adultered/spurious drugs being sold;
absence of any long term and well documented plan of procurement and utilization of
medical equipments etc. The Committee had accordingly given their Observations/
Recommendations in their Twenty-fourth Report.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will
now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.
I. Inadequacy in the Computer based Information System in AIIMS
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
5. In their Twenty-fourth Report, the Committee were concerned to note that the
Manual on Financial Management of All India Institute of Medical Sciences was
stuck up as the computer based information system was woefully inadequate in
AIIMS. The Committee further observed that as an interim measure, the Institute
Authorities had been asked to hire an expert to review the draft manual and make such
minimum amendments so as to enable the Institute to carry out its financial business
on line that might later facilitate a shift to an IT enabled system of financial management.
The Committee opined that it was really a sorry state of affairs that at this age of
advanced information technology evolution, that had penetrated almost every walk
of life; a computer aided information management system was inexplicably deficient
in a super speciality hospital like the AIIMS. Observing that it would be indeed, for all
practical purposes, a redundant Manual if it only codified the conventional drugs and
did not take into account the IT based solutions, the Committee had recommended
that urgent measures be taken by the Ministry to develop a computer aided and
computer based system in AIIMS so that the premier Institute was able to take into
account the IT based solutions besides codifying the conventional drugs, thus
appropriately shifting to an IT enabled system of effective financial management.
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have responded as under:—
“In compliance with the directions for Ministry regarding manual on Financial
Management of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, the Director has
constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Deputy Director (Admn.)
to revise the draft Financial Manual with a view to implement it at AIIMS and

3
making it compatible with IT-enable Accounting System. The finalization/review
of the draft Manual is in progress and likely to be completed by end of the
current year.
It is also added that with the prior approval of SFC the  work for preparation of
Annual Accounts as per new format of Accounts on Accrual Basis (Double
Entry System) has been awarded to Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India—ARF which inter-alia includes the following:—
(a) Drafting of Accounts Manual including codification structure and
chart of accounts;
(b) Audit Manual; and
(c) Training Manual.
As regards developing a computer aided and computer based system to enable
the institute to take into account the IT based solutions besides codifying the
conventional drugs and shifting to an IT-enabled system of effective financial
management it is mentioned that the following e-governance projects are under
active implementation through NIC/NICSI during the financial year
2011-12:—
1. e-Hospital Project.
2. Comprehensive DDO Package.
3. FTS/e-Office.
4. EHS computerization.
It is also not out of place to mention that all necessary informations with respect
to treatment of patients/user charges etc. are available on the website of AIIMS,
almost all the work of  Exam. Section is also computerized and e-tendering
system has already been adopted in Engineering Service Department.
Thus, the Institute had already taken suitable measures to comply with the
recommendations of Public Accounts Committee. The completion of the
above-mentioned projects by ICAI and NIC/NICSI, shall pave the way for
institute to shift the existing accounting system to IT-enabled system of
accounting for effective Financial Management.”
7. In response to the Audit comments on the above reply, the Ministry have further
stated as under:—
"Present status of various projects in AIIMS are as under:—
(i) File Tracking System Software implementation had been completed on
26.6.2011 and is being used by AIIMS.
(ii) E-office started  w.e.f. 13.3.2012 and expected to be completed by
September, 2012.
(iii) Employees Health Scheme implemented w.e.f. Jan., 2012.

4
(iv) E-hospital is being implemented and likely to be completed by
Dec., 2012.
(v) Comp-DDO software could not be taken up any further because of
introduction of new accounting procedures.”
8. The Committee are pleased to note that in pursuance of their Recommendations,
AIIMS has taken measures for finalization of the Manual on Financial Management
of the Institute for moving towards in IT-enabled system. The work for preparation of
Annual Accounts as per the new format of Accounts on Accrual Basis has been
awarded to the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI). Further,  the
e-governance projects like e-Hospital and EHS computerization are reported to be
under active implementation through NIC/NICSI. The Committee desire the Ministry
to impress upon AIIMS to expedite the projects and submit a complete report on
implementation of all the 'E' projects.
II. Prescription of Proprietary Drugs outside the Formulary
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
9. In their earlier Report, the Committee were concerned to note that the
prescription pattern by doctors and reportedly led to excessive local purchases of
medicines. The Committee also found that there were two types of drugs viz.
proprietary drugs and generic drugs. Proprietary drugs were  patented and
manufactured either by the patent holder or the licensees of the patent holder
whereas generic drugs, both branded and non-branded, were off patented drugs
and much cheaper than the proprietary drugs. Although the Ministry reportedly
made efforts to see that maximum purchases were made from generic and
non-branded medicines, the Committee observed that doctors quite often prescribed
expensive medicines which led to large scale purchase of medicines outside the
formulary. In this context, the Committee were informed that two of the CGHS doctors
were produced before the Director General of Health Services (DGHS) after it was
observed that their prescription pattern was regularly at variance with what was
normally expected. Further, meetings were conducted by the DGHS with the doctors/
specialists advising them to confine their prescription of medicines to the formulary.
Moreover, circulars were issued in this regard by the Director, CGHS and also by
the Ministry. The Committee felt that these measures were in right direction to keep
tab on the unusual variances in the prescription pattern of the doctors concerned
which led to unnecessary local purchase of medicines. The Committee desired that
the Ministry should earnestly continue with the measures already initiated besides
exploring introduction of other innovative measures to check the prescription pattern
of doctors. The Committee also recommended that the monitoring mechanism be
strengthened and exemplary action taken against errant doctors, who took
advantage of the helplessness of the patients and frequently prescribed  expensive
medicines outside the formulary, so that superfluous local purchase of medicines
was avoided.

5
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
“Chief Medical Officers in charge of dispensaries are authorised to issue
medicines of any available brand with same configuration and salt instead of
indenting the same brand purchased by Government Specialists.
Instructions have been issued to specialists in Safdarjung Hospital and
Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital to prescribe generic drugs as far as possible
and also to affix a stamp/note stating that ‘equivalent generic medicines can
also be issued’.
CGHS is in the process of generating reports through a software of prescription
pattern by Govt. specialists/doctors for monitoring further and taking
appropriate action.
Given the need to make medicines available to beneficiaries without delay and
taking note of existing prescription practices and newer medicines being
introduced from time to time, it is not possible to entirely do away with local
purchase, though effort is being made to further reduce local purchase.”
11. In response to the Audit comments on the above reply, the Ministry have
further stated that no cases/complaint of the errant doctors frequently prescribing
expensive medicines outside the formulary has come to notice.
12. The Committee find the statement of the Ministry that no case of Doctors
frequently prescribing expensive medicines outside the formulary has come to their
notice far from tenable given their own admission that two CGHS Doctors were
observed to have made prescriptions regularly at variance with what was normally
expected. The Committee are informed that the CGHS is in the process of generating
reports through a software for monitoring the prescription pattern by the Government
Doctors/Specialists and taking appropriate action. The Committee desire that the
project be implemented expeditiously so as to detect unusual prescription pattern by
the Government Doctors as also to prevent possible malpractices. The Committee
also desire the Ministry to evolve a transparent and effective mechanism enabling
the aggrieved patients to lodge their complaints against the errant Doctors without
fear or pressure so that more instances of malpractices are detected and large scale
purchase of medicines outside the formulary is avoided. Further, explanation may be
obtained from these CGHS doctors who make prescriptions which are  regularly at
variance.
III. Absence of a defined process and time-frame for revision of  Formulary and
updating of Medicine selection
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
13. In their Twenty-fourth Report the Committee were dissatisfied to observe that
no defined process had been adopted by the Ministry to update the medicine selections
which could reflect the new therapeutic options and needs. The Ministry's statement,
that the process of identification of slow and fast moving medicines had become
simplified with the computerization of CGHS Delhi and maintenance of computer data,
did not anyway convince the Committee as the formularies of drugs and medicines

6
had failed to include pharmaceuticals that were routinely required by the medical
practitioners. What further concerned the Committee was the fact that the formulary
for essential and life saving  drugs was last revised in August, 2007 and no fixed
periodicity had been prescribed in the matter. The Committee wondered what restrained
that Ministry of prescribing a defined process and a definite time-frame for revision of
the formulary and updating of the medicine selection. In view of the imperatives
involved, the Committee urged upon the Ministry of codify and adopt a defined
process for annual updating of the medicine selection and periodical revision of the
CGHS formularies so  as to ensure that the intended purpose of economical and
efficient procurement of medicines was well served and the emerging therapeutic
options and needs were appropriately catered to.
14. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as follows:—
“There are two types of formularies: one for Generic Drugs and other for
Proprietary Drugs. It has not been possible to update the formularies every
year. Both formularies are however  revised periodically by the Ministry.
Revision of the formularies is undertaken on the bases of change in prescription
pattern, introduction of newer drugs and banning/obsolescence of drugs.
The Generic formulary is a common formulary for MSO, CGHS and four Hospitals
i.e. Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Lady Hardinge
Medical College and Hospital and Kalawati Sharan Children Hospital operating
in Delhi under administrative control of DGHS, MoH&FW.
The Generic formulary containing 664 Drugs having different formulations was
revised recently in May, 2011.
Other formulary  is for Proprietary/Branded Drugs, meant for MSO and CGHS
only. This formulary contains 622 drugs.
A list of  382 life saving essential medicines is in place and these medicines are
being procured on a case-to-case basis. In addition to these medicines, items
like CAPD fluid bags are also being procured on  a case-to-case basis.”
15. In response to the vetting comments by Audit on the above reply, the Ministry
have further stated as under:—
“The Ministry is reviewing/updating the formularies periodically. Current
formulary for Proprietary drugs is approved for one year. To revise the proprietary
drug formulary a committee has been constituted on 19.12.2011. The validity of
the current proprietary formulary is extended upto 23.12.2012. The Generic
formulary was revised on 23.05.2011 and is valid for three years. All efforts were
taken to complete the exercise of updating the formulary in time. However,
in case some time gap was there in updating the current formulary, it was
extended with  the approval of the competent authority at existing rate contracts.
Hence, the procurement made by the Ministry was always economical and
efficient.”
16. The Committee are pleased to note  that in pursuance of their recommendation,
the Ministry are  making all efforts to complete the exercise of updating the formulary

7
in time.  In view of the need and imperatives of such periodic updation which would
leverage the scope for inclusion of ever emerging therapeutic options and
requirements, the Committee desire that a defined process and definite time-frame
be prescribed for mandatory annual updation of the medicines.
IV . Failure of Medical Stores Organisation (MSO) to meet its Main Objective
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
17. In their earlier Report, the Committee were deeply concerned to note that the
MSO had failed to meet the objectives of its establishment as its role over the years
had been limited to procurement of small quantities of drugs/medicines indented by
CGHS dispensaries outside Delhi,  Central Government Hospitals and for Para-military
forces viz. CRPF, BSF, ITBP etc. The underutilization of the manpower and resources
provided to MSO was quite visible from the fact that against the total expenditure of
Rs. 6148.85 crore by the Ministry on the supply of materials/medicines during the
years 2002 to 2007, the contribution of MSO in these purchases was only Rs. 171.05 crore
which constituted a meager three per cent of the total expenditure. The Committee
were informed that the lead role of MSO in catering to the needs of various indenters
showed signs of dwindling from the late 1970s onwards due to a number of factors
which inter-alia included the development of capabilities of the States to locally
meet the bulk of the requirements of the Centrally-sponsored schemes; a more
widespread market of pharmaceuticals obviating the need for much centralized
procurement; increasing outreach of CGHS beyond Delhi; emergence of tertiary health
care system with its specialized needs best met at the hospital level; and wider
acceptability of the rate contract system. More than anything else, what contribute
towards the rapid decline of the MSO was both system and human failure, as candidly
admitted by the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee
were perturbed to note that at one point of time all the senior officers of MSO were
under suspension or in jail or on court cases for which the MSO lost the leadership
and the valuable years when it was required to change its entire working strategy.
Moreover, the organization was manned largely by Group III and IV employees there
were  hardly 13 to 17 officers of Group A and B grade working in MSO out of a total
workforce of 1100 people. Opining that the state of affairs in MSO was in a complete
mess and the organization needed an urgent revamp in view of the apparent relegation
of MSO to  the background so far as procurement aspect was concerned, the Committee
recommended that the Ministry should take effective measures to make the MSO
corruption  free as well as adequately staffed so that the organization was able to
gradually shift its focus from procurement to management aspect of medicines and
medical equipment, ensuring in the  process its own gainful utilization.
18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have submitted as under:—
"The activities of  Medical Stores Organisation have been gradually accelerated
with transition from manual mode to 'e' governance mode of operation. With
Web based application (msotransparent.nic.in) in position for the last two years,
the entire system of Procurement and Inventory Management is being
undertaken online. Rigorous inspection, drawal of samples and quality testing
of each batch of drugs in two randomly selected laboratories have yielded rich

8
dividends. The  procurement activities have increased although it has been
entrusted with the responsibility only to procure and supply for CGHS
dispensaries located outside Delhi, Central Government Hospitals and for Para-
military forces. The value of  medicines procured, stored and distributed during
last three years is as under:—
(Figures in crores)
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
54.00 82.99 93.43
In addition, Rs. 175 crore worth vaccines
and drugs  were procured for H1N1
The procurement of medicines is not the only activity of Medical Stores
Organisation. The major activity is storage and distribution of medicines,
vaccines and cold chain equipment meant for implementation of National Health
Programmes. This includes both dry storage and cold storage items. The
inventory management of these programme stores has also been changed to
'e' storage mode. The value of programme stores handled during last three
years is as under:—
(Figures in crores)
Y ear Programme stores handled
2008-09 506.07
2009-10 556.69
2010-11 650.28
Besides the above activities, MSO also undertakes the emergency
procurement to meet the demands of State Governments in case of natural
calamities like Flood, Earthquake etc. Recently it also procured and supplied
the medicines and other surgical consumables to Maldives through Ministry of
External Affairs.
As the Central Procurement Agency is going to be set up in the Ministry,
MSO will render necessary support for storage and distribution to the
beneficiaries in the States/UTs.
V arious new steps are being contemplated to revamp MSO:
1. All seven GMSDs will be named as Regional  Warehouses.
2. All seven GMSDs will have one  quality control Laboratory each.
3. One training centre for cold chain equipment maintenance including
workshop is proposed to be created at Regional Warehouse at GMSD,
New Delhi to impart training to cold chain technicians of both State and
Central Government.

9
4. A Health logistic management training institute is also proposed at Regional
Warehouse, Chennai which shall generate human resources for proper
management of health logistics. This institute is proposed to run regular
courses, refresher courses as well as tailor made courses for State and Central
Government employees.”
19. Subsequent to Audit observation on the above reply, the Ministry have further
stated as under:—
“The following steps have been taken in respect of procurement distribution,
storage of medicines, vaccines etc.
(a) Introduction of web-based application for moving towards e-procurement
mode since April, 2009.
(b) Publication of all tender notice on website of the Ministry.
(c) Online acceptance of indents besides online complication of indent,
dispatch of purchase, proposal, sanction and  placement of supply orders.
(d) Use of Bar codes on tertiary, secondary and primary packages denoting
the  unique identity number of the drugs, name of the manufacturer, name
of the drugs etc.
(e) Procurement manual of MSO has been comprehensively revised and made
operational in 2011. The updated manual provides Standard Operating
Procedures (SOPs) which inter-alia, include web based e-procurement,
e-governance and incorporation of various novel technologies as
components of Goods  storages Practices and quality assurance. In the
Manual, the responsibilities of Public Procurement Authorities under
Paras 3.5.3 inter-alia include the following:—
(i) Implement a code of conduct that commits the contracting authority
and its employees to a strict anti-corruption policy. The policy
should take into account possible conflicts of interest; provide
mechanisms for reporting corruptions and protecting whistle-
blowers.
(ii) Ensures that all contracts between the authority and its contractors,
suppliers and service providers require the parties to comply with
strict anti-corruption policies. This may best be achieved by
requiring the use of a project integrity pact during both the tendering
and project execution phase, committing the authority and bidding
companies to refrain from bribery.
Para 5.4.3 of the Manual of Qualification and  Eligibility Criteria for Bidders
provides inter-alia following conditions for potential suppliers who can be
barred from participating in the bidding process under various circumstances
which includes:—
(i) The proprietor or employee or representative of the firm has been guilty of
malpractice such as bribery, corruption, fraud, substitution of bids,
interpolation, misrepresentation, evasion or habitual default in payment of
any tax levied by law.

10
(ii) If the firm employs a government servant, who has been dismissed or removed
on account of corruption or employs a non-official convicted for an offence
involving corruption or abetment of such an offence, in a position where he
cold corrupt government servants.
Keeping in view the shortage of staff at various levels in MSO as well as
seven (7) GMSDs, Dte. GHS has been making efforts to fill up the senior and
middle management level posts so that the organization is able to gradually
shift its focus from procurement to management aspect of medicines and
medical equipments.
The sanctioned strength/filled/vacant posts in respect of MSO (Main Office
and Subordinate office) are indicated as under:—
Sl. Name of the Sanctioned Existing V acant Surplus
No. Organization Staff Strength Staff Posts
Strength
1. Medical Store 56 16 40
Orgn. (HQ)
2. GMSD, Chennai 234 206 28
3. GMSD, Mumbai 220 210 10
4. GMSD, New 62 52 10
Delhi
5. GMSD, Hyderabad 148 56 92
6. GMSD, Guwahati 132 86 46
7. GMSD, Karnal 171 123 48
8. GMSD, Kolkata 312 252 60
Total 1335 1001 334
The Incumbency position and action taken by the GMSDs, to fill up these
posts as on 01.09.2012 is as under:—
Sl. Name of Strength In V acant Name of the Since When Vacant
No. the post position Officers
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. DDG (St.) 1 1 Dr. R.C. Sharma
retired on
31.10.1996
2. ADG (St.) 2 - 2 - Dr. G.K. Biswas
retired on
30.09.2003*

11
3. DADG (St.) 2 - 2 1. Shri Moti Lal 1. Retired on
Meena 31.05.2011 (They
2. Shri N.C. got in-situ
Dhawan promotion)
2. Retire on
31.07.2011 (They
got in-situ
promotion)
4. Dy. Director 1 1 - Shri Laxmi
(Admn.) Narayan
5. DDA (A/C) 1 - 1 - Vacant from
01.04.1991
6. Asstt. Director 1 - 1 - V acant from
01.02.2005
7. Private 1 1 - Ms. M. Grant G.P. 5400
Secretary Ganeshwari after completion of
4 years regular
services
8. Section 1 1 - Shri R.K. Bhartia Do
Officer
9. IEO 1 1 - Shri A.C. Saxena -
10. Adm. 1 1 - Shri P.K. Karan -
11. Tech. Officer1 - 1 - Vacant since 10
years
12. Sr.  Tech. 1 - 1 - Vacant since 10
Asstt. (St.) years
13. Asstt. 7 6 1 1. Shri G.C. Meena
2. Shri Pani Ram
3. Smt. Kiran
Pannu
4. Shri G.L. Meena
5. Smt. Chandra Rani
6. Smt. Rani Palta
14. Gr. 'C' 3 - 3 - 1. Post vacant since
Steno 1.12.2010
2. Post vacant
since 10 years
15. Gr. 'D' 3 - 3 - Post vacant since
Steno 10 years
Most of the posts are lying vacant for more than one year which have come
under deemed abolition, which require revival. All these live posts are being
filled up  by out sourcing the services. The sanctioned strength is based on the
job requirement and on the basis of the report of the screening committee and
12 3 4 5 6 7

12
report of the IWSU (Internal Work Study Unit). The posts which are under
deemed abolition, proposals are being received from various GMSDs to revive
the posts. After revival of the posts, the same will be filled up.
The promotional posts are being filled up from the feeder grade by the GMSDs.
As regards MSO office the proposal for filling up the post of the DDG(St.) and
ADG (St.) are under consideration. The proposal for filling up-revival of the
posts   of DADG is under process. For other posts of the MSO, DGHS has been
requested to fill up all the live posts and take necessary action to revive the
lapsed posts.
The post could not be filled up for want of the clearance from screening
committee for Group B, C and D.”
20. The Committee take due note of the various initiatives taken up to accelerate
the transition of the activities of the Medical Stores Organisation (MSO) from the
manual mode to e-governance mode of operation and also the various steps
contemplated to revamp the MSO by way of augmentation of its storage and distribution
capacity as well as filling up the vacancies in the existing staffing requirements.
The Committee are also happy to note that the Procurement Manual of MSO has
been comprehensively revised and made operational in 2011 incorporating Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs) and novel technologies. In view of the immense
potential role that the MSO can play vis-à-vis its original mandate of management of
supply of medicines   and medical equipment which has so far been apparently
relegated to more of procurement, the Committee would like to reemphasize that
initiatives for restructuring of MSO should  be accelerated towards fostering
professionalized regime aiming at more transparency and strict compliance to the
Procurement Manual.
V .  Definite Time Frame for the Government Laboratories to furnish the Test Reports
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
21. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that no time limit has
been prescribed for the Government Laboratories to furnish the drug test reports
on the plea of large number of samples received by these Laboratories and the
variations in the time taken in testing of different categories of drugs. Not inclined
to buy the reason advanced by the Ministry for not prescribing any time limit of
these reports and inordinate delay in furnishing such reports which might invariably
result in the administering of the contentious drugs to the patients before
establishing their quality, the Committee exhorted the Ministry to prescribe a
definite time frame for the Government Laboratories to furnish the test reports so
that slightest possibility of administering sub-standard drugs to the beneficiaries
was altogether  eliminated.

13
22. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have submitted as under:—
"The Ministry acknowledges the fact that sufficient attention was not given in
the past on the functioning of the central drug testing laboratories, the  4
existing labs are not functioning optimally and they are hardly able to take care
of a maximum of around 15000 samples per year as against the required facility
to test more than one lakh samples per year. In combination with the States labs,
they cover around 35000 samples only, further, the central drug laboratories are
also  required to rest legal samples which require more than one level of testing
and hence, more time is required for the purpose. As such, the central labs
hardly able to adhere to any time line. Unless the inputs of manpower and
equipments and also the  number of labs are increased manifold, the present
situation is not likely to change. As mentioned in reply to para 10, the Ministry
is, however, continuously engaged in improving the situation. It would suggest
required interventions in the 12th Plan Proposals.”
23.   Responding to the Audit observation on the above reply, the Ministry have
further submitted as follows:—
"In this regard it is pertinent to mention here that during the  43rd Drug
Consultative Committee (DCC), the matter related to prescribe definite time-
frame for the Government laboratories to furnish the test report was discussed.
The DCC recommended that it may be difficult to prescribe time limits for testing
of drug samples under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. However, the broad
guidelines followed by CDL, Kolkata (HPLC test-60 days, Normal Chemical
testing-45 days and Biological products-90 Days) may be followed as model
timelines by the Government Drug Testing Laboratories for testing drug samples.
Copy of the recommendation is enclosed (Annexure 'E').’’
24. The Committee are deeply concerned to note the observation of the Drug
Consultative Committee (DCC) that under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, it may
be difficult to prescribe a definite time-frame for the Government Laboratories to
furnish the  test report. They are equally concerned to find that the timelines  followed
by CDL, Kolkata i.e. 60 days for HPCL testing, 45 days for Normal Chemical Testing
and 90 days for Biological Products are being prescribed as model timelines, in a
very casual manner, for  other Government Laboratories to follow. In view of the fact
that several cases of submission of test reports after a lapse of one year and
administering of drugs to the patients before obtaining the  test results have been
detected by the Audit,  the Committee impress upon the Ministry to have a serious
relook at the matter and again take up the issue with the DCC, if required by
incorporating suitable Amendments in the Drugs and Cosmetic Rules, so that a
definite, uniform by speedy timeline for submitting the test reports is laid down and
scrupulously adhered to by all the Government Laboratories, eliminating thereby
the remotest possibility of administering sub-standard/contentious/spurious drugs
to the beneficiaries.
VI. Supply of Sub-standard and Spurious Drugs
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
25. In their Twenty-fourth Report the Committee had noted that during the
years 2005-06 to 2007-08, out of 1,16,993 drug samples tested, 7,387 samples were
declared not of standard quality and 256  samples  were found to be spurious/

14
adulterated. As regards action taken against the firms/individuals found involved in
the manufacture and supply of sub-standard and spurious drugs, the Committee were
informed that 8 adulterated products of different firms and specific identified sub-
standard products of 3firms had been debarred for supply to MSO. Similarly, products
of 15 firms which were repeatedly found to be sub-standard had been permanently
debarred to supply their products to MSO. Further, prosecution had been launched
against 546 firms for manufacturing, sale and distribution of spurious/adulterated
drugs and 132 persons had been arrested. In view of the above facts and figures, the
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfares' deposition, that the menace of
spurious/adulterated drugs was not as prevalent and as rampant as  it was being
made out to be, was not accepted by the Committee. Similarly, his statement on an
international movement to condemn all the Indian generic drugs as spurious and
counterfeit did not convince the Committee as evidence of adulterated/spurious drugs
being sold in the sales outlets of metro cities, towns, district headquarters and villages
had been established in a survey conducted by the Central Drugs Standard Control
Organization (CDSCO). Opening that the element of adulteration in drugs should be
absolutely non-existent and there should be zero tolerance on the part of the
Government towards spurious drugs, the Committee urged upon the Ministry to
intensify the Measures' initiated which inter-alia  included recruitment of 400
inspectors, amendment of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and introduction of the
Whistle Blower Policy and ensure their effective implementation so that stringent
penalties were imposed for manufacture and supply of spurious and adulterated
drugs.
26. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as follows:—
"The Government of India has taken a number of initiatives to strengthen the
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) with a view to improving
the regulation mechanism for quality of drugs imported or manufactured in the
country. For example: —
(a) The strength of CDSCO in 2008-09 was 111. The Government of India has
sanctioned 216 new posts in 2008-09 in the CDSCO for strengthening the
office at the head quarters, port/zonal offices, taking the total number of
posts to 327. These posts are also expeditiously being filled. We have
now, besides a regular Drug Controller General (India), a total of 67 Drug
Inspectors, 13 Assistant Drugs Controllers and 11 Deputy Controllers.
100 more drugs Inspectors will very soon be joining. Further, process for
recruiting 18 more Assistant Drugs Controllers, 9 more Deputy Drugs
Controllers and two Joint Drugs Controllers have already been started.
(b) In order to meet the inadequacy of the staff, till such time the regular
posts are filled up, the Government of India have also sanctioned
234 Contractual posts for headquarters, zonal, sub-zonal, port offices
and laboratories to carry out the day-to-day work.

15
(c) CDSCO is also being expanded to meet the requirements of the Pharma
industry of the country. Two sub-zonal offices at  Hyderabad and
Ahmedabad have been converted into full zonal offices. Three new sub-
zonal at Bangalore, Jammu and Chandigarh have been set up to cater to
the need of the pharma industry. Three new sub-zones Goa, Indore and
Guwahati are in the offing.
(d) In order to take care of quality of drugs stored at the Air Ports for Import
or Export, pharmaceutical zones at Delhi, Hyderabad and Mumbai Air
Ports are being set up for storage of drugs.
(e) The Ministry is considering a proposal for creation of more than 1000
additional posts in CDSCO for further expansion.
(f) The National Pharmacovigilance Programme has been launched to capture
Adverse Drugs Reaction (ADRs) and safe-guarding Public Health. 22 ADR
Monitoing Centres have already  been established besides the National
Coordination Centre at Indian pharmacopeia Commission, Ghaziabad and
a Pharmacovigilance Cell at CDSCO (HQ).
(g) As per the Recommendations of the Mashelkar Committee, the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 was amended by the Drugs & Cosmetics
(Amendment) Act, 2008 for enhancing the penalties in the Drugs &
Cosmetics Act, 1940 so as to help tackle the problem of spurious and
adulterated drugs.
(1) The salient features of the amended provisions  of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act,1940 are as follows:—
(i) Maximum penalty life imprisonment and fine of Rs. 10 lakhs or
3 times the value of the Confiscated goods, whichever is more;
(ii) The offences relating to spurious and adulterated drugs made
cognizable and non-bailable;
(iii) Besides officers from the Drug Controller's Office, other gazetted
officers also authorised to launch prosecution under the Act;
(iv) Specially designated courts for trial of offences covered under the
Act; and
(v) Provision for compounding of minor offences.
The amended provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 have come into force
w.e.f. 10.8.2009.
(2) Detailed guidelines have been finalised by the Central Government with
the approval of the Drugs Consultative Committee, a statutory Committee
of States' and Central Drugs Regulators, for effective enforcement of
these amended provisions of the Act.

16
(3) Statutory directions have been issued by the Central Government to the
State/Union Territory Governments under the provisions of Section 33P
of the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 to ensure effective enforcement of
these amended provisions of the Act as per these guidelines.
(4) In pursuance of the provisions of this enactment, special designated
courts have already been established in a number of States/UTs, (h) A
Whistle Blower Policy has been introduced by the Ministry of Health to
encourage vigilant public participation in the detection of movement of
spurious drugs in the country. Under this policy the informers would be
suitably rewarded for providing  concrete information in respect of
movement of spurious drugs to the regulatory authorities."
27. The Committee are pleased to note that in pursuance of their Recommendations,
various initiatives like creating of additional posts for Central Drugs Standard
Control Organisation (CDSCO), launching of the National Pharmaco Vigilance
Programme, issuance of detailed Guidelines and Statutory Directions etc. have been/
are being undertaken by the Ministry to counter the menace of spurious drugs and
to improve the rgulatory mechanism for verifying the quality of drugs imported or
manufactured in the Country. Appreciating the measures initiated by the Ministry,
the Committee hope that the efforts for zero tolerance towards spurious drugs/
adulteration of drugs, having serious remifications on the very life and health of the
beneficiaries, would fructify to achieve the desired objectives. In view of the imperatives
involved, the Committee urge the Ministry to intensify the monitoring mechanism
so as to establish a strict enforcement regime for stringent prosecution/penalties in
cases of manufacture, supply and sale of spurious and adulterated drugs as well as
non-adherence to the quality norms prescribed.
VII. Improvement in Overall Healthcare System
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
28. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted with serious concern the
statement of the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that the healthcare
system in the country had several inadequacies and many of the Government Hospitals
were still in an appalling condition, although some improvements had taken place in
recent years due to reported sincere efforts of the Ministry. In this context, the
Committee found that some of the main reasons for the unsatisfactory healthcare
system were over-crowding and consequent pressure on the infrastructure and most
importantly huge shortage of doctors. The Committee were informed that in the Western
Countries, the doctor-patient ratio was 1:280 whereas in India it was something like
1:2000. The position in the rural and remote areas was more pathetic due to the
unwillingness of the doctors/specialists to be posted there. In  order to overcome the
problem of huge shortage of doctors, the Ministry were reportedly taking a number of
measures which inter-alia included creation of additional posts in the Lady Hardinge
Medical College and RML and Safdarjung Hospitals; sanctioning Rs. 1300 crore to
the Government Medical Colleges in various States for creation of about 5,000
additional Post-Graduate seats; developing an exclusive three year short-term course,

17
with the initiatives of the erstwhile Medical Council of India, for doctors to be appointed
only in sub-centres and Primary Health Care Centres to cater to the needs of the
people living in the rural and remote areas; typing up with other organization like
National Board of Examination (NBE) and  Indira Gandhi National Open University
(IGNOU) to get experts like Diabetologists, Radiologists and Radio Therapists and
train the in-service MBBS doctors to work in Community Health Centres; and working
in partnership with the State Government to improve the overall health care system in
the country. Expressing opinion that the above said measures initiated by the Ministry
were well directed towards meeting the huge shortage of doctors and specialists/
experts throughout the Country, especially in rural and remote areas, the Committee
reposed trust and hoped that the efforts of the Ministry would continue unabated
and bear fruit soon in noticeably improving the much maligned health care system in
the country.
29. On the above Observations/Recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry
have preferred to give ‘‘No Comments”.
30. The Committee in their earlier Report had stressed that the measures initiated
by the Ministry in various areas of health care across the country should continue
unabated till the objectives are attained. They deplore that, instead of assuring the
Committee of the commitment of the Government to provide efficient and satisfactory
health care, the Ministry responded by replying 'No Comments'. The Committee
demand a firm commitment from the Ministry to intensify the measures, in union
with the State Government, to bridge the gap between the abysmal doctor-patient
ratio so as to provide efficient, affordable and satisfactory health care system in the
country.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
Procurement of medicines and medical equipment is carried out by the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare for the implementation of various Disease Control
Programmes, Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) and for providing essential
health care facilities to the people in Central Government Hospitals, Research Bodies
and Institutes. There is a network of 331 dispensaries (246 Allopathic; 32 Ayurvedic
and 53 others), 19 Polyclinics, 65 Laboratories and 17 Dental Units through which the
Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS), an attached office of the Department
of Health and Family Welfare, is responsible for implementing the Central Government
Health Scheme that provides comprehensive medical care to the Central Government
employees, pensioners and members of their families and other beneficiaries. A
Procurement Cell under the DGHS is responsible for procuring machinery and
equipment values at Rs. 50 lakh and above. The machinery and equipment costing
less than Rs. 50 lakh is procured by the respective  hospitals and other subordinate
offices after necessary financial assistance is accorded by the  competent authority.
The Ministry have also constituted a number of Purchase Committees/Purchase
Advisory Committee(s) and Review Committee. Among these the Purchase Committees
are responsible for purchasing drugs and medicines, equipment and stores,
insecticides and larvicide's and vaccines and contraceptives. The cases of purchase
up to the value of Rs. 10 crore are decided by the respective Purchase Committees and
cases where the value of purchase exceeds Rs. 10 crore, the recommendations of the
Purchase Committee are considered by the Secretary (Department of Health and
Family Welfare) up to Rs. 20 crore and by the Minister of State (MoS)/Minister in
cases above Rs. 20 crore. Apart from this, there is an attached office of the Department
of Health and Family Welfare called the Medical Stores Organisation (MSO) which is
entrusted with the task of procurement of drugs and medicines required for healthcare
and research in various Central Government Hospitals and Dispensaries and
implementation of various Disease Control Programme whereas the autonomous bodies
functioning under the Ministry viz. AIIMS, PGI, NIMHANS etc. make purchase of
medicines, drugs and medical equipment under a decentralized system. The
responsibility for procurement of drugs/medicines for CGHS dispensaries in Delhi
and under various Disease Control Programme has also been outsourced to various
PSUs. The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed certain disquieting
aspects including deficient procurement procedure and inadequate inventory control
management as highlighted in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 1 of the 24th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
18

19
Action Taken
No comments. However, it is stated that the Procurement Cell of DGHS is responsible
for procuring machinery and equipment valued at Rs. 1.00 crore and above.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG(CGHS)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are surprised to note that prior to the Audit review of the system
adopted by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for procurement of medicines
and medical equipment, there were no uniform and comprehensive Procurement Policy
Guidelines and Purchase Manuals. It is quite unbelievable that the Ministry responsible
and accountable for efficiency, economy and transparency in the procurement of
medicines and medical equipment including life saving drugs and high end machinery,
did not follow any standardized purchase procedure for years together. It was not
even through prudent to timely revise the MSO Manual of 1979 which has become
outdated. The Ministry's submission that a Committee has been constituted for the
revision of the MSO Manual does not satisfy the Commitee in view of the fact that
such a move by the Ministry should have been initiated much earlier and certainly not
after almost three decades of the existence of the MSO Manual. What is a matter of
more concern is the callous attitude of the Ministry in finalizing the codification of the
Revised Purchase Manual. Despite an assurance given to the Committee that the
codification process of the Revised Manual would be completed by December, 2009,
the Ministry have not yet been able to do so on the plea that although the Revised
Draft of the codified Purchase Manual has been completed, it has not yet been bound
and circulated as some computerized input has to be added in it. This is something
totally unacceptable to the Committee as it depicts and indifferent attitude on the part
of the Ministry towards such in important issue. Although the Ministry are reportedly
taking a number of measures like publication of Tender Notices on the website, online
acceptance of indents and gradual introduction of e-procurement, yet there still exists
ample scope for further improvement in the procurement system, as admitted by the
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee feels that the first
and foremost step towards improving the procurement process is to follow a
standardized purchase procedure. And that can be done only when there is a codified
Purchase Manual. They, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to urgently bring in the
codified Purchase Manual so as to ensure that the entire procurement process becomes
more reliable, accountable and transparent.
[Sl.No. 2 of the 24th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The following steps are already in vogue in respect of procurement, distribution,
storage etc. of medicines, vaccines etc.
Medical Stores Organization under Department of Health and Family Welfare,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had a procurement Manual since 1979. Most of
the components of this manual were outdated due to introduction of various novel

20
technologies in inventory management and changed policy of the Government. This
manual has been comprehensively revised and made operational in 2011. In keeping
with the move towards transparency and better governance practices in procurements
the following has been adopted:—
(a) Introduction of web-based application (msotransparent.nic.in) for moving
towards e-procurement mode since April 2009.
(b) Publication of all tender notices on the website of the Ministry.
(c) Online acceptance of indents from indenters by the Medical Stores
Organizations (MSO). For this purpose, each indenter has been given user
id and password for his access to the web-based application
www.msotransparent.nic.in.
Further, compilation of indent, dispatch of Purchase Proposal, sanction by
MSO and placement of supply orders are undertaken online.
(d) All the medicines received by MSO are mandatorily printed with Bar codes
on tertiary, secondary and primary packages denoting the unique identity
number of the drug, name of the manufacturer, name of the drugs etc.
represented through various bars. The advantages of the bar code lie in
quick uploading onto the web-based application "msotransparent.nic.in"
through bar code scanner/portable Data Terminal, checking of quantity and
genuineness of the medicines, quick supply to the indentors including
tracking of supplies and proper inventory management.
This updated manual provides Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) which, inter-
alia, include web-based e-procurement, e-governance and incorporation of various
novel technologies as components of Good Storages Practices and quality assurance.
Above concepts were absent in previous manual.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that the Manual on Financial Management
of All India Institute of Medical Sciences is stuck up as the computer-based information
system is woefully inadequate in AIIMS. As an interim measure, the Institute
Authorities have been asked to hire an expert to review the draft manual and make
such minimum amendments so as to enable the Institute to carry out its financial
business online that might later facilitate a shift to an IT enabled system of financial
management. It is really a sorry state of affairs that at this age of advanced information
technology  evolution, that has penetrated almost every walk of life; a computer
aided information management system is inexplicably deficient in a super speciality
hospital like the AIIMS. It will be indeed, for all practical purposes, a redundant
Manual if it only codifies the conventional drugs and does not take into account the
IT based solutions as submitted by a representative of the Ministry during evidence.
The Committee, therefore recommended the urgent measures be taken by the Ministry

21
to develop a computer aided and computer based system in AIIMS so that the premiere
institute is able to take into account the IT based solutions besides codifying the
conventional drugs, thus appropriately shifting to an IT enabled system of effective
financial management.
[Sl.No. 3 of the 24th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In compliance with the directions for Ministry regarding manual on Financial
Management of All India Institute of Medical Sciences the Director has constituted a
Committee under the Chairmanship of Deputy Director (Admn.) to revise the draft
Financial Manual with a view to implement it an AIIMS and making it compatible with
IT-enable Accounting System. The finalization/review of the draft Manual is in
progress and likely to be completed by end of the current year.
It is also added that with the prior approval of SFC the work for preparation of
Annual Accounts as per new format of Accounts on Accrual Basis (Double Entry
System) has been awarded to Institute of Chartered Accountants of India—ARF
which inter alia includes the following:—
(a) Drafting of Accounts Manual including codification structure and chart of
accounts;
(b) Audit Manual; and
(c) Training Manual.
As regards developing a computer aided and computer-based system to enable
the institute to take into account the IT based solutions besides codifying the
conventional drugs and shifting to an IT-enabled system of effetive financial
management it is mentioned that the following e-governance projects are under active
implementation through NIC/NICSI during the financial year 2011-12:—
1. e-Hospital project.
2. Comprehensive DDO Package.
3. FTS/e-Office.
4. EHS computerization.
It is also not out of place to mention that all necessary informations with respect to
treatment of patients/user charges etc. are available on the website of AIIMS, almost
all the work of Exam. Section is also computerized and e-tendering system has already
been adopted in Engineering Service Department.
Thus, the institute has already taken suitable measures to comply with the
recommendations of Public Accounts Committee. The completion of the above
mentioned projects by ICAI and NIC/NICSI, shall pave the way for institute to shift
the existing accounting system to IT-enabled system of accounting for effective
Financial Management.

22
Audit Comments
Ministry may mention about the expected dates for completion of four governance
projects by ICAI/NICSI and their operation in AIIMS.
Further Reply
Present status of various projects in AIIMS are as under:—
(i) File Tracking System Software implementation had been completed on
26.6.2011 and is being used by AIIMS.
(ii) e-Office is started w.e.f. 13.3.2012 and expected to be completed by September, 2012.
(iii) Employees Health Scheme implemented w.e.f. Jan., 2012.
(iv) e-Hospital is being implemented and likely to be completed by Dec., 2012.
(v) Comp.-DDO software could not be taken up any further because of
introduction of new accounting procedures.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Comments of the Committee
Please see para No. 8 of Chapter-I.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee find that during the period 2002—06, out of the total expenditure of
Rs. 459.21 crore on purchase of medicines for CGHS dispensaries at Delhi, the value
of medicines purchased through local chemists was Rs. 366.33 crore which constituted
80 per cent of the total purchases. Similarly, the percentage of local purchase of
medicines to total purchase in CGHS Hyderabad, Bangalore, Allahabad, Patna, Kolkata,
Mumbai, Pune and Guwahati ranged between 74 to 91 per cent during the years
2002—07. Further, during the same period local purchases in Smt. Sucheta Kriplani
and Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospitals constituted as large as 77 to 97 per cent  of the
overall purchase of medicines. The Committee are given to understand that the local
purchase system was introduced to enable the CGHS dispensaries to supply to the
beneficiaries those medicines which were not in stock. But over a period of time the
system degenerated as would be gauged from the fact that CGHS was actually procuring
on an average at least 70 to 80 per cent of its medicines through local purchase and
only 20 to 30 per cent through centralized procurement. The Committee's examination
of the subject has revealed that such degeneration crept in as there was no data base
regarding procurement, distribution and inventory management of drugs, for which
no effective monitoring could be put in place to ascertain the reasons of large scale
procurement through local purchases. Another shortcoming was that most of the
medicines that were on the formulary did not have a rate contract. All these factors led
to inefficiency in the procurement system, as also candidly admitted by the senior
officers of the Ministry during evidence. However, post audit review and after this
Committee took up the subject for detailed examination, the Ministry sprung to action

23
and resorted to a number of measures to cut down the local purchases as well as to
bring in efficiency in the procurement system. Such measures, inter-alia, include
computerization of all the dispensaries in Delhi; culling out a list of about 262 medicines
that were not in the formulary of the Medical Stores Organisation (MSO) but were
frequently prescribed by the doctors and procured locally; entering into a rate contract
for all these medicines with the companies that manufacture them; and authorizing
the dispensaries to place the indent directly with the companies after estimating the
requirement every month through computerized projection. The Committee are informed
that as a result of the above cited measures initiated by the Ministry, the local purchase
of medicines has come down to 21 per cent. But the moot point is that such measures
should have been initiated much earlier. However, now that the Ministry have been
able to identify the grey areas and are taking corrective measures, the Committee
stress that the measures initiated should continue unabated and be extended to the
CGHS dispensaries in other cities also to check large scale procurement of medicines
through local purchase. An effective monitoring mechanism should be firmly put in
place for regular oversight of the appropriate implementation of the measures initiated.
Further, as there is scope for making all the purchases by a centralized way if the
demand is forecast and the frequently prescribed medicines is kept track of, as admitted
by the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the Committee recommend
that steps be taken by the Ministry accordingly to explore the feasibility of doing
away with the local purchases altogether so that exploitation of the system by certain
vested interests is prevented and higher payment towards locally procured medicines
is checked. Results of the measures taken in this regard be intimated to the Committee
from time to time.
[Sl.No. 4 of the 24th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Streamlining of the functioning of the CGHS is a continuous process. In order to
make available medicines not available in stock, procurement is due by placing indents
on the local authorised chemist appointed for each dispensary after following the
open tender process. Local indenting of medicines was necessitated in view of the
development of newer medicines by pharmaceutical companies and also changes in
the prescription pattern of Government specialists. In the period prior to the
computerisation of the functioning of the CGHS there was no data base regarding
procurement of medicines by the CGHS through local purchase. After the
computerisation of the functioning CGHS, it was possible for the CGHS to monitor the
prescriptions made by Government specialists, as a result of which 272 drugs which
were not in the formulary of CGHS, but were being commonly prescribed by specialists
were identified. CGHS has been able to procure such medicines directly from
manufacturers/suppliers at more competitive rates. All Chief Medical Officers in charge
of the dispensaries have been authorised to place indents directly on the
manufacturers/suppliers on a periodic basis based on the need. This arrangement has
resulted in beneficiaries getting upto 90% of their requirement of medicines on the
same day. The project, which was attempted as a pilot project in 10 dispensaries, in
Delhi, as a result of positive response received, was extended initially to all dispensaries

24
in Delhi and then subsequently to other CGHS cities. With the expanded coverage of
scheme, the proportion of local purchase is expected to come down further.
Given the need to make medicines available to beneficiaries without delay and
taking note of existing prescription practices and newer medicines being introduced
from time to time, it is not possible to entirely do away with local purchase, though
further effort is being made to further reduce local purchases.
Instructions have been issued to specialists in Safdarjung Hospital and
Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital to prescribe generic drugs as far as possible and
also to affix a stamp/note stating that "equivalent generic medicines can also be
issued”.
Audit Comments
A copy of the instructions issued to specialists in Safdarjung Hospital and
Dr. RML Hospital to prescribe generic drugs as far as possible and also to affix a
stamp/note stating that equivalent generic medicines can also be issued be appended
to final ATN. It may also be mentioned whether these instructions are being complied
with the specialists.
Further Reply
The generic medicines are being prescribed by the Central Government Hospitals.
The compliance report has also been received from various Central Government
institutions. These instructions are being complied and also being monitored. The
Copy of instructions is enclosed herewith (Annexure-F).
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)

ANNEXURE F
No. S-11025/45/10-MH-1
Government of India
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Directorate General of Health Services
(Medical Hospital-I Section)
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi
Dated the 26th May, 2010
ORDER
It has been observed that Doctors in the Central Government hospitals and
autonomous institutions under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare prescribe
specific brands of medicines quite often with a rider that no substitute should be
supplied. Instances have also come to notice where the prescribed drug was very
expensive and cheaper substitutes were available. However, the patient did not have
any choice but to procure the prescribed drug.
The matter has been considered by the Competent Authority. It is observed that
generic drugs are usually much cheaper then branded drugs. Therefore, Central
Government hospitals must provide only good quality generic medicines. It has
therefore, been decided that whenever any branded drug is prescribed in the above
mentioned institutions. It shall invariably also be mentioned that any other equivalent
generic drug could also be provided. For instance, if the prescription is for Tablet
Crocin, then the prescription should read as 'Tab. Crocin' or any other equivalent
generic drug. The hospital would then give the flexibility of providing generic equivalents
of the prescribed medicine.
It has also been decided that henceforth the prescription will be regularly monitiored
in Dte. G.H.S. to verify compliance with these Instruction.
Sd/-
Additional Deputy Director General (M)
Telefax: 23062290
To
All Central Government Health Institutions in Delhi & Outside Delhi (As per list)
25

26
Observation/Recommendation
Absence of formularies entailing the essential list of drugs in Hospitals of repute
like Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia and Safdarjung Hospitals is another grey area that came
to the notice of the Committee in the process of the examination of the subject. Audit
scrutiny revealed that these two Hospitals did not have any essential list of drugs
and they indented for or purchased medicines directly on the basis of drug lists
compiled every year on the basis of requisition made by the Departmental Heads. The
Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare apprised the Committee in evidence
that both the Hospitals have started maintaining/updating the formularies which they
follow to procure their drugs. It is surprising that such major Hospitals used to
procure drugs without adhering to any formulary for years together and only after
Audit pointed out the shortcomings and the PAC took notice of the matter, that the
Ministry impressed upon the Hospitals to stem the rot. It implies lack of self discipline
on the part of the Ministry as well as the Hospitals, to say the least. However, now
that Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia and Safdarjung Hospitals have started following
formularies for procurement of medicines, the Committee desire that there should not
be any further aberrations in this regard. The Committee also impress upon the
Ministry to carry out periodical inspections to ensure that all the CGHS hospitals/
dispensaries maintain their respective formularies and update them at regular intervals
for purchasing/indenting essential drugs.
[Sl.No. 7 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Common Formulary for Generic Drugs for MSO, CGHS and four Government
Hospitals i.e., Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Safdarjung Hospital, Lady Hardinge
Medical College attached Hospital and Kalawati Saran Children Hospital, has been
approved in May 2011. This formulary has been harmonized with the National List of
Essential Medicines.
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Formularies of proprietary/
branded drugs and for generic drugs are being updated from time to time.
Audit Comments
The Ministry has stated that the formularies of proprietary/branded drugs and for
generic drugs are being updated from time to time. The Ministry may mention the
dates on which these formularies have been updated during the last five years.
Further Reply
The Medical Stores Organization (MSO) an attached office of Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare traditionally had a V ocabulary of Medical Store (VMS) Book
which consisted of three Sections i.e., Generic Section, Proprietary Section and Non-
Drug Section and included following two lists:—
(a) Generic List—It includes single ingredient and multi-ingredient drugs for
which a monograph existed in the India Pharmacopoeia.

27
(b) Proprietary List—It includes the branded medicines manufactured by their
sole manufacturer.
At present MSO is operating the following two combined formularies of CGHS &
MSO.
Generic Formulary
A Common Formulary of 1128 Generic Medicines for MSO, CGHS and three Central
Government Hospitals namely Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. RML Hospital and LHMC and
KSC Hospital has been approved and implemented from 23.05.2011, which is valid for
three years. The Common Formulary of Generic Medicines consist of 1128 formulations/
doses forms and 664 generic medicines/drug molecules. This list has been harmonized
with National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM)-2011 (348 Molecules—
527 Formulations). Out of 1128 generic medicines listed in the formulary the rate
contract of 124 items (the rates valid upto 23.6.2014) is available with MSO at present.
The action for finalizing the rate contract of balance 1004 generic items is being
initiated by MSO. The dates on which this formulary has been updated during the last
five years are as under:—
Dec., 2007—818 No. of drugs included May, 2011—A Common formulary of 1128
drugs.
Proprietary Formulary
The Combined Formulary of CGHS/MSO in respect of Proprietary Drugs containing
622 formulations at present was notified by the Ministry on 17.9.2010. The validity of
the formulary has been extended upto 23.12.2012. A Committee has been constituted
on 19.12.2011 for revision of formulary and rate contract.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary and DG(CGHS)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee observe that during the years 2001-02 to 2006-07, 35 items of
medicines in CGHS—Delhi, Pune and Kolkata and Government Medical Store Depot
(GMSD) (Kolkata) were sent for laboratory testing on the basis of complaints received
from the Chief Medical Officers and individuals. The laboratory testing reports had
confirmed the sub-standard quality of the  drugs. In this context, the Committee are
given to understand that the problems lies with the drugs that  are procured locally
where pre-procurement inspection is not possible. In other words, in respect of
medicines procured  in bulk in a centralized way, there is prior inspection of the
supplier whereas local purchases do not allow the scope of drawing of samples of
drugs for testing and their subsequent follow up. In such cases, only  the bona fides
of the suppliers are checked with reference to their past records available with the
State Drug Controller. It is really shocking that such a stopgap arrangement has been
made to confirm the quality of dugs procured locally. The seriousness of the problem
could be well gauged from those years local purchases of medicines constituted
about 70 to 80 per cent of the total  purchases  and the large number of CGHS patients

28
who might have been administered sub-standard drugs during that period. However,
when better sense prevailed upon the Ministry and they introduced the rate contract
system in Delhi to cut down the local purchases, they have tested more than 1650
samples of drugs procured centrally on a very planned and random sampling
methodology and none of them has reportedly failed the quality  test so far. This
precisely why the Committee are keen to see that local purchases of medicines are
altogether done away with or confined to the barest minimum as life saving drugs
without quality assurance, emergency of  the situation notwithstanding may prove to
be counter productive. The Committee also desire that after restricting local purchases
to absolute emergencies, till such time they are completely stopped, the Ministry
should innovate some alternate effective measures, instead of just checking the bona
fides of the suppliers from the past records, to test the quality of the medicines
procured locally so that any possibility of administering substandard drugs to the
patients in distress is eliminated.
[Sl. No. 9 of the 24th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
For purchases made by MSO, each batch is sent for testing to two Government
approved/authorized drug testing Laboratories. After receiving satisfactory test reports
from both Laboratories, the drugs are accepted. All the Drugs are inspected physically
by a team consisting of two doctors from the indenter's side and one officer from the
depot side.
For purchases done locally, at the time of receiving of medicines supplied from
local authorised chemists, physical inspection is done with reference to date of
manufacture, date of expiry as well as any visible deterioration. Instructions are there
to ensure the drugs supplied by local authorised chemists have residual life of at least
50% of its total shelf life.
CDSCO authorities have been requested to collect and test the drug samples from
CGHS authorised local chemists more frequently. This will minimise chances of supply
of substandard drugs to CGHS.
Audit Comments
Ministry may furnish a copy of the letter requesting to CDSCO authorities to
collect and test the drug samples from CGHS authorized local chemists more frequently.
The Ministry may also mention the details of mechanism devised to collect and test
the drug from CGHS authorized local chemists by CDSCO.
Further Reply
The office of DCG(1) has  instructed vide circular No.26/Zonal & Sub-Zonal/DDC
(1)/2010 dated 20.07.2010 (Annexure ‘A’) to the Drugs Inspectors of all Zonal,
Sub-Zonal offices of CDSCO to collect at least 5 samples per month under Drugs and
Cosmetics  Act for testing and the sample shall be preferably collected from Government
dispensaries, hospitals, rural outlets and from manufacturing premises during
inspection. Atleast 9 to 10 samples shall be collected per quarter, and 50% sample

29
shall be from Government dispensaries.  In addition to above, a circular [No. 26/Zonal
& Sub-Zonal/DDC(1)/2010 dated 25.06.2012] has been issued by this office to all the
Drug Inspector of Zonal & Sub-Zonal offices of CDSCO to collect drugs sample from
CGHS Authorized Medical Shop. (Annexure ‘B’)
Further, Section 23 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act prescribe the procedure of
inspectors to collect the drug sample (Annexure ‘C’). The Government Analyst shall
cause to be analysed or tested such samples or drugs and cosmetics as may be sent
to him by inspectors or other persons under the provisions of Chapter-IV of the Act
and shall furnish reports of the results of test or analysis in accordance with these
rules.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG(CGHS)

ANNEXURE A
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
Directorate General of Health Services
Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (HQ)
FDA Bhawan, Kotla Road,
New Delhi
Tel: 23236965
Fax: 23236973
No. 26/Zonal & Subzone/DDC (i)/2010 Date: 20.07.2010
CIRCULAR
To keep a check on the manufacture and sale of not of standard quality drugs the
following guidelines for sampling of drugs and Cosmetics by drug inspectors shall be
followed with immediate effects:—
1. Each drugs inspector shall collect at least 5 samples per month under the
Drug and Cosmetics Act for testing. The sample shall be preferably collected
from Government dispensaries, hospitals, rural outlets and from
manufacturing premises during inspection. As least 9 to 10 samples shall be
collected per quarter and 50% sample shall be from Government dispensaries.
2. At least 2 samples of Cosmetics shall be collected per month from retail
outlets.
3. At least 5 survey samples of drugs per month shall be collected from
manufacturing premises as part of the inspection procedure. This may also
include raw material samples from the stores of the manufacturers.
Whenever required, States help can be taken during collection of samples.
Every quarter, information regarding investigation being carried out and prosecution
launched in the courts of law shall be intimated to CDSCO head quarter.
Please acknowledge this circular.
Sd/-
DCG (I)
Copy to:
1. To all CDSCO Zonal and Sub-zonal Offices
2. PPS to DGHS, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Nirman Bhawan,
New Delhi
3. Joint Secretary (R), Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Nirman Bhawan,
New Delhi
30

ANNEXURE B
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Directorate General of Health Services
Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (HQ)
FDA Bhawan, Kotla Road,
New Delhi-110 002
Tel: -011-23212074
Fax: -011- 23236973
File No. 26/Zonal & Sub-zonal/DDC (i)/2010 Date: 25.06.2012
CIRCULAR
In continuation of the circular No. 26/Zonal & subzonal/DDC(I)/2010 Dated
20.07.2010 of this office, it is hereby instructed that in addition to the sample collected
from Government dispensaries, Hospitals, Rural Outlets and from manufacturer
premises during inspection, the Drugs Inspectors are also directed to draw samples
from the CGHS Authorized medical shops.
Sd/-
Drugs Controller General (India)
To,
1. All CDSCO Zonal & Sub-zonal offices.
2. PPS to DGHS, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Nirman Bhawan.
3. Joint Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Nirman Bhawan.
31

ANNEXURE C
23.  Procedure of Inspectors— (1) Where an Inspector takes any sample of a drug
1[or cosmetic] under this Chapter, he shall tender the fair price thereof and may require
a written acknowledgement therefor.
(2) Where the price tendered under sub-section (1)  is refused, or where the Inspector
seizes the stock of any drug 1[or cosmetic] under clause ( c) of section 22, he shall
tender a receipt therefor in the prescribed form.
(3) Where an Inspector takes a sample of a drug 1[or cosmetic] for the purpose of
test or analysis, he shall intimate such purpose in writing in the prescribed form to the
person from whom he takes it and, in the presence of such person unless he wilfully
absents himself, shall divide the sample into four portions and effectively seal and
suitable mark the same and permit such person to add his own seal and mark to all or
any of the portions so sealed and marked:
Provided that where the sample is taken from premises whereon the drug
1[or cosmetic] is being manufactured, it shall be necessary to divide the sample into
three portions only:
Provided further that where the drug 1[or cosmetic] is made up in containers of
small volume, instead of dividing a sample as aforesaid, the Inspector may, and if the
drug 
1[or cosmetic] be such that it is likely to deteriorate or be otherwise damaged by
exposure shall, take three or four, as the case may be, of the said containers after
suitably marking the same and, where necessary, sealing them.
(4) The Inspector shall restore one portion of a sample so divided or one container,
as the case may be, to the person from whom he takes it, and shall retain the remainder
and dispose of the same as follows:—
(i) one portion or container he shall forthwith send to the Government Analyst
for test or analysis;
(ii) the second he shall produce to the Court before which proceedings,
 if any, are instituted in respect of the drug 1[or cosmetic];
2[(iii) the third, where taken, he shall send to the person, if any, whose name,
address and other particulars have been disclosed under section 18A.]
(5) Where an Inspector takes any action under clause ( c) of section 22,—
(a) he shall use all despatch in ascertaining whether or not the drug
1[or cosmtic] contravenes any of the provisions of the section 18 and, if it is
ascertained that the drug 1[or cosmetic] does not so contravene, forthwith
1. Ins. by  Act 21 of 1962, s. 15 ( w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 1964, s. 16, for cl. ( iii) ( w.e.f. 15-09-1964).
32

33
revoke the order passed under the said clause or, as the case may be, take such
action as may be necessary for the return of the stock seized;
(b) if he seizes the stock of the drug 1[or cosmetic], he shall as soon as may
be inform 4[a Judicial Magistrate] and take his orders as to the custody thereof;
(c) without prejudice to the institution of any prosecution, if the alleged
contravention be such that the defect may be remedied by the possessor of the
drug 1[or cosmetic], he shall, on being satisfied that the defect has been so
remedied, forthwith revoke his order under the said clause.
5[(6) Where an Inspector seizes any record, register, document or any other material
object under clause (cc) of sub-section (I) of section 22, he shall, as soon as may be,
inform 6[a Judicial Magistrate] and take his orders as to the custody thereof.]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are informed that the Central Government Drug Testing Laboratories
at Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, Guwahati and Kasauli are adequately equipped to test
the drug samples sent to them. Two new similar kinds of laboratories are reportedly
being established at Chandigarh and Hyderabad. The Committee, however, finds that
the position in this regard in various States is deplorable. For example, only 17 States
have Drug Testing Laboratories and even among them, only seven laboratories have
the capacity to test all types of drugs. Not only that, every State Government has
grossly inadequate inspectors and the functioning of the Drug Controllers in various
States is not as optimal as it should be. The Ministry on their part is providing
assistance, under a Capacity Building Project through World Bank, to the States to
upgrade the testing facilities and  establish new Drug Testing Laboratories in
23  States and Union Territories. But the Ministry's move to centralize the monitoring
mechanism to ensure the quality of drugs and their supply throughout the country
has not found favour with the State Governments and almost all of them have opposed
the centralization of powers with the Drug Controller General of India. The Committee
are well aware that Health is a State subject. But when the State Governments have
not been able to establish adequately equipped Drug Testing Laboratories and ensure
optimal functioning of their respective  Drug Controllers, despite getting financial
assistance, they should not have  any reservations over the centralization of drug
testing mechanism, as contemplated by the Government of India. After all, it involves
larger public interest. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, besides
providing assistance to the State Governments through the World Bank, should
persuade them to establish adequately equipped Drug Testing  Laboratories and
concur on an effective centralized mechanism to  monitor the drug quality so that
both the Centre and States are able to perform in unison towards a common cause of
providing quality drugs throughout the Country.
[Sl. No. 10 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
1. Ins. by  Act 21 of 1962, s. 15 ( w.e.f. 27-7-1964).
4. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 20, for "a Magistrate" ( w.e.f. 1-2-1983).
5. Subs. by Act 68 of 1982, s. 19, for “the code of Criminal Procedure, 1898” ( w.e.f. 1-02-1983).
6. Ins. by s. 19,  ibid . ( w.e.f. 27-7-1964).

34
Action Taken
(a) (i) The Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory at Chandigarh is a new
laboratory. It has become operational with the appointment of a regular
Director. He has been declared as Government Analyst to test statutory
samples. It is, however, functioning at a minimum operational level due
to shortage  of regular technical staff. The posts required for the purpose
are being created. For the time being, the Ministry has arranged some
minimum staff on contract basis. The matter has been taken up with the
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure for providing regular
technical and administrative staff to this lab in the required number.
(ii) The Central Drugs Testing Laboratory at Hyderabad was inaugurated
in January, 2011. It has started functioning with minimal manpower. The
matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure for providing regular staff to this lab in the required number.
(iii) The Ministry has sent a proposal for creation of 397 posts in various
central drug testing laboratories to the Ministry of Finance, Department
of Expenditure.
(iv) The Ministry is also continuously engaged in upgrading the
equipments infrastructure of all the central drug testing laboratories.
In 2009-2010, high-end sophisticated equipments worth Rs. 3.59 crores
were provided  to these labs. Another lot of purchase  of equipments
worth of Rs. 3.20 crores is currently under process. The Ministry has
also planned to further purchase equipments worth Rs. 25 crores for
upgrading the testing facilities.
(b) The Ministry has been aware of the condition of the drug testing
laboratories of the State/Union Territories. During 2003-2007 the
Ministry, however, provided financial assistance under a previously
implemented  capacity Building Project for Food & Drugs assisted by
the World Bank to upgrade their testing facilities and to establish new
drug testing laboratories so as to enhance the capacity of the
laboratories to test large number of  samples. Under this project 23
States and 6 Central Drugs Laboratories were strengthened through
renovations, extensions and equipments.
The Ministry has now worked out a proposal for financial assistance
to the States/Union territories in augmenting their drug control
infrastructure including setting up of more drug testing laboratories
in its 12th Five Y ear plan proposals. However, this is subject to approval
by the Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance and NDC.
(c) Similarly, the Ministry is aware of the inadequate manpower resources
of the Drugs Control Departments of the States/Union Territories. The
Ministry has been writing to them to strengthen their manpower
adequately.

35
(d) The issue of strengthening of the drugs regulatory system at the State
level was also discussed in detail in the Conference of the State Health
Ministers and health Secretaries held on January 12-13, 2011 at
Hyderabad.
Audit Comments
The Ministry may mention:
1. Whether adequately equipped Drug Testing Laboratories have been
established in all the States. If not, the target dates are mentioned.
2. Whether a centralized mechanism to monitor the drug quality has been
established as recommended by the PAC.
Further Reply
In this regard it is mentioned that the Central Government has 8 Drug testing
laboratories and 24 States/UTs Government have 31 Drug testing laboratories. The
details are enclosed (Annexure ‘D’). The Drugs and Cosmetics Act mandates both
the Central Drug Regulatory Authority  (Drug Controller) and State Drug Controllers
to monitor the quality of various drugs.
Further Audit Comments
It may be mentioned whether Drug Testing Laboratories of Centre (8) and States
(24) state to have been established are adequately equipped for their optimal
functioning. The Ministry may also mention the details of centralized mechanism to
monitor the drug quality so that both the Centre and States are able to perform
towards a common cause of providing quality drugs throughout the country as
desired by the PAC.
Reply of the Ministry on Further Audit Comments
1. Regulation of the Quality of Drugs in the Country
• The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 is a Central Act with the mandate of
ensuring quality, safety and efficacy of drugs manufactured and imported
into the country. The provisions of the Act and the Drugs and Cosmetics
Rules, 1945 made thereunder are implemented mainly through the
States/UTs.
• Under Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rules made thereunder, the Central
Government has the mandate of regulating imports, approving introduction
of new drugs, clinical trials, blood banks and medical devices through the
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO).
• The State/UT Governments have the major responsibilities of regulating the
manufacture, sale and distribution of drugs through a system of grant/renewal
of the drugs manufacturing licenses and sale licenses by their Licensing
Authorities and enforcement of various provisions of the Act and the Rules
through their Drugs Control Authorities.

36
• The Drug Inspectors appointed under the Act, both of the Central and State/
UT Governments, have powers to inspect any premises wherein any drug is
being manufacured or sold, or stocked or exhibited or offered for sale or
distributed. He/she is authorized to take samples  of any drug for testing.
He/she is empowered to  search any person, enter and search any place or
stop and search any vehicle or conveyance where he has a reason to believe
that offence is being committed. He/she can examine records; register and
documents etc. and seize the same if so required under the Act. He/she is
authorized to institute prosecution in respect of breaches of the Act and
Rules thereunder. He/she is required to inspect not less than once a year all
establishment licensed for manufacture or sale within the area assigned to
him/her.
• Schedule-M to the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules provides requirements for
Good Manufacturing Practices and requirements of plant and equipment for
manufacture of drugs. It specifies in detail the requirements of premises,
surroundings, personnel, sanitation, storage of raw materials, documentation
and records, self inspections  and quality control systems and site master
files etc. The manufacturer is required to comply with the requirements of
Schedule-M under the conditions of the licence so as to ensure that the
drugs manufacturers in the country conform to the standards prescribed for
them.
• The States have grossly inadequate infrastructure and manpower for
efficiently discharging their responsibilities.
• The Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), including the
Central drug testing laboratories has also been facing infrastructure
constraints.
• There are at present only 8 Central drug testing labs and 29 labs in the
States, most of which are lacking in the required infrastructure, both
manpower and physical. Given the increasing size of the domestic pharma
sector, there is need for testing of adequate samples of drugs per year.
• At present, the Central Drug Testing Laboratories are testing around 9,000
samples in a year. The State laboratories test over 53,600 samples in a year.
For testing of complex samples of drugs, the States Licensing Authorities
avail the testing facilities of Central Drugs Testing Laboratories. Every batch
of vaccine is tested in the Central Drugs Laboratory, Kasauli before use. The
National Institute of Biologicals, NOIDA is responsible for the testing of
biological products.
• A list of drug testing labs in the country is given below:—
A. Central Drugs Testing Laboratories
Sl. No. Name
1. Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Central Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata, West Bengal
3. Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

37
4. Central Drugs Laboratory, Kasauli, Himachal Pradesh
5. Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory, Guwahati, Assam
6. Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory, Chandigarh
7. Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh
8. National Institute of Biologicals NOIDA. (U.P .)
B. Government Drug Testing Laboratories set up by States/UTs
Sl. Name of State No. of Drug Testing
No. laboratories
1 . Andhra Pradesh 2
2. Bihar 1
3. Chhattisgarh 1
4. Delhi 1
5. Goa 1
6. Gujarat 1
7. Haryana 1
8. Himachal Pradesh 1
9. Jammu & Kashmir 2
10. Jharkhand 1
11. Karnataka 3
12. Kerala 1
13. Madhya Pradesh 1
14. Maharashtra 2
15. Meghalaya 1
16. Odisha 1
17. Puducherry 1
18. Punjab 1
19. Rajasthan 1
20. Tamil Nadu 2
21. Tripura 1
22. Uttar Pradesh 1
23. West Bengal 1
Total 29
Sl. No. Name

38
• The Ministry has devoted special attention to strengthening its drug
regulatory system. The Ministry has been continuously engaged in
enhancing and upgrading the infrastructure facilities at the headquarters as
well as other offices of CDSCO. In April 2008, CDSCO had a total of
111 regular posts. The Government sanctioned additional posts in 2008 &
2009 for strengthening headquarters, port/zonal offices.
• Presently, there are total sanctioned posts of 310. Presently, there are
121 regular officers in-position in CDSCO. UPSC has completed selection of
90 Drug Inspectors who are likely to join within a few months. The remaining
posts are at various stages of filling. Details of staff position of CDSCO as
on November 2012 vis-a-vis that on April 2008 are given below:—
Sl. Name of the post No. of In No. of In V acant
No. Sanctioned Position Sanctioned Position Posts as in
Posts as in as in Posts as as in November
April 2008 April in November 2012
2008 November 2012
2012
12 34 5 6 7
1. Drugs Controller 1 1 1 1* -*
General (India)
[DCG(I)]
2. Joint Drugs 1 0 2 - 2
Controller (India)
[JDC(I)]
3. Deputy Drugs 9 1 19 14 5
Controller (India)
[DDC(I)]
4. Assistant Drugs 16 16 41 14 27
Controller (India)
[ADC(I)]
5. Drugs Inspector 32 12 169 65 104
[DI]
6. Asstt. Drug - - 31 - 31
Inspector [ADI]
7. Sr. Biomedical - - 1 - 1
Engineer
8. Biomedical - - 1 - 1
Engineer
9. Technical 14 5 24 13 11
Officer [TO]

39
10. Senior Technical 17 13 15 9 6
Assistant [STA]
11. Technical 21 16 6 6 -
Assistant [TA]
Total 111 64 310 121 189
*The post is filled up on additional charge basis with the person also selected for regular
appointment, which has been stayed by Madras High Court.
• The Central Drug Testing labs are also continuously being provided newer
sophisticated testing instruments. During the financial year 2012-13 also, it
is proposed to procure equipments worth Rs. 19.45 crores. This will further
enhance the testing capacities of these laboratories.
• Considering the lack of resources available with State Governments, the
Central Government has similarly felt an urgent need to strengthen their
infrastructure, both physical and human resources. It has accordingly
envisaged a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for the purpose during the 12th
Five Year Plan. The Scheme would be funded by the Central and the States.
The required interventions in the direction of strengthening the infrastructure
of State drug control departments will include:—
(i) Strengthening of manpower.
(ii) Strengthening of physical infrastructure.
(iii) Reviving non-operational/party operational drug testing facilities
to enhance their capacity.
(iv) Sharing information about drugs and sub-standard drugs with the
drugs controllers of other States/UTs.
(v) Providing training to enforcement officials.
(vi) Creating data base on Drug Regulation and introducing IT enabled
services.
Further Vetting Audit Comments
Ministry may inform PAC after revival and filling up of the lapsed posts in all
cadres of Medical Stores Organization (MSO), Central Drugs Testing Laboratories
set up by States/UTs and Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO).
Reply of the Ministry on further Vetting Audit Comments
1. Only one lapsed post in the Central Drugs Testing Laboratories and the Central
Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO), i.e. the post of Pharmaceutical Chemist
in Central Drug Laboratory, Kolkata, has been revived by the Department of
Expenditure during the last 5 years vide I.D. No. 240/R&I/ECI/09 dated 17.12.2009.
The post has since been filled up.
12 3 4 567

40
2. The Department of Expenditure did not agree to revival of several other technical
posts.
3. Instead of making further efforts at revival of other lapsed posts in Central
Drugs Testing Laboratories and the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation
(CDSCO), the Ministry has reviewed the organisational structure of these
organisations in view of the changing needs of the regulatory control of drugs,
cosmetics and medical devices. It has accordingly proposed creation of new/additional
posts in these organisations, including some of the lapsed posts.
4. The Ministry is making all out efforts to fill up all the vacant/new posts in the
Central  Drugs Testing Laboratories and the Central Drugs Standard Control
Organisation (CDSCO).
5. The Government Drug Testing Laboratories set up by States/UTs do not fall
within the administrative purview of the Central Government. Hence, no information
is available about them in this regard. However, Central Government has been
strengthening its laboratories continuously. The States have been regularly advised
to strengthen their laboratories and upgrade the capacity of their personnel.
Aware of the deficient status of the State drug control departments and their
Drugs Testing Laboratories,  the Central Government has envisaged a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme during the 12th Five Y ear Plan to help them in upgrading their
infrastructure, both physical and human resources. The  Scheme would be funded by
the Centre and the States. A new budget head has already been created in this regard.
The required interventions in the direction of strengthening the infrastructure of
State drug control departments will include:—
(i) Strengthening of manpower.
(ii) Strengthening of physical infrastructure.
(iii) Reviving non-operational/partly operational drug testing facilities to enhance
their capacity.
(iv) Sharing information about drugs and sub-standard drugs with the drugs
controllers of other States/UTs.
(v) Providing training to enforcement officials.
(vi) Creating data base on Drug Regulation and introducing IT enabled services.
Rs. 1200 crore has been approved for this new scheme for the 12th Plan Period and
Rs. 100 crore for the financial year 2013-14.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary

ANNEXURE  D
No. of Central Government Drug Testing Laboratories
Sl. No. Name
1. Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Mumbai.
2. Central Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata.
3. Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Chennai.
4. Central Drugs Testing Laboratory, Hyderabad.
5. Central Drugs Laboratory, Central Research Institute, Kasauli.
6. Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory, Guwahati, Assam.
7. Regional Drugs Testing Laboratory Chandigarh.
8. National Institute of Biologicals, Noida.
No. of State/UT-wise Government Drug Testing Laboratories
Sl. No. Name of States No. of Drug Testing Laboratories
1. Andhra Pradesh 2
2. Bihar 1
3. Chhattisgarh# 1
4. Delhi 1
5. Goa 1
6. Gujarat 1
7. Haryana 1
8. Himachal Pradesh 1
9. Jammu & Kashmir 2
10. Jharkhand# 1
11. Karnataka 3
12. Kerala 1
13. Madhya Pradesh 1
14. Maharashtra 2
15. Meghalaya 1
16. Orissa 2
17. Pondicherry 1
41

42
Sl. No. Name of States No. of Drug Testing Laboratories
18. Punjab 1
19. Rajasthan 1
20. Tamil Nadu 2
21. Tripura 1
22. Uttar Pradesh 1
23. Uttarakhand 1
24. West Bengal 1
Total 31
# In the State of Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh the drug testing laboratories are not functional
at present because of manpower shortage. However the concerned State Governments are in
the process of recruiting Government Analyst and other supporting staff to make the
laboratories functional.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that in seven Medical Store Depots and two CGHS stores,
failure on the part of the Ministries/Department concerned to periodically and
realistically assess the procurement requirements resulted in unwanted medicines
worth Rs. 5.87 crore becoming time expired. The Committee further note that indents
for procurement of some specific medicines was placed by CGHS, Delhi far in excess
of actual requirements which resulted in huge stockpiling of medicines worth
Rs. 51.69 lakh with short shelf life. In this context, the Committee finds that earlier
procurement was done annually whereas supplies were made on the basis of quarterly
indents generated by each dispensary. In such a situation, there was sometimes a
total mismatch between what was annually indented and what was actually asked for
every quarter. However, now that the indenting has been made online for both CGHS
and the MSO, the Committee desire that infructuous indenting/procurement of
medicines is avoided and the gap between the projection and the actual utilization is
bridged. The Committee also desire that the conditions imposed on the companies
viz. to supply medicines which should have a valid shelf life on three-fourth of the
valid shelf life and to replace the medicines on expiry with a fresh batch, should be
continued unabated along with judicious projections for procurement with a view to
preventing stockpiling of medicines and the consequent loss there from.
[Sl. No. 12 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is a fact that there was accumulated stores worth of Rs. 5.72 crores which expired
subsequently. These stores pertain to the procurement made during various periods
between 1976 and 2001. There are number of factors which resulted in such
accumulation and consequential expiry of these drugs. Some of these are as under:—
(i) In the past, a number of indenters including State Governments, Union
Territories and various Government/Semi-Government Organizations were

43
depending on Medical Stores Organisation for indenting the medicines.
Hence, there was an in-built provision in the GMSD Manual to have
advancing provision of procurement of medicines on the basis of the past
years' experience of consumption. Hence, procurement and supply though
advance provisioning were in vogue during late 70's and 80's. However,
certain medicines which were procured on the basis of advanced provisioning
could not be utilized due to sudden withdrawal of certain indenters from
MSO, return of excess stocks by some indenters and more so the change of
prescription pattern by the Doctors due to introduction of newer drugs and
gradual un-popularity of certain older drugs.
(ii) Certain items because of their obsolete use were deleted from the formulary
of the Medical Stores Organisation.
(iii) There were two manufacturing units attached to GMSD, Mumbai and Chennai
each and responsible for manufacture of many items. The sudden closure of
these factories led to accumulation of not only certain finished products but
also various raw materials procured for the purpose of manufacture.
(iv) Under the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, certain drugs also were banned and
could not be utilized by MSO.
(v) Certain stores also accumulated due to the accidental breakage during
storage/transport.
However, expired drugs worth of Rs. 5.72 crores have already been written off by
Department  of  Expenditure, Ministry of Finance on 2nd August, 2010 its value
amounts to less than 0.5% of the total value of the procurement. It would be pertinent
to mention that no medicine has expired in any of the GMSDs under the control of
MSO during the last ten years.
It has to be appreciated that the likely demand of medicines for the next
12-18 months can be worked out only on the basis of past consumption pattern of
medicines.
Dispensaries place indents on Medical Stores Depot based on the past consumption
pattern. Requirement of medicines changes from region to region.
Keeping  this background in view, CGHS has taken the following steps to reduce
over procurement of drugs:—
1. Now procurement of medicines is done bi-annually;
2. CGHS places orders on HSCC/companies/suppliers for procurement of drugs
with the condition that the spent shelf life of the drugs should not exceed
one-sixth (approx. 16%) of the total shelf life at the time of inspection of the
drugs;
3. CGHS is now strictly enforcing the policy of replacement of expired drugs
with fresh batch of drugs as per "replacement clause" agreed to with
manufacturers/suppliers; and Strict compliance of "First in First Out" is

44
being enforced by Medical Stores Depot, with assistance from the software
installed in the computers. This will enable dispensing of drugs of older
batches first before dispensing of drugs of newer batches to the beneficiaries.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the assurance given by the Ministry that the sale of
medicines whose life has expired would be a thing of the past and if there would be
such cases, then it would not be on account of system failure, but due to deliberate
human failure. In such an eventuality, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to fix
responsibility and take stringent action against the errant/delinquent officials so that
it acts as a deterrent for deliberate callous or malafide attitude towards the assigned
responsibility.
[Sl. No. 13 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The present introduction of system of e-procurement on the basis of confirmed
demand has not resulted in any expiry of medicines. The expired medicines relates to
1976-2001 which is less than 0.5% of the total procurement.
The disciplinary proceeding were initiated against the officers responsible for
such procurement during the said period.
However, due to the minor quantum of expiry vis-a-vis the total quantum of
procurement and the prevailing circumstances during which the medicines were
procured, the vigilance division of the Ministry turned down such proceedings.
Moreover, it has been noted that the commission of these offences is more than
20 years old.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that as the MSO could not live up to the expectation in
discharging its allocated function of procuring, stocking and supplying
pharmaceuticals and with the funding support coming from external bodies like the
World Bank, the Ministry has been engaging consultants, mainly from Public Sector
Undertakings, from time to time for procurement of drugs/medicines required for
CGHS dispensaries in Delhi and for other National Disease Control Programmes
including externally aided projects. Even though these agencies are termed
'consultants', they are in fact contracted to carry out the procurements. In this context,
the Committee finds that the task of procurement of medicines for CGHS units in Delhi
has been assigned to Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (HSCC) with effect
from November, 2002 for a period of six years on a consultancy fee of 4.5 per cent of
the value of drugs procured. The Committee are informed that the reasonableness of

45
the consultancy fee paid to HSCC appeared doubtful in view of the Purchase Advisory
Committee's observation in its meeting held in July, 2005 that the commission paid to
the company was on a higher side and it should have been 1 to 2 per cent, taking into
consideration the job done by them. The Joint Secretary, Vigilance Commission had
also instructed the Director, CGHS in November, 2005 to take up the matter for reducing
the fee to 2 per cent at the time of renewal of the contract during December, 2005. The
Committee are surprised to find that despite the Purchase Advisory Committee's
observation and the Joint Secretary, VC's instruction in 2005 to downwardly revise
the consultancy fee of HSCC, no action was taken till 2007. Only after Audit pointed
out the shortcomings and the Committee took up the subject for examination that the
Ministry informed that the consultation fee shall be capped at 2.5 per cent plus
Service Tax and the same has been conveyed to HSCC. In this context, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the specific reasons for allowing higher consultancy fee
to the extent of at least 5 per cent than what was suggested by the Purchase Advisory
Committee and the Joint Secretary, VC. The Committee would further like the Ministry
to inform them whether the consultancy fee was reduced at the time of renewal of the
contract from December, 2005 as instructed by the JS (VC) and in case of deviation, if
any, the action taken by the Ministry to fix responsibility. In view of the fact that the
Ministry are making efforts to develop and professionalise their procurement system
within the Ministry itself, to oversee and coordinate the entire procurement process
under the externally aided projects and purchases of vaccines under the Universal
Immunisation Programme, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to
revisit their decision to appoint consultants/contractors on commission basis for the
purpose.
[Sl. No. 14 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It has been decided in consultation with IFD in the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare that HSCC would be given 2.5% of the value of drugs as consultancy fee.
HSCC is now given this rate since June 2009.
Audit Comments
As desired by the PAC, Ministry may mention the specific reason for allowing
high consultancy fee to the extent of at least 5 per cent than what was suggested by
the Purchase Advisory Committee and Joint Secretary (VC).
Further Reply
The Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (HSCC), a fully owned Government
of India undertaking under the administrative control of the Department of Health and
Family Welfare of this Ministry was contracted by the Central Government Health
Scheme (CGHS) in the year 2002 as a service provider for procurement of medicines
for CGHS dispensaries located in Delhi and NCR. It was considered necessary as
CGHS was facing problems in providing the prescribed medicines at the dispensary
level and the supplies were erratic and the MSO was also finding it difficult to manage
the supplies to CGHS at Delhi. The services of HSCC were hired at a consultancy fee

46
of 4.5% of the value of goods procured as against 10% being charged by MSO as
Departmental charges. It was found to be a financially prudent and cost effective
solution to improve the supplies of medicines to the CGHS beneficiaries. The initial
contract was for a period of 3 years. The rate of commission was determined by a
Committee headed by the Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare after taking all relevant factors into consideration in its
meeting dated 14.10.2004. Accordingly, an agreement was entered into and HSCC
were paid the service charges in the form of consultancy fee accordingly.
The Ministry has taken note of the PAC's observations in the matter and has taken
appropriate steps to strengthen its procurement system. Accordingly, an autonomous
Central Procurement Agency is being set up to address all such issues related to
centralized procurement of drugs, medicines and other items related to the field of
medical services, on behalf of the Govt. of India.
Further Audit Comments
(i) The Ministry may mention specific reasons for not taking any action on the
suggestion of Purchase Committee and Joint Secretary (VC) made in 2005 to
reduce the consultancy fee to two percent.
Reply of the Ministry on further Audit Comments
The Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (HSCC), a fully owned Government
of India undertaking under the administrative control of the Department of Health and
Family Welfare of this Ministry was contracted by the Central Government Health
Scheme (CGHS) in the year 2002 as a service provider for procurement of medicines
for the CGHS dispensaries located in Delhi and NCR. It was considered necessary as
CGHS was facing problems in providing the prescribed medicines at the dispensary
level and the supplies were erratic and the MSO was also finding it difficult to manage
the supplies to CGHS at Delhi. The services of HSCC were hired at a consultancy fee
of 4.5 % of the value of goods procured as against 10% being charged by MSO as
Departmental charges. It was found to be a financially prudent and cost effective
solution to improve the supplies of medicines to the CGHS beneficiaries. The initial
contract was for a period of 3 years. The rate of Commission was determined by a
Committee headed by the Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare after taking all relevant factors into consideration in its
meeting dated 14.10.2004. Accordingly, an agreement was entered into and HSCC
were paid the service charges in the form of consultancy fee accordingly.
Meanwhile, in the year 2005, the Purchase Advisory Committee and the then Joint
Secretary opined that the consultancy fee was on a higher side and therefore
recommended a reduction in the fee to make it 2 %. However, M/s. HSCC did not agree
to it and instead demanded a higher fee for their services. The Contract was renewed

47
in the year 2006 for a further period of three years at the same terms and conditions
with the approval of the competent authority . However, The Ministry kept up the
pressure on HSCC to reduce it to 2%. After several rounds of discussions and
negotiations, HSCC finally agreed to a consultancy fee of 2.5 %. This could become
possible only because the HSCC and CGHS, both the organisations are under the
administrative control of the same Department and Ministry, i.e. Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare.
Further Audit Comments
(ii) The Ministry may also mention whether any responsibility has been fixed
for reducing the consultancy fee to 2.5 percent of the value of the drugs
since 2009 instead of the date of renewal of contract from December, 2005 as
instructed by the Joint Secretary (VC).
Reply of the Ministry on further Audit Comments
The question of fixing responsibility arises only when there is a lapse or loss to
National exchequer. In this case, there was no loss caused to CGHS as it had procured
services of HSCC with due approval of competent authority. The observations made
by the Purchase Advisory Committee and JS (VC) was recommendatory in nature and
it could have been enforced only with the mutual consent of both the parties which
had signed a formal and legally enforceable agreement. Any unilateral decision in this
regard was unwarranted as it could have led to serious disruption in the services and
great inconvenience to the CGHS beneficiaries. It could have legal implications and
financial implications as well. The decision to renew the contract was taken in the
year 2006 with due consideration of all above factors. CGHS kept on pursuing the
matter with HSCC and it was finally in the year 2009, at the time of renewal of the
contract, that the matter could be clinched with mutual consent of both the parties of
the contract.
Further Audit Comments
(iii) Ministry may also mention action taken on PAC's recommendation that
Ministry to revisit their decision to appoint consultants/contractors on
commission basis for the purpose of procurement of medicines in view of
the fact that the Ministry itself making efforts to develop and professionalize
their procurement system.
Reply of the Ministry on further Audit Comments
The Ministry has taken note of the PAC's observations in the matter and has taken
appropriate steps to strengthen its procurement system. Accordingly, an autonomus
Central Procurement Agency has been set up to address all such issues related to
centralized procurement of drugs. Medicines and other items related to the field of
medical services, on behalf of the Govt. of India. The Agency is likely to become
functional in 2012-13 itself.

48
Further Vetting  Audit Comments
Ministry has stated that Central Procurement Agency (CPA) is likely to become
functional in 2012-13 itself. Ministry may inform PAC after the functional/set up of
Agencies in Centre and States.
Reply of the Ministry on further Vetting Audit Comments
CPA is now termed as Central Medical Service Society (CMSS). The premises for
its functioning has been taken on lease and recruitment process for staffing is under
way. It is expected that initial functioning will be in place by October, 2013 at Delhi.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are happy to note that some States like Tamil Nadu have made
rapid strides in capacity building and procurement of medicines through IT enable
state-of-the-art methodology and made a distinct name for themselves in the field.
The Ministry, on their part, besides considering the creation of an agency on the line
of Tamil Nadu Medical Supplies Corporation (TNMSC) at the Central Level, are also
encouraging the States to set up similar procurement agencies. The Committee are
informed that under the National Rural Health Mission, the Ministry's mandate is to
provide financial assistance to the States and let the States do their own procurement.
In such a scenario, encouraging the States to create IT enabled and professionalized
procurement agencies by emulating TNMSC is a move in the right direction. But the
responsibility of the Ministry does not just end there. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should undertake periodical comparative studies of the progress made by
different States in the establishment of state-of-the-art procurement agencies and
based on the findings of the studies, the laggard States should be constantly cajoled
to do the needful for their own benefit.
[Sl. No. 15 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
MOHFW has prepared Procurement Management Information System (ProMIS)
for five Centrally sponsored schemes namely RCH, RNTCP, NVBDCP, SSM and UIP.
Procurement MIS was started by MOHFW in the month of April, 2009. This was
piloted in three States namely Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.
In  2010-11 the data entry was done by eleven States. In 2011-12 till May, 2011 seventeen
States have started entering data. MOHFW is planning  regional level  training  for
better  implementation  of  ProMIS.  Central  Procurement  Agency  (CPA)  will  take

49
over the procurement MIS and will implement in all 35 States/UTs. Once CPA is
established, it will take steps to assist States/UTs to operationalise State level
procurement agencies.
Audit Comments
The Committee is happy to note that some States like Tamil Nadu have made rapid
strides in capacity building and procurement of medicines through IT enabled state
of-the-art methodology and made a distinct name for themselves in the field. The
Ministry, on their part, besides considering the creation of an agency on the line of
Tamil Nadu Medical Supplies Corporation (TNMSC) at the Central Level, is also
encouraging the States to set up similar procurement agencies. The Committee is
informed that under the National Rural Health Mission, the Ministry's mandate is to
provide financial assistance to the States and let the States do their own procurement.
In such a scenario, encouraging the States to create IT enabled and Professionalized
procurement agencies by emulating TNMSC is a move in the right direction. But the
responsibility of the Ministry does not just end there. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should undertake periodical comparative studies of the progress made by
different States in the establishment of state-of-the-art procurement agencies and
based on the findings of the studies, the laggard States should be constantly cajoled
to do the need for their own benefit.
Further Reply
In spite of the constraints of non-availability of IT Consultants, it is submitted that
further to the information sent earlier it is informed that States of Orissa, Jharkhand,
Uttarakhand, Meghalaya and Tripura are actively using PMIS (Procurement
Information System). A training programme was organized in EPW Division to train
the trainers of Uttarakhand. It is observed that Uttarakhand has subsequently
organized workshops for the training of data entry operators.
The situation will improve drastically once the Central Procurement Agency
becomes fully operational as an institutionalized system would be available to provide
assistance to the States/UTs.
Further Audit Comments
The Ministry may mention the details of action taken for undertaking the periodical
comparative studies of the progress made by different states in establishment of
procurement agencies as specifically recommended by the PAC.
Reply of the Ministry on further Audit Comments
Ministry has been taking steps to reform the procurement of health sector goods
supplied under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes by setting up a Central Procurement
Agency (CPA) on the lines of Tamil Nadu Medical Services Corporation (TNMSC).
The Principal Secretary (H&FW) of all the State Governments have been requested
through D.O. letter from Secretary (HFW) on 24th May, 2012 to take steps to set up
procurement agency in line with the TNMSC.
Ministry has also assured all necessary assistance to State Governments in this
effort. States of Kerala, Rajasthan, Bihar, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh and Gujarat have

50
already set up procurement agencies in line with TNMSC and States of West Bengal
and Punjab are in the process of setting up similar organisations. Mission Directors
(NRHM) of State Governments have been reminded to intimate the progress of setting
up of an organisation like TNMSC.
Further Vetting Audit Comments
Ministry has stated that Central Procurement Agency (CPA) is likely to become
functional in 2012-13 itself. Ministry may inform PAC after the functional/set up of
Agencies in Centre and States.
Reply of the Ministry on further Vetting Audit Comments
CPA is now termed as Central Medical Service Society (CMSS). The premises for its
functioning has been taken on lease and recruitment process for staffing is under way.
It is expected that initial functioning will be in place by October, 2013 at Delhi.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should expedite setting up of
an IT enabled state-of-the-art procurement agency at the Central Level, taking the
cue from the TNMSC, so that the procurement procedure is streamlined and the
whole system of inventory management and control strengthened.
[Sl. No. 16 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The proposal for establishment of Central Procurement Agency (CPA) has been
approved by the competent authority and necessary action has been initiated to
operationalise the same. Main objective of the CPA is to streamline the procurement
system in the Ministry, by introducing effective and transparent procurement system
of the health sector goods in MOHFW.
Audit Comments
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should expedite setting up of
an IT enabled state-of-the-art procurement agency at the Central Level, taking the
cue from the TNMSC, so that the procurement procedure is streamlined and the
whole system of inventory management and control strengthened.
Further Reply
The Central Procurement Agency has been registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 in the name of Central Medical Services Society (CMSS)  and efforts are on to
appoint CEO. It is likely to become operational within financial year,  2012-13.
Further Audit Comments
The target date by which central procurement agencies would be operational
would be mentioned.

51
Reply of the Ministry on  further Audit Comments
Central Medical Services Society (CMSS), a Central Procurement Agency under
Department of Health and Family Welfare is likely to become operational within financial
year 2012-13.
Further Vetting Audit Comments
Ministry has stated that Central Procurement Agency (CPA) is likely to become
functional in 2012-13 itself. Ministry may inform PAC after the functional/set up of
Agencies in Centre and States.
Reply of the Ministry on  further Vetting Audit Comments
CPA is now termed as Central Medical Services Society (CMSS). The premises for
its functioning has been taken on lease and recruitment process for staffing is under
way. It is expected that initial functioning will be in place by October, 2013 at Delhi.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that during the years 2005-06 to 2007-08, out of 1,16,993 drug
samples tested 7,387 samples were declared not of standard quality and 256 samples
were found to be spurious/adulterated. As regards action  taken against the firms/
individuals found involved in the maunfacture  and supply of sub-standard and
spurious drugs,  the Committee are informed  that 8 adulterated products of different
firms and specific identified sub standard products of 3 firms have been debarred for
supply to MSO.  Similarly, products of 15 firms which were  repeatedly found to be
sub-standard have been permanently debarred to supply their products to MSO.
Further, prosecution has been launched against 546 firms for manufacturing, sale and
distribution of spurious/adulterated drugs and 132 persons have  been arrested. In
view of the above facts and figures, the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare's  deposition,  that the menace of  spurious/adulterated drugs is not as
prevalent and as rampant as it is being made  out to be does not  hold  good.  Similarly,
his statement on an   international movement to condemn  all the Indian generic  drugs
as spurious  and counterfeit does not convince the Committee as evidence of
adulterated/spurious drugs being sold in the sale  outlets of metro cities,  towns,
district headquarters and villages have been established in a survey  conducted by
the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO). That the extent of spurious
drugs has been found to be 0.46 per cent only on  the basis of the aforesaid survey as
reported by the Ministry,  is a matter of  little consolation.  The Committee are of the
firm opinion  that the element of  adulteration in drugs  should be absolutely non-
existent and there should be  zero tolerance on the part of the Government towards
spurious drugs.  In  other words, it is only after the firms/persons involved in the
manufacture,  supply and distribution of spurious/adulterated drugs, are dealt  with
iron  hand to wipe out the menance of such drugs, can  the Government defend
themselves  on the  international fora. The Committee, therefore, urge upon  the

52
Ministry to intensify the measures initiated which inter alia include recruitment of
400 inspectors, amendment  of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act  and introduction of the
Whistle Blower Policy and ensure their  effective  implementation so that stringent
penalties are imposed  for manufacture and  supply of spurious  and adulterated
drugs.
[Sl. No. 17 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Government of India has  taken a number of initiatives  to strengthen  the
Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO) with a view to improving  the
regulating  mechanism  for quality of drugs  imported or manufactured in the country.
For example:—
(a) The strength of CDSCO in 2008-09 was 111.  The Government of India  has
sanctioned 216  new posts in 2008-09 in the CDSCO for strengthening the
office at the headquarters, port/zonal offices, taking the total number of
posts to 327. These posts are also  expeditiously  being filled. We have now,
besides a regular Drug Controller General (India), a total  of 67 Drug Inspectors,
13 Assistant Drugs Controllers and 11 Deputy Drugs  Controllers. 100 more
Drugs Inspectors will very soon be joining. Further,  process for recruiting
18 more Assistant Drugs Controllers, 9 more Deputy  Drugs Controllers and
two Joint Drugs Controllers  have already been started.
(b)  In order to meet  the inadequacy of the staff, till such time the regular  posts
are filled up, the Government of India have also  sanctioned 234  contractual
posts for headquarters, zonal, sub-zonal, port offices and  laboratories to
carry out the day-to-work.
(c) CDSCO is also being expanded  to meet the requirements of the Pharma
Industry of the country. Two sub-zonal offices at Hyderabad and Ahmedabad
have been  converted  into full zonal  offices.  Three new sub-zonal offices  at
Bangalore,  Jammu  and Chandigarh have been  set up to cater  to the need
of the pharma industry. Three  new sub-zones  at Goa, Indore  and  Guwahati
are in the offing.
(d) In order  to take care of quality of drugs  stored  at the Air Ports  for import  or
export, pharmaceutical zones  at Delhi, Hyderabad  and Mumbai Air Ports
are being set up for storage  of drugs.
(e) The Ministry  is considering a proposal  for creation of more than 1000
additional  posts in CDSCO for further  expansion.
 (f) The National Pharmacovigilance Programme has been launched to capture
Adverse  Drugs Reaction (ADRs) and safe guarding Public Health. 22 ADR
Monitoring Centres have already been established besides the  National
Coordination Centre at Indian Pharmacopoeia Commission, Ghaziabad and a
Pharmacovigilance Cell at CDSCO (HQ).

53
(g) As per the recommendations of the Mashelkar Committee,  the Drugs  &
Cosmetics Act, 1940 was amended  by the Drugs & Cosmetics (Amendment)
Act, 2008 for enhancing the penalties in the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940  so
as to help tackle  the problem of spurious and adulterated drugs.
(1)  The salient features of the amended provisions  of the Drugs & Cosmetics
Act, 1940 are as follows:—
(i) Maximum  penalty life  imprisonment and fine of Rs. 10 lakh  or 3
times  the value of the confiscated goods,  whichever is more;
(ii) The offences  relating to spurious  and adulterated drugs  made
cognizable and non-bailable;
(iii) Besides  officers from the Drug  Controller's Office, other  gazetted
officers also authorised  to launch prosecution under the Act;
(iv) Specially  designated courts  for trial of offences covered under the
Act; and
(v) Provision for compounding of minor offences.
The amended  provisions of the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 have come
into force w.e.f. 10.8.2009.
(2) Detailed guidelines have been finalised by the Central Government with
the approval of the Drugs Consultative Committee, a statutory Committee of
States’  and Central Drugs  Regulators, for effective enforcement of these
amended provisions  of the Act.
(3)   Statutory  directions have been issued by the Central Government  to
the State/Union Territory Governments under the provisions of Section 33P
of the Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 to ensure  effective  enforcement  of
these amended provisions of the Act as per these  guidelines.
(4) In pursuance of the provisions  of this enactment, special designated
courts have already  been established in a number of States/UTs.
 (h) A Whistle Blower  Policy has been introduced by the Ministry of Health to
encourage  vigilant public participation in the detection of movement of
spurious drugs in the country. Under this policy  the informers would be
suitably rewarded for providing  concrete  information  in respect of movement
of spurious drugs to the  regulatory authorities.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)

54
Comments of the Committee
 Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation
As regards the pilferage and misuse of CGHS medicines, the Committee are
concerned to find that there have been cases where some employees of CGHS in
connivance with the suppliers  tampered with the stamps on CGHS medicines for their
sale in the open  market and misuse. In order to  counter  that,  the Ministry are
reportedly contemplating introduction of a two  dimensional bar code  sticker on the
medicines. Besides a  Standing  Committee  has been entrusted with the responsibility
of making periodical  visits to the CGHS Dispensaries to examine the pattern and
reasonableness  of issue   of indents  to the beneficiaries’ in order to ensure early
detection of  pilferage and misuse of CGHS  medicines. As pilferage of CGHS medicines
is a serious issue   which   deprives the genuine beneficiaries of the much  needed
drugs,  the Committee  impress upon the Ministry to resort to all  possible foolproof
measures to prevent the misuse  of CGHS medicines  besides taking stringent positive
action against the CGHS  employees and the  suppliers who indulge themselves  in
such clandestine activities.
[Sl. No. 18 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Computerisation of dispensaries and bar-coding of medicines has  minimized the
possibilities of pilferage  of medicines  in CGHS.  Stringent action is taken against  the
employees  and suppliers  indulging in clandestine activities.
Periodic  100% physical verification  of stocks  and surprise inspection is also
carried out by senior officers of CGHS.
Stocks and expenditure of dispensaries are being centrally monitored by the
Additional Directors of the respective zones.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee  note that in the process of purchasing  medicines locally through
Authorised Local  Chemists  (ALCs), there was delay in processing the bills and
settlement of claims  as a result of which  there were three instances of strikes  by the
ALCs in the year 2005, 2006 & 2007. The  Committee is informed that the reasons for
delay in the settlement of claims of the ALCs were non-availability of adequate funds
in the earlier years. However,  the position  has reportedly been improved considerably
in the recent  years  as the  Ministry, with the intervention of the Committee of
Secretaries, was able to ensure  timely allocation of adequate funds to the CGHS.

55
With the result,  there has been no major strike by the ALCs in the recent years. As the
delay in settlement in bills/claims  leads  to strikes and holding back of supplies by the
ALCs greatly inconveniencing the bonafide CGHS beneficiaries, the Committee desires
that there  should not  be any further  let up  in the provision of adequate  funds to the
CGHS so that  bills/claims of the ALCs  are timely processed and settled.
[Sl. No. 19 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The recommendation has been noted for compliance. Adequate  funds are not
being made  available at BE stage and then supplemented at RE and Supplementary
Demands  for Grants stages.
It is brought  to the notice of the Hon'ble  Committee  that there has been  no
incidence of strikes by authorised local chemists during the last three  years in any
CGHS  city due to non-receipt  of payments.
Introduction  of direct indenting of medicines by Chief  Medical Officers in charge
of dispensaries on manufacturers/suppliers has also reduced substantially the
dependency of the CGHS on local chemists  for supply of  medicines to the
beneficiaries.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that the MSO and CGHS, Delhi made irregular and unauthorized
purchases of   inadmissible tonics, vitamins, minerals and cosmetics and  toiletry
items such as creams, lotions and mouthwashes amounting  to Rs. 14.48 crore during
2003-2004 to 2005-06 in violation of the  provision of Civil Services (Medical
Attendance) Rules, 1944. The Ministry  have contended that the Medical Attendance
Rules are not applicable to the  CGHS beneficiaries and any item  and figures  in the
formulary, approved by the Competent Authority, whether it is tonic, lotion or cream,
is to be  procured, if prescribed  for the patients. The Ministry's  contention  proved
untenable as later on taking care of the concerns  expressed by the C&AG and PAC,
they have deleted the above-mentioned  inadmissible  items from the formulary and
issued  instruction  to provide  such items only after the   specialists prescribe them
with  proper reasons and the Head of the  Department  countersigns it. Thus, it is
apparent  that  just because the said items  have earlier been included in the formulary,
these were issued indiscriminately for  years together without sufficient  reasons,
resulting in  unauthorized  expenditure  of crores of  rupees. However,  now that the
toiletary and cosmetic items have been removed from the formulary, the Committee
desire that these items  be issued  with proper justification based  on the specialist's
prescription and the competent Authority's approval so that there is proper adherence
to the prescribed rules and procedures and  regularization of expenditure.
[Sl. No. 20 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

56
Action Taken
MSO purchased and supplied the tonics,  vitamins, minerals and cosmetics and
toiletry items as per confirmed demand of the indenters. The items were in the approved
formulary also.
The recommendation of the Committee  has been noted for compliance. Strict
vigilance  is being kept on dispensaries by monitoring through computer network and
by physical  inspection to ensure  that inadmissible and same salt  items are not being
procured from local chemists.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)
Observation/Recommendation
The  Committee regret to note that the procedure adopted for acquisition of medical
equipment suffers from improper planning, non-evaluation of full  lifetime costs  before
the acquisition of equipments, non-standardisation of  medical equipment and
excessive provision or under provision of equipment  across hospitals. In short, no
long   term and well documented plan for  procurement and utilization of medical
equipment has been prepared either by  the Ministry or by the individual hospitals.
Consequent upon the above audit  findings,  the Committee are informed that the
issue of identifying common  items  in Government Hospitals,  under a  system of
Joint Purchase Committee, has been initiated  and would  be in  place soon. The
Ministry  have further  submitted  and it has been decided to undertake  common
procurement of machinery  and equipment having value above Rs. 10 lakh and below
Rs. 1 crore  by RML and Safdarjung Hospitals and Lady Hardinge Medical College
from the financial year 2010-11 so as to have economy in bulk buying  and to  avoid
duplication of work. Moreover, for the six new AIIMS type institutions,  which  are
under establishment, a common list of major equipment has already  been drawn up.
As regards shortage of medical equipment and non-availability  of expertise, the
Secretary, Ministry of Health and  Family Welfare has admitted  before the Committee
that there is indeed  a major shortage  both in terms of  equipment and experts  and the
Ministry are strengthening the system to ensure  that all the Medical Colleges have
the required   equipment  and the expertise.  The Committee are of the opinion that all
the above cited lacunae that have  been persisting  for years together are a  pointer
towards the apathetic attitude of  the Government  and the individual Hospitals
towards prudent procurement and  effective  utilization  of medical equipment. In view
of the vital role played by  the medical equipment and machinery in the provision of
an adequate  healthcare system, the Committee urge the Ministry to intensify the
measures  and strengthen their monitoring system  so as the ensure  that at least  from
now on  a long term procurement plan to consolidate  and coordinate  the needs  of
medical equipment of various Hospitals and Autonomous Bodies is put in  place. The
optimal utilization  of the equipment procured after assessing the  needs  of the
patients  and ensuring economy and availability  of the experts  assume  greater
importance  in the provision of a  sound health  care system.
[Sl. No. 21 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

57
Action Taken
It is mentioned  that the Hospitals procure  a wide variety  of medical equipment
with due diligence and proper  planning after assessing the demands projected  by
different departments/specialities.  These demands are scrutinized by screening
committee in the individual hospitals and after detailed deliberations and considering
the utility, cost justification, service life of equipment and wider public interest; the
Action Plan for procurement of various equipment over the year is planned. Healthcare
scenario in the country is extremely  dynamic and the needs  of the community and the
technology change are rapid. Hence it is difficult to make long term plan for procurerment
of equipment by  the Hospital. The Hospitals are optimally using the allocated budget
with  financial prudence.
To achieve uniformity among all the Central Government hospitals for making
procurement of medical equipment, the Hospitals have been asked to  use standardized
and broad based specifications. For this purpose, a  Compendium of Technical
Specification containing  generic specifications of  around 700 equipment   covering
44 faculties was prepared  in 2006 by involving  technical experts from different
faculties. The same has recently been reviewed/updated in March 2011 after  having
considered the technological upgradations and the available products in the market
suiting to the Hospital requirements.  The same has been uploaded on the website of
Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare.
As per  the extant delegation of powers,  the procurement  of equipments up to
value of Rs. 1 crore is carried out directly  by the Hospitals and for above  Rs. 1 crore,
the hospitals raise  their  indents  to Procurement Cell, DGHS for  procurement action.
Further, the tenders are normally invited under two-bid system. The Bids are evaluated
by committee of experts and these  procurements are being made in compliance with
GFR and CVC guidelines.
It is also submitted that in the procurement of medical equipment, the evaluation of
bids and selection of successful  bidder is based on the total  equipment price as well
as the comprehensive  annual maintenance cost over  useful life. In case of high  end
equipment, the evaluations are made  considering  the equipment price with 5 years
warranty  and 5 years  comprehensive annual maintenance cost. In case of low end
equipment, the  evaluations are made considering  the equipment price with 2 years
warranty  and 5 years comprehensive annual maintenance cost. This helps in not only
buying the equipment after  considering  its life cycle  cost, but this also helps  in
keeping the cost of comprehensive annual maintenance reasonable, in the later  years
of service life  of equipment. There is always scope for further  improvement in the
existing  system  for which advisory has been issued to all concerned  on the basis of
the observations of the Hon'ble  Committee.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary

58
Observation/Recommendation
Abnormal delay in the installation of equipment procured by spending crores of
rupees is another major issue that seriously engaged the attention of the Committee
in the process of examination of the subject. Much to their consternation, the
Committee find that there were delays even upto 54 months in installing the equipment.
In one case, even after the equipment was installed, it could not be operationalised
due to some procedural lapses as a result of which it remained idle for as long as two
years. In another cases, one Hospital of repute had to incur extra avoidable expenditure
to procure equipment due to delay in initiating the procurement process, uncoordinated
approach and indecisiveness. The Committee is not satisfied with the Ministry's
submission that the contracts placed with the suppliers stipulate a fixed time limit,
which varies depending upon the type of equipment, for supply and satisfactory
installation of equipment. Similarly, the Ministry's instructions to the hospitals/
institutes to complete the process of obtaining administrative approval, financial
sanction and technical evaluation within a definite time frame have failed to yield the
desired result, as is corroborated from the above cited facts. In other words, had the
contractual stipulations been properly honoured and the instructions appropriately
adhered to, there would not have been delays of more than four years in the installation
of the equipment. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to make the
contractual obligations more stringent of the equipment. Simultaneously,
responsibility be fixed upon those Hospitals/Institutes/Autonomous Bodies, which
is violation of the instructions of the Ministry, do not complete the procedural
formalities within the prescribed time limit. The Committee also desires that the Ministry
should strengthen their monitoring mechanism so as to ensure that the purpose of
procurement and installation of medical equipment is well served.
[Sl. No. 22 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is submitted that the Hospitals procure a wide range of medical equipments.
These may be available off-the shelf basis or supplied after being manufactured
against the firm order. Further some of these may require installation, commissioning,
extensive training, turn-key work and also certain regulatory clearances (such as from
AERB, for Radiology equipment) for equipment as well as for installation site.
Considering the above, it is not possible to stipulate a standard delivery period for
different equipment ordered by the Hospitals.
It is further submitted that instances of abnormal delays in supply and installation
of equipment ordered by the Hospitals are very rare. In such cases, due deliberations
are made by Hospital to ascertain the reasons and if it is found that these reasons are
due to non-performance or due to delays on the part of the Supplier, the necessary
penalties are imposed. It is submitted that all the contracts placed by the Hospitals
have provision of imposing Liquidate damages, forfeiture of performance security
and/or debarring such firms from future business. For this purpose the individual
Hospitals are following the laid down provisions of GFR and of Ministry of Finance
manual.

59
Earlier, there used to be delay between the Hospital's demand and issuance of
new/revised Administrative approval and Financial Sanction, for procurement of
medical equipment. For rectifying the problem and to prune down delay in procurement
cycle, the system has already been streamlined and detailed instructions have been
issued vide Office Memorandum No. S. 12011/8/Policy/2009/PC dated 06-10-2009, a
copy of which is enclosed.
As regards the time consumed in technical evaluation of the bids, it is submitted
that these are done by committee of internal as well as outside experts. Normally
these are done in a time-bound manner. However, in case of any complaint/
representation made by the bidders against their competitors, the same also need to
be examined by the same Committee. Many a times, it consumes additional time/
effort and consequently this result in overall delay in the process. This is
unavoidable as the procedure demands fairness and transparency. However, there
is always scope for further improvement in the existing system for which advisory
has been issued to all concerned on the basis of the observations of the Hon'ble
Committee.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observation/Recommendation
It is pertinent to note that the population of the country has increased manifold
during the last two/three decades whereas on the other hand, the Government Hospitals
are already overburdened as opening up of new Hospitals has not kept pace with the
surge in the population. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to make a
comparative study of this situation and based on its findings, urgent suitable measures
should be initiated to establish new Government Hospitals especially in those areas
where the existing Hospitals are overburdened or facilities of such Hospitals are
non-existent. The Committee desires that by taking up the matter at the appropriate
level sufficient funds should be made available for the purpose. As mere opening up
of new Hospitals will not serve the purpose, the Committee also desire that adequate
availability of medicines, state-of-the-art equipment and most importantly doctors/
nurses be ensured with a view to catering to the needs of a large number of patients
and coming up to their expectation. The Committee be periodically apprised of the
specific initiatives taken by the Ministry in this regard.
[Sl. No. 24 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Committee has rightly observed that opening up of new hospitals has not
kept pace with the population increase. Based on the available statistics of population
and bed availability ratio, Government initiated a scheme called Pradhan Mantri

60
Swasthya Suraksha Yojna (PMSSY) under which 8 new AIIMS like institutions with
an intake capacity of 100 MBBS students and 960 bedded Speciality/Super Speciality
Tertiary Health Care Hospital have been proposed, out of which six are under various
stages of construction.
Apart from this, 19 existing medical colleges have been taken up for upgradation to
provide tertiary health care facilities. To address the shortage of manpower ( i.e.,
Doctors and Specialists) 25 new medical colleges have been established during the
11th Plan period. In addition by relaxing norms regarding teacher-student ratio and
by upgrading facilities in the existing medical colleges, 3625 additional MBBS  seats
and 7470 PG seats have been added to the existing capacity.
To overcome the shortage of nurses and ANMs in States with poor health indicators,
that have no ANM or GNM school, the focus is on districts to provide training
assistance to open 269 GNM and ANM colleges which will increase capacity by an
additional 20,000 persons each year.
The recommendation of the Committee has been taken note of and proposals for
addressing the issue relating to availability of medicines, providing state-of-art
equipment, establishing new Hospitals as well as upgrading the existing district
hospitals have been included in the 12th Five Year Plan which is under consideration.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observation/Recommendation
To sum up, the Committee find that there has been no uniform and standardized
purchase procedure for procurement of medicines and medical equipment; the objective
of the introduction of the local purchase system has been largely abused; no defined
process has been adopted to update the medicines selections; major hospitals have
not been able to prepare essential list of drugs; the primary role of MSO to cater to the
needs of various indentors for procurement of medicines and medical equipment has
diminished over the years; no fixed time limit has been prescribed for obtaining the
Test reports on contentious drugs; all the States do not have the Drug Testing
Laboratories and many of the Laboratories do not have the capacity to test all types
of drugs; there has been huge gap between the projection and actual utilization of
medicines leading to unnecessary stockpiling of medicines and wastage of money;
several samples of drugs have been found to be sub-standard and adulterated/
spurious; there have been instances of pilferage and misuse of CGHS medicines and
purchase of inadmissible tonics, vitamins, minerals cosmetics and toiletry items, the
procedure adopted for acquisition of medical equipment suffers from improper planning
and disjointed approach; abnormal delay has been noticed in the installation of medical
equipment; there is huge shortage of doctors and specialists throughout the country;
and the overall health care system is far from satisfactory. The Committee urge the
Ministry to plug the loopholes and take timely corrective measures as suggested by

61
the Committee in the preceding paragraphs and constantly endeavour, in unison with
the State Governments, to provide an adequate and sound health care system
throughout the country, paying special attention towards the rural, remote and
backward areas.
[Sl. No. 25 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The recommendations of Committee have been noted for compliance.
Sd/-
Additional  Secretary & DG (CGHS)

CHAPTER  III
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
-NIL-
62

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that the prescription pattern by doctors has
reportedly led to excessive local purchases of medicines. In this context, the Committee
finds that there are two types of drugs viz. proprietary drugs and generic durgs.
Proprietary drugs are patented and are manufactured either by the patent holder or
the licensees of the patent holder whereas generic drugs, both branded and non-
branded, are off patented drugs and much cheaper than the proprietary drugs.
Although the Ministry reportedly makes efforts to see that maximum purchases are
made from generic and non-branded medicines, doctors quite often prescribe expensive
medicines which lead to large scale purchase of medicines outside the formulary. In
this context, the Committee are informed that two of the CGHS doctors were procured
before the Director General of Health Services (DGHS) after it was observed that their
prescription pattern was regularly at variance with what is normally expected. Further,
meetings have been taken by the DGHS with the doctors/specialists advising them to
confine their prescription of medicines to the formulary. Moreover, circulars have
been issued in this regard by the Director, CGHS and also by the Ministry. The
Committee feels that these measures are in right direction to keep tabs on the unusual
variances in the prescription pattern of the doctors concerned which lead to
unnecessary local purchase of medicines. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should earnestly continue with the measures already initiated besides exploring
introduction of other innovative measures to check the prescription pattern of the
doctors. The Committee also recommended that the monitoring mechanism be
strengthened and exemplary action taken against the errant doctors, who take
advantage of the helplessness of the patients and frequently prescribe expensive
medicines outside the formulary, so that superfluous local purchase of medicines is
avoided.
[Sl. No. 5 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Chief Medical Officers in charge of dispensaries are authorised to issue medicines
of any available brand with same configuration and salt instead of indenting the same
brand purchased by Government Specialists.
Instructions have been issued to specialists in Safdarjung Hospital and Dr. Ram
Manohar Lohia Hospital to prescribe generic drugs as far as possible and also to affix
a  stamp/note stating that "equivalent generic medicines can also be issued".
63

64
CGHS is in the process of generating reports through a software of prescription
pattern by Govt. specialists/doctors for monitoring further and taking appropriate
action.
Given the need to make medicines available to beneficiaries without delay and
taking note of existing prescription practices and newer medicines being introduced
from time to time,  it is not possible to entirely do away with local purchase, though
effort is being made to further reduce local purchase.
Audit Comments
Ministry may mention action taken, if any, against the errant doctors, who take
advantage of the helplessness of the patients and frequently prescribe expensive
medicines outside the formulary.
Further Reply
No such case/complaint has come to the notice.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)
Comments of the Committee
 Please see para No. 12 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are dissatisfied that no defined process that has been adopted by
the Ministry to update the medicine selections which could reflect the new thereapeutic
options and needs. The Ministry's statement, that the process of identification of
slow and fast moving medicines has become simplified with the computerization of
CGHS Delhi and maintenance of computer data, does not anyway convince the
Committee as the formularies of drugs and medicines have failed to include
pharmaceuticals that are routinely required by the medical practitioners. What further
concerns the Committee is the fact that the formulary for essential and life saving
drugs was last revised in August, 2007 and the Ministry's callous response that while
revision of formulary is regularly undertaken, no fixed periodicity has been prescribed
in the matter. The Committee wonders what restrains the Ministry in prescribing a
defined process and a definite time-frame for revision of the formulary are updating of
the medicine selection. In view of the imperatives involved the Committee urge upon
the Ministry to codify and adopt a defined process for annual updation of the medicine
selection and periodical revision of the CGHS formularies so as to ensure that the
indented purpose of economical and efficient procurement of medicines is well served
and the emerging therapeutic options and needs are appropriately catered to.
[Sl. No. 6 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

65
Action Taken
There are two types of formularies: one for Generic Drugs and other for Proprietary
Drugs. It has not been possible to update the formularies every year. Both formularies
are however revised periodically by the Ministry. Revision of the formularies is
undertaken on the bases of change in prescription pattern, introduction of newer
drugs and banning/obsolescence of drugs.
The generic formulary is a common formulary for MSO, CGHS and four Hospitals
i.e. Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Lady Hardinge Medical
College and Hospital and Kalawati Saran Children Hospital operating in Delhi under
administrative control of DGHS, MoH&FW.
The Generic Formulary containing 664 Drugs having different formulations was
revised recently in May, 2011.
Other formulary is for Proprietary/Branded Drugs, meant for MSO and CGHS only.
This formulary contains 622 drugs.
A list of 382 life saving essential medicines is in place and these medicines are
being procured on a case to case basis. In addition to these medicines, items like
CAPD fluid bags are also being procured on a case to case basis.
Audit Comments
(i) The Ministry may explain the reasons for not able to fix periodicity for
updating the formularies as recommended by the PAC.
(ii) The Ministry may also mention as to how it ensures that intended purpose
of economical and efficient procurement of medicines is served without
updating the formularies annually.
Further Reply
(i) Ministry is reviewing/updating the formularies periodically. Current
formulary for Proprietary drugs is approved for one year. To revise the
proprietary drugs formulary a Committee has been constituted on
19.12.2011. The validity of the current proprietary formulary is extended
upto 23.12.2012. The Generic formulary was revised on 23.05.2011 and is
valid for three years.
(ii) All efforts are taken to complete the exercise of updating the formulary in
time. However, in case some time gap is there in updating the current formulary,
it is extended with the approval of the competent authority at existing rate
contracts. Hence, the procurement made by the Ministry is always economical
and efficient.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG (CGHS)

66
Comments of the Committee
 Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation
The Medical Stores Organisation (MSO) whose origin dates back to the 1940s
was established with the main objective of meeting the needs of various indenters
including other Ministries of the Government of India, in respect of medicines,
surgical equipments and other medical supplies and manufacture drugs/medicines,
as far as possible, in the manufacturing units under MSO. But  the Committee are
deeply concerned to note that MSO has failed to meet the above said objectives as
its role over the years have been limited to procurement of small quantities of
drugs/medicines intended by CGHS dispensaries outside Delhi, Central Government
Hospital and for Para-military forces viz. CRPF, BSF, ITBP etc. The under utilization
of the manpower and resources provided to MSO is quite visible from the fact that
against the total expenditure of Rs. 6148.85 crore by the Ministry on the supply of
materials/medicines during the years 2002 to 2007, the contribution of MSO in these
purchases was only Rs. 171.05 crore which constituted a meagre three per cent of
the total expenditure. The Committee are informed that the lead role of MSO in
catering to the needs of various indenters showed signs of dwindling from the late
1970s onwards due to a number of factors which inter-alia included the development
of capabilities of the States to locally meet the bulk of the requirements of the
Centrally sponsored schemes; a more widespread market of pharmaceuticals
obviating the need for much centralized procurement; increasing outreach of CGHS
beyond Delhi; emergence of tertiary healthcare system with its specialized needs
best met at the hospital level; and wider acceptability of the rate contract system.
More than anything else, what contributed towards the rapid decline of the MSO
was both system and human failure, as candidly admitted by the Secretary, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee are perturbed to note that at one point
of time all the senior officers of MSO were under suspension or in jail or on court
cases for which MSO lost the leadership and the valuable years when it was required
to change its entire working strategy. Moreover , the organization is manned largely
by Group III and IV employees as there are hardly 13 to 17 officers of Group A and
B grade working in MSO out of a total work force of 1100 people. It would be an
understatement to say that the state of affairs in MSO is in a complete mess and the
organization needs an urgent revamp. Such restructuring of MSO seems more
imperative in view of the imminent establishment of a professionalized comprehensive
Central Procurement Agency by the Ministry which would further diminish the
primary role of MSO i.e. of cater to the needs of various indenters for procurement
of medicines and medical equipment. In view of the apparent relegation of MSO to
the background so far as procurement aspect is concerned, the Ministry is reportedly
planning to train the organization to take on the responsibility of the entire inventory
control management. The Committee are of the opinion that the onus lies squarely
with the Ministry to take effective measures in order to make the MSO corruption
free as well as adequately staffed so that the organization is able to gradually shift

67
its focus from procurement to management aspect of medicines and medical
equipment, ensuring in the process its own gainful utilization.
[Sl. No. 8 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The activities of Medical Stores Organisation have been gradually accelerated
with transition from manual mode to 'e' governance mode of operation. With Web
based application (msotransparent.nic.in) in position for the last two years, the entire
system of Procurement and Inventory Management is being undertaken online.
Rigorous inspection, drawal of samples and quality testing of each batch of drugs in
two randomly selected laboratories have yielded rich dividends. The procurement
activities have increased although it has been entrusted with the responsibility only
to procure and supply for CGHS dispensaries located outside Delhi,
Central Government Hospitals and for Paramilitary forces. The value of medicines
procured, stored and distributed during last three years is as under:—
(Figures in crores)
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
54.00 82.99 93.43
In addition, Rs. 175 crore worth vaccines
and drugs were procured for H1N1
The procurement of medicines is not the only activity of Medical Stores
Organisation. The major activity is storage and distribution of medicines, vaccines
and cold chain equipment meant for implementation of National Health Programmes.
This includes both dry storage and cold storage items. The inventory management of
these programme stores has also been changed to 'e' storage mode. The value of
programme stores handled during last three years are as under:—
(Figures in crores)
Y ear Programme stores handled
2008-09 506.07
2009-10 556.69
2010-11 650.28
Besides the above activities, MSO also undertakes the emergency procurement to
meet the demands of State Governments in case of natural calamities like Flood,
Earthquake etc. Recently it also procured and supplied the medicines and other surgical
consumables to Maldives through Ministry of External Affairs.
As the Central Procurement Agency is going to be set up in the Ministry, MSO will
render necessary support for storage and distribution to the beneficiaries in the
States/UTs.

68
V arious new steps are being contemplated to revamp MSO:—
1. All seven GMSDs will be named as Regional Ware Houses.
2. All seven GMSDs will have one quality control Laboratory each.
3.  One training centre for cold chain equipment maintenance including workshop is
proposed to be created at Regional Ware House at GMSD, New Delhi to impart
training to cold chain technicians of both State and Central Govt.
4.  A Health logistic management training institute is also proposed at Regional
Ware House, Chennai which shall generate human resources for proper
management of health logistics. This institute is proposed to run regular course,
refresher courses as well as tailor made courses for State and Central Government
employees.
Audit Comments
As desired by PAC, the Ministry may mention the measures taken by it to make
MSO corruption free as well as adequately staffed so that the organization is able to
gradually shift its focus from procurement to management aspect of medicines and
medical equipment.
Further Reply
The following steps have been taken in respect of procurement distribution, storage
of medicines, vaccines etc:—
(a) Introduction of web-based application for moving towards e-procurement
mode since April, 2009.
(b) Publication of all tender notice on website of the Ministry.
(c) Online acceptance of indents besides online complication of indent, dispatch
of purchase, proposal, sanction and placement of supply orders.
(d) Use of Bar codes on tertiary, secondary and primary packages denoting the
unique identity number of the drugs, name of the manufacturer, name of the
drugs etc.
(e) Procurement manual of MSO has been comprehensively revised and made
operational in 2011. The updated manual provides Standard Operating
Procedures (SOPs) which inter-alia, include web based e-procurement,
e-governance and incorporation of various novel technologies as
components of Good storages Practices and quality assurance. In the Manual,
the responsibilities of Public Procurement Authorities under Paras 3.5.3
 inter-alia include the following:—
(i) Implement a code of conduct that commits the contracting authority and
its employees to a strict anti-corruption policy. The policy should take
into account possible conflicts of interest; provide mechanisms for
reporting corruptions and protecting whistle-blowers.

69
(ii) Ensures that all contracts between the authority and its contractors,
suppliers and service providers require the parties to comply with strict
anti-corruption policies. This may best be achieved by requiring the use
of a project integrity pact during both the tendering and project execution
phase, committing the authority and bidding companies to refrain from
bribery.
Para 5.4.3 of the Manual on Qualification & Eligibility Criteria for Bidders provides
inter-alia  following conditions for potential suppliers who can be barred from
participating in the bidding process under various circumstances which includes:—
(i) The proprietor or employee or representative of the firm has been guilty
of malpractice such as bribery, corruption, fraud, substitution of bids,
interpolation, misrepresentation, evasion or habitual default in payment
of any tax levied by law.
(ii) If the firm employs a government servant, who has been dismised or
removed on account of corruption or employs a non-official convicted
for an offence involving corruption or abetment of such an offence, in a
position where he could corrupt government servants.
Keeping in view the shortage of staff at various levels in MSO as well as seven  (7)
GMSDs, Dte. GHS has been making efforts to fill up the senior and middle management
level posts so that the organization is able to gradually shift its focus from procurement
to management aspect of medicines and medical equipments.
Further Comments
The Ministry may mention the details of the shortage of staff at various levels of
MSO and efforts made to fill up all the vacancies. The schedule date of filling up all
the vacancies may also be mentioned.
Reply of the Ministry on the further Audit Comments
The sanctioned strength/filled/vacant posts in respect of MSO (Main office and
Subordinate office) are indicated as under:—
Sl. Name of the Sanctioned Existing V acant Surplus
No. Organization Staff Staff Posts
Strength Strength
12 3 4 5 6
1. Medical Store Orgn. 56 16 40
(HQ)
2. GMSD, Chennai 234 206 28
3. GMSD,  Mumbai 220 210 10
4. GMSD,  New Delhi 62 52 10
5. GMSD, Hyderabad 148 56 92

70
6. GMSD, Guwahati 132 86 46
7. GMSD,  Karnal 171 123 48
8. GMSD,  Kolkata 312 252 60
Total 1335 1001 334
The Incumbency position and action taken by the GMSDs to fill up these posts as
on 01.09.2012 is as under:—
Sl. Name of the Strength In V acant Name of the Since When Vacant
No. post position Officers
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. DDG (St.) 1 - 1 - Dr. R.C. Sharma
retired on
31.10.1996*
2. ADG (St.) 2 - 2 - Dr. GK Biswas
retired on
30.09.2003*
3. DADG (St.) 2 - 2 1. Shri Moti Lal 1. Retired on
Meena 31.05.2011 (They
got in situ
promotion)
2. Shri N.C. 2. Retire on
Dhawan 31.07.2011 (They
got in situ
promotion)
4. Dy. Director 1 1 - Shri Laxmi
(Admn.) Narayan
5. DDA (A/C) 1 - 1 - Vacant from
01.04.1991
6. Asstt. Director 1 - 1 - V acant from
01.02.2005
7. Private 1 1 - Ms. M. Grant G.P. 5400
Secretary Ganeshwari after completion of
4 years regular
services
8. Section 1 1 - Shri R.K. Bhatia -do-
Officer
9. IEO 1 1 - Shri A.C. Saxena -
10. ADM 1 1 - Shri P.K. Karan -
11. Tech. Officer 1 - 1 - Vacant since 10
years
12. Sr.  Tech. 1 - 1 - Vacant since 10
Asstt. (St.) years
12 3 4 5 6

71
13. Asstt. 7 6 1 1. Shri G.C.
Meena
2. Shri Pani Ram
3. Smt. Kiran
Pannu
4. Shri G.I. Meena
5. Smt. Chandra Rani
6. Smt. Rani
Palta
14. Gr. 'C' 3 - 3 - 1. Post Vacant since
Steno 1-12-2010
2. Post Vacant since
10 years
15. Gr. 'D' 3 - 3 - Post Vacant since
Steno 10 years
Most of the posts are lying vacant for more than one year which have come under
deemed abolition, which require revival. All these live posts are being filled up by out
sourcing the services. The sanctioned strength is based on the job requirement and
on the basis of the report of the screening committee and report of the IWSU (Internal
Work Study Unit). The posts which are under deemed abolition, proposals are being
received from various GMSDs to revive the posts. After revival of the posts, the same
will be filled up.
The promotional posts are being filled up from the feeder grade by the GMSDs.
As regards MSO office the proposal for filling up the post of the DDG (St.) and
ADG (St.) are under consideration. The proposal for filling up-revival of the posts
in respect of DADG is under process. For other posts of the MSO, DGHS has been
requested to fill up all the live posts and take necessary action to revive the lapsed
posts.
The posts could not be filled up for want of the clearance from screening committee
for Group B, C and D.
Further Vetting Audit Comments
Ministry may inform PAC after revival and filling up of the lapsed posts in all
cadres of Medical Stores Organization (MSO), Central Drugs Testing Laboratories
set up by States/UTs and Central Drugs Standard Control Organization (CDSCO).
Reply of the Ministry on further Vetting Audit Comments
As on date, there is no change in the position. Any updation in the position will be
communicated to PAC in due course.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
12 3 4 5 6 7

72
Comments of the Committee
 Please See Para No. 20 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are surprised to note that no time-limit has been prescribed for the
Government Laboratories to furnish the drug test reports on the plea of large number
of samples received by these Laboratories and the variations in the time taken in
testing of different categories of drugs. The Committee are not inclined to believe the
reason advanced by the Ministry for not prescribing any time limit of test reports as
inordinate delay in furnishing such reports may invariably result in the administering
of the contentious drugs to the patients before establishing their quality. The
Committee's apprehension are well founded in the Audit observation that in two
cases the test reports were submitted after a lapse of one year by which time the
drugs had already been prescribed and administered to the patients. Further, in
20 other cases, more than 70 per cent of the medicines had been administered to the
beneficiaries before obtaining the test results. As administering contentious drugs to
the patients before assuring their quality defies the very purpose of test checks, the
Committee exhorts the Ministry to prescribe a definite time frame for the Government
Laboratories to furnish the test reports so that slightest possibility of administering
sub-standard drugs to the beneficiaries is altogether eliminated.
[Sl. No. 11 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry acknowledges the fact that sufficient attention was not given in the
past on the functioning of the central drug testing laboratories. The 4 existing labs are
not functioning optimally and they are hardly able to take care of a maximum of
around 15000 samples per year as against the required facility to test more than one
lakh samples per year. In combination with the States' labs, they cover around 35000
samples only. Further, the central drug laboratories are also required to test legal
samples which require more than one level of testing and hence, more time is required
for the purpose. As such, the central labs are hardly able to adhere to any time line.
Unless the labs, both Central and States, are comprehensively overhauled with required
inputs of manpower and equipments and also the number of labs are increased
manifold, the present situation is not likely to change. As mentioned in reply to
para 10, the Ministry is, however, continuously engaged in improving the situation. It
would suggest required interventions in the 12th Plan Proposal.
Audit Comments
Ministry may mention any action taken on recommendation of the PAC that the
Ministry to prescribe a definite time-frame for the Government Laboratories to
furnishing the test Report.

73
Further Reply
In this regard it is pertinent to mention here that during the 43rd Drug Consultative
Committee (DCC), the matter related to prescribe definite time-frame for the Government
laboratories to furnish the test report was discussed. The DCC recommended that it
may be difficult to prescribe time limits for testing of drug samples under the Drugs
and Cosmetics Rules. However, the broad guidelines followed by CDL, Kolkata (HPLC
testing — 60 days, Normal Chemical testing — 45 days and Biological Products —
 90 days) may be followed as model time lines by the Government Drug Testing
Laboratories for testing drug samples. Copy of the recommendation is enclosed
(Annexure  'E').
Sd/-
Additional Secretary & DG(CGHS)
Comments of the Committee
 Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter I.

ANNEXURE  E
AGENDA No. 6
Mandatory provision be incorporated in Drugs & Cosmetics Rules to test drug
samples by Government  Analysts in time frame:—
Testing of drug samples often takes very long time and in some cases the test
reports are received even after expiry date. If such sample is declared adulterated/
spurious, the manufactures gets the benefit as he is debarred of his right to
challenge the test reports. Therefore maximum time limit be prescribed for testing/
analysis of drug samples by the Government  Analysis as in case of Prevention of
Food Adulteration Act, where 40 days are prescribed under Rule 7 to the Public
Analyst for analysis of Food samples.
Recommendations
Drugs Controller, Rajasthan desired that a time limit may be prescribed for testing
of drug samples by the Government analysts under the Drugs and Cosmetics
Rules.
Dr. G .N. Singh, Secretary IPC informed the House that the matter was earlier
discussed in the Government analysts conference also but the final decision is still
pending.
The Director CDL, stated that the normal guidelines followed by his laboratory are
as under.
HPLC testing 60 days
Normal chemical testing 45 days
Biological products 90 days
The DCC recommended that it may be difficult to prescribed time limit for testing of
drugs samples under the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules. However, the broad guidelines
followed by CDL, Kolkata may be followed as model time lines by the Government
Drug Testing Laboratories for testing drug samples.
74

75
Observation/Recommendation
It is a matter of serious concern for the Committee to take note of the Secretary,
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare that the health care system in the country has
several inadequacies and many of the Government Hospitals are still in an appalling
condition, although some improvements have taken place in recent years due to
reported sincere efforts of the Ministry. In this context, the Committee find that some
of the main reasons for the unsatisfactory health care system are over-crowding and
consequent pressure on the infrastructure and most importantly huge shortage of
doctors. The Committee are informed that in the Western countries, the doctor-patient
ratio is 1: 280 whereas in India it is something like 1:2000. The position in the rural and
remote areas is more pathetic due to the unwillingness of the doctors/specialists to
be posted there. In order to overcome the problem of huge shortage of doctors, the
Ministry are reportedly taking a number of measures which inter alia include creation
of additional posts in the Lady Harding Medical College and RML and Safdarjung
Hospitals; sanctioning Rs. 1300 crore to the Government Medical Colleges in various
States for creation of about 5,000 additional Post-Graduate seats; developing an
exclusive three year short-term course, with the initiatives of the erstwhile Medical
Council of India, for doctors to be appointed only in sub-centres and Primary Health
Care Centres to cater to the needs of the people living in the rural and remote ares;
tieing up with other organizations like National Board of Examination (NBE) and
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) to get experts like Diabetologists,
Radiologists and Radio Therapists and train the in-service MBBS doctors to work in
Community Health Centres; and working in partnership with the State Government to
improve the overall health care system in the country. The Committee feels that the
above said measures initiated by the Ministry are well directed towards meeting the
huge shortage of doctors and specialists/experts throughout the country, especially
in rural and remote areas. In this context the Committee appreciates the confidence
exuded by the Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare that in a few years the
Ministry would be able to show the improvements by dint of the measures undertaken
by them. The Committee trust and hope that the efforts of the Ministry will continue
unabated and bear fruit soon in noticeable improving the much maligned health care
system in the country.
[Sl. No. 23 of the 24th Report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
No Comments.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Comments of the Committee
 Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter I.

CHAPTER  V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
— NIL—
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
29 April, 2013 Chairman,
9 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
76

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE  TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 29TH APRIL, 2013
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th April, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in
Room No. '51' (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
9. Shri J.D. Seelam
10. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
77

78
Representatives of  the office of  the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India
1. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General
2. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director
3. Ms. Athoorva Sinha — Director
4. Shri Likhariya — Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India to the last sitting of the Committee (2012-13). Giving
an overview of the performance of the Committee in the year 2012-13 as well as in the
15th Lok Sabha, the Chairman observed that the years have been very productive due
to the hard work of the C&AG and his team, the PAC Secretariat led by the Joint
Secretary and above all the cooperation and active participation of the Members in
the deliberations. The Committee unanimously endorsed the views of the Chairman.
3. The Chairman, then apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider
the following Draft Reports of the Committee:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Twenty-fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha)
on 'Procurement of Medicines and Medical Equipment';
(vi) *** *** ***
(vii) *** *** ***
4. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Report and the comments
of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/suggestions of the
Members.
5. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above-mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports in the
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to
Parliament on a convenient date.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Draft Reports. The Members also conveyed their
thanks to the Chair for his able leadership in conducting the meeting of the Committee
in a probing and educative manner.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

79
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH
LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations. 25
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
 which have been accepted by the Government: T otal: 18
 Para Nos. 1, 2,  5, 7-10, 12, 13, 15-20 and 23-25 Percentage-72%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government: Total: 6
Para Nos. 4, 6, 11, 14,  21 and 22 Percentage-24%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:
Total: 00
—NIL— Percentage-0%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:
Para No. 3 T otal: 1
Percentage-4%
GMGIPMRND—767ls 23-11-2013