35
ACCELERATED RURAL WATER
SUPPLY PROGRAMME
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
2011-12
THIRTY-FIFTH  REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

THIRTY -FIFTH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ACCELERATED RURAL WATER
SUPPLY PROGRAMME
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER
AND SANITATION)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2011
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 11.08.2011
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
August, 2011/Sravana, 1933 (Saka)

PAC  No.  1942
Price: Rs. 56.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2011-12) ..................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11)...................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE . (vii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (ix)
REPORT
PART - I
I. Introductory ............................................................................ 1
II. Status of Pending Audit para in the Ministry of Rural
Development, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation . 2
III. Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme [Report No. 12
of  2008—Performance Audit]................................................. 4
IV . National Habitation Survey-2003 ............................................ 6
V. Planning ............ ...................................................................... 6
VI. Budgetary Allocation and Control .......................................... 8
VII. Slip-Back and Re-Emergence of Problem Habitations............. 10
VIII. W ater Quality
(a) Water Quality Laboratories ................................................ 12
(b) Water Quality Testing ........................................................ 16
(c) Procurement and Distribution of Field Test Kits................ 18
(d) Engagement of Experts ...................................................... 19
IX. Sustainability .......................................................................... 20
X. Monitoring, Reporting and Inspections
(a) Monitoring ......................................................................... 23
(b) Submission of Reports to Government of India................. 25
(c) Inspection .......................................................................... 25
XI. Non-completion of W orks ....................................................... 26

PART - II
Observations/Recommendations ............................................................. 29
ABBREVIATIONS .......................................................................................... 37
APPENDICES
I. State-wise datails of the financial progress reported by the
States for the year 2009-10 ...................................................... 39
II. Minutes of the Second Sitting of Sub-Committee-I held on
16th August, 2010 ................................................................... 41
III. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of Sub-Committee-I held on
30th November, 2010............................................................... 43
IV . Minutes of the Second Sitting of Public Accounts Committee
held on 28th June, 2011 ........................................................... 45
(ii)
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION  OF   THE   PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija Vyas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Vacant
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1.    Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.    Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3.   Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
(iii)
*Vacancy occurred vice  Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan has been appointed as Minister of State
w.e.f.  12th July, 2011.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
*16. V acant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
*Vacancy occurred vice Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
19th January, 2011.
(v)

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I  OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11)
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal
3. Dr. K. Sambasiva rao
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Kalraj Mishra
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Thirty fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme' based on C&AG Report No. PA 12
of 2008 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil) for the year ended March,
2007 relating to the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking Water
and  Sanitation).
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2007, Union Government (Civil) was laid on the Table of the House on
19th December, 2008.
3. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time frame, the Public Accounts
Committee (2010-11) took up the subject for detailed examination and report. A Sub-
Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation with the
Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Drinking Water and  Sanitation).
4. In the process of the scrutiny of the Audit Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports
pending with the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking Water and
Sanitation), the Sub-Committee came across certain pending Paragraphs/Remedial/
Corrective ATNs on very important issues and considered it prudent to examine and
report the same alongwith the Non-Compliance issue. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee
took up the above-mentioned Audit Report for in-depth examination.
5. The Sub-Committee of the Public Accounts Committee (2010-11) took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department
of Drinking Water and Sanitation) on the subject at their sittings held on 16th August
and 30th November, 2010. The Committee considered and finalized this Report at
their sitting held on 28th June, 2011. The Minutes of the sittings form Appendices to
the Report.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
7. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee and their Sub-Committee
for taking oral evidence and obtaining information on the subject.
8. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation)
for tendering evidence before Sub-Committee and furnishing information that the
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
(ix)

9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
2 August, 2011 Chairman,
11 Sravana, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(x)

 1
PART-I
REPORT
I. Introductory
The Reports of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India, after being laid in
Parliament in accordance with Article 151 of the Constitution of India, stand referred to
the Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. As it becomes practically impossible
for the Public Accounts Committee to examine each and every paragraph contained in
the Audit Reports, the Committee adopt a selective approach and take up a few relatively
more important paragraphs for indepth examination at the beginning of the term every
year. As regards the paragraphs which are not formally selected for examination by the
Committee, these are dealt with by means of a procedure devised by the Public Accounts
Committee whereby the Ministries/Departments are required to furnish the Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes on all the Non-selected Audit paragraphs to the
Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).
2. Taking cognizance of inordinate delay on the part of the Ministries/Departments
in furnishing the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee in their
105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that with effect from 31st March,
1996 the Action Taken Notes on all the Paragraphs of the Reports of the C&AG, which
are not formally taken up by the PAC for examination and Reports presented thereupon
should be furnished to the Committee within four months of the laying of the Audit
Reports.
3. During 2000-01, vide their 9th Report, the Committee decided that the Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes furnished by the respective Ministries/Departments
should be categorized by the Audit under three broad heads namely 'Accepted', 'Partially
Accepted' and 'Not Accepted'. In subsequent developments, the Committee also
decided that a brief on those Action Taken Notes which ought to be categorized as
'Not Accepted' should be furnished by the Office of C&AG, clearly indicating the
reasons for such categorization as well as the points of difference between Audit and
the Ministry/Department concerned. The remedial Action Taken Notes and briefs on
'Non-accepted' paras are then circulated to the members of the PAC for their perusal. If
situation warrants, any of these categorized paras/Reports/Subjects can be taken up
for in-depth examination and Report. From the year 2009-10 onwards, the Public
Accounts Committee have been examining vigorously the subject 'Non-compliance
by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on
Non-selected Audit Paragraphs' the Reports on which are also presented to the
Parliament. These Reports too have to undergo the same stages of 'Action Taken
Reports' and 'Action Taken Statements'. This is how the remedial Action Taken Notes
reach the stage of finality.
4. Even after devising an elaborate system, the Committee note with concern that
various Ministries/Departments have been unable to furnish the Remedial/Corrective

 2
Action Taken Notes to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure which have special monitoring cell) within the prescribed time line of four
months. As per the information furnished by Department of Expenditure on
25th June, 2010 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on a total number of
4191 Chapters/Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/Departments. Out of
these a total of 4 paras are pending with the Ministry of Rural Development where
Action Taken Notes have not been furnished.
5. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject of "Non-compliance
by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs
of the C&AG" on Report No. PA 12 of 2008 (Entire Report) relating to 'Accelerated
Rural Water Supply Programme' for detailed examination during the year 2010-11. A
Sub-Committee was constituted to go deep into the matter, prepare separate Reports
on each defaulting Ministry/Department concerned with the subject and place the
same before the Main Committee for their consideration. In the process, the Sub-
Committee obtained Background Notes/Preliminary Materials and Written Replies/
Post evidence replies from the Ministries/Departments concerned. The Sub-Committee
also took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development,
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation on the subject on 16.8.2010 and 30.11.2010.
II. Status of Pending Audit Paras in the Ministry of Rural Development, Department
of Drinking Water and Sanitation
6. The Ministry of Finance — Department of Expenditure intimated to the Committee
that a total number of 4191 Action Taken Notes are pending with various Ministries/
Departments as on 25th June, 2010. As per Audit information on the same total of
3 paras/chapter/reports were pending with different Departments of the Ministry of
Rural Development. This Report pertains to their Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
Notes on the Audit Paragraphs pending with the Ministry of Rural Development,
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation.
7. After the commencement of the examination of the subject, the Sub-Committee
were informed by Audit that as on 31st May, 2010 a total of 3462 paragraphs were
pending with all the Ministries on which Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes
(ATNs) were due. With regard to Report No. PA 12 of 2008, Audit revealed that Action
Taken Notes on same was pending with the Ministry. This Audit Report was presented
to Parliament on 19th December, 2008.
8. In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the exact number
of Audit paragraphs received by the Ministry of Rural Development in the last two
years. The Ministry in its written reply stated that Department (DEA) had received a
total of 2 Audit Paras.
9. When asked to indicate the exact number of paras pending with the Ministry of
Rural Development (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation), the Ministry
informed the Committee that 1 Audit/Report was received by Department of Drinking
Water and Sanitation on which the final ATNs had not been furnished to audit.
10. The Committee note that Action Taken Notes on Report No. PA 12 of 2008,
were due by 18th April, 2009. However the final replies were given to Audit in two lots
on 24.9.2010 and 15.10.2010. Audit sent their final vetted reply on 26.11.2010.

 3
11. The Committee desired to know as to why Action Taken Notes in respect of the
Audit observation were not furnished despite lapse of 19 months from the presentation
of ARWSP Report to Parliament i.e. on 19th December, 2008 and issue of eight reminders
on different dates between April, 2009 and March, 2010. In its response, the Ministry
in a written note stated as under:—
“With regard to Audit Para PA 12 the Department did not get the information
about laying of the report in the Parliament. As came out later from the
correspondence, a copy of the report was sent to this Department but it seems
that the report was not received in the Department. The C&AG office sent the
report to a wrong address and thereafter continuously kept on sending reminders,
which were never received in the Department. On receipt of a latter dated
27th October, 2009 from the Comptroller General of Audit, Government of India, a
copy of the report was obtained by the Department. It was sent to all the State
Governments on 6th November, 2009 for necessary action and since then the
Department has made all possible efforts to get the reports from the States to
finalise the Action Taken Notes.’’
12. The Committee desired to know as to what mechanism the Ministry has devised
or propose to devise to ensure that the Action Taken Notes are submitted within the
stipulated time of four months. In response, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“On receipt of the Audit Paras, the Department immediately examines the same
and initiates action for compliance. The Audit Paras are segregated in two parts—
one on which action is to be taken at the Department level and another on which
action has to be taken by the respective State Governments. On the Audit Paras
wherein action lies with the Department itself, immediate action is initiated. On
issues requiring orders from the higher authorities, proposals are made and as per
laid down procedure, matter is examined at different levels/authorities and once
suitable orders are obtained, action is initiated for its actual implementation. It is
submitted that the Department is implementing Centrally sponsored programmes
whose actual implementation is vested with the States. Thus, in most of the cases,
action lies with the State Government and or its implementing agencies. Moreover,
water supply having been placed in the XIth Schedule of the Constitution among
the subjects that may be devolved to Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), in many
States, action/compliance rests with PRIs. By the very nature of the scheme as it
is a Centrally sponsored scheme, Department has to coordinate with a large number
of States/their implementing agencies for action taken report and compliance.’’
13. Further, the Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation during the
evidence on 30.11.2010 informed the Committee that they had established an Audit
Committee in their Ministry chaired by the Secretary himself with members from the
Finance and other wings. This would go a long way in ensuring timely submission of
Action Taken Notes.

 4
14. On being asked whether any responsibility has been fixed for not furnishing
remedial Action Taken Notes on the pending audit paragraphs, the Ministry in its post
evidence reply stated as under:—
‘‘There has not been any deliberate attempt on the part of the Department and or
its officials to delay furnishing the ATN. The Action Taken Note got delayed as
inspite of its best efforts, information from all the States could not be received on
time. Once, the Department came to know that Performance Audit Report has been
laid on the Table of the House, the Department took all possible steps to get the
action taken reports from the States and finalize Action Taken Note for
submission.’’
15. A close scrutiny of the above reveals that this para was finally settled after
about 1 year and 11 months. The final vetted reply from the Audit was received on
26.11.2010. The Committee took their first oral evidence on 16.08.2010 and the settlement
of the para reached finality only after the Committee examined the subject.
III. Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme [Report No. 12 of 2008 —
Performance Audit]
16. It has been stated that in order to supplement efforts in the rural water supply
sector made by the States, the Government of India, introduced the ‘Accelerated Rural
Water Supply Programme’ in the year 1972-73. However, the programme was withdrawn
from 1974-75 with the introduction of the Minimum Needs Programme (MNP). Since
the MNP was not found to be satisfactory, ARWSP was reintroduced in 1977-78. The
entire programme was given a mission approach with the introduction of the National
Drinking Water Mission (NDWM) in 1986. The NDWM was renamed as the
Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission (RGNDWM) in 1991. In 1999, a
Comprehensive Action Plan (CAP 99) was prepared to identify and cover Not Covered
(NC) and Partially Covered (PC) habitations. Further, the Bharat Nirman Programme,
which was launched in 2005, has a rural drinking water supply component which
envisaged covering of all uncovered habitations identified under CAP 99, and also
addressing the problems of slip-back and water quality in four years by 2008-09.
17. The Committee have been given to understand that the Performance Audit of
‘Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme’ was carried out between June and October,
2007 through test check of records of the Departments of Drinking Water Supply, now
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation (Union Ministry of Rural Development),
State Public Health Engineering Departments and other implementing Agencies in
26 States. The period covered under the audit was 2002-03 to 2006-07.
18.The fundamental objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess whether:—
♦ The survey of habitations was conducted effectively, and resulted in authentic
and reliable data;
♦ There was an effective process of planning for ARWSP;
♦ Financial control was adequate and effective, and funds were released in
timely fashion;

 5
♦ Individual projects were implemented within the stipulated time and cost, and
were executed economically, efficiently and effectively;
♦ The mechanism for monitoring of water quality and surveillance was adequate
and effective;
♦ Adequate attention was accorded to sustainability of water sources and
Operation and Maintenance of existing water supply assets;
♦ The objective of participatory, demand-driven rural water supply through
Swajaldhara was achieved effectively; and
♦ There was an adequate and effective mechanism at different levels for
monitoring and evaluation of the scheme.
19. The important findings of the Performance Audit Review are as under:—
♦ Deficiencies were noticed in the conduct of the 2003 National Habitation
Survey at the States which adversely affected quality and reliability of the
survey data, and thus its utility for planning purposes;
♦ Absence  of  Annual Action Plans in many States were noticed which adversely
affected the coverage of habitations, especially in prioritization for incomplete
work and Not Covered (NC), Partially Covered (PC) habitation;
♦ Instances of deficient financial control, besides instances of inadmissible
expenditure and diversion of ARWSP funds;
♦ Slip back of fully covered habitations and re-emergence of problem habitations
continued to be a major problem, which raised the issue of indefinite continuity
of the programme;
♦ Cases of inadequate infrastructure for testing and monitoring water quality
and periodic testing requirements were noticed. Distribution and utilization
of field testing kits at the Gram Panchayat (GP)/Village Water and Sanitation
Committee (VWSC) level was also found to be poor;
♦ There were many cases where States did not take adequate measures for
ensuring sustainability of water resources especially ground water.
Consequently, the slip back of habitation may continue to remain a major area
of concern; and
♦ There were numerous deficiencies in execution and implementation of works.
These issues along with other related matters pertaining to the implementation of
the programme are discussed at length in the succeeding paragraphs.

 6
IV . National Habitation Survey-2003
20. The Committee have learnt that in 2003, Department of Drinking Water and
Sanitation (DDWS) decided to conduct a fresh survey to ascertain the exact position
of drinking water supply in rural habitations; the result of the survey could form the
basis for developing future strategies for the programme. DDWS issued detailed
guidelines in February, 2003 for conducting the National Habitation Survey, 2003.
21. However, several inconsistencies and discrepancies in the conduct of survey
were found in many States. In Manipur, the Survey was conducted through an NGO
and a report submitted to the Government of India (GoI) in December 2006; however,
due to inconsistencies in the survey report, the State Government was considering
conduct of another survey. In Haryana, the survey was completed in 2005, but the
survey results could not be finalized due to discrepancies between the figures with the
State Government and GoI. In Chhattisgarh (partly), Jharkhand and Orissa authenticity
of survey could not be verified due to lack of documentation. Detailed maps were not
prepared in 130 out of 154 test-checked districts in 22 States viz. Andhra Pradesh,
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal. Training for
the conduct of the survey was not done in 12 States viz., Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Kerala, Manipur,
Orissa and Rajasthan.
22. The Committee wanted to have details of the outcome of Habitation Survey. In
this connection the Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation during
evidence simply stated as under:—
“Regarding the survey that was conducted in 2002-03, some of the States have
conducted in a thorough manner, others have not done it. That is a matter of
history now because the whole system has changed now. We already have a new
census going on which will further determine which are the villages which are
affected and which are not affected. Most of the explanations given by the States
for delay have been explained and it has been submitted.”
23. Throwing light on the non-completion of Survey by some States, Department
of Drinking Water and Sanitation in written note had also submitted that due to
organizational problem at the field level, some States did not complete the survey in
the scheduled time. Moreover, the maps for the survey could not be prepared because
there was no specific budget for the survey and it was carried out for the first time.
V . Planning
24. As per the ARWSP guidelines, the States should prepare an Annual Action
Plan (AAP) on the basis of a shelf of schemes, the likely size of the allocation under
State Sector Minimum Need Programme (MNP), ARWSP, as well as likely carry over
funds, if any, and submit them to DDWS by the beginning of October of the previous

 7
year for use at the Annual Plan discussions. This AAP should be reviewed and finalized
by April, after the final outlay is decided.
25. Audit scrutiny revealed that out of 26 States, two States (Jammu & Kashmir
and Jharkhand) had not prepared the AAPs at all during the period 2002-03 to 2006-07,
while seven States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh) had not submitted the AAPs, though prepared, to the
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation.
26. It was further revealed that in 15 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Kerala, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Rajasthan,
Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal), the AAPs did not have
habitation-wise details. In 9 States (Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Manipur, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal), the AAPs
did not indicate the shelf of schemes and likely size of allocations. In 9 States (Himachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal), the AAPs did not indicate the population to be
benefited. In  8 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal), the AAPs did not indicate priority for
completion of incomplete works over taking up new works. In 11 States (Assam,
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal), the AAPs did not indicate the activities
to be taken up under the submission on water quality and sustainability.
27. The Committee desired to know about the follow up action to make the States
agree for timely preparing AAPs and submitting the same to the Ministry. The Secretary,
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation stated as under:—
“I am very happy to inform the Committee that this year, the preparation of the
annual action plan of the States was taken up with a lot of seriousness. In the
months of March and April, individual State Action Plans were discussed and
they were all approved. It was all jointly approved and agreed upon. In case of
UTs also, they had a meeting with all the Union Territories and they are trying to
bring them into the fold.”
28. When asked about the preparation of Annual Action Plans on a habitation-
wise basis and availability of the details of such AAPs with States, the Department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation in a written reply has stated as under.—
“States have been asked to prepare detailed district-wise Annual Action Plans for
which formats too have been provided. The details of villages/habitations to be
covered during the year are marked by the States in the online Integrated
Management Information System of the Department. Habitation-wise details of
previous year’s works viz. type of source, water supply systems, expenditure,
functional status of the scheme, etc. are also reported in the habitation-wise data
in the online Integrated Management Information System (IMIS).”

 8
VI. Budgetary Allocation and Control
The Committee have been intimated by Audit that the State and Central
Governments have made investment to the tune of Rs. 66000 crore since the 1st Five
Year Plan in the rural water supply sector.
29. On being asked about the arrangements made for the release of funds by the
Central Government to the State Governments and detail of the present budgetary
allocation for Rural and Drinking Water, the Secretary, Department of Drinking Water
and Sanitation deposed before the Committee during evidence as under:—
“The present budget for Rural Drinking water is Rs. 9,000 crore per year. The
money is distributed among the States on pre-determined formula, which has
been approved by the Cabinet. The formula takes care of requirements like
population, geographic coverage and then that money is distributed to the States.
It is very heartening that most of the States also give their own contribution as a
supplement to the budget, which is provided by the Centre. Even though, we
have a scheme of 50:50 funding in some components of the programme and
100 per cent funding for other components of the programme, yet I have seen that
if the total budgetary allocation of the Ministry is about Rs. 9,000 crore, then
almost an equal amount is forthcoming from the States. So, the total availability
for the drinking water sector as a whole in the country is pretty substantial.”
30. When the Committee desired to know about the mechanism to monitor the
utilisation of funds released to the State Governments, the Ministry in its note stated
as under:—
“As per provisions of the National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), if
a State has been able to avail 2nd instalment of NRDWP funds in a financial year,
in the following year, it gets the 1st instalment automatically without any proposal.
At the time of release of 2nd instalment of funds, States have to send the proposal
in the prescribed format which inter alia includes various details viz. release of
State’s share, expenditure statement both of Central and State shares, audit report
of the year before the preceding year, unspent balance at the end of the last year,
component-wise expenditure, etc. In case, audit has pointed out any irregularity
in the utilisation of funds, the equivalent amount is deducted from the proposed
release of 2nd instalment and/or the concerned State is requested for necessary
compliance. Proposals for release of 2nd instalment have to reach the Department
by 31st December of the year. Cut of 10% in the total allocated amount is imposed
if the proposal is received by January, 20% is cut if received in February and 30%
cut is imposed if it is received in March. This provision is an incentive for timely
utilisation of funds. Excessive opening balances and slow utilization of funds may
also lead to cut in releases.”

 9
31. The Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation also stated in this
regard during evidence:—
“As far as financial expenditure is concerned, for the last four or five years, the
financial expenditure, the releases of the Department have been pretty high; they
have to the tune of 95 per cent plus, and the States have also reported a very good
expenditure on these issues.”
32. The State-wise detail of the financial progress reported by the States for the
year 2009-10 is given in Annexure-I.
33. As per the ARWSP guidelines, the States were to match releases by the
Government of India on a 1:1 basis. However, audit scrutiny revealed significant cases
of short releases over the period 2002-07 by 10 States viz., Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Nagaland, Orissa,
Rajasthan and West Bengal amounting to Rs. 2773.14 crore.
34. When asked about the measures taken to check deficient financial control, the
Ministry in their written reply stated that at the time of release of 2nd instalment of
NRDWP funds, States are required to provide details of matching share released, audit
certificate, etc. However, in spite of the best efforts and insistence of the Department,
there were some States which were unable to provide matching State share due to a
number of factors. Keeping this in view, in 2009, Government of India revised the
funding pattern for North-Eastern States and Jammu & Kashmir which were facing
difficulties in providing matching share, from 50:50 to 90:10 between the Centre and the
respective States. While considering the release of 2nd instalment of funds under
NRDWP one of the essential documents needed is the Audit Certificate pertaining to
the year before last year. In case audit points out any inadmissible expenditure or
diversion of funds, the same is also deducted from the 2nd instalment due for such
States. It may be stated that there is already a clause in the sanction orders for release
of NRDWP funds that the States are required to ensure transfer of the Central funds
along with matching State share to the implementing agencies within 15 days of its
receipt. This requirement is laid down so as to ensure that there is no delay in the
transfer of funds to the implementing agencies. Realising the persistence of this problem,
now the guidelines have been revised and funds are released into the account of State
Water & Sanitation Mission (SWSM) instead of the State Finance Department, to
facilitate faster transfer of funds to the district implementing agencies.
35. Audit scrutiny also revealed cases of diversion of ARWSP funds in 12 States
namely Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal
amounting to Rs. 404 crore.
36. Giving details on the diversion of fund, the Secretary, Department of Drinking
Water and Sanitation stated during evidence:—
“.....about the money that has been diverted, we will try to give the details of
Rs. 400 crore. A majority of this is by way of centage charges which the
Departments have charged out of Rs. 400 crore. Mostly, two major  States are

 10
involved—Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra. We are getting reports from them
and we will come back to you.”
Throwing light on the centage charges the Ministry clarified that centage charge
is the fee given by the Government to a construction agency for its establishment cost
after it is awarded a project. Some States like Uttar Pradesh had charged centage
charges on rural drinking water projects. Under the NRDWP guidelines, no centage
charges can be charged for NRDWP funds. The guidelines also state that if any State
levies the centage charges on NRDWP fund, double the amount charged will be
deducted while releasing further instalments.
37. However, in subsequent written reply, Department of Drinking Water and
Sanitation submitted as under:—
“(i) Expenditure on creating water sources and water supply systems in FC and
PC habitations. Due to the unpredictability of the monsoon on which most
surface and ground water sources depend, in parts of the country every year
drought situations develop. During these times established water sources
dry up. To provide drinking water, which is a basic necessity, it becomes
essential for Government to make arrangements for its provision in crises
situations even in villages which are categorised as FC or PC. This expenditure
may not be categorised as inadmissible expenditure or diversion of funds.
(ii) Time and Cost overruns occur in many cases especially when sanctions are
obtained late in the financial year. This necessitates revalidation of funds in
the subsequent year. Legal issues regarding land acquisition also results in
overruns. This may not be categorised as diversion of funds.
(iii) The State Government of UP has in principle accepted in the year 2004 to
reimburse centage on all GoI funded schemes being implemented by UP Jal
Nigam to the extent of 12.5% since 1.4.2004. Maharashtra has said that ETP
charges are added on all cumulative net costs of sub-work to work out gross
cost of scheme.”
VII.  Slip-Back and Re-Emergence of Problem Habitations
38. The National Habitation Survey 2003 revealed a slip back of 3.14 lakh habitations
from fully covered to partly covered/not-covered from April, 2000, and highlighted the
problem of re-emergence of problem habitations. However, audit revealed that despite
the coverage of problem habitations during 2003-07, 1.54 lakh habitations, which were
fully covered in April, 2000, had slipped back to partly covered/not covered status as
of April, 2007. The stated reasons for the alarming levels of slip back were excessive
drawal of ground water, inadequate/non-maintenance of tubewells, and lack of
sustainability of water resources. Audit’s comparison of data on status of habitations
at the Government of India’s level and corresponding data with State implementing
agencies revealed substantial discrepancies in the number of partly covered, not
covered and total habitations. Further, many States did not take adequate measures for
ensuring sustainability of water resources.

 11
39. Audit found substantial slip backs in 18 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal.
40. Audit scrutiny also revealed significant deficiencies in the reliability of data.
Two sets of data relating to status of habitations were collected by audit; one at the
Central level (from DDWS) and the other collated from data collected by field audit
from the respective State implementing agencies. The total figures of habitations as
per the State level agencies was higher than the DDWS figures by more than
10,000 habitations.
41. Responding to the Audit observations the Ministry in 2008 stated that slippage
was unavoidable, and was a part of the water supply system. Slippage took place due
to a number of factors e.g. lifespan of water supply scheme, sources running dry,
lowering of water table, reduction in capacity due to poor maintenance, increase in
population etc. Consequently, the Government had revised its strategy, which was not
focused on sustainability in all drinking water schemes so that the phenomenon of
slippage was reduced.
42. When asked about the steps taken to address the problem of slip back of fully
covered habitations, and re-emergency of problem habitations on a permanent basis,
the Ministry in a post evidence reply informed as under:
“In the old ARWSP guidelines, one of the criteria for allocation of funds to States
was the number of slipped-back habitations. This led to a perverse incentive and
many States started reporting a very large number of slipped-back habitations to
get more funds from Government of India. While revamping the programme, this
criteria has been done away. Thus w.e.f. 2009-10, there is no further incentive for
States to report large numbers of slipped-back habitations. On the other hand, to
prevent slippage, States are given 20% of NRDWP funds as 100% grant for
sustainability measure of water conservation, artificial recharge of drinking water
sources etc., to strengthen drinking water sources and systems. In the belief, that
local communities/GPs have a greater stake in proper management, operation and
maintenance of water supply systems, there is a weightage of 10% in the allocation
criteria of  the NRDWP funds for States that have transferred water supply systems
to PRIs for operation and maintenance. Under NRDWP, 10% funds are given for
the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) component, which State can give to PRIs
for proper O&M of drinking water supply systems.”
43. During evidence, the Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation
stated:—
“About the slip-back habitation, at least, I have not been able to follow it up
properly in the sense that it is so subjective that we are leaving everything to the
States. The States give the report saying that one habitation is covered, one is
partially covered, etc. it is at their whim. That is why, in the Bharat Nirman

 12
Programme, after covering the entire slip-back habitations, we still have half a
million habitations to be brought back.’’
44. In another context, he also stated:
“The third important part, which has now been the most important part of the
programme, is quality problem villages—villages which are in quality affected
areas, they need to be prioritised. We have almost about 16 lakh habitations in the
country out of which about 1.4 lakh habitations have been identified as quality
affected.”
VIII. Water Quality
45. The major water quality problems in India are fluorosis, brackishness/salinity,
excess arsenic, excess iron and nitrates. There are separate sub-mission components
for fluorosis, desalination, removal of excess iron and other items. The Committee have
been informed that under ARWSP, up to 15 per cent of funds could be utilised by the
State Government for tackling water quality problems like fluorosis, arsenic,
brackishness, excess iron and nitrates.
(a) Water Quality Laboratories
46. According to the ARWSP Guidelines, establishing of water quality laboratories
could be one of the components of the programme. Water quality laboratories may be
implemented at three levels, consisting of a nodal unit at the top level, intermediary
level units like district laboratories, and grassroot level units. State and region-specific
IEC activities were to be taken up. Further, 100 per cent funding was to be provided to
the States for strengthening water quality monitoring facilities with a view to networking
the nodal unit (premier technical institution) with the State headquarters (PHED).
47. The Committee have been informed of significant deficiencies in the
development of infrastructure for water quality monitoring and testing. Ten States
(Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,
Kerala, Meghalaya, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh) had not assigned the task of checking
water quality at the State level to premier institutes. Eleven States (Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Orissa and Sikkim) did not take up region-specific IEC activities involving
PRIs, cooperatives, women groups, Self Help Groups etc.
48. Audit also found several deficiencies of varied kinds in the district level
laboratory infrastructure in several States, as shown below:—
* In Arunachal Pradesh, in six test checked districts, no qualified staff was
appointed in the laboratories.
* In Assam, neither was any new laboratory for testing water quality established,
nor were the facilities in the existing ones strengthened. No qualified staff
was appointed in the laboratories and the departmental staffs like JEs, sectional
assistants etc., were performing the tests.

 13
* In Bihar, two out of nine test-checked districts did not have a laboratory.
* In Chhattisgarh, no funds were utilised for strengthening of laboratories.
Further, no staff was appointed in the newly constructed Raipur district
laboratory, which was being used as a guest house.
* In Gujarat, out of 25 districts, eight districts did not have laboratories.
* In Haryana, only seven chemists were posted for covering all the
19 laboratories in the State by rotation.
* In Himachal Pradesh, technically qualified staff was not available in one out
of three test checked district laboratories.
* In Jammu & Kashmir, out of a total of 14 districts, only four districts had water
testing laboratories, of which one was not functional.
* In Jharkhand, district laboratories existed in four out of six districts, of these,
facilities in only one laboratory were strengthened. Further, no qualified staff
were appointed in three district laboratories.
* In Karnataka, one out of seven test-checked districts did not have a laboratory,
while two district laboratories were not functioning.
* In Madhya Pradesh, in one district laboratory, no regular chemist was
appointed.
* In Manipur, there were no laboratories in the districts.
* In Nagaland, only one out of eleven district laboratories was functional.
* In Orissa, out of 30 district level laboratories, only 15 were made operational
in 2006-07.
* In Punjab, in three test checked districts, no district level laboratories were
established, and no water tests were conducted there.
* In Uttar Pradesh, none of the 16 test-checked district laboratories were having
the recommended staffing pattern, and 14 laboratories were being run by
non-qualified staff like work agents and fitters. Further, no district laboratories
were strengthened or new laboratories set up.
49. On being asked about the status of staff strength of water quality laboratories
set up at both the levels viz., district and sub-divisional, the Ministry in a written reply
informed that the exact information regarding staff strength at specific laboratories is
available with the States. While the issue of manpower at the State level laboratories is
comparatively better, the issue of technical manpower remains a matter of concern
especially at the district and sub-district levels. States have been urged to ensure that
adequately trained manpower is available at these laboratories.

 14
The State-wise availability of manpower in the district water testing laboratories
as on 10.12.2011 is presented in the following table:—
Name of the State/UT Manpower available in District Laboratory
Chemist Bacterio- Assistant Others Total
logists
1. Andhra Pradesh 55 51 102 51 259
2. Bihar 40 1 39 5 85
3. Chhattisgarh 11 1 32 4 48
4. Goa 0 0 0 0 0
5. Gujarat 27 16 18 16 77
6. Haryana 14 0 14 11 39
7. Himachal Pradesh 5 0 3 5 13
8. Jammu And Kashmir 1 0 1 12 14
9. Jharkhand 13 2 10 5 30
10. Karnataka 27 8 28 37 100
11. Kerala 17 9 23 44 93
12. Madhya Pradesh 24 0 86 46 156
13. Maharashtra 7 3 6 8 3 6 5 5 232
14. Orissa 5 0 14 5 24
15. Punjab 19 0 20 0 39
16. Rajasthan 34 0 85 76 195
17. Tamil Nadu 75 10 33 8 126
18. Uttar Pradesh 63 0 67 8 138
19. Uttarakhand 16 12 16 21 65
20. West Bengal 2 2 0 0 4
21. Arunachal Pradesh 2 2 20 3 27
22. Assam 1 2 0 2 0 4 0 7 2
23. Manipur 0 0 0 0 0
24. Meghalaya 0 0 4 1 5
25. Mizoram 8 0 8 8 24
26. Nagaland 1 0 2 1 4
27. Sikkim 0 0 0 0 0
28. Tripura 0 0 10 1 11
29. Andaman And Nicobar 0 0 0 0 0
30. Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0
31. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0 0 0 0 0
32. Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0
33. Delhi 0 0 0 0 0
34. Lakshadweep 9 0 16 25 50
35. Puducherry 7 0 4 13 24
TOTAL 560 182 711 501 1954

 15
50. When enquired about the status of laboratories set up at district and
sub-divisional level, the Ministry informed the Committee that States can establish
district and sub-district water testing laboratories as per the need. State/Union Territory-
wise status of laboratory infrastructure available for water testing at the district and
sub-district is presented in the table shown below:—
Sl. Name of the State/ No. of No. of District No. of Sub- T otal number of district
No. U T Districts Water Testing divisional and sub-district water
Laboratories Laboratories testing laboratories set
set up set up up as on 10.12.2010
1. Andhra Pradesh 22 51 27 78
2. Bihar 38 39 0 39
3. Chhattisgarh 18 19 1 20
4. Goa 2 0 10 10
5. Gujarat 26 26 0 26
6. Haryana 21 17 0 17
7. Himachal Pradesh 12 18 1 19
8. Jammu & Kashmir 22 3 0 3
9. Jharkhand 24 22 0 22
10. Karnataka 30 33 64 97
11. Kerala 14 14 15 29
12. Madhya Pradesh 50 48 21 69
13. Maharashtra 33 30 380 410
14. Orissa 30 32 1 33
15. Punjab 20 20 14 34
16. Rajasthan 32 32 0 32
17. Tamil Nadu 31 63 45 108
18. Uttar Pradesh 70 72 2 74
19. Uttarakhand 13 17 0 17
20. West Bengal 19 35 80 115
21. Arunachal Pradesh 16 15 0 15
22. Assam 26 26 0 26
23. Manipur 9 0 0 0
24. Meghalaya 7 7 0 7
25. Mizoram 8 8 5 13
26. Nagaland 11 1 4 5
27. Sikkim 4 0 0 0
28. Tripura 4 4 15 19
29. Andaman and Nicobar 3 0 2 2
30. Chandigarh 1 0 0 0
31. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 1 0 0 0
32. Daman & Diu 2 0 0 0
33. Delhi 9 0 0 0
34. Lakshadweep 1 9 0 9
35. Puducherry 4 2 0 2
TOTAL 633 663 687 1350

 16
(b) Water Quality Testing
51. The ARWSP Guidelines stipulate testing of 10 per cent of all samples tested,
including all positive tested samples by the district water quality testing laboratories,
at the State level. Further, District laboratories/Public Health Engineering Department
(PHED) were to test at least 30 per cent of water samples tested by GPs, and all cases
where possibility of contamination was reported by the community. Also, all water
sources were required to be tested at least once a year initially.
52. Audit have revealed that in 17 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim and Uttarakhand), there was
no system or practice of testing at the State level of a percentage of samples, including
positive samples, tested by the District laboratories.
53. Audit also revealed that in Chhattisgarh no water quality tests were conducted
in any of the four test checked districts. In Gujarat, the shortfall in conducting tests
during 2003—07 ranged between 13 and 65 per cent. In Haryana, in four test checked
laboratories, against the target of testing 94,000 samples during 2002—07, only 13,980
samples were tested. Of the 13,980 samples, water in 1,598 samples was found unfit for
human consumption. In Himachal Pradesh, in six test-checked divisions, against the
requirement of 941 tests during 2002—07, only 91 tests were conducted. In Kerala, in
Thiruvananthapuram, out of 79 RWSSs, the required percentage of quality testing was
done only in 12 schemes. In respect of 22 schemes, the shortfall ranged from
25 per cent to 75 per cent. 45 schemes were not tested at all. In Manipur, during 2003—
07, the State laboratory tested only 83 samples, against the requirement of 1,260 samples;
of these, 56 samples were found to be potable. In Orissa, no periodic tests were
conducted. Only 36 per cent of functional rural water supply sources had been tested
at least once. In Punjab, no periodic tests were conducted and in West Bengal, out of
174 PWSSs in 3 Districts, test results showed that 77 schemes were affected with
bacteriological or chemical (excess arsenic/iron) problems. Water from these 174
schemes was not being tested monthly, as required. Also, water quality testing was
not conducted on 579 newly created tube wells sunk during 2005—07.
54. When asked about the steps taken to ensure adequate infrastructure for testing
and monitoring water quality at the State, District and Gram Panchayat level, the
Ministry in its written reply stated as under:—
“At the State level, the Department dealing with rural drinking water supply has
been advised to identify a State Referral Institute for proper water quality monitoring
and surveillance whose primary duty is to build capacities of manpower working
in district water testing laboratories and to identify upgradation requirements in
physical infrastructure.
At the district level, provision has been made under the NRDWP guidelines for
establishing district water quality testing laboratory where such facility is not
available and also fund for upgradation of district water quality testing laboratories.
With the implementation of online IMIS, the Ministry has now started reviewing
the availability of trained manpower in the district water testing laboratories.

 17
Provisions have been made to set up new sub-division level water testing
laboratories to ensure testing of more water quality samples.
At the GP level, provisions have been made to provide a chemical field test kit and
bacteriological strips/vials for initial screening of chemical and bacteriological
quality of drinking water sources and send only the positively tested samples to
the District/Sub-division water testing laboratory. Provisions have also been made
to provide chemical refills/bacteriological strips/vials under the 5% NRDWP-
Support funds.
Chief Secretaries have been requested in writing to ensure that the required
laboratories are set up and are properly staffed and undertake regular testing at
State, district and village levels.”
55. The Committee desired to know as to how the Ministry ensure that the
stipulated frequency of tests are carried out. In response, the Ministry in its post
evidence reply stated as under:—
“The Ministry has been repeatedly requesting the States to arrange testing of all
drinking water sources at least once in a year for chemical contamination and
twice a year for bacteriological contamination in rural drinking water sources. For
the first time in the Annual Action Plan 2010-11. States have been given targets for
testing of samples. This would ensure more focus is given on monitoring of the
number of tests being carried out. The Department has made provision in the
IMIS for reporting of data relating to water quality tests carried out in the water
quality testing laboratories. Department has made enabling arrangements in the
NRDWP guidelines for resources to carry out such tests and funding is available
as 100% grants from Government of India to States.”
56. When asked about the tests checks done at the district level laboratories and
sub-divisional level laboratories as well with a view to monitoring water quality between
September 2010 and December 2010. In response the Ministry in its written reply
informed that till November 2010, a total of 8.66 lakh water samples were reported to
have been tested in the district water laboratories. In the month of December 2010,
8784 more samples have been tested till 9.12.2010.
57. In regard to the financial support by the Ministry for ensuring quality, the
Secretary stated during evidence:—
“Regarding quality, the Government of India is providing supporting money for
establishment of district laboratories for conduct of the tests of drinking water
resources. But what I have realised in the last three or four months is that my total
support to the States is five per cent of this money and with this money, I have to
meet administrative expenses as well as quality issues. So, I have requested each
of the State Governments to tell the minimum money they will require so that
quality thing is never lost sight of and administrative matter is also taken care of.
Once I get that information, maybe I will move for an amendment and increase this

 18
five per cent. Maybe another four or five per cent I can give only for quality thing.
But it is a commitment by the Government of India that we will support all these
activities. We will give this money.”
(c) Procurement and Distribution of Field Test Kits
58. ARWSP envisaged building capacity of Panchayats to own the Field Test Kits
(FTKs) and take up full O&M responsibility for water quality monitoring of all drinking
water resources in their respective PRI area. Further, 100 per cent testing of all sources
at the village level was to be done by grassroot level workers from Gram Panchayat
(GP)/Village Water and Sanitation Committee (VWSC).
59. Audit scrutiny has revealed that in 15 States (Bihar, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur,
Nagaland, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttarakhand and West Bengal), no procurement
of field testing kits for use by GPs, was undertaken as of March 2007.
60. It has further been revealed that in Andhra Pradesh, field test kits were not
received in any of the six test-checked districts. In Arunachal Pradesh, out of 338
multiparameter test kits and 5642 bacteriological test kits procured in March 2007, only
192 multiparameter test kits and 42 bacteriological test kits were issued to the districts
and no kits were issued to GP level functionaries. In Chhattisgarh, field test kits were
procured in only one out of four test-checked districts; even here, only 48 kits were
procured against a requirement of 367 kits, and these had not been distributed. In
Gujarat, in six test-checked districts, only 332 kits were received, against 582 VWSCs.
In Jharkhand, field test kits were received in only one district. Further, in two divisions,
Tenughat and Jamshedpur, 8676 kits for bacteriological testing were lying unused for
three to eight years. In Uttar Pradesh, out of 9860 kits received as of January 2007, only
5626 kits were dispatched to the BDOs (for distribution to GPs) as of June 2007.
61. The Committee wanted to know as to what steps the Ministry has taken to
ensure that Gram Panchayats have been provided with adequate Field Testing Kits
and are effectively used. In response, the Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and
Sanitation stated that:—
“Regarding FT kits, I had a review meeting with the State Secretaries. While the
FT kit has been given, unfortunately, most of it is not passed on to the Gram
Panchayats. The five individuals who are supposed to be trained like the teachers
etc. are not properly trained. In some cases, the training has not been
satisfactory...................... I have told the Secretary to identify the individuals in a
particular Gram Panchayat who physically has the kits.”
62. However, in their post evidence reply, Department of Drinking Water and
Sanitation subsequently clarified as under:—
“Under Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance Programme, provisions have
been made for States to provide one field test kit to each Gram Panchayat and train
5 grassroot workers at the GP level, 5 at block level, 4 at the district level and 2 at
the State level for water quality monitoring and surveillance activities. In the
Annual Action Plan 2010-11, States have indicated targets for provision of FTKs

 19
and for training of grassroot workers. This will be regularly monitored to ensure
that the targets are achieved. As reported by States, so far against the cumulative
target to train 12 lakh grassroot level workers at the GP level, 8.55 lakh have been
trained. Against the target to provide field test kits to 2.45 lakh GPs, 2.47 lakh
chemical FTKs and 424.33 lakh bacteriological kits are reported to be procured/
distributed”.
63. The Department further clarified that 2.66 lakh chemical field test kits have
already been procured/distributed to the GPs in the country. States have been advised
to provide such kits wherever they have not been provided and also to train adequate
number of grassroot workers for testing their own drinking water sources. This process
may take some time.
(d) Engagement of Experts
64. The Committee understand that experts for monitoring and evaluating the
quality of drinking water in rural areas, covered under the Scheme have been engaged.
The Committee desired to know as to what are the terms of reference for the deployment
of such experts. In response, the Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation
during the evidence state that:
“........................the technical Manpower issue, the orders were issued in April,
2010. But what was missing was that we had not really specified the qualifications
for all. We had not really specified the enumeration that can be given to a particular
officer. That we have got the approval of the Minister now and we should be in a
position to issue in next seven to ten days time. After that, most of the districts will
have at least five experts to support them and the States will also have eight to ten
experts to support them....................... on the pattern of NHRM, I will try to see that
most of these technical manpower are in place by the end of this financial year and
all of them are recruited properly. The same thing is being done for the blocks also.
At the block level also, we will also create a block extension work unit because in
the district also there is no one else to look after the drinking water supply
programme. So, this we will support.”
65. Subsequently, in this regard, the Ministry in its post evidence reply stated as
under:
“In order to provide proper support to the State Departments/Boards dealing with
rural water supply, the Department of DW&S has recently issued guidelines for
engaging experts as Consultants at the State and District levels. At the Block
level, 2-4 Block Resource Co-ordinator(s) depending upon the population of the
block will be engaged by the States.
At the State level, in each State/UT, there will be a Water & Sanitation Support
Organisation (WSSO) under the State Water & Sanitation Mission (SWSM)
for taking up various support activities required for drinking water and
sanitation sector. The WSSO will be staffed with Consultants in IEC, HRD,
Water Quality Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), Hydrogeology and Sanitation
& Hygiene.

 20
In each DWSM, five Consultants in IEC and Equity, Monitoring, Evaluation-cum-
MIS, HRD, Hydrogeology, Sanitation, Hygiene are to be engaged to provide
support to the DWSM and the GPs. VWSCs in carrying out their responsibilities
in the sector.”
66.  Secretary however, during evidence further stated that:
“I just want to inform you that we have been able to sanction the National Resource
Centre, the State Resource Centres and the Block Resource Centres. We have
issued the guidelines also. All these posts have been sanctioned now. Most of
the States have already started action on appointing all these people. At the
national level also, we have also advertised; we have received the applications.
The recruitment to these places will be completed hopefully by the end of January.
On technical strengthening part, the work has been completed.”
67. When asked about the existing mechanism to test the quality of water in the
districts, where the experts have not been engaged, the Ministry in a note stated as
under:
“With such a large number of drinking water sources in rural areas of the
country and with only district level water quality testing laboratories, it is
almost impossible to carry out water quality testing for bacteriological and
chemical contaminants in all drinking water sources used by people in rural
areas on a regular basis. Thus, the Department, came out with an initiative to
equip Gram Panchayats (GPs) to develop proper understanding of various
aspects of drinking water quality issues and keep surveillance on their drinking
water sources. As a part of surveillance process, it was envisaged that GPs
should be able to carry out simple indicative tests using Field Test Kits (FTKs)
on various contaminants in their drinking water sources and report the same
to the Department of the State in-charge of rural water supply. In case of
bacteriological contamination, it can be prevented by certain actions by the
local community. However, in case of chemical contamination, they have to
approach the district or sub-district laboratories set up by the rural water
supply Department for carrying out confirmatory tests and take necessary
corrective action. Based on the laboratory data,the State Department/in-charge
of rural water supply is also to update the status of habitations in the IMIS. In
addition, every year, a sanitary survey is also required to be carried out by the
State to ascertain the contamination status and required preventive action to
render drinking water sources safe especially during monsoon when the
possibility of bacteriological contamination is very high.”
IX. Sustainability
68. ARWSP has a separate component to ensure sustainability of water resources.
Five per cent of ARWSP funds were to be kept aside for sustainability projects, including
ground water recharge and rain water harvesting; different technological options could
be explored, depending on the local requirement. Further, the State Governments were

 21
encouraged to adopt and implement the model bill to regulate and control development
of ground water, especially in water stressed areas.
69. Audit scrutiny has revealed that the proportion of schemes relying on ground
water sources was very high in most States, and ranged between 91 and 100 per cent
in eight States (Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal), between 71 and 90 per cent in six States (Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim and Tamil Nadu), and between 41 and 70 per
cent in four States (Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Kerala and Meghalaya).
70. Audit further revealed that 19 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Manipur, Meghalaya, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal) had not passed and implemented the model bill for
controlling development of ground water in water-stressed areas and in 14 States viz.,
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Manipur, Orissa, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand periodical
assessments of ground water potential on a scientific basis had not been conducted.
20 States (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh,  Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jammu
& Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and
West Bengal) had not made ground water recharge compulsory in all ground water
based supply schemes. 16 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Manipur, Meghalaya, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand) had not fully utilized the amount
of five per cent of ARWSP funds for sustainability projects.
71. When asked about the arrangements made for the sustainability components
by the States while formulating water quality schemes, the Ministry in its written reply
has stated as under:
“While funds released under the components of coverage and water quality can
be utilized interchangeably, 20% NRDWP fund is earmarked for sustainability
component as 100% grant to be utilized by the States for sustainability measures
alone. In the Annual Action Plan 2010-11, States had to indicate the specific
sustainability measures and have to indicate the same in the online IMIS of the
Department. Moreover, while funds for coverage and quality are given on 50:50
funding pattern, funds for sustainability is given as 100% grant by the Government
of India. This is to ensure that States accord higher priority to sustainability of
sources and systems so that water supply schemes last their full life span and
habitations do not slip back. In addition, training programmes are being conducted
for State and district level engineers on planning, designing and implementing
sustainability structures in all States in Collaboration with the Central Ground
Water Board. The Department has also commissioned the National Remote Sensing
Centre (NRSC) to prepare Hydrogeo-morphological (HGM) maps to facilitate local
engineers in locating drinking water sources and in appropriate siting of recharge
structures for these sources. NRSC is also conducting training programmes in
various States to train engineers using the HGM maps.”

 22
72. When asked about the steps taken to prevent depletion of ground water, the
Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation during evidence stated that:
“Water policy and proper use of water is now being looked after by Planning
Commission. The Prime Minister has asked the Planning Commission to prepare a
Ground Water Policy. So, we, from our side, from the Department’s side have
already started preparing the background material. We are requesting them to do
something so that ground water depletion is stopped at least in the areas where
there is human habitation.”
73. Asked to throw light on the steps taken to bring a punitive legislation for
making polluting of drinking water resources an offence, the Secretary, Department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation during evidence stated as under:
“There are three Acts which govern water pollution. First is the Water (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; second is the Water (Prevention and Control
of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977; and the third is the Environment Protection Act,
1986. These three Acts govern the water pollution as a whole. Drinking water &
other water, those enforcement powers are vested with the Ministry of Environment
and Forests. They do it through the Pollution Control Board and other measures.
They have also the power to establish authorities for ensuring standards, and
under that power, they have also established the Water Quality Assessment
Authority. That Water Quality Assessment Authority is chaired by the Ministry
of Environment and Forests. In fact, the Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation
was not even a member of that. Now, they have started inviting the Joint Secretary
from our Department. The other important Ministry in this is the Ministry of Water
Resources which control the Central Ground Water Board. They also constitute
the Central Ground Water Authority. This Authority was constituted in 1997.
These are two major bodies which look into the punitive measures of drinking
water quality. The Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation has been working
as a promoting/development Department. It is not working as a punitive
Department. The punishing powers and the punitive powers, unfortunately, are
not with us.”
74. The Committee have come to learn that Andhra Pradesh, a State of India
adopted community Ground Water Management Model. The Andhra Pradesh
Government gave one lakh rupees to certain communities of each village of drought
prone area. Utilising this amount the communities have shown the first large-scale
example of self-regulation of ground water, which is very close to sustainable
level.
75. On being asked about the steps taken to ensure that the farmers in States have
changed their practices with regard to regulation of ground water, the Ministry in its
written reply intimated as under:
“Through various meetings and conferences, State officials have been appraised
of the successfully implemented Andhra Pradesh Farmers Managed Ground Water
Systems (APFMGS). During the meetings, they have been urged to study the
possibilities of replicating the same in their States as a part of Integrated Water

 23
Resources Management. The Department has also held meetings with concerned
States to launch pilot projects in 10 overexploited blocks on Integrated Drinking
Water Security Planning incorporating elements drawn from APFMGS.”
76. On the steps taken by the Ministry for effective coordination with the Ministry
of Water Resources, Ministry of Agriculture and the State Governments for ensuring
that first priority is retained for drinking water, the Ministry in its written reply stated as
under:—
“As per the National Water Policy 2002, drinking water needs of human beings
Zand animals has been given the first charge on any available water. However, it
is true that there are multiple demands on water. According to FAO-Forestry
report (1990) regarding India, domestic consumption accounts for 5% of total
water availability. Out of the remaining, 92% is used for agriculture and 3% for
industry needs. Under National Water Mission, Ministry of Water Resources has
been made the nodal Ministry for “conservation of water, minimizing wastage and
ensuring its more equitable distribution both across and within States through
integrated water resources development and management”. The department is
coordinating with the Ministry of Water Resources and other agencies like Central
Ground Water Board (CGWB), Ministry of Agriculture, NRSC, State Governments
and other organizations in the matter of water management. However, currently,
there is no formal institutional arrangement for continuous coordination between
all agencies involved in the management of ground and surface water.”
X. Monitoring, Reporting and Inspections
(a) Monitoring
77. The ARWSP Guidelines stipulated that Vigilance and Monitoring Committees
(VMCs) at the State, District and Village levels were to be set up, and regular meetings
of these Committees held. This would be a pre-condition for release of funds. Special
Monitoring and Investigation Units (SMIUs) were to be set up at the State
Headquarters. These units would be responsible for collecting information from the
executing agencies, maintenance of data and timely submission of returns to the
GoI. They would also be responsible for monitoring the quality of water and adequacy
of service at the field level, and maintain such water quality data. Further, they would
be responsible for controlling/regulating the quality of construction works in water
supply schemes.
78. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed significant deficiencies in the organizational
arrangements for monitoring such as in 13 States (Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal), VMCs were not
constituted at the State level, while in 6 States (Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Jharkhand,
Karnataka and Punjab) VMCs did not hold regular meetings. 17 States (Andhra Pradesh,
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tamil Nadu,
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) did not nominate officials of the Health
Department for surveillance activity. In 9 States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh,

 24
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Manipur and Uttarakhand),
SMIUs were not established. SMIUs in seven States (Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka,
Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh) did not have qualified
technical experts, and instead used engineers from the regular Line Departments,
which would not adequately serve the purpose.
79. The Committee desired to know about the effectiveness of the National Resource
Centre (NRC) in monitoring the implementation of the schemes. In response, the
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation in its post evidence reply stated as
under:—
“The proposed National Resources Centre (NRC) is basically to assist the
Department by strengthening the existing manpower especially in software activities
viz. information, education & communication (IEC), capacity building of
implementing agencies and PRIs, public health engineering, water resources
management and hydro-geology, monitoring and evaluation, etc. NRC has been
envisaged as a ‘Think Tank’ and ‘Knowledge-cum-Resources Centre’ to
continuously study the sector and programmes in a dedicated and sustained
manner for providing inputs for policy formulation, programme development and
decision making by the Department and for guidance at the State level. NRC has
not been envisaged only as a monitoring centre. This NRC will also assist the
Department in monitoring the implementation of the water supply schemes. The
Department will continue to monitor the NRDWP through online IMIS, which is
continuously being improved from time to time based on inputs/suggestions
received from various quarters.”
80. When asked as to when Resource Centre/Mission at the State, the District &
Block level would be fully operationalised and whether the Ministry propose to monitor
these centres and missions, the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation in a note
submitted as under:—
“In all States State Level Mission have been set up. It is expected that by the end
of the current financial year, in most of the States, such Missions will also be filled
with required staff at State and district level.
The State Water & Sanitation Mission (SWSM) is the apex body headed by the
Chief Secretary/Additional Chief Secretary of the State with Secretaries of different
Departments as well as members from civil society. SWSMs have been created for
planning, guidance, supervision, coordination and monitoring in water supply
schemes. These SWSMs will be responsible for monitoring and as such there is
no proposal to monitor these monitoring bodies. The District Water & Sanitation
Mission (DWSM) is to ensure coordination and convergence at the district level
and ensure proper implementation, supervision, monitoring of the programme.
The Block Resource Centre (BRC) is basically a facilitating centre to help the local
community, Gram Panchayats and Village Water & Sanitation Committee (VWSCs)
in bridging the knowledge and information gaps and help them on a continuous
basis in shouldering the responsibility of drinking water supply and sanitation in

 25
their villages. It is expected that by 31st March, 2011, most of the BRCs will
become fully functional.
It is the SWSMs and DWSMs, which are expected to ensure that status of water
supply which inter alia includes implementation of water supply schemes, are
monitored and are also reported in the online IMIS of the Department. The
Department monitors the status through IMIS meetings, review visits, video
conferences etc. The reporting system and data inputs format have been
standardized. Within the Department, the responsibility of the States and UTs
have been divided among the limited number of 4 technical officers available in
the Department as ‘Area officers’ to review to status and report for taking
appropriate action. Every month, by the 17th day, they have been asked to put up
State-wise and activity-wise reports highlighting the shortcomings for further
action.”
(b) Submission of Reports to Government of India
81. The States were required to submit a large number of annual, quarterly and
monthly reports to GoI, covering such aspects as progress in clearance of schemes,
district-wise break-up of ARWSP and MNP provisions, status of functional/non-
functional schemes, quarterly and monthly progress reports, installation of drinking
water schemes in rural schools etc. However, audit scrutiny revealed that many States
were not submitting these returns in time.
82. In response to the aforesaid Audit findings, the Ministry stated that submission
of these reports have been made online from April 2008. Most of the States also
accepted delay/non-submission of reports and agreed to ensure their timely submission.
83. When enquired about the reliability of such reports from the States, the
Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation during the evidence
stated:—
“We start the presumption that most of the reports that come to us are duly sent
by the State Governments, signed by a senior officer. It is reliable. If there is any
discrepancy in between, then we have now evolved a system in which either we
send one of our officers to the field to verify it or we have started taking the use of
the National Monitors now. The National Monitors have been appointed by the
Ministry of Rural Development as a whole. So far they were basically working for
NREGA and PMGSY. For The first time we started using them for the Drinking
Water Supply Scheme. the third important information source that we have is that
when the Members of Parliament write to us regading some problems, we get a
comment from the State Government and in turn we communicate the State
Governments’s response to the Members of Parliament. This is a very good system
of verifying whether the States are reporting it properly or not.”
(c)  Inspection
84. As per ARWSP Guidelines, while the Government of India would take up
monitoring and evaluation studies from time to time, the State Governments may
also take up similar studies. However, audit scrutiny revealed that in 18 States

 26
(Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand), no
evaluation studies were carried out by the State Governments. Further, in 16 States
(Assam, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Orissa, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal), officers from the State Government Headquarters
did not visit the districts, blocks and villages for inspection, or no such records of
inspection were made available.
85. On being asked about the field inspection carried out since the inception of
this scheme, the Ministry in its written reply stated that Department officials do not
carry out inspection. They visit the States to participate in the meetings of the State
Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee (SLSSC), workshops, trainings, etc. The
‘inspection’ function is the assigned responsibility of the officers of the State
Government/Department/agencies responsible for rural water supply.
86. When asked about the number of people used for carrying out the inspection
of the projects/schemes in various States, the Secretary during evidence stated:
“We have just about 7-8 people. ....Each of them have been allocated 10-12 States;
they go to the field and do the inspections.”
87. Further, written clarification was given by the Ministry to the Committee which
stated as under:—
“There are currently 3 regular technical officers and 1 temporary Consultant in the
department, who have been given the responsibility as Area Officers. The Area
Officers nominated by the Department are members of the State Level Scheme
Sanctioning Committees, where they monitor the completion of Schemes and
provide technical advice on the sanctions under the NRDWP. While it is difficult
to fix the periodicity of visits of the Area Officers to each State, most of them can
cover each of their allotted States, at least once in 3 months.”
XI. Non-completion of  Works
88. Audit Scruitiny has revealed several cases of delayed completion and non-
completion of water quality projects/schemes such as Piped Water Supply Schemes
(PWSS), Water Supply Scheme (WSS) and Boring of Deep Tube Well (DTW), in
14 States viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Uttar
Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal.
89. The Committee wanted to know the extant State-wise status of the completion
of projects and also the constraints which hampered the timely completion of such
projects by the State Governments. The Ministry in a written note has intimated to the
Committee that State Government of Punjab has submitted that minor works pertaining
to these schemes have been completed and no further action is required in any of the

 27
districts for the scheme under consideration. Whereas the rest of the States where
projects are still ongoing have highlighted varied kind of bottlenecks and impediments
which thwarted timely completion of project. These are — Shortfall in State share
sector (Assam), dispute at site (Himachal Pradesh), meagre funding (Jammu & Kashmir),
non-availability of assured sources of safe water (Madhya Pradesh), acute law and
order problem (Manipur), delay by contractor/shortage of funds/delay in drawal of
Power line (Meghalaya), land ownership in private hands (Nagaland), theft of conductor
or damage of Transformers (Orissa), dispute over land (Uttar Pradesh) source dispute,
drying up of sources, natural calamities (Uttarakhand).
90. When asked about the steps taken to ensure that incomplete works are
completed and are functional, the Ministry in a note submitted that at the time of the
Annual Action Plan discussion in 2010, States were impressed upon to ensure that
completion of ongoing schemes is given priority. Further, for the purposes of assessing
the performance of States under NRDWP, Bharat Nirman and 20-point programme,
achievement is considered only after scheme has been completed, commissioned and
people have started getting water.
91. On this aspect, the Secretary, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation
during evidence stated as under:—
“We have developed 12-13 formats. This format will capture how many schemes
are pending for more than one or two or three years and whether money has
been allocated to them or not. Similary, this will capture how many schemes
have been transferred to Gram Panchayats and whether they have been given
the necessary support by way of electricity bill payment, maintenance charges,
capital expenditure etc. So, some of these things will automatically be captured
in these formats.”
92. About the systematic changes to ensure that the States complete the incomplete
works before taking up new works, the Ministry in a post evidence reply stated as
under:—
“During Annual Plan discussions, the status of schemes taken up are reviewed
and States are requested to take up new schemes based on the availability of
funds after giving priority to ongoing schemes. Further, while participating in the
State level Scheme Sanctioning Committee, Department’s representatives insists
on giving priority and releasing funds for the completion of ongoing schemes and
only thereafter for sanction of new schemes out of the residual funds. The following
provision has been made in the NRDWP Guidelines:—
Amount released under NRDWP cannot be utilized/adjusted against any cost
escalation of the schemes or excess expenditure over and above the approved
cost of the schemes in the previous years. “This is a good disincentive and would
help to ensure that the States do not delay ongoing works inordinately”.”

 28
93. Giving assurance in regard to the completion of the ongoing scheme, the
Secretary during evidence stated:—
“......in the Annual Action Plan, what we have told them (States) and also given in
writing is that, they must prioritise the incomplete piped water supply schemes
and those places where the quality is an issue and the quality affected villages
where piped water supply scheme from a distant surface source is the only solution.
These two will have to be prioritised.”
94. The Secretary, during evidence further stated:—
“I am pretty confident that in the next one to two years, the number of pending
incomplete schemes will come down. States will also be forced not to take up new
schemes as long as these schemes are pending. That will be ensured during our
meetings. Now, when my officers go for State sanctioning Committee, they also
make it a point to see what the pending schemes are and what money has been
allocated to those schemes. So, the States are getting into this habit of allocating
money for old schemes on priority and then take up the new schemes.”

 29
PART-II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Failure on the part of the Ministries/Departments in giving timely submission
of replies to the audit paragraphs of C&AG is an issue of serious concern to the
Public Accounts Committee. It is a reflection on the working of the Government of
India. The act of the Secretaries, who are also the chief accounting authority of the
respective Ministries/Departments, by not making timely response, tantamounts to
diluting authority of Parliament. This trend is definitely fraught with danger. The
Public Accounts Committee (2009-10) of the 15th Lok Sabha were perturbed in view
of the large number of pending audit paragraphs on which Remedial/Corrective
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) were not furnished by the Ministries/Departments. This
has resulted in constituting a Sub-committee to examine the issue. The Committee
took oral evidence of selective Ministries/Departments and total of 8 reports were
presented to Parliament on the subject. The Committee are agitated to note that even
after their intervention the overall picture in regard to the pending Remedial/
Corrective ATNs remains rather dismal.
2. As per information furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) 4191 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were pending as of 25th
June, 2010. The Audit also supplied a figure in this regard which stated that a total of
3462 Paragraphs were pending with all the Ministries as of 31st May, 2010. Having
observed the discrepancies of figures pertaining to pendency of cases, between the
Ministry and Audit, the Committee would therefore, like the two to reconcile the
figures and apprise the Committee of correct figures as on date.
3. While examining the subject “Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme”
the Committee note with distress that the Ministry had failed in furnishing ATNs
despite a lapse of 19 months from the presentation of the ARWSP Report to Parliament
on i.e. 19th December, 2008 and issuance of eight reminders by Audit on different
dates between April, 2009 and March, 2010. The final ATNs were sent to Audit in two
lots on 24.09.2010 and 15.10.2010 including ATNs from J&K and Uttarakhand. The
Committee deplore the stance taken by the Ministry that delay in furnishing final
Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes occurred because the Office of C&AG had
sent the Audit Report to a wrong address and thereafter kept on sending reminders,
which were according to the Ministry never received in the Department. According to
them as soon as the matter came to their notice they initiated quick action to collect
the information from all the States for submitting ATNs. Such a stand taken by the
Ministry is totally unacceptable to the Committee as all the Reports presented by the
Audit to the House are invariably uploaded on their website. It is a given fact that all
the Ministries are in constant touch with the field officers of the Audit when the Audit
Reports are being finalized in consonance with respective Ministries/Departments.
In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry ought to have kept track of the

 30
developments and not relied solely on the formal communication to be received from
the Audit. Moreover, the Report once placed on the Table of the House becomes a
public document of which Ministry should have taken immediate cognizance. The
Committee hope no Department of Government would ever take such an imprudent
and lame excuse of non-receipt of Audit Report.
4. The Committee also recommend that the issue of pendency of Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes be reviewed by the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) on a Monthly basis by the Secretary
to ensure that ATNs are collected from the States and are submitted within the
stipulated time-frame of four months. The Committee have also been given to
understand that the Ministry has established an Audit Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary with other members from the Finance and other wings to
deal with the cases of pendency and obviate delay in submitting ATNs. In light of this
initiative, the Committee recommend that the composition, procedure to be adopted
for obtaining ATNs from States and progress of the Committee be intimated to Public
Accounts Committee. The Committee further desire that if delay is anticipated in
submitting the Action Taken Notes, the Secretary of the Ministry/Department ought
to bring the matter to the notice of Cabinet Secretary and Minister-in-Charge and
apprise them of constraints and impediments in complying with the time period and
accordingly approach the Audit for seeking any genuine extension of time under
intimation to the Committee.
5. The Committee are constrained to note that several deficiencies have been
found in the implementation of Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme
(ARWSP). These pertain to the conduct of 2003 National Habitation Survey in the
States, anomalies in regard to Annual Action Plan (AAPs) of several States not having
been based on detailed and comprehensive habitation-wise analysis, instances of
deficient financial controls besides instances of inadmissible expenditure and
diversion of funds. Also, slip back of fully covered habitations and re-emergence of
problem habitations continued to be a recurring major problem. Further, the
Committee note that cases have also surfaced of inadequate infrastructure for testing
and monitoring water quality and periodic testing requirements, poor distribution
and utilisation of field testing kits at the Gram Panchayat/Village Water and Sanitation
Committee (VWSC) level; and lacunae have been noticed in taking measures for
ensuring sustainability of water resources especially ground water and depletion of
ground water which is evidently a major cause of vexation. These deficiencies have
been discussed in detail in the succeeding paragraphs for their urgent redressal.
6. Taking the issue subject-wise, the Public Accounts Committee take a serious
view upon the way the National Habitation Survey, 2003 was conducted. Inconsistencies
and discrepancies were noticed in the conduct of the Survey in Manipur and Haryana.
In Manipur, the Survey was conducted through an NGO and a report submitted to the
Government of India in December, 2003. However, due to inconsistencies in the Survey
Report, the State Government of Manipur was considering conducting another survey.
In Haryana, the Survey was conducted in 2005 but the Survey results could not be
finalized due to discrepancies between the figures with the State Government and

 31
Government of India. In Chhattisgarh (partly), Jharkhand and Orissa authenticity of
the Survey could not be verified due to lack of documentation. Detailed maps were not
prepared in 130 out of 154 test-checked districts in 22 States. When the Secretary,
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation was asked to explain about lack of
reliable data which is essential for proper planning for Rural Water Supply Scheme,
the Secretary stated that National Habitation Survey has become redundant as a
result of the Census 2011, since the Census 2011 will afresh determine the number
of villages which will come within its ambit. The Committee are not convinced with
the reply of the Ministry and would emphasize that Ministry cannot absolve itself of
its original responsibility of monitoring and surveillance of the Survey. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that they be apprised of the methodology to be adopted for new
census and progress made till date within three months of the presentation of this
Report to the Parliament. The Committee also recommend that such census should
be completed in a time bound manner so that ARWSP is implemented effectively.
7. The preparation of the Annual Action Plan (AAP) is also of great concern to
the Committee. It has been revealed that Annual Action Plan which is the mainstay in
making any project successful or otherwise has been neglected thoroughly by the
various State Governments. The Committee note with concern that two States: Jammu
& Kashmir and Jharkhand have not prepared the AAPs during the period 2002-03 to
2007-08, while 7 States had not submitted their AAPs to the Department of Drinking
Water Supplies, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, though the
same had been prepared. In 15 States, the AAPs lacked habitation-wise details.
Similarly, in 9 States, AAPs did not indicate the shelf of the schemes. And in
11 States, the AAPs did not indicate activities to be taken under submission of water
quality and sustainability. The ARWSP guidelines require that States/UTs should
earmark and utilize at least 25% and 10% of ARWSP funds for drinking water
supply to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively.  However, the Committee
note with deep anguish that a number of States are not following the said guidelines
in letter and spirit. The Committee, therefore, desire that details of coverage of SC,
ST population should be a part of the AAPs. The State Governments came out with a
number of excuses for not preparing their AAPs. The Committee are of the view that
success rate of the implementation of ARWSP is very much dependent upon preparing
of the AAPs and the Committee stress that each State should invariably prepare their
AAPs. The Ministry has informed the Committee that it has taken up the work of
preparing AAPs of the States with a lot of seriousness and States have also been
asked to prepare detailed district-wise AAPs for which formats have been provided.
The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry should issue the instructions
to the States to prepare and submit the AAP habitation-wise within three months. The
Committee recommend to the Ministry that such instructions should not be merely
on paper but bring tangible results. If need be, the Ministry should make suitable
amendments in the ARWSP guidelines to make submission of AAPs in a time-bound
manner so that the benefits of the schemes percolate to the grassroots.
8. The Committee are distressed to note that the cases of diversion of funds to the
tune of Rs. 404 crore have taken place in 12 States viz. Assam, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya,

 32
Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal. In this regard, the Committee
have been informed that a majority of this is by way of Centage Charges which the
States have charged out of Rs. 400 crore. The Committee have also learnt that if any
case of inadmissible expenditure or diversion of funds is pointed out, the same is
deducted from second instalment due for such States. As per the existing system
proposals for release of second instalment has to reach the Department by
31st December of the year. A cut of 10, 20 & 30 per cent respectively is imposed, if the
proposal is received late i.e. in January, February or March.
The Committee are appalled to find that the problem of diversion of funds has not
been addressed in the right earnest by the Ministry. The Committee understand that
the Centage Charges have completely been stopped from 1.4.2009. What can be more
disturbing than the fact that eight months have elapsed since the Committee took oral
evidence on the subject and the latest position on the recovery of funds by the two
erring States i.e. Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra have not been intimated to the
Committee. They, therefore demand that the latest position be intimated to the
Committee forthwith and diverted funds be recouped within six months of the
presentation of the Report to Parliament. They would also like to have the details of
those erring States who had to undergo the percentage cuts on accounts of late
submission of proposals, recorded excessive opening balances and slow utilization of
funds. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry devise a strong Monitoring
Mechanism in consultation with Chief Secretaries of States so that proposals are
invariably received in time. Timely receiving of the proposal would in turn result into
timely execution of the Scheme which is very vital for providing safe drinking water
in the rural habitat of India. Towards this end, the Committee would urge the Ministry
of Rural Development (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) to take up the
matter with all concerned Ministries/Departments/Authorities/Boards to make
pollution of drinking water sources an offence and to bring punitive legislation. The
Committee also desire the Ministry to make all out efforts to get draft legislation
prepared on the same within the next 6 months.
9. Slip-backs and re-emergence of problem habitations is another issue which
drew the attention of the Committee. The reasons tendered by various State
Governments for this phenomenon were excessive drawal of ground water, inadequate
and non-maintenance of tube-wells, lack of sustainability of water resources and
increase in population. The Ministry’s stand that it had not been able to follow-up the
matter with the States does not help since it is foremost duty of the State to make
available adequate drinking water to the people while conserving precious water
resources. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry evolve mechanism
within a time frame whereby precise data with regard to the slip-back habitations
could be obtained. The Committee should be intimated about the new mechanism
evolved. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should impress
upon the States that they must ensure that habitation does not slip-back further and
a quarterly report of the progress in this regard should be sent to the Department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation.
10. Success of the ARWSP depends on the quality of water being supplied to the
beneficiaries. The Committee’s examination of the subject has revealed that

 33
establishing of water quality laboratories hitherto was not a mandatory component of
the ARWSP. Audit has suggested that water quality laboratories may be implemented
at three levels, consisting of a nodal unit at the top level, intermediary  level units like
district laboratories and grass-root level units. They also stated that State and region-
specific Information Education and Communication (IEC) activities were to be taken
up. In the Scheme of things, 100 per cent funding was to be provided to the States for
strengthening water quality monitoring facilities with a view to networking the nodal
unit (premier technical institution) with the State headquaters Public Health
Engineering Department (PHED). In the Scheme of things, it is apparent to the
Committee that the Ministry may provide funding to this effect if sought by the States.
The Committee are distressed to observe that 10 States viz. Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Meghalaya,
Orissa and Uttar Pradesh had not assigned the task of checking water quality at the
state level to premier institutes. States did not take up region-specific IEC activities
involving Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) cooperatives, women groups, Self-help
groups etc. In States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh, no qualified staff was appointed in the
laboratories. In Bihar, 2 out of 9 test checked districts did not have a laboratory. In
Gujarat, 25 districts did not have laboratories.  In Jammu & Kashmir, out of a total of
14 districts, only four districts had laboratories, of which one was not functional. In
Manipur, there were no laboratories in the  Districts. In Nagaland, only one out of
11 District laboratories were functional. In Orissa, out of 30 district level laboratories
only 15 were made operational in 2006-07. The Committee note with deep concern
the Ministry’s view that the exact information regarding staff strength at specific
laboratories is available only with the States. While the issue of manpower at the
State level laboratories is comparatively better, the issue of technical manpower
remains a matter of concern. According to the Ministry, the States have been urged to
ensure that adequate trained manpower is available at these laboratories. Taking a
serious view of these lapses in so many States, the Committee strongly recommend
that the component of water quality testing through laboratories should be made a
mandatory provision in the ARWSP Guidelines. They also desire that all States
should assess the technical staff requirements and Ministry should impress upon
the States to fulfil the vacancies so that the Scheme could be implemented in an
effective manner and Quality Water is available to the users. The Ministry should
also periodically monitor the augmentation of water testing in States through field
visits or otherwise and ensure that these laboratories are functional at all times.
11. The Committee find that ARWSP Guidelines stipulate testing of 10 per cent of
all samples tested, including all positive tested samples by the district water quality
testing laboratories, at the State level. Further, District laboratories/Public Health
Engineering Department (PHED) were to test at least 30 per cent of water samples
tested by Gram Panchayats (GPs), and all cases where possibility of contamination was
reported by the community. All water sources were required to be tested at least once a
year initially. Examination of data revealed that the State Governments were not at all
serious with the issue of testing the quality of water. The Committee feel that in the
absence of periodic test check, it is extremely difficult to locate the areas affected with
bacteriological or chemical contamination. The Ministry has informed the Committee

 34
that it has been repeatedly requesting the States to arrange testing of all drinking
water sources at least once in a year for chemical contamination and twice a year for
bacteriological contamination in rural drinking water sources. The Committee note
that for the first time in the Annual Action Plan 2010-11 States have been given
targets for testing of samples. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should
pay more emphasis on water testing aspect and should increase the frequency of
monitoring the quality of water. To begin with, the Ministry should instruct the States
to test all drinking water sources at least twice a year and for chemical contamination
at least four times in a year i.e. every quarterly. They also desire that the information
so obtained should be put on the public domain at District, Block and Village level
through print and visual media so that no individual is affected due to contamination
in drinking water. The Committee are happy to learn that Ministry is planning to
enhance financial support to States from meagre 5 per cent to 9-10 per cent for
establishment of laboratories to conduct test of drinking water sources. In this regard,
the Committee feel that paucity of budget should not stand as a barrier in test-checks
for quality water and they expect the Ministry to pursue this aspect vigorously so that
the same is approved expeditiously by the Government of India. The Committee would
like to be intimated of the final decision taken in this regard within six months.
12. With a view to encourage drinking of safe water, the ARWSP envisages
building capacity of Panchayats to own the Field Test Kits (FTKs) and take up full
Operation & Maintenance (O&M) responsibility for water quality monitoring of all
drinking water sources in their respective Panchayati Raj Institution (PRI) area.
The Committee also understand that 100 per cent testing of all sources at the Village
level was to be done by grass root level workers from Gram Panchayat (GP)/Village
Water and Sanitation Committee (VWSC). However, in reality a dark picture emerges.
In certain States, FTKs were not received, whereas in some States only a handful of
Districts received the FTKs. The Committee recommend promoting household based &
Community based terracotta filters for tackling iron and bacteriological contamination.
The FTKs serve as powerful tool to supplement water quality treatment facilities.
The Committee are astonished to note the admission of the Ministry that although the
FTKs had been given by the States yet they were not passed on to the Gram Panchayats.
Five individuals who were supposed to be trained like teachers for others were not
themselves properly trained. The Committee have been intimated that the State
Secretaries have been directed to identify the individuals in  particular Gram Panchayat
who possess such kits. However, in its post evidence reply the Ministry has informed
that under Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Programme, provisions have
been made for States to provide one Field Test Kit to each Gram Panchayat. Further,
in the Annual Action Plan 2010-11 States have indicated targets for provisions of
FTKs and for training of grass root workers. As reported by States, so far against the
Cumulative target to train 12 lakh grass root level workers at the GP level, only
8.55 lakh have been trained. Against the target to provide Field Test Kits to 2.45 lakh
GPs, 2.47 lakh chemical FTKs and 424.33 lakh bacteriological kits are reported to
be procured/distributed.
However, the figures supplied by the Ministry to the Committee in regard to
supply of FTKs, Training etc. are in stark contradiction with the findings of the Audit.

 35
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should once again supply to
the Committee the genuine and verifiable data pertaining to the procurement and
distribution of FTKs. Such data should clearly bring out the achievements against
the target as well. The Ministry should also fix future targets for procurement and
distribution of FTKs and apprise the Committee of the time line by which all Gram
Panchayats will be equipped with FTKs. The Committee recommend that workers at
the grass root level at GPs be adequately trained by experts in the shortest possible
period so as to achieve the sole objective of providing safe potable water in each rural
habitat.
13. The Committee note that plans are in place for engaging experts for monitoring
and evaluating the quality of drinking water in rural areas. During examination, the
Committee were given to understand that such technical manpower would be in place
by the end of the financial year 2010-11. In this regard, the Committee would like to
have details of the developments which took place at the time of oral evidence of the
subject i.e. 16.8.2011 till the date of presentation of this Report. It is also disconcerting
to note that the financial year which was mentioned by the Ministry is already over but
no intimation has been given to the Committee whether the experts have already been
engaged or not along with reasons for delay, if any. They accordingly recommend that
complete details in this regard may be furnished to the Committee.
14. As per ARWSP Guidelines both the Government of India as well as State
Governments would take up monitoring and evaluation studies of representative water
sample from time to time. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that the
officials of the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation do not carry out field
inspection of the projects/schemes. The officials of Ministry only visit the States to
participate in the meetings of the States Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee
(SLSSC) workshops, trainings etc. The evaluation and monitoring studies are
assigned to the officers of the State Governments for rural water supply. The Committee
note with concern that the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has
7-8 officers and each of them have been allocated 10-12 States to do the field
inspections. The Committee can well comprehend the quantum of work these handful
of officers can handle. Shortage of staff is a matter of concern for the Committee.
These handful of officers have not only to undertake field visits but also participate in
SLSSC workshop. It also goes to show that how much importance the Ministry gives
to monitoring and evaluation studies. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
staff strength be augmented adequately to ensure effective monitoring and evaluation
of water samples from time to time.
15. Slow rate of completion of projects for achieving better water quality is
another matter of serious concern for the Committee. In nearly 14 States, relevant
projects/schemes were found to be incomplete. The Committee have been informed by
the Ministry in this regard that States have been impressed upon to ensure that
pending projects are completed on priority basis and take up new schemes only after
completing the ongoing schemes. Consequently in the next one to two years, the
number of pending incomplete schemes will gradually come down. The Ministry
further informed that it has developed 12-13 formats to identify incomplete schemes.

 36
However, the Committee desire to be apprised of the exact status and progress in this
regard, including details such as how many projects have been completed/what are
the cost/time overrun/target dates of incomplete projects etc. mainly after the
introduction of the said formats within six months of the presentation of this Report.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that being a funding agency, it is incumbent
upon the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking Water and
Sanitation) to monitor and ensure timely completion of projects without time overrun
as the delayed completion of project would jeopardize the very objective of the
programme.
16. The Ministry has informed the Committee that in order to check inordinate
delay in ongoing works provision has been made in the NRDWP Guidelines, whereby
amount released cannot be utilized/adjusted against any cost escalation of the schemes
or excess expenditure over and above the approved cost of the schemes in the previous
years. Taking note of the provision made, the Committee recommend that in case of
delay in completion of a project beyond the approved time limit, the cost overrun, if
any, be borne by the respective State Governments. The Ministry needs to ensure the
focus of every measure taken by it remains to serve the rural population/masses
which had hitherto been deprived of their basic right of safe drinking water.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
2 August, 2011 Chairman,
11 Sravana, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

 37
ABBREVIATIONS
AAP Annual Action Plan
APFMGS Andhra Pradesh Farmers Managed Ground Water System
ARWSP Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme
BRC Block Resources Centre
CAP99 Comprehensive Action Plan 1999
CCDU Communication and Capacity Development Unit
CGWB Central Ground Water Board
FTK Field Test Kits
DDP Drought Development Programme
DDWS Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation
DTW Deep Tube Wells
DWSC District Water and Sanitation Committee
DWSM District Water and Sanitation Mission
FC Fully Covered
GoI Government of India
G P Gram Panchayat
HGM Hydro Geo Morphological
HRD Human Resource Development
IEC Information, Education and Communication
IMIS Integrated Management of Information System
LPCD Litres per Capita per day
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
MIU Monitoring and Investigation Unit
NRC National Resources Centre
NC Not Covered
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre
NSMC National Swajaldhara Monitoring Committee

 38
NSS No Safe Source
NTU Nephelometric Turbidity Units
O&M Operation and Maintenance
PC Partially Covered
PHED Public Health Engineering Department
PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
PRIs Panchayati Raj Institutions
PWSS Piped Water Supply Scheme
RGNDWM Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission
RWSS Rural Water Supply Scheme
SMIU Special Monitoring and Investigation Unit
SWSM State Water and Sanitation Mission
VMC Vigilance and Monitoring Committee
VWSC Vil lage Water and Sanitation Committee
WSS Water Supply Scheme
WSSS W ater Supply Sanitation Scheme

 39
Appendix-I
State-wise details of the Financial progress reported by the
States for the year 2009-10
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. State/UT M onth Opening Balance Allocation Release Total Exp. Reported %age
No. Code as on 1.4.2009 Availability by State/UT Expen.
1 2 3456789
1. Andhra Pradesh 03 0.00 43709.00 53736.50 53736.50 38978.90 72.54
2. Arunachal Pradesh 03 2746.61 18000.00 17820.00 20566.61 19891.00 96.72
3. Assam 0 3 0.00 30160.00 32350.29 32350.29 24177.10 74.74
  4. Bihar 03 67144.70 37221.00 18610.50 85755.20 28487.20 33.22
 5. Chhattisgarh 03 2759.29 11601.00 12822.21 15581.50 10406.50 66.79
  6. Goa 03 0.00 564.00 332.00 332.00 50.00 15.06
  7. Gujarat 03 8673.32 48275.00 48275.00 56948.32 48437.80 85.06
  8. Haryana 03 0.00 20789.00 20689.00 20689.00 13235.10 63.97
  9. Himachal Pradesh 03 1.93 13852.00 18285.31 18287.24 14450.20 79.02
10. J & K 03 23790.81 44774.00 40251.00 64041.81 38348.70 59.88
11. Jharkhand 03 6148.35 14929.00 11134.28 17282.63 8604.20 49.79
12. Karnataka 03 3205.32 57367.00 62786.00 65991.32 47371.10 71.78
13. Kerala 03 119.46 15277.00 15189.31 15308.77 15099.40 98.63
14. Madhya Pradesh 03 3350.42 36766.00 37966.00 41316.42 34702.60 83.99
15. Maharashtra 0 3 19225.94 65243.00 64780.80 84006.74 61856.20 73.63

 40
16. Manipur 01 2668.91 6160.00 3857.39 6526.30 3218.50 49.32
17. Meghalaya 03 18.37 7040.00 7940.00 7958.37 6857.20 86.16
18. Mizoram 03 1743.27 5040.00 5526.02 7269.29 5131.10 70.59
19. Nagaland 03 2960.87 5200.00 4706.39 7667.26 7657.30 99.87
20. Orissa 03 2556.04 18713.00 22665.87 25221.91 19886.60 78.85
21. Punjab 03 654.23 8117.00 8880.70 9534.93 9534.93 100.00
22. Rajasthan 03 387.92 103646.00 101216.00 101603.92 68000.00 66.93
23. Sikkim 03 1033.23 2160.00 2060.00 3093.23 3057.50 98.84
24. Tamil Nadu 03 5723.85 32043.00 31795.07 37518.92 36420.70 97.07
25. Tripura 03 1785.10 6240.00 7740.00 9525.10 7651.40 80.33
26. Uttar Pradesh 03 17370.57 95912.00 95636.23 1130 06.80 97413.50 86.20
27. Uttrakhand 03 3705.74 12616.00 12489.84 16195.58 6382.60 39.41
28. West Bengal 03 2094.30 37229.00 39430.29 41524.59 39076.10 94.10
29. A&N Islands 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
30. D&N Haveli 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
31. Daman & Diu 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
32. Delhi 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
33. Lakshadweep 0 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
34. Puducherry 03 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Total 179868.55 798 643.00 798972.00 978840.55 714383.43 72.98
1 2 3456789

 41
APPENDIX-II
MINUTES OF THE  SECOND  SITTING  OF  SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF  THE  PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11) ON “NON-COMPLIANCE BY
THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED
PARAGRAPHS OF THE C&AG OF INDIA HELD
ON 16TH AUGUST, 2010
The Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Monday, the 16th
August, 2010 from 1600 hrs. to 1720 hrs. in Committee Room No. ‘D’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit (ESM)
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking
Water and Sanitation)
1. Shri Arun Kumar Misra — Secretary (DWS)
2. Shri T.M. Vijay Bhaskar — Joint Secretary (DWS)
3. Shri Bharat Lal — Director (DWS)
4. Shri Sujoy Majumdar — Director (WQ&C)
2. At the outset, an internal meeting of Sub-Committee-I was held to consider
C&AG Letter No. 626/109-Rep(C)/2010 dated 16th August, 2010 suggesting thereby
three topics on the Ministry of Defence, out of which one was to be selected for
substituting PA 4 of 2008 Performance Audit Defence Services-Army and Ordnance
Factories which was selected earlier by the Sub-Committee-I at their first sitting held
on 4th August, 2010. After some deliberations Hon’ble Convenor decided to examine
para 6.3 titled ‘Abnormal delay in execution of Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda’ of
Audit Report No. CA 4 of 2008. The Members concurred with the decision of the
Convenor.

 42
3. Hon’ble Convenor, Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts Committee, then
welcomed the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the
Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the Secretariat briefed the
Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on “Non-compliance by
the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the
Non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India”.
4. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened
for taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) on the subject relating to
“Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the Non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India”. The Convenor also
informed the Members that the meeting will proceed with a discussion on Audit Report
No. 12 of 2008 (Civil Performance Audit) on “Accelerated Rural Water Supply
Programme (ARWSP)”.
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) were called in and the Convenor
welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The representatives then, briefed
the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry in timely submission of
replies to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG. They also, inter-alia, threw light on the
current status of pending paras in their Ministry and hindrances faced by the Ministry
in replying to the pending Audit Paragraphs. The representatives also elaborated on
the various issues and concerns raised by the Sub-Committee.
6. During the course of deliberations with the representatives of Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) some points emerged
which needed clarifications. The Convenor desired that the requisite information in
the form of second set of Background Note be obtained from the Department by the
third week of September, 2010. The meeting remained inconclusive and the
Sub-Committee decided to meet again on 4th of October, 2010 to continue with the oral
evidence of the representative of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of
Drinking Water and Sanitation).
7. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) for appearing before the
Sub-Committee and for furnishing information in connection with the examination of
the subject. The Convenor also thanked the C&AG of India for providing assistance
to the Sub-Committee in the examination of the subject.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

 43
APPENDIX-III
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11) ON “NON-COMPLIANCE BY THE
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION
TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED PARAGRAPHS OF THE
C&AG OF INDIA” HELD ON 30TH NOVEMBER, 2010
The Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday, the
30th November, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1625 hrs. in Room No. 63, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar  — Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
Secretariat
1. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1.  Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit (ESM)
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking
Water and Sanitation)
1. Shri Arun Kumar Misra — Secretary (DWS)
2. Shri T.M. Vijay Bhaskar — Joint Secretary (DWS)
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Convenor, Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts
Committee, welcomed the Members and representatives of the Office of the C&AG of
India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
“Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the Non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India”.
3. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened
for taking further oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) on the subject relating to
“Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the Non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India”. The Convenor also
informed the Members that the meeting will proceed with a discussion on Audit Report
No. 12 of 2008 (Civil Performance Audit) on “Accelerated Rural Water Supply
Programme (ARWSP)” alongwith the written replies furnished by the Ministry after
the first evidence held on 16.8.2010.

 44
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) were called in and the Convenor
welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The representatives first, briefed
the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry in timely submission of
replies to the Audit paragraphs of C&AG. They also, inter alia, threw light on the
current status of pending paras in their Ministry and difficulties faced by the Ministry
in replying to the pending Audit Paragraphs within the stipulated time frame. The
representatives also elaborated on the various issues and concerns raised by the Sub-
Committee during the sitting.
5. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) for appearing before the
Sub-Committee and for furnishing information in connection with the examination of
the subject. The Convenor also thanked the officers of the office of the C&AG of India
for providing assistance to the Sub-Committee in the examination of the Subject.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.
————

 45
APPENDIX IV
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12) HELD ON 28TH JUNE, 2011
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 28th June, 2011 from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in
Room No. ‘53’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Adhi Sankar
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
16. Shri Naresh Gujral
17. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
18. Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan
19. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1.  Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4.  Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
5.  Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
6. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Under Secretary

 46
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri R.S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit (Central
Expenditure)
2. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence Service)
3. Ms. Geetali Taare — Pr. Director of Audit (Scientific Department)
4. Shri Bhawani Shankar — Pr. Director (Economic Service and
Ministries)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised
that the sitting was convened to consider the Draft Reports of the Committee. Thereafter,
the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) Draft Report on ‘Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)’
based on C&AG Report No. PA 12 of 2008;
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** ***
3. After detailed deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports, one by
one with some modifications/amendments and authorized the Chairman to finalise and
present the same to the Parliament in the light of factual Certification done by Audit.
4. While adopting the draft Report on ‘Accelerated Rural Water Supply
Programme (ARWSP)’, some Members opined that a D.O. letter should be addressed
to the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation)
highlighting the discrepancies and inadequacies in conducting the National Habitation
Survey, 2003 and its subsequent results with regard to the implementation of
‘Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)’. Similarly in respect of draft
Report on ‘Non Lapsable Central Pool of Resources Scheme’ some Members desired
that a D.O. Letter should be addressed to the Ministry of Development of
North Eastern Region drawing their attention to poor/non-implementation of various
schemes in the North Eastern Region and the need for setting up of a monitoring
committee to oversee the proper implementation of various schemes/projects in the
region. The Committee concurred with the views of the Members.
5 . *** *** *** ***
6 . *** *** *** ***
7 . *** *** *** ***
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*** Part not related with this report.