55
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL
AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT LOCAL AREA
DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30 March, 2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 March, 2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
March, 2012/Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)

PAC No. 1970
Price:  ` 70.00
© 2012  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012)  . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PAC (2011-2012)  . . . . . . . . . . (v)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (vii)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
II. Budget Estimates and Expenditure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
III. Pattern of Funds Utilization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
IV . Incorrect Reporting of Financial Progress  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
V. Deficient V erification of Monthly Progress Reports  . . . . . . . . 7
VI. Distribution of Funds of ex-MPs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
VII. Diversion of Funds  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
VIII. Refund of Unspent Balances  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
IX. Contingency Expenses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
X. Annual Accounts and Utilization Certificates  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
XI. Doubtful Expenditure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
XII. Recommendation of works  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
XIII. Execution of works without the Recommendation of MPs  . . . 15
XIV . Selection of Prohibited works  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
X V . Execution of works for the Societies/Trusts  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
XVI. Status of works completed  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
XVII. Sanction of works  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
XVIII. Award of works  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
XIX. Execution of works without Administrative Approval and
Sanction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
XX. Delay in Execution of works  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
XXI. Sub-standard works  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
XXII. Identification of the Implementing Agency  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
XXIII. Non-maintenance of works Register and Assets Register  . . . . 29

XXIV .Handing over of Assets to the User Agency/Non-use of
Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 0
XXV . Maintenance and Upkeep of Assets  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
XXVI. Inspection of works  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
XXVII. Monthly Progress Reports  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
XXVIII. Uploading of data on Website, Ineffective Monitoring
Software  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
XXIX. Monitoring Committee Meetings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
XXX. Inadequate coverage of areas inhabited by the SC/ST
community  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
XXXI. Internal Audit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
XXXII. Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
PART II
Observations/Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the  First sitting of the Sub-Committee-I of PAC
held on 03.10.2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
II. Minutes of  the Second sitting of the Sub-Committee-I of
PAC held on 24.10.2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
III. Minutes of  the Third sitting of the Sub-Committee-I  of
PAC held on 30.01.2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
I V . Minutes of  the Fourth sitting of the Sub-Committee-I  of
PAC held on 07.03.2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
V. Minutes of  the Nineteenth sitting of  PAC held on
22.03.2012  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
(ii)
PAGE

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Yadav — Committee Officer
* Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
(iii)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  SUB-COMMITTEE-I  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2011-12)
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab—Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Adhi Sankar
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Naresh Gujral
5. Shri Prakash Javadekar
6. Shri Satish  Chandra Misra
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Fifty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Member of
Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS)’ based on C&AG Report
No. 31 of  2010-11 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil) for the year ended
March, 2009 related to the Ministry of Statistics and Programme  Implementation.
2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
was laid on the Table of the House on 18 March, 2011.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. A Sub-Committee was specially constituted for the purpose.
The Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation on the subject at their sittings held on 03.10.2011 and
24.11.2011. The Sub-Committee held a meeting on 30.01.2012 to finalise the line of
Recommendations. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee considered and adopted the Draft
Report at their sitting held on 07.03.2012 . The Draft Report was then placed before the
main Committee which considered it at their sitting held on 22.03.2012 wherein it was
decided that subject to the incorporation of the views expressed by the Members,
suitably in the Draft Report and after being shown to them on a later date, the Draft
Report on ‘MPLADS’ would be deemed to be approved by the Committee. Accordingly,
the suggestions of the Members were appropriately incorporated in the Draft Report
and shown to the Members on 28.03.2012 in the presence of the Chairman, PAC. The
Minutes of the sittings are appended to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part II of
the Report.
5. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for taking oral evidence of the Ministry
and obtaining information on the subject as well as for finalising and placing the Draft
Report before the main Committee.
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Statistics  and Programme Implementation for tendering evidence
before them and Sub-Committee and furnishing information that the Committee desired
in connection with the examination of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
(vii)

8. The Committee feel that Scheme can be very fruitful by focussing on creation of
infrastructures like School Building, Library, Community Hall etc. which have greater
outreach and long term sustainable benefits for the people living in small localities/
pockets.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 March, 2012 Chairman,
8 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(viii)

PART  I
REPORT
I. Introductory
The Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) was
introduced on 23 December 1993 to enable Members of Parliament (MPs) to identify
small works of capital nature to meet local needs in their constituencies. The MPLADS
is a Plan Scheme fully funded by the Government of India and the funds released under
the scheme are non-lapsable. The Scheme provides that a Member of Lok Sabha may
select works for implementation in his/her constituency while a Member of Rajya  Sabha
may select works for implementation in one or more districts of his/her choice in the
State from which he/she has been elected. Since 1998-99, Rs. 2.00 crore (now Rs. 5.00
crore) per annum is being allotted to each MP. Between 2004-05 and 2008-09,
Rs. 7245.95 crore had been released and Rs. 9836.53 crore was available with various
District Authorities (which included opening balance of Rs. 2404.26 crore as of 01 April
2004 and interest of Rs. 186.32 crore accrued on unspent balances during the period
(2004-09). Against this, an expenditure of Rs. 8048.53 crore had been incurred leaving
an unspent balance of Rs.1788.00 crore as on 31 March 2009.
2. The Scheme is administered by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, which is responsible for policy formulation, release and funds and
also for prescribing a monitoring mechanism for its implementation. At the State level,
a Department is designated as the Nodal Department with the overall responsibility for
supervision, monitoring and coordination of MPLADS implementation with the districts
and other line Departments. Decision-making powers in regard to technical, financial
and administrative sanctions to be accorded under the Scheme vest in the district level
functionaries, viz. the District Authorities (DAs).
3. The Scheme was earlier reviewed by the C&AG in 1998 and in 2001 and Audit
Reports on MPLADS were laid in the Parliament wherein various weaknesses and
lapses in the implementation of the Scheme were pointed out. The Ministry in their
A TN submitted after a lapse of eleven and eight years respectively i.e. in 2009 Stated
that most of the State Governments had reportedly been making efforts to achieve
timely completion of work in future. The current Performance Audit was conducted by
the C&AG between April 2009 and December 2009 through test check of records of the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, State Nodal Departments, the
District Authorities and the Implementing Agencies (IA) covering the period from
2004-05 to 2008-09. The comments of the Audit are contained in their Report No. 31 of
2010-11 for the year ended March 2009. Some of their important observations are as
follows:
(i) The Scheme design did not ensure participation of various constituents in an
MP's constituency such as active resident forums, local bodies, NGOs etc., in
determining works responsive to locally felt needs.

2
(ii) There were weaknesses in the process of sanction of works. In the sampled
districts of eight States, DAs executed 800 works costing Rs. 9.45 crore with-
out receiving any recommendations from the MPs concerned. In three States,
DAs executed 150 works costing Rs. 2.44 crore on the recommendation of the
representatives of the MPs rather than the MPs themselves. In seven
States, 10 DAs sanctioned 260 works whose cost exceeded by Rs. 2.49 crore
vis-a-vis the cost indicated by the MP concerned.
(iii) The Scheme Guidelines prohibited the execution of certain types of work
such as construction of office and residential buildings of Government
Departments and Cooperative Societies, all works benefiting commercial
organizations, an individual or a family, works within the premises of religious
institutions, all works of renovation, repair and maintenance. Y et, in 100
sampled districts of 29 States/UTs, expenditure of Rs. 73.76 crore was
incurred on 2340 such works during 2004-09.
(iv) In 10 States, Rs. 14.40 crore was sanctioned for works pertaining to 34 trusts/
societies, which exceeded the ceiling of Rs. 25 lakh per trust/society fixed
under the Scheme by Rs. 5.90 crore. In seven States, DAs sanctioned
Rs. 5.94 crore to 145 Trusts/Societies, which were either ineligible as per the
Scheme Guidelines or whose eligibility had not been verified by the DAs.
(v) The District Authority, after verifying the eligibility and technical feasibility
of each recommended work, was to get the works technically approved. There
were several instances of delays in sanctioning works as well as sanctioning
works without adhering to stipulated scheme procedures.
(vi) MPs had been assigned no role in the selection of implementing agencies
(IAs) as per the guidelines. Yet, in nine States/UTs, the MPs had
recommended the names of IAs along with their recommendations and/or
recommended the release of funds directly to the user agency for execution
of 8,746 works.
(vii) Basic internal control records such as asset registers, works registers etc.
underpinning accountability structures within the Scheme were missing in a
number of instances with 90 per cent of the audited DAs not maintaining
asset/works registers.
(viii) In five States/UTs, 17 works completed at a cost of Rs. 1.47 crore had not
been put to intended use and in six districts of five States, 10 assets created
at a cost of Rs. 1.48 crore were not being utilized for the purpose for which
these were sanctioned.
(ix) While many IAs did not furnish Utilization Certificates (UCs) to the DAs,
12 DAs of six States depicted the entire advance release to IAs as utilized in
their UCs, thus inflating the figures of expenditure. The Ministry had not
been closely monitoring the receipt of UCs and routinely relaxing the
condition that required the submission of UCs and Audit Certificates by the
DAs, before allowing the release of the second instalment of funds.

3
(x) Audit noticed cases that included diversion of funds, release of advances to
Implementing Agencies in excess of the prescribed limit, non-refund of
unspent balances by Implementing Agencies.
(xi) The Ministry could not ensure proper and timely receipt of Monthly Progress
Reports (MPRs), which were required to be used for strategic planning and to
prepare the details of fund release and expenditure. About 58 per cent of the
MPRs available with the Ministry were more than two months old.
(xii) The Scheme Guidelines stipulated e-monitoring, using the MPLADS' web
portal. However, as of 31 March 2009, details of only 43 per cent of completed
works were uploaded on the website of MPLADS by the DAs. This database,
too, was characterized by a number of omissions and errors rendering it
unreliable.
(xiii) At the State level, the Monitoring Committee to review the progress in
MPLADS had not been constituted in three States/UTs. In 14 States/UTs,
where committees were constituted, they never met. In the remaining 18 States/
UTs, the MC did not meet annually.
(xiv) While the DAs were required to inspect at least 10 per cent of the sanctioned
works, 86 DAs of 23 States/UTs that were audited had not inspected any
work during the period from 2004-05 to 2008-09.
4. Against the above backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) selected
the subject for detailed examination and report. A Sub-Committee under the
convenorship of Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, MP and a Member of the PAC was
constituted to go deep into the matter. In the process of examination of the subject, the
Sub-Committee obtained background material and detailed written reply from the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation. They also took oral evidences
of the representatives of the Ministry on two occasions and obtained post evidence
replies. Based on the written and oral depositions by the Ministry, the Sub-Committee
examined the implementation of the MPLAD Scheme in detail and discussed some
very important issues as enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.
II. Budget Estimates and Actual Expenditure
5. Under the MPLAD Scheme, the Government of India released Rs. 19,425.75 crore
from 1993-94 to 2008-09. Against the total fund of Rs. 19,845.91 crore available with
DAs (including Rs. 420.16 crore accrued as interest), an expenditure of Rs. 18,057.91
(91 per cent) was incurred cumulatively in all these years. The details of the budget
allocations, funds released, inspent balances of previous year available with the District
Authorities, interest earned on unspent balances, total funds available with the

4
DAs and expenditure incurred during each of the five years' period (2004-05 to
2008-09) are as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Y ear Budget Funds Unspent Interest T otal Exenditure
estimates released balance earned funds incurred
of on available during the
previous unspent with the year
year balance DAs
available
with DAs
2004-05 1,580.00 1,310.00 2,404.26 42.35 3,756.61 1,909.11
2005-06 1,580.00 1,433.90 1,847.50 34.29 3,315.69 1,382.63
2006-07 1,580.00 1,451.50 1,933.06 31.57 3,416.13 1,278.71
2007-08 1,580.00 1,470.55 2,137.42 35.12 3,643.09 1,506.45
2008-09 1,580.00 1,580.00 2,136.64 42.99 3,759.63 1,971.63
6. As would be seen from the above table, the expenditure incurred during the years
2004-05 to 2008-09 was even less than the opening balance and interest earned thereon
in each year. When asked to explain the reasons for persistent less expenditure during
each year the Ministry in their reply submitted as under:
"Under the MPLAD Scheme, incurring of expenditure and concomitant release of
funds, takes place continuously, throughout the year on meeting the eligibility
criteria as per para 4.3 of the Guidelines. Therefore, in view of the nature and
dynamics of the scheme and the fact that funds are released to different Lok Sabha
constituencies and Rajya Sabha MPs at different points of time, unspent balances,
which also include interest accrued on the funds released, are bound to exist at any
given point of time.
The Ministry has been continuously monitoring the progress of the implementation
of the Scheme and constantly urging the Secretaries of State/UT nodal departments
to take effective steps for maximum utilisation of funds. It is noted that the funds
released under MPLADS is non-lapsable and the District Authority is also required
to maintain liquidity in order to fund on-going works as second and last instalment
of fund.
As per para 4.15 of the Guidelines, District Authority may release advance upto
50% of the estimated amount of a sanctioned work to an Implementing agency.
Thus the District Authority keeps 50% of the funds with them for release of second
instalment for the work already sanctioned. In case the District Authority do not
keep the 50% funds with them, there are chances of delay in completion of work as
per the provisions of the Guidelines, the total responsibility for executing the work
on time lies with the District Authority."
7. When the Sub-Committee desired to know the responsibility of the Ministry to
ensure maximum utilization of funds, the Additional Secretary submitted in evidence:

5
".......we have also noticed that the percentage of utilization of funds
cumulatively has been consistently over 90 per cent. Of course, the CAG
Report has mentioned about low expenditure on the annual basis......., I would
be explaining that. In non-lapsable scheme, we look at cumulative basis. The
MPs are entitled to be in their constituencies right up to the end of the year
and take the feedback from the people as to the requirements. Therefore, an
MP can nominate a scheme right in the end, that is, February-March. Therefore,
it is absolutely impossible that you should have 100 per cent expenditure
during the course of the year. In our Ministry, we look at it cumulatively.
Comparing the works, which have been sanctioned and those which have
been completed, we have noticed that the trend cumulatively is over
90 percent...... ."
8. Asked to state the specific measures taken/proposed to encourage and ensure
optimum utilization of the earmarked funds in an annual basis, the Ministry responded
as under:
"It has been stipulated in Para 3.13 of the Guidelines that the time limit for
completion of the works should generally not exceed one year. In exceptional
cases, where the implementation time exceeds one year, specific reasons for
the same shall be incorporated in the sanction letter/order. The sanction
letter/order shall also include a clause for suitable action against the
Implementation Agency in the event of their failure to complete the work
within the stipulated time as per the State Government Procedure.
The Guidelines stipulate the provision of review the implementation of the
works at the level of Chief Secretary/Nodal Secretary and also at District
Authority level. Apart from the above, Ministry also undertakes Bi-Annual
Review Meeting with the Nodal Secretaries of the State/UTs chaired by
Hon'ble Ministry of the Ministry.
With the enhancement of the annual entitlement of the MP from Rs. 2 crore to
Rs. 5 crore under MPLADS from the financial year 2011-12, Para 4.3 of the
Guidelines have been suitably amended to ensure maximum utilisation of
funds and to minimize the accumulation of unspent funds.
As per amendment of this Para 4.3 of the Guidelines, the first instalment of
Rs. 2.5 crore will be released in the beginning of the financial year. In the
remaining years, the first instalment will be released in the beginning of the
financial year subject to the condition that the second instalment of the
previous year was released for the MP concerned and also subject to furnishing
of the provisional Utilization Certificate of previous year covering at least
80% of the expenditure of the first instalment of the previous year which is in
line with the GFR and in concurrence with the Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance."
III. Pattern of Funds Utilization
9. Audit scrutiny revealed that the year-wise utilization of funds under the Scheme
ranged from 37.43 to 52.44 per cent of the funds available with the DAs during 2004-09.
Substantial closing balances (Rs. 1788 crore to Rs. 2137 crore) remained outside the

6
Consolidated Fund of the Union or States. The expenditure under the Scheme had a
propensity to increase at the times close to Elections.
10. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to know the reasons for
accumulation of substantial unspent balances with the District Authorities and the
steps taken by the Ministry for early and proper utilization of funds lying unspent with
the District Authorities. In reply, the Ministry stated that under the MPLAD Scheme,
expenditure and release of funds was a continuous process throughout the year as per
provision 4.3 of the Guidelines and the fact that funds were released to different
Lok Sabha constituencies and Rajya Sabha MPs at different points of time, unspent
balances, which also included interest accrued on the funds released, were bound to
exist at any given point of time. The Ministry also stated that the Guidelines on
MPLADS allowed the funds to be kept in the nationalized banks only if the balance
was left after releasing the advances to the Implementing Agencies for carrying out the
works.
11. The Ministry further stated that the information relating to the amount for
various work authorized by the MPs (out of unspent balance of Rs. 2137 crore) was yet
to be received from the District Authorities who alongwith the Implementing Agencies
were responsible for non-utilization of MPLADS funds.
12. Asked to spell out the responsibility of the Ministry in this regard, it was stated
that in order to ensure continuous and prompt execution of works under the Scheme,
Para 4.3 of the Guidelines had been amended suitably under which the first instalment
of Rs. 2.5 crore would be released in the beginning of the financial year. In the remaining
years, the first instalment would be released in the beginning of the financial year
subject to the condition that the second instalment of the previous year was released
for the MP concerned and also subject to furnishing of the provisional Utilization
Certificate of previous year covering at least 80% of the expenditure of the first instalment
of the previous year which was in line with the GFR and issued in concurrence with the
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.
13. The Secretary, M/o S&PI during evidence inter-alia stated that in the earlier
Guidelines, the check on unspent balances was made only once at the time of the
release of second instalment. Now they sought to rectify this by requiring an unspent
balance at the time of each release. According to the Secretary, the total magnitude of
unspent balance would obviously be higher because the total magnitude of each
instalment had been increased.
IV . Incorrect Reporting of Financial Progress by the DAs
14. Audit Scrutiny revealed that 12 DAs of six States depicted the entire advance
(Rs. 100.17 crore) released to IAs as utilized, thus inflating the figures of expenditure
by Rs. 35 crore. Further, the DAs had reported lesser amounts of interest earned in
their annual accounts and/or MPRs than those reported in the MPRs of the earlier
months resulting in understatement of interest of Rs. 5.60 crore in respect of
21 constituencies.
15. In the above context, the Sub-Committee asked whether the Ministry had
prepared any Guidelines on accounting of funds released under MPLADS to the DAs

7
and monitored the actual expenditure incurred by the implementing agencies so as to
ensure countrywide uniformity of accounts. In reply, the Ministry stated that as
stipulated in Para 5.1 of the MPLADS Guidelines, the District Authorities and the
Implementing Agencies were required to maintain accounts of MPLADS fund,
MP-wise. The cash book and other books of accounts were required to be maintained
as per the State/UT Government procedure. The Ministry further stated that the
information received from the States/UTs indicated that there was no incorrect reporting.
In response to another specific querry, the Ministry replied that Monthly Progress
Report (MPR) received with discrepancies, if any, were sent back with observation to
the concerned District Authorities for verification and correctness of the same.
16. When the Sub-Committee desired to hear more on the above aspects, the
representative of the Ministry in evidence stated as under:
"The New General Financial Rules (GFR) 2005, says that in case of Central
Autonomous Organisation, there was note under the Rule which says that
the money given as advance should not be reported as expenditure in the
utilization certificate. What is happening here is that whatever money or 50%
of the cost which was given to implementing agency by the District
Administration as first instalment has been reported as expenditure in
Utilization Certificate."
17. Asked to state what specific remedial measures were taken by the Ministry to
remove the shortcomings, the Ministry replied that the District Authorities were in the
process of replying to the Audit observations and the Ministry would be examining
them one-by-one.
18. On being asked whether the Ministry had taken any steps to develop software
for preparing district-wise MPLADS accounts and collating annual accounts and
balance sheet of all districts to capture annual accounts and balance sheet of the entire
Scheme, the Ministry replied that they were in the process of taking initiative through
NIC to develop an integrated software for monitoring of the Scheme at macro and
micro level. The software would facilitate district-wise capturing of datas viz.
Government of India releases, work/project-wise details including sanctions, advances
and expenditure incurred, generation of Monthly Progress Report (MPR) and
unautided Annual accounts/report containing physical and financial aspects.
V . Deficient Verification of Monthly Progress Report
19. The Ministry released grants worth Rs. 18.00 crore in respect of two
Rajya Sabha MPs and six Lok Sabha constituencies of seven States/UTs despite
having substantial unspent balances in their accounts.
20. On being asked about the excess release of funds the Ministry, denied the
findings and stated that it released the instalments only on fulfilment of eligibility of
criteria given in the para 4.3 of the Guidelines. No excess funds had been released by
the Ministry to District Authorities.

8
VI. Distribution of Funds of ex-MPs
21. Audit pointed out that the unspent balances of Rs. 82.54 crore left by the
predecessor Rajya Sabha MPs in 10 States had not been distributed among their
successor RS MPs of that particular State.
22. In the above context, when the Sub-Committee desired to know whether the
Ministry had prepared any data on the total amount of unspent balances of former
Rajya Sabha MPs lying with various District Authorities, the quantum of the unspent
balance and the reasons for not distributing the same as per the provisions of the
Scheme, the Ministry replied that based on the information given in the Monthly
Progress Report (MPR), the data on unspent amount of Members of Parliament
(Rajya Sabha) including former MP (RS) was uploaded on the website of the Ministry
i.e. www.mplads@nic.in. As stipulated in the Guidelines, the District Authorities were
required to distribute the unspent amount of the former MPs, which was a continuous
process. The unspent balance as per the MPR system as on 30th September, 2011 was
stated to be Rs. 3186.75 crore.
23. In evidence, the Sub-Committee asked the Ministry to furnish specific reasons
for accumulation of unspent balance in the funds of ex-Members of Rajya Sabha and
their non-distribution among all the sitting MPs of the State. In reply, the representative
of the Ministry stated as under:
"Whatever unspent balance is lying whether in the case of Rajya Sabha or
Lok Sabha is required to be distributed after completing whatever
recommended work sanctioned by the Member of Parliament and the
Guidelines are accordingly well laid down. But it happens a number of times
that distribution does not take place on a regular basis. That is the reasons
we keep on reiterating these facts and the circulars. Whenever we have the
bi-annual review meetings in Delhi, we insist on these issues. If you see, in
the last one-and-a-half years, we have issued a number of circulars in this
regard. We are thinking of a little bit tigthening of the Guidelines also, that is,
we want to give some time frame."
24. The Sub-Committee then asked the status of the distribution of the unspent
balances by the States. In reply, the Secretary, Ministry of S&PI submitted:
"As far as I know, we have got reports from the States. Some of the States
have completed their redistribution work. We should ask for the status
of accounts post-redistribution. I am not sure whether the accounts have
been formally closed or not. We will have to ask them to report us on
that. Rajya Sabha is a continual process. So we have to check vis-a-vis
Rajya Sabha about the status."
25. In response to another related specific query, the representative of the Ministry
stated that there was a dead-line to complete the accounting process before
31st December, 2010. But even by the end of October, 2011, some States had not
distributed the unspent balances and not closed the account.
26. The Sub-Committee asked the rationale for kept showing balances if they were
not to be used for an indefinite period. In response, the representative of the Ministry
stated:
"We can prescribe some time limit."

9
27. The Sub-Committee then pointed out whether a sunset clause could be
incorporated to the effect that if the States were unable to distribute the unspent
balances within a definite time period, the funds would come back to the Centre. In
reply, the Secretary submitted:
"I think we should impose a time limit and then ask for a mandatory
distribution."
VII. Diversion of Funds
28. Audit pointed out that in seven States Rs. 4.67 crore was diverted to other
Schemes of the State and Central Governments by 22 DAs.
29. The Sub-Committee deisred to know whether the DAs had been authorised to
divert the funds meant for the MPLAD Scheme to other Schemes. The Ministry in
reply stated that the District Authorities were not authorised to divert funds meant for
MPLADS to any other Schemes. The Ministry further stated that in Andhra Pradesh,
funds diverted had been received back in the MPLADS funds except in one case.
Similarly in the States of Odisha and Tamil Nadu, the funds had been received back
except in one case each in both the States. As regards action taken by the Ministry to
stop diversion of funds, it was replied that the Ministry proposed to write to all the
District Authorities to ensure that funds allotted to MPLAD Scheme should not be
diverted to any other scheme.
30. Since the diversion of funds of MPLADS to other Schemes was a clear violation
of rules, the Sub-Committee desired to know the action taken against the persons
responsible for such violation. In reply, the Ministry stated that in the extent cases,
since violation had been noticed, these States would be requested to take  appropriate
action against the officials concerned.
31. In the same context, the Secretary, Ministry of S&PI submitted in evidence:
"I would suggest that we should advice the State Government to take action
as per rules because the rules do provide for a certain process to be followed
when action has been initiated. We can certainly ask them to take action as
per the rules. The rules provide space to examine circumstances. If there is
any justification let them examine it as per rules."
32. On being asked to state categorically whether the Ministry had already written
to all the DAs/States concerned, another representative of the Ministry replied that
they were in the process of writing to them in a phased manner.
VIII. Refund of Unspent Balances
33. Audit had pointed out that in 24 States/UTs, unspent balances of Rs. 1.98 crore
arising due to completion of works at lower than the sanctioned cost and interest
accrued on balances of Rs. 4.71 crore had not been refunded by the IAs after completion
of the work. Further, in 12 States/UTs, Rs. 12.14 crore was lying with various IAs as
unspent balances pertaining to 679 works which could not be taken up for
implementation.

10
34. Asked to explain the reasons for the above-cited shortcomings, the Ministry
replied that, Para 6.5(iv) of the Guidelines stipulated that the Implementing Agencies
shall refund to the District Authority the savings including interest, If any, at their
disposal within one month and close the Bank Account opened for the purpose.
Therefore, it was the responsibility of the District Authority to co-ordinate and supervise
the work being executed under MPLADS and ask the Implementing Agencies to refund
the unspent amount as the District had the direct control over the Implementing
Agencies. The Ministry further stated that from the information received from the
District Authorities, it was observed that either the unspent balance had been received
by the District Authority or the funds had been utilized while making payment for other
works. Hence the Ministry was of the opinion that there were minimal chances of the
unspent amount left with the Implementing Agencies.
35. The Sub-Committee desired to know the latest status of the unspent balances
not refunded by the Implementing Agencies. In reply, the Ministry stated that as per
the replies received from States/UTs, an amount of Rs. 127.50 lakh was the balance
unspent amount which was  lying with the Implementing Agencies. The District
Authorities had assured that they would get back the balance of amount lying with the
Implemeting Agencies with interest thereon. It was further stated that no case of
misappropriation of funds with regard to uncommitted and unspent balance lying with
the Implementing Agencies, had been reported to the Ministry.
IX. Contingency Expenses
36. Audit scrutiny revealed that in 13 States/UTs, 35 DAs had utilized an amount of
Rs. 1.30 crore on payment of honorarium/wages/travelling expenses of staff,
refreshments for staff, electrification of office building, fuel for official vehicles, purchase
of laptops, office furniture and supervision charges, etc., which were inadmissible.
Further, six DAs in five States had incurred excess expenditure on contingencies than
the prescribed limit of 0.5 per cent of the amount spent on completed project.
37. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to know the mechanism put in
place by the Ministry to ensure that contingency expenses remained within the
prescribed limit and not incurred on inadmissible items. In reply, the Ministry stated
that Para 4.17 of the Guidelines stipulated that a separate account for such expenditure
incurred during a year under MPLAD Scheme shall be maintained and the MP concerned
shall be kept informed besides making available the details for scrutiny by Audit. The
Ministry further stated that the District Authority was expected to take action as per
this provision and ensure that the expenses remained within the prescribed limit.
38. When asked if the prescribed percentage of 0.5 per cent towards contingency
expenditure was adequate for effective monitoring of the MPLAD Scheme, the Ministry
replied that the Administrative Expenses of 2 per cent had now been allowed by the
Government with effect from the financial year 2011-12 after enhancement of MPLADS
Funds allocation for effective monitoring and implementation of the MPLAD Scheme.
39. Elaborating the distribution of contingency fund between different departments/
agencies, the Secretary, M/o S&PI during evidence stated as follows:
"What we have said is that of the 2 per cent, 2 per cent will be earmarked for
use by the State nodal Department. The balance will be shared between the

11
nodal district and other implementing districts in the formula which we have
defined in the rules. It will be the responsibility of the nodal district to allocate
the money as per this formula. We have also indicated the class of activities
for which it can be used. At the level of the State/UT nodal Department the
money was principally meant for third party inspection, physical audit, quality
checks and monitoring of works at State level. It is not for the purpose of
meetings precisely. But we felt that we must give some resources to the State
nodal Department to do some checking at their level. So, 2 per cent we
calculated for the State as a whole. In certain States we have made an estimate
and it will come to almost about Rs. 50 lakh or so. Per MP the amount comes
to Rs. 1 lakh. For large States where there are as many as 50 MPs the amount
could be Rs. 50 lakh. We figured this could be a reasonable sum to permit
them to do a certain amount of independent checking as well. That was the
logic for including a figure for the State nodal Department as well."
X. Annual Accounts and Utilization Certificates (UCs)
40. Audit scrutiny revealed that proper records were not maintained by the Ministry
to watch the progress of receipt of the annual accounts and Utilization Certificates
(UCs) from the DAs so as to review the fund utilization under the Scheme. Audit also
pointed out that the Ministry had been routinely relaxing the condition for submission
of UCs and Audit Certificates by the DAs, before allowing the release of the second
instalment of funds. The IAs which received advances from 80 DAs of 23 States/UTs,
did not furnish UCs for Rs. 369.97 crore (41.32 per cent of the total funds released to
the IAs) pertaining to 19,540 works (41.10 per cent of total works) completed during the
period 2004-09.
41. In the above context, the Sub-Committee enquired as to the Ministry's inability
to maintain the database to ascertain the unspent balances and watch the progress of
receipt of Annual Accounts and Utilization Certificates from the District Authorities
and in the absence of such data base how the Ministry was conducting strategic
planning under the Scheme. The Ministry in their written reply stated as under:
"This Ministry is maintaining the register for UCs and Audit Certificates. The
Audit Certificates as prescribed in Annexure IX of the Guidelines are invariably
being examined while releasing the MPLADS funds. The Audit Certificate
received if found to be in accordance with the Annexure, it is considered to be
in order. In case, there is audit observation in the Audit Certificates, the
District Authorities are usually being requested for taking necessary action
and furnishing the Action Taken Note.
CAG in their Audit has recommended for maintaining MP-wise Grants-in-Aid
Register with details on funds released, status of receipt of MPRs, UCs and
Audit Certificates in a computerized format with complete data validation and
placing it on the official website of the Ministry of monitoring the fund utilization
under the Scheme.
Controller of Accounts of the Ministry has suggested that the Grant-in-Aid
register is to be maintained as per Format 39 of GFR-2005 and NIC of the
Ministry have been requested to make the electronic format of Grant-in-Aid."

12
42. The Sub-Commitee asked the Ministry to state the specific action taken by them
to ensure timely submissions of UCs so that the implementation of the Scheme was not
adversely affected. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:—
"The Ministry is aware that in case the Utilization Certificates is delayed by
the Implementing Agencies, it will affect the overall planning and further
release of funds to the District Authority and also increase the amount of
unspent balance. The Ministry is regularly requesting the State/UT Nodal
Departments and District Authorities through various fora for execution of
work in time and submission of Utilization Certificates in order to bring down
the amount of unspent balance."
43. Asked to state the reasons for grant of routine relaxation in the condition of
submission of Utilization and Audit Certificates by the DAs and the impact of such
relaxation on funds management, the Ministry stated that they had relaxed the condition
before 2009-10 for furnishing of UC and AC concerned for the release of 2nd instalment
for the year with the condition that the next instalment i.e. 1st instalment of the
succeeding year would be released only on receipt of the Utilization Certificate and
Audit Certificate for the previous release of funds.
44. It was further stated that the decision to relax the condition was taken by the
Ministry on the basis of review of release position to ensure that the works recommended
by the MPs and sanctioned by the Districts did not suffer for want of funds, and not
on specific request from the District Authorities. The Ministry had been regularly
emphasizing the need to furnish the Audit Certificates and Utilization Certificates in
the Bi-annual Review Meeting on MPLADS and other various meetings. In consultation
with Department of Expenditure, more stringent financial discipline was being forced
through the amendment of Para 4.3 of the Guidelines. The Ministry further opined that
the relaxation of release of second installment pending Utilization Certificate and Audit
Certificate had not contributed to the accumulation of large unspent balances under
the MPLADS funds.
XI. Doubtful Expenditure
45. Audit review revealed instances of doubtful expenditure amounting to Rs. 0.40
crore indicating suspected misappropriation of funds, which needed further
investigation by the Government. These included: (a) non-existence of assets in West
Bengal (Rs. 5 lakh) and Jharkhand (Rs. 8 lakh), (b) payments made on doubtful muster
roll entries in Bihar (Rs. 6.15 lakh), and (c) payments made on doubtful vouchers in
Mizoram (Rs. 19 lakh) and Jharkhand (Rs. 2 lakh).
46. In the above context, the Sub-Committee asked whether the Ministry had
obtained necessary information/explanation from the DAs and made arrangements for
investigation of cases of doubtful expenditure. In reply, the Ministry stated that they
had received information from the State Governments of West Bengal and Mizoram
(part reply) which was as under:—
"(a) West Bengal— As per State reply, the superintendent of Police, South
24 Parganas furnished and action taken report on the FIR lodged by the

13
District Planning Officer, South 24 Parganas, stating that the accused
Shri Bimal Kumar Haldar, Headmaster of Rajapur Free Primary School and
Secretary Taldi 1, Village Education Committee has not yet been arrested.
Efforts are continuing to arrest the accused person and investigation of the
case is proceeding.
(b) Mizoram — As per State reply, vouchers on plain paper were accepted by
DA as some of the material are sourced directly from queries or from small
businesses in the villages which do not have proper vouchers. Also, dates
on vouchers may differ from that during which work was executed as the
Implementing Agencies take material on credit from the store and repay them
at their convenience or as and when the funds are available to them. Also, it
may be stated that the final payment to the Implementing Agencies are not
given without recommendation of an inspecting officer, usually a technical
person who ensures that works are not only complete but also commensurate
with the sanctioned amount thereby ensuring the funds are not misused.
V ouchers on plain paper submitted by Implementing Agencies are no longer
accepted."
The Ministry further apprised that reply from the Governments of Bihar and
Jharkhand was still awaited.
47. In evidence, the Sub-Committee pointed out that nowhere in the documents
furnished, it was found that disciplinary action was initiated by any State Government
against the erring officials. In that context, the Sub-Committee desired to know the
specific action taken by the respective State Governments. In reply, a representative of
the Ministry stated:
"The reply given by West Bengal says that FIR has been lodged against the
Head Master of that school because the fund was given to the school which
is the implementing agency to construct that building. They have basically
wanted to arrest him also."
48. Expressing surprise, the Sub-Committee asked whether an FIR against the Head
Master of a particular school would suffice to check fraud and irregularities. In reply,
the Secretary, M/o S&PI stated:
"I think the point is that once the State police takes up an investigation, the
FIR will name some people. It does not mean that they are the only people
involved. That is the process of police investigation which will then uncover
who are the other people. We can certainly write to the State Government
pointing out the seriousness of this charge and urging them to make sure that
this does not fall into the backburner. We will do that exercise."
49. The Sub-Committee asked whether it would not be prudent to hold the officer
who issued the Utilization Certificate ultimately responsible for doubtful expenditure.
In reply, the representative of the Ministry stated:
"Your point is that the officer who signed the Utilisation Certificate should
also have been implicated in the FIR."

14
50. Asked to state categorically the measures taken to strengthen the internal
controls under the Scheme to check fraud and misappropriation of funds, and their
early detection, the Ministry replied that they had already put in place a web based
work monitoring system. The Ministry were further in the process of development of
an integrated software of MPLAD Scheme for monitoring funds release and expenditure
both at Macro level.
51. The representative of the Ministry also apprised as under:
"... the guidelines may be talking about the role of monitoring at the District
Authority and Implementing Agency level. It has been well devised and the
District Authority will monitor the extent of 10 per cent of work completed.
The Implementing Agency is supposed to monitor 100 per cent work as such.
If they would have completed the process of monitoring of the ongoing
projects, they would have certainly seen that the work is not coming up at all.
So, prime facie, certainly they have not monitored or seen when the Utilization
Certificate was signed and given to the DM."
XII. Recommendation of Works
52. Audit scrutiny revealed that the design of the scheme did not specify the
mechanism to be adopted by MPs to ensure participation of various constituents in an
MPs constituency such as active resident forums, local bodies, NGOs., etc. in
determining and recommending works responsive to locally felt needs and the priority
of the MPs constituency. Further, there were no records to show that priorities for
works considered were based on local requirements.
53. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to know the measures taken by
the Ministry to ensure participation of various constituents such as local bodies,
NGOs and forums of residents to determine the local needs with priority. The Ministry
in its reply stated as under:
"The Scheme is so designed to give complete freedom to MPs to choose
location and projects subject to the basic objective and provision of the
Guidelines. The objective of the scheme is to enable MPs to recommend
works of developmental nature with emphasis on the creation of durable
community assets based on the locally felt needs in their Constituencies. The
MP on his tours of his constituency contacts the people of his constituency
about the work to be executed for the welfare of the public at large in a
particular area. It is for the MP to either consult or not to consult the
constituents of his locality. However, in order to facilitate MPs, the District
Authorities have been asked to provide shelf of projects. The Ministry have
also circulated an illustrative list of projects/works."
54. The Ministry further stated that as per para 2.11 of the Guidelines, the Panchayati
Raj Institutions were preferably the implementing agencies in the rural areas and it
was expected that an MP during his constituency tour should consult the Panchayati
Raj Institutions.

15
55. Audit scrutiny further revealed that, in respect of 34,023 works pertaining to 64
DAs out of 70 test-checked DAs in 15 States/UTs, recommendations were furnished
by MPs with delays beyond the prescribed time-limit of 90 days from the commencement
of the financial year and the MPs continued recommending the works up to the end of
the financial year.
56. In the above context, Sub-Committee desired to know whether the Ministry had
every analyzed the reasons for the delay on part of the MPs and taken any steps to
ensure timely recommendation of the works by the MPs so as to avoid slow utilization
of funds as well as time and cost overrun. The Ministry in their reply stated as follows:—
"Based on information from the States/UTs, it has been ascertained that
delay occurs in view of unavoidable circumstances like imposition of code of
conduct, touring of Hon'ble MPs in and outside the country and engagement
of Hon'ble MP with other important assignments etc.
In order to review the performance of the MPLADc Scheme, this Ministry is
holding two Bi-annual Review meetings with the Nodal Secretaries of the
States/UTs and they share their experiences and the Ministry takes corrective
measures.
MPLAD Scheme is not like other Centrally sponsored scheme where action
plan is made in early part of the Financial Y ear. In MPLAD Scheme, the MPs
frequently tour their constituency and make recommendations based on locally
felt needs which may also be as late as Feb. or March of the year, thus
extending the period of utilization of funds. Some of the MPs were not able to
recommend work within the stipulated period of 90 days, the Ministry has
amended thus, Para 2.6 of the Guidelines to enable the MPs to make
recommendations throughout the financial year."
XIII. Execution of Works without the Recommendation of MPs
57. Audit pointed out that nine DAs in eight States, Executed 700 works amounting
Rs. 9.45 crore without a formal recommendation of the MPs concerned. Besides, three
DAs in three States executed 150 works amounting to Rs. 2.44 crore, recommended by
the representatives of the MPs. Further, in seven States/UTs, 10 DAs accorded sanction
to 260 works involving Rs. 10.75 crore during 2004-09, though the actual cost of these
works exceeded, by Rs. 2.49 crore, of the cost indicated by the MPs concerned.
58. Expressing their surprise, the Sub-Committee asked the Ministry to explain how
works could be executed without the recommendation of the MPs concerned. In reply,
the Ministry stated that only J&K State constituted major share of executing works
(consisting of 558 works) without the recommendation of the MPs. The District
Authority, Anantnag had reported that the MP had been requested to recommend the
projects/works within the stipulated time as per Guidelines. In the reply received from
the other States, it had been intimated that due to urgency of work and assurance of
the local MLA, to make available funds from MPLADS funds through the MP, the
District Authority had sanctioned the work in anticipation of the MP's recommendation.

16
59. Asked to state the monitoring mechanism put in place/proposed to ensure that
expenditure from the MPLADS fund was incurred only after obtaining the
recommendation of the MPs, the Ministry stated that as per provision of the Guidelines
Para 3.12, the implementation of works under MPLAD Scheme should start only after
receipt of the recommendation of work from the MPs. This was to be scrupulously
followed by the District Authority and if any deviation occurred, the State Government
could take disciplinary action against the District Authority.
60. When asked to indicate the specific action taken against the DAs responsible
for incurring unauthorized expenditure from the MPLAD funds, the Ministry informed
that replies received from the District Authorities were being compiled and analyzed.
Suitable instructions would be given to all the State Nodal Secretaries for directing the
District Authorities to strictly adhere to the Guidelines and take appropriate action
against the erring officials. The Ministry further informed as under:—
"Reply from States of Assam, Bihar and Jharkhand is still awaited.
Replies received from State except J&K and Meghalaya that the work were
executed keeping in view the urgency of work without formal recommendations
of the Hon'ble MPs. However, the recommendation were taken subsequently.
As per reply received from DDC, Anantnag (J&K), Hon'ble MP has been
requested time and again to recommend the projects/works within the
stipulated time as per Guidelines made available to him. However, sometimes
delay occurs in view of unavoidable circumstances like imposition of code of
conduct, touring of Hon'ble MPs in and outside the country and engagement
of Hon'ble MP with other important assignments etc. The matter is under
examination with the Ministry and direction to the Chief Secretary of the
State is being requested to initiate necessary action against the district officials
responsible for the irregularities.
As per reply from DC West Garo Hills, Tura (Meghalaya), the funds belongs
to C&RD, Govt. of Meghalaya, the bank mistakenly deposited in MPLADS
Account. Later cash books and A/Cs have been reconciled."
61. Asked to state categorically the action taken by the Ministry to ensure
punishment to the erring officials, it was replied that these lapses had been viewed
seriously and the District Authorities had been advised not to repeat such mistakes.
The Ministry further stated that wherever such lapses had occurred it would be in the
fitness of things to take action against the erring officials. The Ministry proposed to
write to concerned State Governments appropriately in this regard.
62. In evidence, when the Sub-Committee desired to hear the clear cut views of the
Ministry on the above cited serious irregularities, the Additional Secretary submitted
that they did not support this kind of action and it called for disciplinary action.
63. When asked to state what disciplinary action had been taken after a lapse of
five/six years, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of S&PI submitted:—
"We will write to DoPT. We will take it up with them."

17
64. The Sub-Committee asked whether it would not be prudent to bring the
irregularities committed by the officers immediately to the notice of the Union Ministry/
Parent Organisation with a view to ensuring strict action against them for awarding
works without the recommendation of the MPs. In reply, the Additional Secretary
assured:—
"We will do that."
XIV . Selection of Prohibited Works
65. Audit pointed out that in 100 sampled districts of 29 States/UTs (78 per cent of
sample DAs), expenditure of Rs. 73.76 crore was incurred during 2004-09 on 2340
works which were prohibited as per the Scheme Guidelines.
66. When the Sub-Committee desired to hear the views of the Ministry on the
above findings of Audit, they stated that the execution of prohibited works were
attributable to the recommendation of the MPs which was inconsistent with the
Guidelines and thereby irregular sanction of such works by the District Authorities.
The Ministry further stated that it was the responsibility of the District Authority to
examine and sanction only eligible works recommended by the MPs. The replies received
from the States were reportedly being examined by the Ministry and the State/UT
Governments would thereafter be requested to take necessary action against the erring
district officials.
67. As regards steps taken by the Ministry to avoid recurrence of such cases, it was
stated that in order to avoid recurrence of such irregularities, the Ministry had issued
the illustrative list of eligible works to all the States/UTs. Sometimes due to compelling
circumstances, the District Authorities had to act on the recommendations of the MP
for one reason or the other, beyond their control resulting in execution of prohibited
works. Besides, the Ministry reportedly provided regular training to the State/District
officials in order to have better appreciation and implementation of Guidelines. The
Collectors/Magistrates would be requested to ensure that no such irregularities would
occur in future. The Ministry in the Bi-annual Review Meetings had been regularly
requesting the State/UT Governments to adhere to the provisions of the Guidelines to
avoid recurrence of such lapses.
68. Not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry, the Sub-Committee during oral
evidence asked the Ministry to explain how it could be beyond the control of the DAs
and to spell out the innovative measures taken to avoid recurrence of execution of
prohibited works. In reply the representative of the Ministry submitted as under:—
"It can be done only by exemplary action. If one or two people are punished
in every State, then it will stop. In fact, in the past, as per the earlier Guidelines
also we have been taking action whenever irregularities are pointed out. We
have a number of cases where we have asked for recoupment of funds."
69. Asked to furnish the complete details of the recoupment of funds, the
Ministry in a post-evidence information submitted that the name of the States and
funds to be recouped were Andaman & Nicober Islands (Rs.  0.10 crore),
Andhra Pradesh (Rs. 53.283 crore), Assam (Rs. 1.31 crore), Bihar (Rs. 0.65 crore),

18
Haryana (Rs. 0.87 crore), Jharkhand (Rs. 8.81 crore), Karnataka (Rs. 3.24 crore), Madhya
Pradesh (Rs. 3.32 crore), Maharashtra (Rs. 9.66 crore), Mizoram (Rs. 0.19 crore), Orissa
(Rs. 99.00 crore), Rajasthan (Rs. 0.14 crore), Uttar Pradesh (Rs. 0.10 crore), and West
Bengal (Rs. 0.05 crore). The States of Delhi and Meghalaya were also included in the
list. However, the exact amount recouped from the defaulting authorities in these
States was yet to be know. It was also informed that the Nodal State Authorities were
being requested to make all out efforts to recoup the fund with interest from the
defaulting agencies as per the Guidelines.
XV. Execution of works for the Societies/Trusts
70. Audit scrutiny revealed that in 10 States, Rs. 14.40 crore was sanctioned and
released for works pertaining to 34 Trusts/Societies, which exceeded the ceiling of
Rs. 0.25 crore per trust/society fixed under the Scheme Guidelines by Rs. 5.90 crore.
Further in seven States, the DAs sanctioned Rs.  5.94 crore to 145 Trusts/Societies,
which were either not eligible as per the Scheme Guidelines or whose eligibility had not
been verified by the DAs.
71. The reasons for release of funds in excess of the ceiling to the Trusts/Societies
and that too without verifying their eligibility particularly in the States of West Bengal,
Meghalaya and Jharkhand, were stated to be as under based on responses of the
State/District Authority:—
(a) Declaration not taken from the Trusts/Societies by the District Authority.
(b) Lack of interaction amongst District Authorities.
(c) Lack of transparency as the record of Trusts/Societies was not available on
line.
72. In reply to a pointed query of the Sub-Committee regarding fixing responsibility
and action taken against the erring officials, the Ministry informed that as all the works
under MPLADS were executed by the District Authorities, they were responsible for
release of excess fund to the Trusts/Societies. The reply received from the States were
being examined by the Ministry and the State Nodal Secretaries would be requested to
investigate the matter and direct all the District Authorities for initiating necessary
action against the erring district officials, if found responsible for the irregularities, and
recouping the funds from the Societies/Trusts concerned. It was further stated that
replies from the States of Jharkhand, Goa, Maharashtra and Rajasthan were still awaited.
73. The Sub-Committee asked whether the Ministry had prepared a central database
containing district-wise list of all the eligible Trusts/Societies so as to avoid recurrence
of lapses by way of better monitoring. In reply, the Ministry stated that as per the
Guidelines, the execution and implementation of works was carried out by the District
Authorities. Since the Ministry did the monitoring at the macro level, it did not maintain
the data-base of eligible Trusts/Societies. However, incase any irregularity was
reported, the Ministry used to take up the matter with the State Governments for
corrective action.
74. The Sub-Committee, referring to the Ministry's written submission that
recoupment of excess funds sanctioned to the Trusts/Societies would be done with
interest, asked in evidence whether it was feasible and the number of cases where it

19
had actually been done. In reply, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of S&PI
submitted:—
"There is a case of Brahma Education Society, Maharashtra. The State
Government had given permission to the said Society to sell the land by
recovering the amount spent along with 18 percent interest thereon as per
paragraph 3.21 of the Guidelines. It is under process."
75. He further stated:—
"Sir, there is another case of recoupment of Rs. 40 lakh sanctioned to Palampur
Hindu Samaj V adil Vishranti Bhawan........"
76. The Sub-Committee asked whether the recoupment and actually been
materialized. The Joint Secretary replied:—
".............we still have not got the final report as to whether the fund is recouped
or not. We keep on writing to the States. We will confirm it from the States and
let you know about the final picture."
77. Asked to state when the Ministry had their last correspondence with the States
concerned, the Joint Secretary deposed:—
"We are still having correspondence with them. We corresponded with them
in May, 2011 this year. Basically, the State Government wanted to get this
case dropped on the basis that since the asset has already been created and
the public at large has been using this asset, so they wanted to have
condonation, that is, ex-facto approval kind of thing from the Ministry."
78. The Sub-Committee asked whether the Ministry was authorized to condone the
matter. The Joint Secretary, replied in the negative. The Secretary, Ministry of S&PI
supplemented:—
"The power to approve is only with the MPs, and we have no power to
approve it. Therefore, we have no power to condone either."
XVI. Status of Works Completed
79. The MPLADS Guidelines stipulated that the time limit for completion of works
should generally not exceed one year. However, Audit observed that the percentage of
works remaining incomplete ranged from 48.23 percent in 2004-05 to 59.28 percent in
2006-07. Age-wise analysis of incomplete works was not available with the Ministry.
80. When asked for the reasons for such a high percentage of works remaining
incomplete, the Ministry stated that on the basis of the information received from
various District Authorities, the reasons of such inordinate delay in completion of
work were as under:—
(i) Late receipt of recommendation of work from the Hon'ble MPs.
(ii) Selection of in-admissible work.
(iii) Dependency on other offices for technical estimates.

20
(iv) Non-identification of land.
(v) Local disputes.
(vi) Ownership of land.
(vii) Delay in tendering procedure.
(viii) Imposition of Election Code of Conduct.
(ix) Non-fulfillment of formalities by the implementing Agencies.
(x) Shortage of staff in DRDA/Nodal Agency in the District.
81. The Ministry further added that the funds were non-lapsable. The MP could
nominate schemes/projects right up to the end of the year and since one year was
allowed for execution, the funds did not get utilized 100% by the end of the year.
However, each instalment of the fund was released as per Para 4.3 of the MPLADS
Guidelines which had the approval of Department of Expenditure. The Ministry also
stated that cumulative expenditure as on 22nd September, 2011 was over 90%. Funds
being non-lapsable, there was no requirement for spending the entire amount within
the same financial year.
82. When asked to state the details of action taken against the implementing
Agencies who failed to complete the work within the stipulated time mentioned in the
sanction letter, the Ministry replied that the work sanctioned by the District Authority
in all the States were being executed by the Implementing Agencies and the time period
invariably formed the part of sanction. It was the responsibility of the District Authority
to take necessary action against the defaulting Implementing Agencies. The Ministry
further stated that so far out of 35 States/UTs, replies from Himachal Pradesh and
Puducherry had been received. Replies from the balance of the States were still awaited
and the Ministry were yet to request all the State Nodal Authority to instruct the
District Authority for initiating action against the defaulting Implementing Agencies.
83. Asked to state the reasons for non-maintenance of the age-wise data of incomplete
work and measures taken for effective monitoring to clear the backlog of the incomplete
works, the Ministry stated that the District Authorities were responsible for the
maintenance of such data for effective monitoring. The work wise details were required
to be uploaded on the MPLADS website by the District Authority. Accordingly, in
case of insufficient updating of the information, the Ministry was not in a position to
effectively monitor the incomplete works. However, the Ministry monitored the
performance of MPLADS works in the review meetings with the Nodal Secretaries of
the States/UTs and monitoring meetings taken by the senior officials in the States.
84. The representative of the Ministry, during evidence further clarified as under:—
"As per the guidelines, the asset register has to be maintained at the district-
level. We do not get the reports about the completion or non-completion of
the projects and for how long have these projects been lying incomplete.
This is the problem of the Ministry."

21
85. The Sub-Committee asked, in such a scenario, what exact monitoring the Ministry
was doing to ensure the completion of works entrusted under the Scheme. The
representative of the Ministry responded that they had a work monitoring system
portal which was supposed to be updated by the District Authorities concurrently on
real time basis. But in actual practice it was not being done.
86. When the Sub-Committee desired to know the action taken by the Ministry to
ensure the real time updation of the portal, the representative of the Ministry stated:—
“We are thinking actively on having a single portal. It is in the thinking stage.
It will provide that unless the District Magistrate uploads it on a real time
basis, the releases will not be possible. But then it has its own drawbacks. We
are thinking of a scheme where the District Magistrate will upload the data on
a real time basis. We might probably put it in place in the next financial year.”
XVII. Sanction of Works
87. All the eligible works under MPLADS are to be sanctioned within 45 days of the
receipt of the recomendation from the MPs. But, Audit pointed out delays in according
sanction by the DAs in respect of 28,135 works out of 74,223 works (38 per cent of the
test checked sanction orders) in 104 districts of 28 States/UTs. Out of this, in 18 States/
UTs, sanction for 1,376 works (8 per cent) out of 17,763 works were accorded by the
DAs with a delay of more than one year after receiving the recommendation from the
MPs concerned.
88. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to know the reasons for such
inordinate delay on the part of the DAs. In reply the Ministry stated that based on the
information received from the States/District authorities, the reasons for delay in
sanction by DAs were as under:—
(i) Administrative procedures and model code of conduct of elections and bye-
elections.
(ii) T ime taken by the Executive Agencies for rectification of defects in estimates.
(iii) Non-submission of the estimates from the implementing agencies in time.
(iv) Non-identification of land, local disputes and selection of work place.
(v) Dependency on engineering/other offices for technical estimates of
recommended works.
(vi) Change in design on the recommendation of Hon'ble MP as per the demand
of the public residing around the site.
(vii) Non-fulfilment of formalities by the implementing Agencies.
(viii) Delay of execution of the formal Agreement by the implementing agencies as
per para 3.21 of the Guidelines.
(ix) Not able to identify the suitable site and get the NOC.
(x) Delay in formation of the beneficiaries committee and delay in getting the
work vetted by the Committee.

22
(xi) District Authorities over-burdened with their present other jobs and as such
the implementation of MPLADS without any suitable additional infra-
structure/manpower; and
(xii) Tendering procedure results in delay.
89. When asked to state the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure the sanction of
works by the DAs in time, the Ministry stated that they monitored the performance of
MPLADS works in the Bi-annual Review Meetings held with the Nodal Secretaries of
the States/UTs and also through Monthly Progress Reports, Utilization Certificates
and Audit Certificates submitted by the DAs. Monitoring meetings were also taken by
the senior officials of the Ministry by visiting the States for reviewing MPLADS
works. Training was also imparted to the officials of the State/District authorities. The
State/UT Nodal Authorities/District Authorities were instructed to strictly adhere to
the provisions of the Guidelines to avoid recurrence of lapses. Taking into account the
reasons given by the State Governments, the Ministry had emphasized that rejection
have to be made within 45 days from the date of receipt of the proposal and approval
to be accorded after obtaining all clearances within 75 days.
90. In reply to another query regarding devising any checklist at different stages of
sanction of work to monitor the timely sanction of work, the Ministry stated that
para 3.3 of the Guidelines stipulated that the District Authority shall follow the
established work scrutiny, technical work estimation, tendering and administrative
procedure of the State/UT Government concerned in the matter of work execution, and
shall be responsible for timely and effective implementation of such works. The
Guidelines on MPLADS also stipulated the time frame for completing the MPLADS
works. Thus, the District Authorities were required to review implementation of
MPLADS works with the Implementing Agencies every quarter. The District Authorities
were required to invite the MPs concerned invariably to such review meetings.
XVIII.  Award of Works
91. Audit observed that award of contract for 703 works in four States involving
Rs. 28.65 crore was not done in accordance with the standard tendering procedures of
the State/UT Governments. These instances indicated dilution of checks and balances
prescribed in the Scheme to ensure accountability.
92. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to know the action taken by
the Ministry to impress upon the State/UT Governments to scrupulously follow the
standard tendering procedure. In reply, the Ministry stated that they had taken up the
matter with the States concerned. The District Authorities of the States/UTs in their
replies had intimated the Ministry that standard tendering procedures of the States
were being followed while tendering the work. Out of the four States, reply from
Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh was still awaited. The Government of Odisha had
intimated that no such work was being done without following the State procedure. As
per the reply from the Government of West Bengal, the execution of works by
Government Agency was usually undertaken following the tendering process. For the
execution of works by NGO/Trust, the DAs had been asked to advice the NGO/Trust
to maintain financial norms.

23
93. The District Authority of West Bengal had, however, intimated that the procedure
could not be followed thoroughly due to heavy pressure in Block Establishment and
inadequate technical staff and other staff also. It was stated that at the time of purchasing
the materials, selected supplier who were already approved as per financial rules of the
respective Panchayat Samity areas, supplied bricks and other related materials.
Beneficiary of organizations (such as educational institutions, clubs) executed their
own work without engaging contractor for cost saving and implementing jobs directly.
They purchased materials from open market comparing the prices on market information
through a purchase Committee.
94. Asked to state the specific role and responsibility of the Ministry in this regard,
the Ministry replied that during the review meetings, they had been requesting the
State Governments to direct the District Authorities to take action against the erring
officials besides resorting to corrective measures to avoid recurrence of such irregularity.
XIX. Execution of Works without Administrative Approval and Sanction
95. The execution of work under the MPLADS was to be preceded by financial
sanction and administrative approval from the competent authority. But, Audit pointed
out that in four States, 363 works out of 1363 works amounting to Rs. 17.80 crore were
executed either without Administrative approval by the DAs or their execution was
initiated without obtaining prior financial sanction which contravened the Scheme
Guidelines.
96. Asked to explain the reasons for such departure from the Guidelines, the Ministry
stated that as per the information received from the State Governments, no work was
being undertaken without the administrative and financial sanction of competent
Authority. The Ministry further stated that in the past sometimes in exceptional cases
only, taking into consideration the urgent need of the community, the Implementing
Agencies had begun works in anticipation. However, it had been ensured that the
practice no longer existed and no works were executed without the administrative
approval and sanction of the DA. The Ministry was also taking up the matter with the
State Governments to ensure strict compliance of the Government procedure and take
action against the officials concerned.
XX. Delay in Execution of Works
97. Audit scrutiny revealed that 391 works, for which an estimated cost of Rs. 18.08
crore (including two case studies) was released by the DAs, could not be commenced
during the period 2004-09 in 10 States/UTs. Further, 3,490 works costing Rs. 108.65
crore in respect of 47 DAs of 15 States/UTs, were completed beyond the stipulated
period of one year. Also, 12,006 works amounting to Rs. 279.99 crore remained incomplete
in respect of 71 DAs of 16 States/UTs, for periods ranging from one year to five years
and in some cases up to 15 years. In 11 States/UTs, 307 incomplete works, on which
Rs. 13.90 crore (including two case studies) were spent, had been abandoned or were
at standstill thereby rendering the expenditure incurred on these works unfruitful.
98. Asked to explain the reasons for the above shortcomings and the Ministry's
inability to properly monitor the works, the Ministry stated that the scheme was
implemented through the District Authority and governed by a set of Guidelines.

24
The responsibility to monitor the completion of work in time and as per the Guidelines
was the primary responsibility of the District Authority. The Ministry reasoned that
therefore, it was not correct to state that they were unable to monitor completion of
work in time and in accordance with the Guidelines. The Ministry initiated action
only on receipt of complaints, if any, in a particular District.
99. The Ministry also stated that if the progress of work in a District was slow,
then further release of fund was stopped until the District improved performance
and the unsanctioned and unspent balance fell below a particular threshold. This
control mechanism was reportedly exercised by the Ministry.
100. When asked to state the penal action taken by the Ministry/DAs against the
erring Implementing Agencies for delay in the completion of works as well as the
corrective steps taken to ensure timely completion of works in future, the Ministry
replied that in the extant case, the State/UT Governments were being directed to
take action and furnish Action Taken Report to the Ministry. It was further stated
that the Ministry reviewed the physical & financial performance on MPLADS works
in the Bi-annual Review meeting held with the State Nodal Secretaries of all States/
UTs. Besides, the monitoring meetings were also held with the State/District
Authorities concerned during the visit of senior officials of the Ministry. As already
mentioned elsewhere, training was also imparted to the States/Districts officials on
the MPLADS Guidelines for effective implementation and monitoring of the Scheme.
The Ministry also stated that as and when any delay in a particular case was
brought to the notice of the Ministry, appropriate directions were issued to the
States/UTs Nodal and District Authorities for necessary corrective action.
101. As regards revival of the suspended/abandoned works, the Ministry stated
that as and when a work was sanctioned by the District Authority, it was expected
that the work should be completed as early as possible but not later than one year
as stipulated in the Guidelines. However, some cases had come to the notice where
due to unavoidable circumstances, the work had to be abandoned/suspended but
some of them were completed later on.
102. When the Sub-committee enquired as to how would the abandoned/
suspended works be completed, who would bear the cost for their completion and
also who would be responsible for the consequence both in monetary and benefit
terms, the Ministry stated that the Guidelines stipulated the time-frame for sanction
and completion of eligible works under MPLADS. However, there had been no
provision for completion of abandoned/suspended works. Implementation of MPLAD
Scheme works was the responsibility of the District Authority and thus, the State
Government was expected to complete the abandoned/suspended works from its
own funds. The Ministry would be requesting the States/UT Governments to take
necessary action against the officials concerned.
103. The Sub-committee then asked about the action taken by the Ministry in
respect of those works which had not commenced, especially those in respect of
which advances had been released to the implementing Agencies. In reply, the
Ministry furnished the following State-wise position:

25
Himachal Pradesh
As per reply from DC Hamirpur, 30 works in respect of BDO Nadaun have been
shown in audit report where as per report of BDO Nadaun, there are 33 works
amounting to Rs. 74.85 lakh. So out of 37 works amounting to Rs. 0.78 crore in
respect of Block Nadaun and Block Bijhari, 24 works are completed, 3 works are in
progress and 10 works amounting to Rs. 45.10 lakh have been cancelled. Instructions
have been issued to concerned executing agencies to complete the above 3 remaining
works immediately.
As per reply from DPO Kangra that 34 works in Indora Block which were not
started at the time of audit have now been started and are in progress. The sanctioned
amount of Rs. 5.24 lakh of 09 works have been refunded by the BDO Nurpur to this
office and same will be utilized for execution of another works after recommendation
of Hon'ble MP. Three works in Nagrota Bagwan block are not started yet due to
land dispute. The BDO has been directed to refund the money immediately so that
the amount could be utilized for some other works.
Haryana—All the 72 works have been completed.
Andhra Pradesh
Collector Nellore has intimated that sanctions are accorded based on the
proposals given by the Hon'ble MPs. But some of the works have not commenced
due to site disputes and local problems arose at the time of execution. Soon after
receipt of the reports from the executive agencies the said works are being cancelled
by the Hon'ble MPs and new works are proposed in the place of non-commenced
works.
District, Collector Kurnool has intimated that in Nandyal Parliamentary
Constituency, out of 508 works sanctioned during 2004-05 to 2008-09, 07 works
were not taken up due to various reasons like non-availability of ST population,
taken up in other schemes and site problems.
In Kurnool Parliamentary constituency out of 525 works sanctioned during
2004-05 to 2008-09, 18 works are ongoing at the time of performance audit. Now
04 works have been completed and 14 works also completed but the completion
report is awaited from the executing agency.
District Hyderabad has intimated that work-wise reasons for delay in sanction of
17 works have been furnished to the performance audit team during the audit
exercise itself. Most of these 17 works are recommended by the MPs (RS) in other
districts and the delay has taken place in according administrative sanction by the
other concerned district authorities.
Karnataka
In Haveri District threre only 125 incomplete works. All works are in progress
and will be completed as early as possible.
In Bagalkot District there are total 07 works which were not taken up due to land
disputes. Out of these land problem in 04 cases is solved and works are completed

26
as reported by the Implementing Agencies. In respect of remaining 03 works, (KRIDC)
has reported that disputes will be settled and work completed shortly.
Punjab
DC Hoshiarpur has intimated that the funds for 30 works amounting to Rs. 0.25
crore were released by District Authority after obtaining the cost estimates and
other papers from the conerned Implementing agencies. However, in these cases
the dispute arose at the time of start of work. All the amount was refunded by the
concerned Implementing agencies."
As regards information from Kerala, Tripura, Bihar and A&N Island, the Ministry
informed that reply from these States were still awaited.
104. In view of the reply of the Ministry that the State Governments were expected
to complete the abandoned/suspended works from their own funds, the Sub-committee
desired to know the details of the projects completed by the States out of the 307
abandoned works as commented by Audit. The Ministry replied that in the case of
construction of water tank and pipeline at Kesori, Tal Kuhi in Maharashtra, the concerned
IA had submitted the revised estimate and requested to give revised administrative
approval. However, as per the MPLADS Guidelines dated 08.04.2010 as the said work
was sanctioned during the 14th Lok Sabha, the revised administrative approval could
not be given and any such escalation or cost over run had to be borne by the IA.
These facts were communicated to the IA concerned and it was asked to complete the
work immediately. The Ministry further stated that as per the Guidelines, suitable
action would be taken against the IA concerned.
105. On being asked whether the Ministry proposed to fix responsibility on the
officials/IAs who were responsible for non completion of work in time, the Ministry
stated that on receipt of replies from the State/UTs, the Ministry would take up the
matter with the States/UTs concerned. The Ministry also stated that under the federal
setup, it was for the disciplinary authority to not only locate and fix responsibility but
also to take further appropriate disciplinary action.
106. The Sub-committee then pointed out in evidence that one of the reasons for
projects, especially immovable, remaining incomplete was that the MPs could not part
with large sum at one go as such projects like school buildings could not be completed
in one season. In view of that, the Sub-committee asked, whether a suggestion could
be feasible from the Ministry's side with regard to a commitment from the MP concerned
that the subsequent amount would also follow for completion of the projects. In reply,
the Secretary, M/o Statistics and Programme Implementation submitted:—
"...I will look into this and examine what you are suggesting. But let me point
out this to you. I have a difficulty in conceptualizing it, but I will apply my
mind to it. The difficulty is principally the recommending power is with the
MP. I would not like to change that essential character of the Scheme. I have
noted what you have said. Let me try to gather more facts on this thing. I will,
as you have suggested take it up with the Committees of the two Houses to
apprise them of this problem. But I will need some time to think about it."

27
107. The Committee then desired to know whether the Ministry had assessed the
adverse impact of the delay in execution of works under the MPLAD Scheme. In reply,
the Ministry stated that no such assessment  had been undertaken by the Ministry.
However, the NABARD Consultancy Service (NABCONS), an indpendent agency in
its physical monitoring of MPLADS works had reported over all positive impact of the
Scheme on the users, along with some suggestions for modification in the Guidelines
for better monitoring and implementation of the Scheme.
108. Throwing more light on the issue, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of  Statistics
and Programme Implementation submitted as evidence:—
“...we had done the third party monitoring through NABCONS, who have
covered upto now 208 districts and done physical monitoring. They have
informed us that the MPLADS has been a very useful scheme in creating
useful assets based on the locally felt needs. That is one feedback, I wanted
to give. This is actually NABCONS interacting with the people in various
constituencies.”
109. Another representative of the Ministry supplemented:—
“...... But, they (NABCONS) have also reported that sometimes the assets are
lying idle. Some cases have not been traceable. So, we have been directly
taking it up with the District Authorities. Smaller sample of these cases are
certainly brought to our notice and we are regularly brought to our notice and
we are regularly working on that. I am looking into the Guidelines and I am
trying to strengthen the monitoring system.”
XXI. Sub-standard Works
110. Audit review revealed serval shortcomings in the execution of works under the
scheme including sub-standard works in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh.
111. When asked whether the Ministry had obtained the necessary information/
clarification on the sub-standard works mentioned in the Audit Report and the measures
taken to impress upon the Implementing Agencies to produce up to the mark works,
the Ministry submitted as under:—
“It has been reported that the States of Delhi and Uttar Pradesh are involved
in execution of sub-standard works. As per reply received from Chief Engineer,
Municipal Corporation, Delhi, the works executed at site is as per job mix
formula approved by the Competent Authority. However, there is a difference
in specification in schedule item and job mix formula which is having a financial
implications of  Rs. 0.66 crore as pointed out by Audit. The State Authority of
Delhi has reported that the process of recovery has been initiated. The report
from Uttar Pradesh is still awaited.”
112. The Sub-committee asked whether the Ministry had any monitoring mechanism
of their own to oversee the standard of works executed by the DAs/IAs. The Secretary,
M/o Statistics and Programme Implementation replied as under:—
“We can only do a limited amount through the two mechanisms. One is, of
course, the State Government, who we expect to take up on a sample basis.

28
Secondly, our independent exercise which we do through NABCONS. We
expect them also to do a certain amount. But, all these are essentially on a
sample basis. It is not possible to do a complete assessment. For that we will
have to rely on the administrative machinery to implement and report. But,
one reason for expanding the scope not only of NABCONS per se but expand
the number of districts being taken up for physical monitoring is to give us an
independent assessment outside the State. We are actually hoping that we
will authorize more agencies than a single one to look at this work so that we
will have a larger set of agencies doing this work.”
XXII. Identification of the Implementing Agency
113. Although the Guidelines on MPLADS do not allow MPs to select the
Implementing Agency (IA) and this is the responsibility of the DAs alone. Audit
scrutiny revealed that in nine States/UTs, the MPs had recommended the names of
IAs along with their recommendations for works. Further, in some cases, the
recommended IAs were also the user agency, to which the funds were released. In all,
such instances were noticed in 14,904 works (including a case study) most prominently
in West Bengal, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Mizoram, Manipur and Meghalaya.
114. In the above context, the Sub-committee desired to know the action taken
against the DAs who were primarily responsible in exercising due diligence while
scrutinizing the recommendations of the MPs in accord with the provisions contained
in the Scheme. The Ministry in reply inter-alia stated that as per the provision of the
Guidelines, the District Authority shall identify the agency through which a particular
work recommended by the MP should be executed. The District Authorities were
required to adhere to the Guidelines while selecting the Implementing Agencies.
Wherever the District Authorities were found responsible for non adherence to
Guidelines in this regard, the Ministry wrote to the States for taking necessary action
against the officials concerned.
115. The Sub-committee asked whether the MPs had been apprised of the violations
of the Guidelines of the Scheme particularly with regard to the identification and
recommendation of the Implementing Agency, the Ministry replied that the
District Authorities had been requesting in writing to the Hon'ble MPs for desisting
from the practice of nominating the Implementing Agency while recommending the
works.
116. During the course of evidence, in response to a related query, the
Additional Secretary submitted:—
“The Implementing agency is not to be recommended by the MP. It is the
district authority which has to nominate the implementing agency.”
117. When asked whether MPs could at least suggest the implementing agency, the
Additional Secretary responded:—
“That is provided in the Guidelines.”
118. But the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation stated:—
“Technically speaking, it is incorrect.”

29
119. The Sub-committee asked what harm would be there if the MPs recommended
a Government agency to do the job and whether the Guidelines could be modified to
that extent. In response, the Secretary submitted:—
“Sir, formally, the judgement is that the Collector has the authority to decide
the given recommendations by the MP on the project to be undertaken. What
would be the appropriate agency given all the local realities of the State and
the District in question? It is this separation between the Executive and the
Legislature which allowed the Supreme Court to find the Scheme intra vires
of the Constitution. So, formally we cannot provide for the MP in the
Guidelines to recommend the implementing agency. In practice, a number of
informal consultations do take place.”
120. The Secretary further stated:—
“..............It is often brought to our attention that there are very reputed private
agencies who do exemplary work in designated specific  areas and they have
a high level of expertise in certain types and why should that expertise not be
available for implementing these schemes. It is very hard to make a hard and
fast rule because these private agencies are used in implementing other
Government schemes. That is the argument which is made. It is because of
this difficulty that we left the burden of choice on the Collector and reqired
that whatever choice we made, we made within the Guidelines of the concerned
State.”
121. The Sub-committee pointed out that the media did not understand that and
more often than not whenever MPs suggested expert private agencies to do the job, it
was projected/highlighted that as if the MPs wanted kickbacks. The Secretary,
responded:—
“I appreciate your point. I am just explaining my difficulty because I also have
to reconcile the other side. I do appreciate what you are saying.”
XXIII. Non-maintenance of Work Register and Asset Registers
122. Audit pointed out that the work registers were not being maintained in 16DAs
of eight States. Registers maintained in 22 DAs of five States/UTs were found
incomplete. Similarly, asset registers had not been maintained in 115 DAs of 31 States/
UTs (90 per cent of sample).
123. In the above context, when the Sub-committee asked for the reasons for
non-maintenance of work and asset registers by the DAs, the Ministry replied that as
per Para 6.4 (iii) and (iv) of the Guidelines, the District Authority shall maintain the
work registers indicating the position of each work recommended by the MPs. The
District Authority shall also maintain a regsiter of assets created with the Scheme
funds. The District Authorities/Implementing Agencies were expected to adhere to
Guidelines strictly. The Ministry further stated that except the States of Nagaland,
J&K, Assam and Goa, all other States/UTs had informed that they were maintaining the
work register. So far as asset register was concerned, except the States/UTs of Tripura,
Punjab, Puducherry, Nagaland, Mizoram, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Jharkhand, J&K,

30
Delhi, Bihar, Assam and Dadar and Nagar Haveli, all other States/UTs had confirmed
maintenance of such register by the District Authority concerned.
124. In reply to a query of the Sub-committee regarding action taken to ensure
scrupulous maintenance of all the necessary records/registers in a proper manner by
the DAs of all the States/UTs, the Ministry stated that while furnishing action taken
note on the Audit report, the Ministry had requested that maintenance of Work Registers
and Asset Registers be ensured by the District Authorities. It was further stated that
the Ministry had always been requesting the State/UT Nodal Authorities to direct all
the District Authorities to strictly adhere to the provisions of the Guidelines, and this
would again be reiterated.
125. Elaborating on the above aspect, the representative of the Ministry during
evidence stated as under:—
“The present work monitoring system that we have is virtually to capture all
assets created since inception. The districts are responsible to put up
everything on the website. The situation has much improved to the extent
that a majority of assets we are now putting on the website. Delays are
certainly there and it is a fact. That is the reason why are thinking to have an
integrated system. But some kind of compulsion should be there on the
districts as they are bound to put up the information. Basically we are working
on that kind of a system. It is a kind of putting compulsion on the district
authorities as such. Without that they are not able to move with the Press
release and all that.
Presently, in the work monitoring system all assets are basically on the website.
Apart from that, they are maintaining the physical form also. Suppose you
take the new districts, if you go to the site, they have the capsules of all
completed works, all ongoing works and non-started works. It certainly talks
about the assets. Anybody in the public can view this”.
126. Asked to categorically comment on the issue of non-maintenance of Asset
Register, the representative of the Ministry submitted:—
“....Not having an asset register is a very serious flaw.....”
XXIV . Handling Over of Assets to the User agency/Non-use of Assets
127. Audit scrutiny revealed that in seven States/UTs, out of 15,049 sample works
created during 2004-09, formal handling over/taking over of assets was not on record
for 14,828 works (98.53 per cent) worth Rs. 251.91 crore. In five States/UTs, 17 works
completed at a cost of Rs. 1.48 crore had not been put to use. In six districts of five
States, ten assets created at a cost of Rs. 1.48 crore were not being utilized for the
purpose for which these were sanctioned.
128. Asked to state the measures taken to ensure proper utilization of the assets
created, the Ministry replied that in Bi-Annual Review Meeting with the Nodal
Secretaries of the States/UTs, the Ministry directed them to adhere to the provision of
the Guidelines including the formal handing over of the assets to the user agencies as
stipulated in the Guidelines. On receipt of any specific complaint, the Ministry used to

31
request the States/UTs Nodal Authorities for taking corrective measures so as to
avoid recurrence of such irregularities.
129. As regards monitoring of the creation, utilization and maintenance of assets,
the Ministry submitted that monitoring of the progress on creation of assets was done
through WMS and through Monthly Progress Report received from the District
Authorities. It was also stated that as per Para 3.6 the Guidelines, the District Authority
should get in advance a firm commitment about the operation, upkeep and maintenance
of the proposed asset from the User Agency concerned before the execution of the
work was sanctioned.
130. When asked whether the Ministry had obtained the necessary clarification
and investigated each case of non-use/misuse of assets pointed out by Audit and
action taken against the agencies responsible for misuse of assets created out of the
MPLAD funds, the Ministry replied that all the States/UTs were required to reply to
the Audit observation in this regard. The reply received so far had not reported misuse
of assets. The Ministry would request the States/UTs Nodal Authorities to take
necessary action to avoid recurrence of such irregularities.
XXV . Maintenance and Upkeep of Assets
131. Joint physical verification by Audit and district functionaries revealed that
four assets in three States/UTs costing  Rs. 45.00 lakh were not maintained properly.
In this context, the Sub-committee desired to know the mechanism available with the
Ministry to ensure that the assets created were in good condition. In reply, the Ministry
stated that once the assets were created under the MPLAD Scheme, these were handed
over to the User Agencies. It was the responsibility of the User Agencies for its
upkeep, maintenance and use for the purpose for which it was created. The Ministry
also stated that they undertook the third party independent monitoring of the scheme
under which proper utilization of the assets created was being examined and reported.
132. The Sub-Committee pointed out that the assets created under the Scheme were
not going to be there for ever as some assets like Ambulances, Medical equipment and
water coolers had a definite life span and maintenance and upkeep of such assets
would not be economical. In such a scenario, the Sub-Committee desired to know,
whether it would not be prudent to incorporate a provision in the Guidelines for
replacement of assets. In response, the Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation submitted:—
"....I know the position of the Guidelines is that the State is responsible for
the subsequent upkeep and maintenance, but it is a fact that in State
Governments, particularly, with regard to maintenance of assets–even those
created under other Government schemes—is not up to the mark and often
when assets wear away, replacing them is literally as good as a new initiative.
It is not a routine task, which is done in any systematic way. I would be happy
if there is some suggestion or guidance of the Committee whether we can
examine the possibility of such replacement, after the life is over, and it can be
taken up as part of the Scheme. This is something, which I have been thinking
about, though I would hesitate to say that I have fully reached a conclusion
on this issue, but it is worth examining."

32
133. In the same context, another representative of the Ministry submitted:—
“....even Ambulances in the hospitals run out of their economic life in 10-12
years, and as per rules of the State Governments they can condemn the
vehicle and dispose of as per their own rules. But the fact remains that we
need that facility or service of the hospital. As of now, I think that these
Guidelines do not permit the replacement of the assets once their economic
life has run out. But I think that if the Committee makes such a recommendation,
then we can consider it.”
134. As regards provisions for writing off assets, the representative of the Ministry
apprised:—
“My assumption is that writing off assets etc. will be as per State Guidelines
because once the asset is created, it becomes the property of the State. Its
subsequent maintenance, upkeep and disposal will be the responsibility of
the State as per their rules.”
XXVI. Inspection of works
135. The DAs were to inspect at least 10 per cent of the sanctioned works. However,
Audit pointed out that 86 DAs of 23 States/UTs that were audited had not inspected
any work during 2004-05 to 2008-09. Some DAs inspected less number of work and
some did not keep any record of inspection. It indicated a week internal control.
136. When asked to explain the reasons for inadequate inspection of work-in-
progress by the DAs, the Ministry stated that the information received from a majority
of the States/UTs indicated that instructions/Guidelines were being followed and
inspection was carried out. It was however, felt that inadequate inspection of work in
progress was due to non-availability of staff and if available, they were overburdened
with the other Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
137. The Sub-Committee then desired to know whether the Ministry received any
periodical report/return from the DAs indicating the total number of works undertaken
under the Scheme and the number of inspections carried out by them, in reply, the
Ministry stated that no such reports were received in the Ministry as the District
Authorities had been assigned the responsibility for overall supervision and
coordination of the work at the District level. Accordingly, the District Authorities
were expected to maintain such records at the district level.
XXVII.  Monthly Progress Reports
138. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) were not
being received in the Ministry regularly. The Ministry had also not maintained any
register/records to monitor the timely receipt of MPRs. The Ministry could neither
ensure proper receipt of MPRs, nor use the MPRs for strategic planning and to prepare
the details of fund release and expenditure.
139. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to be apprised of the reasons
for pendency of the MPRs and the remedial measures taken to ensure timely receipt of
MPRs. In reply, the Ministry stated that as per Para 6.4 (viii) of the Guidelines, the
Nodal District Authority was required to submit the MPRs to the Government of India/

33
State/UT Government and the MP concerned for each MP separately in the prescribed
format on or before 10th of the succeeding months. It was expected by the Ministry
that the DAs should meticulously follow these instructions and send the MPRs by
due date.
140. In reply to a specific query of the Sub-Committee about the latest status of
pending Monthly Progress Reports to be submitted by the District Authorities, the
Ministry informed that furnishing of Monthly Progress Report by the District authorities
was a continuous process. The Monthly Report prepared by the Ministry provided
such details.
141. In the above context, the Secretary, M/o S&PI during evidence stated that they
were at a fairly advanced stage of preparing a proposal for strengthening the entire
Programme Implementation Wing.
XXVIII.  Uploading of data on Website/Ineffective Monitoring Software
142. The Ministry had developed a software for e-monitoring under the Scheme.
However, Audit pointed out that as on 31 March 2009, details of only 43 per cent of
completed works were uploaded on the website of MPLADS by the DAs. This database
was characterised by a number of omissions and errors rendering it unreliable.
143. In view of the Audit observations, the Committee enquired about the steps
taken by the Ministry to ensure that all the requisite and authentic information were
included in the portal and to make the portal user friendly for MPs. In reply, the
Ministry submitted that the portal contained dynamic information w.r.t. Government of
India releases, expenditure details and work details put up by the Ministry and the
District Authorities on a regular basis besides other information (guidelines, circulars
etc.). The Ministry had evolved internal processes for generating information containing
Government of India release position and expenditure details before uploading on the
portal. The District authority directly entered the works details on the portal after
authentication (login ID password). The system generated status-wise reports regarding
work details including priority Sector-wise reports. The portal was made user friendly
as the above reports could be viewed by the Member of Parliament on a few click of the
button.
144. The Ministry further stated that they used to hold Bi-annual Review Meetings
on MPLADS with the State Planning Department and emphasized regular updation of
data on the portal by the District Authorities. A window had also been provided to the
States for viewing the summary report based on the data entered by the Districts. In
addition, the Ministry funded the States to organize training workshops every year to
familiarize/update the District/State officials with the MPLADS software implemented
at the District level.
XXIX.  Monitoring Committee Meetings
145. The State level Monitoring Committee under the chairmanship of the
Chief Secretary/Development Commissioner was required to hold annual meetings to
review the progress of the implementation of MPLADS. Audit pointed out that the
Monitoring Committee was not constituted in three States/UTs. In 14 States/UTs, the
Committee never met. In the remaining 18 States/UTs, it did not meet annually.

34
146. During evidence, a representative of the Ministry admitted that the State level
monitoring Committees had not been meeting very frequently despite the Ministry's
repeated instructions.
147. The Additional Secretary in the same context submitted:—
“The provision is there in the Guidelines. But we do not get the Minutes. It
is a fact and the C&AG has very rightly observed that their meetings are
very infrequent.”
148. The Sub-Committee pointed out that if the States were not holding regular
meetings, the Minister should write to the CMs concerned so that the Officers
responsible for dereliction of duty could be taken to task. In reply, the Additional
Secretary stated:—
“We will do that.”
149. In view of the non-setting up of State level Monitoring Committee under the
Chairmanship of  the Chief Secretary/Development Commissioner in some States/
UTs and inadequate number of their meetings in some other States/UTs, the Sub-
Committee desired to know its adverse effect in effective monitoring of the Scheme
and the steps taken by the Ministry to impress upon the States/Committees to do
the needful. In reply, the Ministry stated that as per the information received from
some of the States/UTs, monitoring committee meetings were held regularly. However,
Mizoram and Dadar & Nagar Haveli had not constituted the Committees so far. The
Ministry in their Bi-annual Review Meetings and monitoring meetings with State/
District authorities, highlighted this issue to ensure that such meetings were held as
per the provision of the Guidelines.
150. Asked to state the action taken to improve the participation of State
Government/UT Administration/local MPs in the implementation of the Scheme and
whether the local MP was invited to the Monitoring Committee meetings. In reply,
the Ministry stated that as per para 6.3 (i) of the Guidelines, the meeting under the
Chairmanship of Chief Secretary/Development Commissioner should review
implementation of the MPLAD Scheme with District Authorities and MPs at least
once in a year. However, in practice, information had been received from various
District Authorities that despite their request to the MPs to attend such meetings,
some of the MPs did not attend.
151. The Ministry also stated that in normal practice, the copy of the sanction
letter was forwarded to the MPs for the work recommended by them. The MPs were
also invited to the Review meeting of MPLADS Works, held under the Chairmanship
of the Chief Secretary/Development Commissioner, held every year. Moreover, the
District Authorities were required to view and monitor the Progress of the Scheme
on quarterly basis in which the MPs were also to be called.
XXX. Inadequate coverage of areas inhabited by the SC/ST community
152. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Ministry did not have information regarding
utilization of services by the Scheduled Caste (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST)

35
population. In 18 States/UTs, only 13.69 per cent  of  funds were sanctioned for
areas inhabited by the SC/ST community against the requirement of 22.5 per cent.
153. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to know whether any
mechanism had been put in place to ensure that the required percentage of expenditure
under the Scheme was being incurred in the areas inhabited by the Scheduled Caste
(SC) and Scheduled Tribe (ST) population. In reply, the Ministry submitted as under:—
“As per Para 2.5 of the Guidelines, the MPs are expected to recommend
every year works costing at least 15% of MPLADS fund for areas inhabited
by Scheduled Caste population and 7.5% for areas inhabited by Scheduled
Tribe population. In case, a constituency does not have ST inhabited area,
such fund may be utilized in SC inhabited areas and vice-versa. It shall be
the responsibility of the District Authority to enforce this provision of the
Guidelines.
The Guidelines have recently been amplified to include para 3.27 which
provides availability of shelf of Projects including projects for SC/ST
inhabited areas to MPs. Though the Shelf of Projects is only suggestive, it
gives ample flexibilities to the MP to go beyond the list in order to meet the
needs of the people.”
154. When the Sub-Committee asked whether the Ministry had taken any measures
to collate the data on expenditure under the Scheme for the benefit of the Scheduled
Caste (SC) and Scheduled Tribe (ST) population as received from the DAs through
Monthly Progress Reports, the Ministry replied that they had no manpower to
collate all the data from the District Authorities.
XXXI. Internal Audit
155. Internal audit is an integral part of any internal financial control system.
Audit, however, noticed that neither the Ministry nor 17 States/UTs had made any
arrangements for an internal audit of the scheme.
156. In the above context, the internal audit wing of the Ministry had clarified
that internal audit of the scheme had never been conducted since the inception of
the scheme in 1993-94.
157. The Sub-Committee asked in evidence the role and responsibility of the
Ministry in this regard. In reply, the representative of the Ministry stated:—
“We have provided in the Guidelines that the  District Authorities can use
from the CAG panel of Chartered Accountants and Auditors to get one of
them to do an audit of the MPLAD funds and submit us an audit
Certificate....”
158. Asked to state whether it was mandatory on the part of the States to carry
out internal audit of the MPLAD funds, the representative of the Ministry
submitted:—
“It is in the guidelines. They are empanelled by the CAG Office or the State
Accountant General Office.”

36
159. He further stated:—
“...suppose I am looking into the release of 2011-12, we are calling for the
audit of 2009-10. It is with the intention that the CA must examine the entire
banking accounts, the financial details and report us back. If any irregularities
have been found, they must report to us....If you see Audit Certificate
Proforma in the Guidelines, it has certainly talked about some kind of check
to be brought before us in the entirety, the financial discipline and control
mechanism”.
160. While discussing the matter in one of their meetings, the Sub-Committee
decided to get the views/suggestions of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India with regard to bringing out a foolproof simultaneous internal auditing mechanism
for the MPLAD Scheme. According a reference was made to the ICAI and in response,
the Institute informed that they had already given their recommendations to the
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation on improvement in accounting
and auditing aspects of the MPLAD Scheme. A copy of the report was also obtained
by the Sub-Committee.
XXXII.  Conclusion
161. Many of the systemic weaknesses affecting the implementation of MPLAD
Scheme had been persisting since its inception 17 years ago. The lapses were brought
to the notice of the Ministry by the C&AG in their two earlier performance Audit
Reports (1998 and 2001). Audit pointed out that submission of Action Taken Notes
(ATNs) on the report of 2001 after a lapse of eight years (2009) spoke volumes about
the monitoring methods. Given that many weaknesses noted in this audit had been
persisting over the years notwithstanding the reported corrective actions confirmed
by the Ministry in the ATNs, any drastic improvement in the implementation of the
Scheme appeared to the Audit unlikely.
162. Keeping in view the persistent systemic weaknesses in the implementation
of the Scheme, as pointed out by Audit, the sub-Committee enquired about the
status of the prosposed revision, if any, of the Guidelines of MPLADS and its
distinct salient features to make the Scheme more effective. In reply the Ministry
stated that to ensure that the MPLADS Scheme was implemented in the spirit of the
Guidelines, it was necessary that the Guidelines were followed properly by the
District Authorities. The Ministry further stated that in the course of the time, many
suggestions had been received for making amendment in the Guidelines. The
suggestions had been examined and various amendment in the Guidelines had been
notified. The Revised Guidelines were expected to be made available in the coming
year.
163. The Sub-Committee pointed out in evidence that there were two earlier C&AG
Reports on the MPLAD Scheme i.e. one in 1998 and the other one in 2001. In that
context, the Sub-Committee desired to know the specific corrective action taken on
the shortcomings pointed out by Audit. In reply, the representative of the Ministry
submitted:—

37
“Based on the observation and suggestion of the earlier C&AG's Report
and the Action Taken Report submitted by the States, it was confirmed that
lot of hitches were there in the Guidelines which we could modify. The final
modified Guidelines came out in 2005. So, in order to have an effective,
better implementation, better monitoring of the scheme and mode of financial
control, a number of suggestions were there in this regard. If you look at
the 2005 guidelines, the modifications with regard to the monitoring parameter
were quite exhaustive at the level of our Ministry, at the level of a State, at
the level of a district and at the level of the implementing agency. The
MPLADS website was also created in 2004.”
164. The Additional Secretary supplemented:—
“The CAG also suggested some measures to be taken by the Ministry in
terms of devising a robust monitoring mechanism strengthening internal
controls and impose greater financial discipline for the release and
expenditure. In this regard, I would like to say that this Ministry has
accordingly modified Release and Expenditure Guidelines recently in August,
2011 in consultation with the Department of Expenditure in order to bring
the releases more or less in line with the GFRs and in order to bring about
a better utilization of funds and minimize the unspent balances available at
any given point of time. This specially becomes more important with the
increase in the entitlement of an MP per annum from Rs. 2 crore to Rs. 5 crore
with effect from 1st April, 2011”.
165. As regards action taken by the State Governments on the Audit observations
as contained in the present Audit Report (2010) under discussion, the Additional
Secretary, Ministry of S&PI submitted:—
“....... I would like to bring to the notice of the Hon'ble Committee that eight
States/UTs, that is, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Dadra and Nagar Haveli,
Goa, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala and Nagaland have not furnished a single
reply up till now. In addition, only partial replies have been received from
other States or UTs.....”
166. The Sub-Committee asked what course of action the Ministry used to take in
such a scenario. The Additional Secretary replied that the Ministry was constantly
following up with the States and UT Governments and districts on a regular basis
for obtaining the ATNs and the complete replies. He further stated:—
“We are sending reminders and we are pursuing with them”.
167. Asked to state whether the Ministry's responsibility ended at just sending
the reminders, the Additional Secretary responded:—
“We have to write to the Chief Secretaries and if we do not get any action,
even the Hon'ble Committee can summon the officers because we live in a
federal set up. So, our Ministry's hands are tied to the extent that we have
to keep on reminding.”

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS
The Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS),
introduced on 23 December 1993 to enable the Members of Parliament (MPs) to
identify small works of capital nature to meet local needs in their constituencies, is
a Plan Scheme fully funded by the Government of India. The funds released under the
Scheme are non-lapsable. The Scheme provides that a Member of Lok Sabha may
select works for implementation in his/her constituency while a Member of Rajya
Sabha may select works for implementation in one or more districts of his/her choice
in the State from which he/she has been elected. The Scheme is administered by the
Union Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, which is responsible
for policy formulation, release of funds and also for prescribing a monitoring
mechanism for its implementation. At the State level, a Department is designated as
the Nodal Department with the overall responsibility for supervision, monitoring and
coordination of MPLADS implementation with the districts and other line
Departments. Decision making powers in regard to technical, financial and
administrative sanctions to be accorded under the Scheme vest in the district level
functionaries, viz., the District Authorities (DAs). The Audit had earlier reviewed the
scheme in 1998 and also in 2001 wherein it had pointed out several weaknesses/
lapses in the implementation of the Scheme. Based on the current review of the
scheme by the C&AG for the period between April, 2009 and December 2009, through
test check of records of the Ministry, States/UTs and DAs, covering the period
2004-05 to 2008-09, the examination of the subject by the Committee has revealed
several deficiencies in sanction and execution of work, utilization of funds,
maintenance of various records and monitoring of the implementation of MPLAD
Scheme at both Central and State levels as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. The Committee note that the Government of India released Rs. 19,425.75 crore
between 1993-94 to 2008-09 towards the MPLAD Scheme. Against a total fund of
Rs. 19,845.91 crore available with the DAs including Rs. 420.16 crore accrued as
interest, an expenditure of Rs. 18,057.91 crore (91 per cent) was incurred. On
scrutiny of the budget allocation, funds released and previous years funds available
with the DAs during the years 2004-05 to 2008-09 the Committee find that an amount
of Rs. 17891.15 crore was available with the DAs whereas the actual expenditure
incurred in all these years combinedly was to the tune of  Rs.  8084.53 crore,
depicting significant shortfalls in the utilization of funds each year. The Ministry's
explanation that in non-lapsable schemes they look at the expenditure on cumulative
basis is untenable in view of less than 50 per cent cumulative expenditure during the
above said five years. Further, the non-lapsable character of a particular Scheme and
the resultant carry forward of the unspent balances to the next fiscal cannot be a ruse
for non-completion of the projects/works within a given financial year and the given
38

39
time lines. On the contrary, non-completion of projects and non-utilisation of the
earmarked funds defeats the very purpose for which the Scheme was conceived and
funds allotted annually. Similarly, though it is a fact that the funds were released to
different Lok Sabha constituencies and Rajya Sabha MPs at different points of time
and unspent balances are bound to exist at any given point of time, the trend of fund
utilization during each of the five years 2004-05 to 2008-09 is deplorable. As merely
making provision in the guidelines would not be sufficient to maximize the funds
utilization, the Committee urge the Ministry to take appropriate steps, including
effective monitoring, to ensure optimum utilization of the annual earmarked funds by
the State Government/DAs so that the unspent balances are reduced to the barest
minimum and the avowed objectives of the MPLAD SCheme are well served. The
Committee hardly need to emphasise that the need for taking such pro-active measures
on the part of the Ministry assumes far greater significance in view of the enhancement
of the annual entitlement of an MP from Rs.  2 crore to Rs.  5 crore w.e.f. the financial
year 2011-12.
3. The Committee are highly concerned to note that 12 DAs of six States inflated
the figures of expenditure by Rs. 35 crore by depicting the entire advance of
Rs. 100.17 crore released to the Implementing Authorities as utilized. Not only that,
the DAs had reported lesser amount of interest earned in their annual accounts and/
or Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) than those reported in the MPRs of the earlier
months resulting in an understatement of interest of  Rs. 5.60 crore in respect of
21 constituencies. Shockingly, in blatant violation of the General Financial Rules
(GFR) 2005 DAs in some States are showing money given as advance as expenditure
in the Utilisation Certificate (UC). Though the Ministry of S&PI hold the DAs/IAs
responsible for properly maintaining the accounts of MPLADs funds as per the
State/UT Governments yet they failed to obtain/examine necessary clarifications of
the DAs/States concerned on the financial irregularities. Since the Ministry are
still in the process of developing an integrated software incorporating District-wise
MPLADs accounts and collating annual accounts and balance sheet of all the Districts
and considering the importance and urgency of developing such an integrated software,
the Committee impress upon the Ministry to expedite development and installation of
the woftware without further loss of time. The Committee are sanguine that the early
installation of the desired integrated software would help capture all the relevant data
and facilititate effective management and monitoring of the MPLAD Scheme both at
micro and macro levels. The Committee also desire that the necessary explanations
of the DAs concerned be obtained and examined by the Ministry without further loss
of time so that requisite preventive and punitive measures are taken to observe strict
fiscal discipline.
4. The Committee are dismayed to note that the unspent balances of the present
and former Rajya Sabha MPs stood at Rs. 3186.75 crore as on 30th September, 2011,
as per the Monthly Progress Reports received by the Ministry. It is a matter of
serious concern that although there was a time line i.e. 31st December, 2010 for the
States to complete the accounting process, some States had not disturbuted the unspent
balances nor closed the accounts, even by the end of October, 2011. The Ministry
admitted before the Committee that it happens a number of times that distribution of

40
unspent balances does not take place on a regular basis and the Ministry are not sure
whether the accounts have formally been closed or not in case of those States which
have initiated the distribution process. It is a matter of little consolation that the
Ministry keep on reiterating through circulars and review meetings for timely
distribution of the unspent balances. In view of the huge proportion of the outstanding
unspent balances. as on 30th September, 2011, it is obvious that the Ministry's efforts
are grossly inadequate. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
should intesify their monitoring mechanism, tighten the related provisions in the
Guidelines and prescribe a definite time limit for the distribution of unspent balances
of the Members of  Parliament as well as for the timely closure of the accounts. The
Committee specifically desire that a sunset clause be incorporated in the Guidelines
making it mandatory that if the States are unable to distribute the unspent balances
within the prescribed time line, the funds would revert to the Centre.
5. Diversion of funds meant for MPLAD Scheme to other Schemes of the Central
and State Governments is another area of serious concern. The Committee find that
Rs. 4.67 crore of the MPLAD funds were diverted to other Schemes by 22 DAs of
seven States, although the DAs are not authorized to do so. What further irks the
Committee is the fact that the Ministry, instead of taking prompt action when the
irregularities were pointed out by Audit, are yet to write to the State Governments for
taking action against the DAs concerned. Since diversion of funds meant for MPLAD
Scheme to other Schemes is a clear violation of rules notwithstanding the fact that in
some cases diverted funds have been received back, the Committee exhort the Ministry
to impress upon the State Governments concerned to initiate disciplinary action
against the DAs involved in such irregularities. The Committee also recommend that
the Ministry, in consultation and coordination with the State Governments, should
resort to foolproof measures with a view to ensuring that under no cirucumstances
funds meant for MPLAD Scheme are diverted, even temporarily, to any other Schemes.
6. Although the MPLADS Guidelines stipulate that the Implementing Agencies
shall refund to the District Authorities the savings including interest, if any, at their
disposal within one month and close the Bank Account opened for the purpose, the
Committee find that in 24 States/UTs, unspent balances of  Rs. 1.98 crore arising due
to completion of works at lower than the sanctioned cost and interest accrued on
balances of Rs. 4.71 crore have not been refunded by the IAs to the DAs after the
completion of the works. The Ministry's statement that there are minimal chances of
the unspent amount is left with the IAs is self-contradictory in view of their own
admission that an amount of Rs. 127.50 lakh was the balance unspent amount lying
with the IAs in various States/UTs. Needless to say, the two statements need to be
reconciled by the Ministry. Although it is the responsibility of the DAs to coordinate
and supervise the work being executed under MPLADS and ask the IAs to refund the
unspent amount, yet if the DAs are found wanting in the effective discharge of their
assigned duties, prudence warrants that the Ministry intervene appropriately. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to monitor the expenditure closely and
take up the matter with the State/UT Governments so that the IAs refund promptly the
unspent amount including interest to the DAs as per the procedure laid down in the
MPLADS Guidelines.

41
7. The Committee note that in 13 States/UTs, 35 DAs utilized an amount of
Rs. 1.30 crore on inadmissible items like payment of honorarium/wages/travelling
expenses of staff, fuel for official vehicles, purchase of laptops etc. Further, six DAs
in five States incurred excess expenditure on contingencies than the prescribed limit
of 0.5 per cent of the amount spent on the completed project. The Ministry's statement
that the DAs are expected to ensure that the expenses remain within the prescribed
limit does not satisfy the Committee, as mere expectation without any preventive or
punitive action, would not deter the DAs from incurring excess expenditure on
contingencies. Now that the Administrative Expenses have been increased to 2 per cent
of the amount spent on the completed project w.e.f. the financial year 2011-12,
commensurate with the enhancement of the MPLAD fund allocation, the Committee
recommend that a separate account for such expenditure incurred during a financial
year be maintained and the MP concerned be informed in accord with the provisions
stipulated in the Guidelines. Any deviations in this regard be viewed seriously and
stringent action taken against the DAs in the event of incurring expenditure on
inadmissible items or beyond the prescribed limit. The Committee would also like the
Ministry to explore the feasibility of extending necessary assistance to the MPs for
monitoring works recommended by them.
8. The Committee deprecate to note that proper records are not maintained by the
Ministry to watch the progress of the receipt of the Annual Accounts and Utilisation
Certificates from the DAs. Further, the Ministry have routinely been relaxing the
conditions for submission of UCs and Audit Certificates by the DAs, before allowing
the release of the second instalment of funds. The Committee are surprised that the
Ministry themselves are not maintaining proper records which are so vital for it to
review overall funds utilization but expect the State Governments/DAs/IAs to be
perfect in every respect just because Guidelines have been issued. The Committee
are of the firm opinion that the Ministry have to first put their house in order and set
an example for the State/UT Governments to emulate. They, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry should urgently start maintaining MP-wise Grants-in-Aid Register
with details of funds released, status of the receipt of the Monthly Progress Reports,
Utilisation Certificates and Audit Certificates in a computerized formate with complete
data validation and place it on the official website of the Ministry for effective monitoring
of the fund utilization as well as to bring in transparency and public scrutiny.
9. The Committee take due note of the explanation of the Ministry that the decision
to relax the conditions for submission of UCs and ACs by the DAs was taken on the
basis of review of release position to ensure that the works recommended by the MPs
and sanctioned by the Districts did not suffer for want of funds. While appreciating
the concern of the Ministry, the Committee would, however, like to caution that such
relaxations in the conditons for submission of UCs must be discouraged so that
proper fiscal discipline is maintained while ensuring smooth progress of the Scheme.
Having said that, the Committee are of the view that timely furnishing of the UCs by
the DAs/IAs should be ensured so that subsequent release of instalment of funds do
not get delayed.
10. The Committee are worried to observe instances of doubtful expenditure which
include non-existence of assets in West Bengal and Jharkhand, payments made on

42
doubtful muster roll entries in Bihar and on doubtful vouchers in Mizroam and
Jharkhand, leading to a combined financial irregularities of Rs. 40 lakh. although
the State Governments of West Bengal, and Mizoram have furnished certain
explanations on the matter including action taken thereon, the State Governments of
Bihar and Jharkhand did not bother to even respond to the irregularities pointed out
by Audit. The Committee desire that such indifferent attitude of the State Governments
concerned be viewed seriously by the Ministry and the matter be taken up with utmost
urgency at the Chief Minister/Chief Secretary level so that responsibility could be
fixed on the delinquent officials.
11. The Committee find that the abovesaid doubtful expenditure occurred due to
grossly inadequate monitoring of the projects by both the District Authorities and the
Implementing Agencies, as corroborated by the Ministry in evidence. The Committee
are of the considered view that mere lodging of an FIR against the Head Master of a
particular school or the local head of the implementing agency would not suffice to
check financial fraud and irregularities, unless supervisory officers, including those
who check and sign the Utilization Certificates are held primarily responsible for
any doubtful expenditure. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to prevail
upon the State Governments where such irregularities have been reported to further
investigate the matter with a view to finding out whether there are larger conspiracies
involved in the fraud and depending upon the findings, exemplary action be taken
against the officers concerned. The Committee also desire that the practice of
submitting vouchers on plain paper by the Implementing Agencies, as happens in
some States, be discarded forthwith so that instances of payments on doubtful vouchers
do not recur.
12. The Committee note that the objective of the MPLAD Scheme is to enable the
MPs to recommend works of developmental nature with emphasis on the creation of
durable community assets based on the locally felt needs in their constituencies. As
per the provisions of the Guidelines, the Panchayati Raj Institutions are the preferable
Implementing Agencies and according to the Ministry it is expected that an MP
during his constitutency tour should consult the PRIs. But the Committee feel that
the design of the Scheme itself should specify the mechanism to be adopted by the
MPs to ensure participation of various constituents like active resident forums, local
bodies and NGOs in determining and recommending the works responsive to locally
felt needs and according to the priority of the MP's constituency. With a view to
invovling the local bodies/communities effectively in the planning and implementation
of the Scheme, the Committee recommend that the Implementing Agencies should be
advised/counselled to involve local people/bodies while conceiving, designing and
implementing works/projects under MPLADS so that a sense of belonging and
participatory approach is generated.
13. One of the peculiar characteristics of the MPLAD Scheme is that it is unlike
other Centrally Sponsored Schemes where action plan is made in the early part of the
financial year. As the MPs frequently tour their constituencies and make
recommendations, sometimes as late as February and March of the financial years,
based on the locally felt needs, the Ministry have amended para 2.6 of the guidelines

43
to enable the MPs to make recommendations throughout the financial year. In this
context, the Committee find that in respect of  34,023 works pertaining to 64 DAs in
15 States/UTs, recommendations were furnished by the MPs with delays beyond the
prescribed limit of 90 days from the commencement of the financial year and such
recommendations continued upto the end of the financial year, thus extending the
period of utilization of funds. The Committee appreciate the concerns and steps taken
by the Ministry in enabling the MPs to continue recommending works throughout
the financial year, as funds do not lapse at the end of the fiscal under the Scheme. But,
in view of the urgency of the projects in some sectors like education, drinking water
supply, health and family welfare, drainage etc. Which have a direct utility impact on
the people and a greater outreach for long term sustainable benefits, the Committee
desire that the Ministry may advise the MPs to timely recommend as far as practicable,
the works pertaining to such sectors so that both short term and long term benefits
are extended to the people and time and cost overrun is avoided. The Committee also
desire that a system needs to be evolved wherein the DAs, after evaluating the locally
felt needs of the people, can suggest comparatively lead activities to be taken up at the
beginning of the financial year so as to facilitate the timely recommendation of works
by the MPs. The Committee would further like the Ministry to explore the feasibility
of the provision of issuance of structural safety certificate by the local/competent
authority for very old aided school buildings, where building plans are not available,
with a view to enabling the MPs to recommend work for such educational institutions.
14. The Committee are shocked to note that nine DAs in eight States executed 700
works costing Rs. 9.45 crore without formal recommendations of the MPs concerned.
In addition, three DAs in three States executed 150 works amounting to
Rs. 2.44 crore, recommended by the representatives of the MPs. It is really
incomprehensible that on the plea of urgency of work and assurance of the local MLA
to make available funds from the MPLAD Scheme, the District Authorities had
sanctioned the work in anticipation of the MP's recommendation. As per the provisions
of para 3.12 of the Guidelines, the implementation of the works under the MPLAD
Scheme should start only after the receipt of the recommendation of work from the
MPs. This is to be scrupulously followed by the District Authorities and if any deviation
occurs, The State Government can take disciplinary action against the DAs. But the
Committee are perturbed to observe that no disciplinary action has been taken against
the erring DAs even after a lapse of five/six years and the Additional Secretary,
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, though submitted before the
Committee that the Ministry do not support such kind of action on the part of the DAs
and it calls for disciplinary action, the Ministry have not taken up the matter at the
appropriate level. In view of the fact that award/implementation of works without
formal recommendation from the MPs is a clear violation of the provisions of the
MPLADS Guidelines and tantamount to gross irregularities, the Committee urge
the Ministry to bring the irregularities committed by the DAs concerned immediately
to the notice of the Union Department of Personnel and Training and also to the Chief
Secretary of the State Government concerned for initiating disciplinary action against
the defaulting officers. The Committee are of the firm opinion that such an action on
the part of the Ministry is imperative so as to convey in unambiguous terms that
irregularities of such nature would not be brooked or allowed to go unpunished. The

44
Committee further desires that as soon as the MPs recommend a particular work,
the same should be intimated by the IAs to the beneficiaries.
15. The Committee note that the Ministry have issued the illustrative list of eligible
works under the MPLAD Scheme to all the States/UTs. Despite that, the Committee
note that during the period from 2004 to 2009, an expenditure of Rs. 73.76 crore was
incurred on 2340 works which are prohibited as per the Scheme Guidelines. It is the
responsibility of the DAs to examine and sanction only eligible works recommended
by the MPs. Therefore, the explanation of the Ministry that sometimes due to
compelling circumstances the DAs have to act on the recommendations of the MPs
for one reasons or the other beyond their control, resulting in execution of prohbited
works is not acceptable to the Committee. Though the Ministry have reported that
they have been taking action wherever such irregularities are pointed out and asking
for recoupment of funds. Y et the exact amount of funds recouped from the defaulting
authorities in the States/UTs concerned is yet to be known to the Ministry. Since
award of prohibited works is illegitimate under the Guidelines, the Committee impress
upon the Ministry to urgently take up the matter with the State Governments concerned
so that funds are recouped with interest, wherever prohibited works have been awarded/
implemented, as per the provisions contained in the Guidelines. The Committee wish
to emphasise that it is incumbent upon the DAs to bring to the notice of the MPs the
distinction between the eligible and prohibited works in terms of the Guidelines and
to stand firm to ensure that under no circumstance or condition prohibited works are
executed. It also need to be made abundantly clear that responsibility shall be fixed on
the DAs and exemplary action taken against them if any deviation is made by them
from the approved Guidelines.
16. The Committee note that in 10 States, Rs. 14.40 crores were sanctioned and
released for works pertaining to 34 Trusts/Societies, which exceeded the ceiling of
Rs. 25 lakh per Trust/Society as fixed under the Scheme Guidleines. The Committee
further note that in seven States, the DAs sanctioned Rs. 5.94 crore to 145 Trusts/
Societies which were either not eligible as per the Guidelines or whose eligibility
were not verified by the DAs. The Ministry have attributed reasons like non-obtaining
of declarations from the Trusts/Societies by the DAs, lack of interaction amongst the
DAs and lack of transparency due to non-availability of records of the Trusts/Societies
online, for the above cited irregularities in the States of West Bengal, Meghalaya and
Jharkhand whereas no response has been received from other States like Jharkhand,
Goa, Maharashtra and Rajasthan. The Committee deplore the sorry state of affairs
leading to blatant violation of the provisions of the Guidelines and the resultant
siphoning away of public funds. They desire that the Ministry expeditiously obtain the
clarifications from those States which have not Y et responded to the lapses, examine
the explanations of all the States concerned and prevail upon them to investigate the
matter for initiating necessary and appropriate action against the erring officials
and the Committee be apprised of the specific measures taken in this regard. The
Committee also desire that a Central database containing district-wise list of all the
eligible Trusts/Societies be maintained by the Ministry so as to avoid recurrence of
lapses and to facilitate timely recoupment of funds.

45
17. The Committee recommend that the ceiling of Rs. 25 lakh per Trust/Society
as per the Scheme Guidelines should be doubled commensurate with the increase of
the MPLAD fund from Rs. 2 crore to Rs. 5 crore per MP. They also desire that in view
of the highly commendable works done by some Trusts/Societies of national/
international repute, the allocation of the prescribed MPLAD fund to them should not
be a one time affair. In other works, based on the periodic assessment of the
performance of the Trusts/Societies, they may be allocated funds at regular intervals,
say every five/six years.
18. Although the MPLADS Guidelines stipulate that the time limit for completion
of works should generally not exceed one year, the Committee note that percentage of
works remaining incomplete ranged from 48.23 percent in 2004-05 to 59.28 percent
in 2006-07 reportedly due to various reasons which inter-alia include late receipt of
recommendations of work from the MPs, selection of inadmissible work, non-
identification of land, local disputes, delay in tendering procedure, imposition of
election code of conduct and shortage of staff in DRDA/Nodal Agency in the District.
The Committee are also unhappy to note that 33 States/UTs have not yet reported the
action taken against the Implementing Agencies who failed to complete the work
within the stipulated time mentioned in the sanction letter. To make the matter worse,
the Ministry are not in a position to effectively monitor the incomplete works as
according to their own admission they do not get the reports about the completion or
non-completion of the projects due to insufficient updation of the information by the
DAs. Even then, the Ministry are just in the thinking stage of developing a single
portal whereby they could get the status of work on real time basis. The Committee
feel that it is high time the Ministry rose to the occasion and considered setting up of
an effective institutional mechanism for regular and concurrent monitorng of the
ongoing works in view of the fact that the cumulative number of works is increasing
every year. Needless to stress that the upkeep of data on the implementation of the
MPLAD Scheme requires tremendous  improvement. In fact, the implementation
process, right from sanctions of works till their completion must be IT enabled and a
comprehensive software portal is an absolute must for effective data compilation,
management and monitoring. The Committee, therefore, emphasize that urgent
centralized efforts at the level of the Ministry be made to develop a single portal, if
required by outsourcing reputed IT firms, for streamlining the data base management
system and obtaining data on real time basis so that not only the assets created under
the scheme are highlighted for public awareness and scrutiny but also requisite
corrective measures are taken as and when warranted. The Committee further desire
that the Ministry should appropriately take up with the State Governments the matters
of procedural impediments like non-identification of land, local disputes, delay in
tendering procedure etc. so that timely action is taken and delay in implementation/
execution of works is avoided. It is also imperative on the part of the Ministry to
unfailingly bring to the notice of the Chief Secretaries of those States who have not
yet clarified the delays on their part in the execution of MPLADS works. Even after
that, if the State Governments concerned fail to comply, the matter should be brought
to the notice of the Chief Ministers so that responsbility is fixed on the errant officials
and action taken against the defaulting Implementing Agencies.

46
19. The Committee are concerned to note that 391 works at an estimated cost of
Rs. 18.08 crore, already released by the DAs, could not be commenced during the
period  2004-09 in 10 States/UTs. Further, 2006 works amounting to
Rs. 279.99 crore in 16 States/UTs remained incomplete for periods ranging from one
year to five years and in some cases even upto 15 years. Not only that, 307 works on
which Rs. 13.90 crore was spent were abandoned or at standstill in 11 States/UTs.
Such a large number of works involving huge sum of money remaining incomplete,
nonstarters and stand still belie the Ministry's assurance that they do review the
physical and financial performance of the MPLAD Scheme in their biannual and
monitoring meetings with the State Government/DAs. In fact, as per their own
admission before the Committee, the Ministry initiate action and give appropriate
directions only on receipt of specifics complaints, if any, in a particular District. The
Committee are of the considered opinion that in a Centrally Sponsored Scheme like
MPLADS, the Ministry cannot and should not remain content by merely issuing the
Guidelines and expecting the State Governments/DAs to perform according to the
provisions contained therein. As an ounce of practice is worth more than tons of
preachings, the Ministry ought to strengthen their own monitoring mechanism, take
serious note of the inordinate delays in the commencement and completion of the
projects under the Scheme and resort to corrective measures viz. stopping further
release of funds and bringing the non-performance of the Officers/Agencies
concerned to the notice of the Central/State Government Authorities for initiating
necessary disciplinary action.
20. The Committee find that one of the main reasons for a substantial number of
projects, especially immovable, remaining incomplete is that a large sum cannot be
sanctioned at one go under MPLAD Scheme and projects like school buildings cannot
be normally completed in one season. The Committee would, therefore, like the
Ministry, as also assured by the Secretary in evidence, to examine the feasibility of
obtaining commitment from the MPs that the subsequent amount would also follow
for completion of the projects. To be fair to the District Authorities who are primarily
responsible for execution of works under the MPLADS, a mechanism should be
devised whereby the DAs could get written assurance from the  MPs regarding
timely and subsequent release of funds so that they can take into account the cost of
the projects, the pattern of  release of funds, the tenure of the MPs concerned etc. for
smooth completion of the projects within a definite time frame. The Committee also
desire that a concurrent monitoring mechanism for the ongoing projects may be
introduced in the Guidelines to resolve various issues including delay in release of
instalment of funds so that time and cost overrun in the execution of projects are
avoided.
21. Although the Guidelines stipulate the time frame for sanction and completion
of eligible works under the MPLADS, The Committee note that there has been no
provision for the completion of abandoned/suspended works. The Ministry have
clarified that as the implementation of the Scheme is the responsibility of the DAs,
the State Governments are expected to complete the abandoned/suspended works
from their own funds. The Committee desire that a suitable provision to this effect be
incorporated in the Guidelines so that if it becomes mandatory for the State/UT

47
Governments to complete the abandoned/suspended projects from their own funds,
they would certainly take action against the DAs/IAs who abandon works after
incurring expenditure on them.
22. The Committee note that the Ministry themselves have not assessed the adverse
impact of the delay in execution of works under the MPLAD Scheme. They have,
however, assigned to NABARD Consultancy Service Pvt. Ltd. (NABCONs) the job of
having an independent/monitoring review of the works completed under the MPLADS.
The NABCONS accordingly carried out its study in three phases in the years
2007-08 to 2009-10 covering 30, 43 and 60 Districts respectively. The Committee's
perusal of the NABCONS 2009-10 report covering 60 Districts in 24 States/UTs has
revealed that the Consultancy Service has given some very useful suggestions/
recommendations in the effective implementation of the MPLAD Scheme. The
Committee desire that the Ministry should appropriately consider the suggestions
made by the NABCONS for implementation in the smooth functioning of the Scheme.
They also recommend that more Agencies like the NABCONS be engaged in such
independent assessment of the Scheme so that more and more Districts are covered
and corrective action taken to make the Scheme fruitful.
23. The MPLADS Guidelines provide that all the eligible works under the Scheme
are to be sanctioned within 45 days of the receipt of the recommendations from the
MPs. But, the Committee note that there were delays, in many cases even upto one
year, in according sanction by the DAs in respect of 28,135 works in 104 Districts of
28 States/UTs. The Ministry have furnished reasons for the inordinate delay in
sanction of works which inter-alia include delay in administrative and tendering
procedures, non-submission of the estimates from the IAs in time, non-identification
of land and work place, dependency on engineering/other officers for technical
estimates of the recommended works, non-fulfilment of formalities by the IAs, lack of
additional infrastructure and manpower, imposition of model code of conduct of
elections and change in design on the recommendation of the MPs as per the demand
of the public. Taking into account the reasons given by the State Governments, the
Ministry have reportedly emphasized that rejection of the works, if any, has to be
made within 45 days from the date of receipt of the proposal and approval has to be
accorded after obtaining all the clearances within 75 days. The Committee are unhappy
with the reasons adduced for the delay in sanction of works and they are not convinced
with the rationale on which the Ministry have given 30 days more to the State
Governments for sanction of work when the Guidelines clearly stipulate that all the
eligible works under the Scheme are to be sanctioned within 45 days of the receipt of
the recommendations from the MPs. The Committee, therefore, stress that the time
line prescribed between the recommendation and sanction of works under the Scheme
be strictly adhered to and the DAs be impressed upon to resolve the administrative
impediments in coordination with the other departments concerned so as to timely
overcome the procedural shortcomings like delay in tendering process, non-
identification of land/site, non-fulfilment of formalities by the IAs etc. The Committee
specifically emphasise that no work should be awarded without requisite administrative
approval or without following proper tendering procedure as any deviations in this
regard would lead to irregularities. The Committee also desire that the Ministry

48
should take up with the State Governments the matter of strengthening the staff
position at the DA level, who are primarily responsible for the overall implementation
of the MPLADS. In fact, there is an urgent need for an assessment of the ideal
staffing pattern and redesigning of job specifications of the staff at the DA level with
a view to facilitating creation of dedicated cell for MPLADS in each DA's office with
appropriate staff and adequate infrastructure for effective inspection and
implementation of the Scheme.
24. Instances of sub-standard works under the MPLAD Scheme in Delhi and
Uttar Pradesh have come to the notice of the Committee during the course of the
examination of the subject. While the Delhi Government have explained the position
i.e. difference in specification in the schedule items and the job mix formula leading
to a financial implication of Rs. 66 lakh, the report from the UP Government is still
awaited in the Ministry. In order to maintain the quality and credibility of the assets
created out of MPLAD funds, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to introduce
and operationalise an effective quality control mechanism for the MPLADS, in line
with other CPWD/PWD works, the Committee also recommend that the DAs should
carry out regular and surprise monitoring of the ongoing and completed projects so
that in case of any quality compromise action could be taken against the Implementing
Agencies. The Ministry/State Government authorities should also take periodic stock
of the position during their field visits so that appropriate action could be initiated
against the District Authorities, if found wanting in their assigned roles and
responsibilities. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should obtain
and compile periodical reports/returns from the DAs indicating the total number of
works undertaken in their respective Districts and the number of inspections carried
out by them as per the provisions of the Guidelines so that effective checks and
corrective measures, wherever needed, could be initiated concurrently.
25. The Committee are highly concerned to note some instances of the MPs
recommending the names of the Implementing Agencies alongwith their
recommendations for works, although the Guidelines debar the MPs from making
such recommendations. Worse, in some cases the recommended IAs were found to be
the used agencies, to whom the funds, were released. Explaining the position, the
Ministry have clarified that wherever the DAs, who shall identify the IAs under the
provisions of the Guidelines, deviate from the prescribed procedure, the Ministry
writes to the States for taking necessary action against the officials concerned. In
this context, the Committee feel that the Ministry should periodically advise and
remind the MPs not to recommend the names of the IAs which is strictly prohibited
under MPLADS guidelines. However, before identifying the IAs to carry out the
works, the DAs may have informal consultations with the MPs, to shortlist IAs
having done exemplary work in specific areas and have expertise in certain types of
works. Thereafter, the DAs should exercise due diligence in scrutinizing the
suggestions of the MPs, in accord with the provisions contained in the Guidelines,
failing which responsibility be fixed on the DAs for non-adhernece to the prescribed
procedure.
26. As per the Guidelines the District Authorities are required to maintain Works
Register indicating the position of each work recommended by the MPs. They are

49
also required to maintain the Assets Register showing the assets created under the
Scheme funds. But, much to the consternation of the Committee, cases of either non-
maintenance or incomplete Works and Asset Registers have come to the notice. The
Ministry have reportedly been requesting the State/UT nodal authorities to direct all
the DAs to ensure maintenance of Work and Asset Registers. Even after that, there
are slippages for which the Ministry are planning to have an integrated system to
monitor the maintenance of such Registers. Since non-maintenance of Work and
Asset Registers is a serious flaw, as also agreed to by the Ministry in evidence, which
greatly impedes proper inspection and effective monitoring of the ongoing works and
assets created, the Committee urge the Ministry to expeditiously develop a
comprehensive integrated system, as under their consideration, so that scrupulous
maintenance of the Register by the DAs is effectively monitored and appropriate
action taken in case of aberrations.
27. The DAs are expected to get in advance a firm commitment about the operation,
upkeep and maintenance of the proposed assets from the user agency concerned
before the execution of the work is sanctioned. But, the Committee observe that in
practice many cases of non-use or misuse of the assets are there. Although, based on
the replies received from some of the States concerned, the Ministry have informed
that no case of misuse has been reported so far, the Committee desire the Ministry to
investigate the reported cases of misuse of assets in view of the Audit observation with
photographic evidences in some cases. Based on the findings of such investigation,
action should be initiated against the persons responsible for misuse of assets. They
also desire that documentation in respect of handling over the assets created under
MPLAD be streamlined at the DA level by effective supervision and monitoring.
28. The Committee note that the assets created by utilizing the MPLADS funds
are handed over to user agency and thereafter it is the responsibility of the user
agency to maintain/upkeep these assets. The Committee are, however, informed that
there is no provision under the Scheme for use of MPLADS funds for the maintenance
or replacement of assets created under the Scheme. In view of the fact that some
assets such as vehicle, ambulances, medical equipments or machines have a limited
life span after which such assets wear away and maintenance of these assets cannot
be done or may not be economical, the Committee feel that in such cases, existing
Guidelines of the Scheme is not helpful in replacement of such assets. The Committee
are of the view that the Guidelines should be suitably reviewed by the Ministry with a
view to reexamining the existing provisions of the maintenance of assets so that
adequate provisions are incorporated which would allow the MPLADS funds to be
utilized for maintenance, repair and replacement of the assets. The Committee would
also like the Ministry to explore the Public Private Partnership model for the
maintenance of assets like roads created under the MPLADS.
29. The Committee observe that the State level Monitoring Committee headed by
the Chief Secretary/Divisional Commissioner, which is to hold annual meeting with
DAs & MPs to review the progress of implementation of MPLADS, have not even
been constituted in three States/UTs. In other States, the Monitoring Committee
either failed to meet annually or never held any meeting. The Committee express

50
their serious displeasure on this pathetic state of affairs and recommend that the
Monitoring Committee at the State level under the Chairmanship of the Chief
Secretary/Divisional Commissioner/Additional Chief Secretary be constituted
expeditiously and the meetings of such Committees be convened at least once in a
year with wider participation of MPs to enhance the accountability of the DAs. The
Ministry should ask for regular compliance reports in this regard in their biannual
meetings with the State authorities so that corrective measures are taken as and
when required. As assured in evidence, the Committee would like the Ministry to
involve the Minister to write to the Chief Ministers so that the officers responsible
for dereliction of duty could be taken to task.
30. The Committee are concerned to note that in 18 States/UTs, only 13.69 percent
of MPLADS funds were sanctioned for areas inhabited by the SC/ST community
against the requirement of 22.5 percent as per the Guidelines. It shall be the
responsibility of the DAs to enforce the provisions of the Guidelines in this regard.
Although the Guidelines have recently been amplified to give ample flexibility to the
MPs to go beyond the list of shelf of Projects in order to meet the needs of the SC/ST
people, the Ministry have not collated the data on expenditure under the Scheme for
the benefit of the SC/ST people on the plea of inadequate manpower. The Committee
are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. They desire that the Ministry must
compile and collate on an annual basis the expenditure under the MPLADS for
SC/ST population, either utilizing the available resources or by augmenting them, so
that any aberrations/slippages on the part of the DAs are rectified. The Committee
specifically desire that in case a constituency does not have ST inhabited area, the
22.5 percent earmarked funds may be utilized in SC inhabited areas and vice-versa,
in consonance with the provisions contained in the Guidelines.
31. The Committee are shocked to note that neither the Ministry nor 17 States/
UTs have made any arrangements for an internal audit of the MPLAD Scheme. Much
to the chagrin of the Committee, the internal audit wing of the Ministry have submitted
that internal audit of the Scheme has never been conducted since the inception of the
Scheme. In view  of the fact that internal and concurrent audit is an integral part of a
strong internal control and monitoring system, the Committee impress upon the
Ministry to put in place forthwith a robust internal auditing mechanism and ask the
State/UT Governments to engage the office of the C&AG of India at the State level for
periodically auditing the MPLADS account of each individual MP. In this context, the
Committee would like the Ministry to take into consideration the suggestions of the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India regarding changes in the Guidelines
relating to Accounting procedures, improvements in quality of audit, guidance note
on the conduct of audit on MPLADS funds etc. which have already been communicated
to the Ministry by the ICAI.
32. The Committee note that many of the systemic weaknesses affecting the
implementation of the MPLAD Scheme were brought to the notice of the Ministry by
the C&AG in two earlier performance Audit Reports in 1998 and 2001. Based on the
suggestions of the C&AG for devising a robust monitoring mechanism, strengthening
internal controls and impose greater financial discipline for the release and

51
expenditure of MPLADS funds, the Ministry have reportedly modified the Release
and Expenditure Guidelines in August, 2011 in consultation with the Department of
Expenditure. What, however, concerns the Committee is the inordinate delay on the
part of the State/UT Governments in furnishing Action Taken Notes to the Audit
observations. For example, while partial replies to the Audit comments contained in
their Report of 2010 have been received from most of the States/UTs, a single reply
has not yet been received from eight States/UTs i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Dadra
and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala and Nagaland. The Ministry, on
their part, are just sending reminders. In view of the fact that Audit observations are
meant to plug the loopholes and foster good governance, they ought to be taken with
the seriousness they deserve. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry
should take up the matter at the Chief Secretary/Chief Minister level so that the
State/UT authorities resort to adequate and timely preventive and punitive measures
on the Audit observations in their own interest.
33. To sum up, the Committee find that many basic flaws and fundamental
weaknesses have been plaguing the MPLAD Scheme primarily due to inadequate
monitoring of the Scheme at various levels. As regular monitoring at all the three
levels i.e. Central, State and District is a powerful tool and an essential sine qua non
for overcoming the shortcomings that bedevil the proper and effective implementation
of the Scheme, the Committee exhort the Ministry to take note of their considered
suggestions/recommendations, as highlighted in the preceding paragraphs.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 March, 2012 Chairman,
8 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012) HELD ON 3RD OCTOBER, 2011
The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 3rd October, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to
1630 hrs. in Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Adhi Sankar
Rajya Sabha
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
4. Shri Prakash Javadekar
5. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri R.S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit (Central
Expenditure)
2. Smt. Ahlladini Panda — Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
1. Dr. T.C.A. Anant — Secretary
2. Shri Pankaj Jain — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Ashish Bahuguna — Additional Secretary and Financial
Adviser
4. Dr. Davendra Verma — Deputy Director-General (PI)
5. Shri A.K. Choudhary — Director (MPLADS)
52

53
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members, the Audit Officers and the
representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to the
sitting of the Sub-Committee. Apprising that the meeting has been convened to have
a preliminary briefing on the subject 'Members of Parliament Local Area Development
Scheme (MPLADS)' based on the C&AG Report No. 31 of 2010-11, the Convenor
impressed upon the witnesses not to disclose the contents of the deliberations to any
outsider, especially the members of print and electronic media. Thereafter, he requested
the Secretary to give an overview of the Performance of MPLAD Scheme and the
measures taken by the Ministry to overcome the shortcomings/deficiencies pointed
out by the Audit so as to make the Scheme more effective.
3. The Secretary and other officers of the Ministry accordingly briefed the Sub-
Committee on various issues relating to the MPLAD Scheme. They also attended to
the queries of the Members on related aspects. On some specific points, the Convenor
asked the Secretary to furnish detailed written reply to the PAC Secretariat within two
weeks. The representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
assured to do so.
4. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing before
the Sub-Committee and furnishing the available information on several issues on the
subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX  II
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012) HELD ON 24TH OCTOBER, 2011
The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 24th October, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to
1635 hrs. in Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Adhi Sankar
Rajya Sabha
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
SECRETARIA T
Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence
Services)
2. Smt. Ahlladini Panda — Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
1. Dr. T.C.A. Anant — Secretary
2. Shri Chaman Kumar — Additional Secretary and Financial
Adviser
3. Dr. Davendra Verma — Deputy Director-General (PI)
4. Shri A.K. Choudhary — Director (MPLADS)
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members, the Audit Officers and the
representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to the
sitting of the Sub-Committee. Apprising that the meeting has been convened to take
further evidence on the subject 'Members of Parliament Local Area Development
Scheme (MPLADS)’ based on the C&AG Report No. 31 of 2010-11, the Convenor
impressed upon the witnesses not to disclose the contents of the deliberations to any
outsider, especially the members of print and electronic media. Thereafter, he requested
the Secretary to respond to the further queries of the Members on the subject.
54

55
3. The Secretary and other officers of the Ministry accordingly attended to various
points raised by the Members relating to the MPLAD Scheme. On some specific
issues, the Convenor asked the Secretary to furnish detailed written reply within three
weeks. The representatives of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
assured to do so.
4. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing before
the Sub-Committee and furnishing the available information on several issues on the
subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX  III
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012) HELD ON 30TH JANUARY , 2012
The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 30th January, 2012 from 1130 hrs. to
1240 hrs. in Room No. ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Rajya Sabha
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
SECRETARIA T
Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Member to the sitting of the Sub-
Committee. Apprising that meeting had been convened to consider the draft outlines
indicating the points to be incorporated in the draft Report on ‘Members of Parliament
Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS)’ based on the shortcomings highlighted
in the C&AG Report No. 31 of 2010-11 and the clarifications/expalanations given by
the Ministry thereon through written reply and oral depositions, the Convenor
requested the Member to give his suggestions. Accordingly several issues were
discussed and the Sub-Committee suggested certain additional valuable inputs to be
incorporated in the Draft Report. The Sub-Committee also desired that the views/
suggestions of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India regarding evolving a
foolproof simultaneous internal auditing mechanism of the MPLAD Scheme be obtained.
The Sub-Committee also desired that the preparation of the Draft Report by the
Secretariat be expedited.
3. The Convenor thanked the Member for his active participation in the discussion
as well as for the valuable suggestions made by him for incorporation in the Draft
Report.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.
56

APPENDIX  IV
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012) HELD ON 7TH MARCH, 2012
The Sub-Committee sat on Wednesday, the 7th March, 2012 from 1130 hrs. to
1230 hrs. in Room No. ‘51’ (Chairman, PAC's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Rajya Sabha
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Prakash Javadekar
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri R.S. Mathrani — DGA(CE)
2. Sh. Saurabh Shukla — Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-I of the PAC welcomed the Members
and Audit Officers to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The Convenor apprised that
the meeting had been convened to consider the Draft Report on ‘Members of  Parliament
Local Area Development Scheme' based on the C&AG Report No. 31 of 2010-11. The
Sub-Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report.
3. After some discussions, the Sub-Committee adopted the above-mentioned Draft
Report with some modifications and authorized the Convenor to finalize the Report in
the light of the suggestions made by the Members and the consequent changes
arising out of the factual verification by the Audit, for being placed before the Chairman,
PAC for his approval.
4. The Convenor thanked the Members for their active participation in the
discussions and valuable suggestions to the Draft Report.
The Sub-Committee, then, adjourned.
57

APPENDIX  V
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTE (2011-12) HELD ON 22ND MARCH, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 22nd March, 2012 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Prakash Javadekar
10. Shri J.D. Seelam
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit
2. Shri R.S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit (Report
Central)
3. Ms. lla Singh — Principal Director of Audit
58

59
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. Apprising that the
meeting had been convened to consider and adopt three Original Draft Reports on
‘Training of Pilots in the Indian Air Force’, ‘Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance
Factory Nalanda’, and ‘Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme
(MPLADS)’ and one Action Taken Report on ‘Assistance to States for Developing
Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities (ASIDE) Scheme’, the Chairman thanked
the Convenor and the Members of the Sub-Committee who took evidence of the
representatives of various Ministries/Departments in connection with the examination
of the above original subjects, especially ‘MPLADS’ and finalized the Draft Reports
for being placed before the main Committee for their consideration. The Chairman,
then, suggested that the Draft Report on ‘MPLADS’ be taken up first for consideration/
discussion. The Members concurred and the Chairman, thereafter, requested the
Convenor, Sub-Committee-I to give a brief overview of the issues contained in the
Draft Report.
3. The Convenor, Sub-Committee-I accordingly briefed the Committee on the major
issues highlighted in the Draft Report which inter-alia included doubtful expenditure,
execution of works without the recommendation of the MPs, selection of prohibited
works, sub-standard works, non-provision of repair/maintenance of Assets created,
inadequate provisions for eligible Trusts/Societies, deficient monitoring mechanism at
all the levels, etc. The Convenor further apprised that on the basis of the oral and
written depositions of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation and
taking into account the findings of the independent study carried out by NABARD
Consultancy Services (NABCONS) and the imputs furnished by the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), the Sub-Committee dealt with the above said
shortcomings and had given their recommendations accordingly. The Convenor
thanked the Office of the C&AG of India for highlighting the infirmities in their
Performance Audit Reports of 1998, 2001 and 2010. He also thanked the PAC Secretariat
for the commendable drafting of the Report.
4. The Chairman, then, solicited the views and additional inputs of the Members on
the Draft Report. In response, one of the Members was of the view that the was
amongst the 40 odd Members of Parliament who opposed the introduction of the
Scheme itself for various reasons. He, however, suggested that the C&AG should
devise and implement a foolproof mechanism for auditing the accounts of the individual
MPs in each State, Monitoring mechanism should be strengthened and intensified in
view of the poor implementation of the Scheme and exemplary action should be taken
against the officers concerned for executing works without the recommendation of the
MPs.
5. Another Member opined that the MPLAD Scheme was in fact a very useful
Scheme under which many a good works had been done. However, in view of the
lacunae existing in the effective implementation of the Scheme, he suggested that
(i) for proper monitoring and supervision of the Scheme, the office of the C&AG at the
State levels should conduct periodical audit of the Scheme; (ii) certain percentage of
funds should be earmarked for vehicles and salary of the staff assisting the MPs to

60
oversee the overall progress of the Scheme; and (iii) a single portal be created
highlighting the assets created under the Scheme for public awareness and scrutiny.
6. Another Member suggested that in case of very old buildings, a structural
certificate issued by the local authority concerned instead of a complete building plan,
should suffice to enable the MPs to allocate fund under the Scheme. He also suggested
that another date be fixed for consideration of the Draft Report as he could not go
through it due to paucity of time.
7. After taking note of the views/suggestions of the Members, the Chairman
observed that most of the issues raised by the Members have found a place in the
Draft Report and the thrust of the recommendations in fact revolve around putting in
place an effective monitoring mechanism at the Central, State and District levels.
However, taking into consideration the concerns expressed by the Members and the
time sought for further reflection on the Draft Report, the Chairman observed that if the
Members wished to make any additional suggestions for inclusion in the Draft Report,
they might do so in writing three/four days. The Members concurred with the
observation of the Chairman. Thereupon, the Committee decided that subject to the
incorporation of the views expressed by the Members, suitably in the Draft Report and
after being shown to them on a later date, the Draft Report on ‘MPLADS’ would be
deemed to be approved by the Committee.
8. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following other Draft
Reorts and adopted the same:—
(i) ‘Training of Pilots in the Indian Air Force’ based on the C&AG Report
No. 5 of 2008 (Chapter II).
(ii) ‘Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda’
based on the C&AG Reports Nos. 4 of 2008 (Para No. 6.3) and 15 of 2010-11
(Chapter II).
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Twenty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha) on
‘Assistance to States for Developing Export Infrastructure and Allied
Activities (ASIDE) Scheme’.
9. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the adopted Draft Reports
in light of the views expressed by the Members and factual verifications made by
Audit and present them to Parliament on a date convenient to him.
10. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
discussions and valuable suggestions on the Draft Reports.
The Committee, then adjourned.
N.B.: On 28th March, 2012, the revised Draft Report on ‘MPLADS’ was shown to
the Members in the Chairman's Chamber after suitably incorporating their views/
suggestions.
GMGIPMRND—4898L(S-3)—31.05.2012.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006.
(A.P)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co. Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28 Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2671,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
124, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P)
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.