17
CONSERVATION AND PROTECTION OF
TIGERS IN TIGER RESERVES
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
SEVENTEENTH  REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SEVENTEENTH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
CONSERV ATION AND PROTECTION OF
TIGERS IN TIGER RESERVES
MINISTRY  OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
Presented  to  Lok  Sabha  on  29.4.2010
Laid in Rajya  Sabha  on  29.4.2010
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2010/V aisakha, 1932 (Saka)

P.A.C. NO. 1912
Price: Rs. 37.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10)........................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-V OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10) (v)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (vii)
REPORT
PART  I. Narrative Portion
 I. Introductory ........................................................................ 1
II. Status of Pending Audit Paras ............................................ 2
 III. Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger Reserves .. 4
IV . Audit Review ...................................................................... 4
V. Funding Pattern .................................................................. 5
VI. Biotic Pressure .................................................................... 7
VII. Relocation of Families Residing in Tiger Reserves ............. 8
VIII. Protection of Tigers ............................................................ 10
IX. Measures to Combat Poaching ........................................... 10
X. Tiger Census and its Methodology .................................... 12
XI. Captive Breeding of Tigers ................................................. 13
PART  II. Observations and Recommendations................................. 15
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of Sub-Committee-V held on
27th November, 2009........................................................... 19
II. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of Sub-Committee-V held
on 23rd February, 2010. ....................................................... 21
III. Minutes of the Eighth sitting of Sub-Committee-V held on
5th March, 2010................................................................... 24
IV . Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2009-10) held on 26th April, 2010...................... 27

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
*Shri Gopinath Munde  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18.
$Vacant
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
*Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant
  Singh resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
$Vice Shri Ashwani Kumar retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
(iii)

COMPOSITION  OF  SUB-COMMITTEE-V  OF  THE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  (2009-10)
*Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convener
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
*Ceased to be a Member of the Committee/Sub-Committee on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha
w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Seventeenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘‘Conservation and Protection of
Tigers in Tiger Reserves’’ based on C&AG Report No. 18 of 2006 for the year ended
March, 2005 relating to the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2005 was laid on the Table of the House on 25th August, 2006.
3. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time-frame, the Public Accounts
Committee (2009-10) took up the subject for detailed examination and report. A Sub-
Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation with the
Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of the Ministry of Enviroment
and Forests alongwith some other Ministries/Departments.
4. In the process of the scrutiny of the Audit Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports pending
with the Ministry of Environment and Forests, the Sub-Committee came across certain
pending Paragraphs/Chapters on very important issues and considered it prudent to
examine and report the same alongwith the Non-Compliance issue. Accordingly, the
Sub-Committee took up the above mentioned  Audit Report for in-depth examination
and report.
5. The Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests on 27th November, 2009, 22nd February, 2010 and 5th March,
2010. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on
26th April, 2010. Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
7. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for their efforts in examining the subject
in detail and finalizing and placing the Report before the main Committee.
8. The Committee would  like to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and
furnishing information that the Sub-Committee/Committee desired in connection with
the examination of the subject.
9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH  MUNDE,
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(vii)

REPORT
PART - I
NARRATIVE  PORTION
I. Introductory
The Reports of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India, after being laid in
Parliament in accordance with Article 151 of the Constitution of India, stand referred to
the Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. As it becomes practically impossible
for the Public Accounts Committee to examine each and every paragraph contained in
the Audit Reports, the Committee adopt a selective approach and take up a few relatively
more important paragraphs for indepth examination at the beginning of the terms every
year. As regards the paragraphs which are not formally selected for examination by the
Committee, these are dealt with by means of a procedure where by the Ministries/
Departments are required to furnish the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to the
Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).
2. But as there was inordinate delay on the part of the Ministries/Departments
in furnishing the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee in their
105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that with effect from 31st March,
1996 the Action Taken Notes on all the Paragraphs of the Reports of the C&AG, which
are not formally taken up by the PAC for examination, should be furnished to the
Committee within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports.
3. Even then, various Ministries/Departments have been unable to furnish the
remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to the Committee through the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) within the prescribed time line of four months. As
on 28th February, 2010 remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on a total number of
3450 Chapters/Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/Departments.
4. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject for detailed examination
during the year 2009-10. A Sub-Committee was constituted to go deep into the matter,
prepare separate Reports on each defaulting Ministry/Department concerned with the
subject and place the same before the Main Committee for their consideration. In the
process, the Sub-Committee obtained Background Notes/Preliminary materials and
Written Replies from the Ministries/Departments concerned. The Sub-Committee also
took separate evidence of the representatives of the respective Ministries/Departments
on different dates.
5. This Report pertains to the remedial/corrective Action Taken notes on the Audit
Paragraphs pending with the Ministry of Environment and Forests. Out of the
3450 Chapters/Paragraphs pending with various Ministries/Departments as on
28th February, 2010, 12 Reports/Paragraphs pertained to the Ministry of Environment
and Forests. One of the important Reports/Paragraphs out of these 12 Reports/
Paragraphs is the Report No. 18 of 2006 (Entire Report) of the C&AG of India for the
1

2
year ended March, 2005 relating to the Performance Audit of Conservation and
Protection of tigers in tiger reserves in the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The
Sub-Committee considered it prudent to touch upon this Report, as a test case, to
gauge the compliance of the Department to the Audit observations/suggestions
contained therein, alongwith the status of remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to
be furnished by the Department.
II. Status of Pending Audit Paras
6. Out of the total No. of 13 chapters/paras that were pending with the Ministry of
Environment and Forests Action Taken Notes on 5 paragraphs viz. (i) Para 6.1 of CA 3
of  2008, (ii) para 6.1 of CA 16 of 2008-09, (iii) para 6.2 of CA 16 of 2008-09, (iv) para 6.3
of CA 16 of 2008-09 and (v) report No. 14 of 2008 (PA) have not been received from the
Ministry/Department even for the first time. In respect of two paras Audit has given
comments/observations but revised Action Taken Note is awaited from the Ministry/
Department. ATNs on remaining six paras are under examination in Audit. These are—
(i) para 9.1 of Report No. 5 of 1998 (ii) para 3.1 of Report No. 5 of 2002, (iii) para 1.1 of
Report No. 5A of 2000, (iv) para 8.1 of Report No. 5 of 1999, (v) para 6.1 of Report
No. 2 of 2007 (TA), and (vi) Stand alone Report No. 18 of 2006 (PA) (Entire Report).
7. The Ministry of Environment and Forests in a note furnished to the Sub-Committee
have stated that A TNs in respect of all the audit paras barring Paras 12.8 to 12.21 of
Report No. 1 of 2001 and Paras 8.9 to 8.17 of Report No. 1 of 2006 have been submitted
to the Audit.
8. The Committee desired to know the reasons for pendency of Action Taken Notes
in respect of the Audit paras/Reports pertaining to the Ministry of Environment and
Forests. In their response, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"Ministry of Environment and Forests has always given priority to submission
of replies to C&AG's Audit Paras. Delay in obtaining information of Audit Paras
from various organizations of the Ministry, the State Governments concerned to
which grants are released and delay in vetting/comments by the office of the
Principal Directors of Audit, Scientific Departments and Director General of Audit,
Central Revenues are some of the reasons for pendency. It is also pertinent to
mention here that there was lack of understanding of appropriate procedure by
the concerned Divisions. Some of them were under the impression that if the
reply duly vetted by Audit has been dropped Local Audit Officer would be
dropped automatically by the office of the C&AG's. Some of the instances are
reproduced below:
(i) Paras No. 8.1 of Report No. 5 of 1999:
The para was prepared by the Local Audit Party during its inspection in the year
1996. Reply was submitted on 14.02.1997 and 22.06.1998. In the year 1999 Para
was included in the CAG's report for Scientific Departments. On the basis of
Reply submitted on 31.01.2000 para was dropped by the Local Audit Office and
the Division took it as dropped from the C&AG's report.
(ii) Report No. 18 of 2006:
On 04.12.2006 an advance copy of the reply was sent to the Lok Sabha Secretariat
(PAC Branch) and subsequently on receipt of the V etted questionaire from the

3
C&AG's office, the reply was submitted to the Lok Sabha Secretariat on 20.03.2007
in English & Hindi versions. It was presumed that by submitting the vetted
questionaire to Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch), the para has been settled".
9. The Committee desired to know as to what mechanism the Ministry have devised
or propose to devise to ensure that the Action Taken Notes are submitted within the
stipulated time of four months. In response, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"We have analyzed the difficulties encountered in timely submission of Action
Taken Notes and on that basis outlined the Action Plan to avoid any delay in the
future. The main components of this are:—
(i) Sensitize all the officials in the Ministry about the paramount importance to
be attached to the expeditious setting of Audit Paras. It has been noted in
the past that even though prompt action had been taken on the Audit Paras,
still due to lack of awareness about the proper procedure to be followed; the
format for submitting Action Taken Notes and the need to follow up and
ascertain the view taken by the Principal Director of Audit, the remedial
action taken could not be placed before the Sub-Committee. It is, therefore,
proposed that the Budget & Accounts Division of the Ministry will prepare
detailed instructions outlining step by step action to be taken by the Division
concerned to settle the Audit Para. The procedure will also be explained to
the officers in a meeting to remove any doubts.
(ii) It is proposed that the outstanding Paras will be reviewed in the first meeting
of the Senior Officers every month.
(iii) If there is any delay on the part of the subordinate and autonomous
institutions/boards/authorities of the Ministry in furnishing the material to
formulate the ATNs, then the concerned agency would be summoned
together with the reply so that no further delay takes place in furnishing the
ATNs to the Audit.
(iv) The Divisional Heads would be charged with the responsibility to follow up
with Internal Finance, Principal Director of Audit etc. to ensure that the
vetting of the reply is quickly done and if any additional information is
sought for that is also provided in a timely manner.
(v) Any willful delay on the part of the officers will be dealt with strictly.
As regards the difficulties encountered and anticipated, it is submitted that
sometimes, the reply from the Ministry is dependent on furnishing of all the
details by the State Governments or an agency coming under the administrative
control of some other Ministry in the Government of India. Delay in response
from such agencies will naturally have an adverse impact on the time schedule
drawn up by the Ministry for submission of A TNs. This would be a major
challenge. However, it is proposed that frequent telephonic contact and if
necessary, convening of meetings with the officials concerned would help in
eliciting timely response from them".

4
10. On being asked whether any responsibility has been fixed for not furnishing
remedial Action Taken Notes on the pending audit paragraphs, the Ministry in their
post evidence reply stated as under:
"A combination of circumstances have resulted in delays in the past. first of all,
there was a lack of understanding about the proper procedures to be followed
and sometimes the officers were under the wrong impression that a particular
Para has been settled. In Many other cases, even though, the remedial action
had been taken on the audit para, it was not submitted in the proper format after
completing the due procedures and, therefore, the Para could not be taken as
'settled'. Similarly, in some other cases, the delays occurred at various levels.
Officers are now being sensitized and it is assured that willful delay in future will
certainly be dealt with very severely. However, as for the past, it is submitted
that no disciplinary action had been taken".
11. When asked about the time-frame by which the pending Action Taken Notes
would be submitted to the Committee, the Ministry in a note stated that all the pending
A TNs will be submitted to Director of Audit for vetting by 31.01.2010, However, in a
subsequent note the Ministry stated that the Action Taken Notes will be submitted to
Audit by 10th March, 2010.
III. Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger Reserves
[Report No. 18 of  2006—Performance Audit]
12. As it was imperative to protect tigers, Government of India initiated several
measures for conservation and protection of the species. Significant among these
were Project Tiger, a centrally sponsored scheme launched in April 1973. The main
activities of Project Tiger include wildlife management, protection measures, and specific
ecodevelopment activities. Twenty eight Tiger Reserves were created in 17 states
between 1973-74 and 1999-2000. The Project Tiger Directorate (PTD) [now National
Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA)] in the Ministry of Environment and Forests
(MoEF) at New Delhi is responsible for providing technical guidance, budgetary
support, coordination, monitoring, and evaluation of Project Tiger while the
management and implementation of the Project rests with the State Governments
concerned.
13. As per the information furnished by the Ministry during the Xth Plan period
they had taken a decision to create eight new tiger reserves under the Project Tiger, in
Sahyadri in Maharastra, Pilibhit in Uttar Pradesh, Ratapani in Madhya Pradesh and
Sunabeda in Orissa. Presently, Project Tiger is being implemented in 38 Tiger reserves
falling in 17 States.
IV .  Audit Review
14. The performance Audit of "Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger
Reserves" was carried out during 2005-06 through test check of records of various
organizations viz. (i) Project Tiger Directorate, Ministry of Environment  and Forests,
(ii) Wildlife Division of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, (iii) Offices of the
Regional Deputy Director of Wildlife Preservation, Ministry of  Environment and Forests

5
at New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai, (iv) Offices of the Field Directors and
their subordinate offices in 24 selected Tiger Reserves, (v) Offices of PCCFs, Wildlife/
Chief Wildlife Warden of 17 State Governments and Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun.
15. The fundamental objectives of the performance audit were to assess whether:
* the efforts made by the Government in conservation and protection of
tigers has ensured a viable population of tigers in India;
* the planning for conservation and protection was adequate and the
resources were allocated as per the identified needs and approved
prioritization of various activities of the Tiger Reserves;
* the targets set in the plan documents were achieved through judicious
utilisation of resources; and
* the steps taken to reduce the biotic disturbance from the tiger habitats
caused by human settlements and other land uses were effective;
16.  The Important findings of the Performance Audit Review are as under:
* Cases of understaffing at the level of Tiger Reserves were noticed. The
personnel actually employed were also found to be overaged, undertrained
and underequipped in many cases. The intelligence and communication
network at the Reserves level was also weak. All these led to many instances
of poaching of tigers.
* Deficiencies were noticed in relocation of the people living within the Tigers
Reserves which is inevitable to ease the biotic pressure on the tiger
population. Endeavours in this regard failed because of demure scarcity of
resources.
* The actual area of most of the tiger reserve was less than the prescribed area
which forsooth, not conducive for conservation, protection and sustenance
of a viable tiger population. Besides the boundaries of many of the tiger
reserves had not been demarcated nor the areas falling within the tiger
reserve notified legally; and
* There were many cases where the State Government did not release their
share of funds. Cases of diversion of Central funds for other purposes were
also noticed.
V .  Funding Pattern
17. Project Tiger was launched in 1973 with 100 per cent Central Assistance. From
the VI Five Year Plan (1980-81 to 1984-85) onwards recurring expenditure was shared
by Central and States in equal proportion. However, the Centre continued to meet 100
per cent of the non-recurring expenses. The Central Government also meets the entire
cost of Project Allowance introduced during the IX Plan to the staff working in the
Tiger Reserves as well as the entire cost of relocation of families from the Tiger Reserves.
A provision of Rs. 150 crore was made for Project Tiger in the X Plan. During XI Plan
Government had provided Rs. 640 crore for Tiger Projects. Central Government had
provided Rs. 237.75 crore as financial assistance to the Tiger Reserves till 31 March

6
2005 since the commencement of the project in 1973.
18. Audit found divergences in the fund allocation across Tiger Reserves against
the area covered and the number of tigers. The funds released for different Tiger
Reserves could not be correlated to the areas of the Tiger Reserves or the tiger
population. During the period 1997—2005, the average funds released per sq. kilometre
of Tiger Reserve area amounted to Rs. 5560 but the amount actually released varied
from Rs. 25,968 per sq. km in respect of Panna to only Rs. 640 sq. km to Nagarjunsagar.
Similarly, the average allocation per tiger during the period 1997—2005 was Rs. 1.33
lakh but the amount actually allocated varied from Rs. 10.99 lakh in case of Dampa to
Rs. 0.94 lakh in case of Melghat.
19. The PTD in reply state that the fund release was site specific and could not be
correlated with the area of the Tiger Reserves and the population of the tigers in a
reserve. However, it added that action has been initiated for categorising the Tiger
Reserves under four categories viz. (i) established Tiger Reserves without any major
problems, (ii) problematic old reserves, (iii) upcoming reserves not consolidated and
(iv) new reserves. According to the PTD, prioritisation of various activities for providing
funds under recurring and non-recurring heads would be taken up in a rational manner
in the coming years.
20. Audit scrutiny revealed that, as of March 2005, out of Rs. 87.11 crore released to
28 Tiger Reserves during the period 2002—05, Rs. 77.53 crore was utilized. In Karnataka,
Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh against liberal Central Assistance of Rs. 10.45
crore, Rs. 11.06 crore and Rs. 25 crore respectively, only Rs. 8.16 crore, Rs. 4.13 crore
and Rs. 19.50 crore were utilised during the period 2002—05. PTD in reply stated that
the poor utilization of Central Assistance was due to late release of central funds by
States to field formations.
21. In a subsequent reply the PTD informed that the unspent central assistance was
adjusted in subsequent releases or revalidated and as of March 2006 no huge unspent
Central Assistance under the Project Tiger and left with States.
22. As per the funding pattern of Project Tiger, the recurring expenditure was to be
shared by the States and the Central Government in equal proportion. However, a test
check in Audit revealed that in Valmiki Tiger Reserve, Bihar as against the State share
of Rs. 1.13 crore, Rs. 80.85 lakh only was made available by the State Government
during 2000—05. The short release of matching contribution thus worked out to more
than 28 per cent. This depicts low commitment of the State in conservation measures
in the Tiger Reserve.
23. When asked about the arrangements made for release of funds by the Central
Government to the State Governments after the creation of the National Tiger
Conservation Audhority (NTCA), and the details of the fund released so far and
utilization/underutilization of the same by the State Governments, the Ministry in a
written reply have stated as under:
"Based on the amendments made to the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 in 2006,
vis-a-vis the Tiger Task Force recommendations, enabling provisions (section

7
38X) have been made in the said Act for establishing reserve specific Tiger
Conservation Foundation, which, inter alia, can receive funding support. Detailed
guidelines have been notified in this regard and communicated to States. So far,
out of 38 tiger reserves, only 21 tiger reserves have established the Tiger
Conservation Foundation. However, due authorization to such Foundations for
receiving central assistance under Project Tiger is awaited from the concerned
States. Letters have been addressed to respective Chief Ministers in this regard
from the Minister for Environment and Forests for the needful. Meanwhile central
assistance under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Project Tiger is provided
to States through the Reserve Bank of India for tiger conservation in respective
tiger reserves, as done in the past".
24. The Committee desired to know about the mechanism for proper monitoring of
the expenditure that the states are incurring. In response, the member Secretary, NTCA,
during the evidence held on 27.11.2009 stated that besides the state machinery's due
diligence, we have an independent group of expert and based  on the International
Union for conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) criterian adapted to
our condition. We have taken out 45 parameters. So, these 45 parameters are used.
They assess everything right from fund flow to utilization. Then this is given to IUCN
itself for peer review. IUCN points out certain pluses and certain minuses. Then the
report and peer review are placed in both Houses of Parliament.
VI. Biotic Pressure
25. Tiger population breeds well and grows repidly in habitats without incompatible
human uses. They cannot co-exist with people particularly in a situation where both
human impacts and live stock grazing is continuously on the increase. The long-term
survival of the tiger, therefore, depends on how secure and inviolate are the Protected
Areas they live in. Expert international advisers had suggested in 1972 that the best
method of protection of the tiger was to have a large areas of at least 2000 km. with a
similar contiguous area to ensure a viable population of about 300 tigers in each such
area. Considering the difficulty to locate such a large area in the Indian context, Special
Task Force decided in 1972 to create Tiger Reserves with an average area of 1500 km.
with at least 300 km. as core area. Thus, for management purposes, each Tiger Reserve
is broadly divided into two parts namely core and buffer. In the core area, forestry
operations, collection of forest produce, grazing, human settlement and other human
disturbances are not allowed. In the buffer zone, strictly controlled wildlife oriented
forestry operations and grazing are allowed.
26. According to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, an area of 29284.76 sq.
km. has been notified by 15 Tiger States (out of 17) as core or critical tiger habitat
under seciton 38 V of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, as amended in 2006. These
are Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Uttarakhand, and West Bengal. Two tiger States (Bihar and Uttar Pradesh) have
taken a decision for notifying the core or critical tiger habitats (2765.04 sq. km.). The
State of Madhya Pradesh has not identified/notified the core/critical tiger habitat in
its newly constituted tiger reserve (Sanjay National Park and Sanjay Dubri Wildlife

8
Sanctuary).
VII.  Relocation of Families Residing in Tiger Reserves
27. One of the main thrusts of Project Tiger is protection and mitigation of negative
human impacts for comprehensive revival of natural ecosystems in the Tiger Reserves
and to create favourable atmosphere to increase the tiger population. Hence, to a great
extent, the success of the Project Tiger depends on the relocation of persons living in
the core and the buffer areas of the Tiger Reserves.
28. As per the records in Project Tiger Directorate (PTD) there are 1487 villages with
64,951 families living in the core and buffer areas in 26 out of the 28 Tiger Reserves as
of July 2005. The distribution of villages and families in the Tiger Reserves since their
creation reflects the increasing encroachment of the Tiger Reserves and the
ineffectiveness of the efforts to keep them encroachment free by moving out the
families. Out of the families residing in the Tiger Reserves 17,650 families were in the
core area and the remaining 47,301 families were in the buffer zone.
29. Audit found shortcomings in the relocation efforts of the States. The Ministry
of  Environment and Forests (MoEF) released Rs. 21.89 lakh in 1989-90 for the relocation
of families at Bandhavgarh Tiger Reserve. The entire fund was kept in civil deposits
and not utilised for the stated purpose. In Maharashtra, Rs. 4 crore released by MoEF
in 2002-03 for the relocation of families from Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve remained
unutilized. Relocation from Kalakad Tiger Reserve was not taken up by the Tamil Nadu
Government despite payment of Rs. 55 lakh in March, 1992 to the Collector and allotment
of alternative site in 2004. Similarly, out of Rs. 1 crore released by MoEF in March 2003
for the relocation of families from Corbett Tiger Reserve, Uttranchal Government kept
Rs. 95 lakh under forest deposit while rehabilitation programme were included in the
APOs of Corbett Tiger Reserve during 2000—05. In the Simlipal Tiger Reserve,
relocation of the families had not succeeded, as the alternate site offered was not
suitable for irrigation.
30. The Committee enquired about the amount of money required for relocation of
people and where from they are going to generate this amount and also the time
anticipated to address this core issue of resettlement of people elsewhere. In response,
the Member Secretary, NTCA during briefing stated as under:—
"Now the number of families, which reside in the co-critical tiger habitat is around
80,000. The people who qualify as family, their children are growing up in the
villages. So, we have an idea of the landscapes of the areas where they need to
be relocated based on the recent All India Tiger Estimation, which was done in
collaboration of the Wildlife Institute of India. We need Rs. 8 crore. We have
requested the Planning Commission but the allocation is not forthcoming. And,
this is an issue. If this gets delayed further, the source areas would be in trouble.
We would not be in a position to make the areas inviolate which need to be
inviolate. This is a big challenge before us. If we get this allocation of Rs. 8,000
crore, we will be in a position to relocate these families within two Plan periods".
31. The witness added:
"We may go in for a special project Donor Driven Project and link this to the

9
benefits which will accrue to the Community because of not cutting trees.
Regional Deputy Director (RDD) and so many things are there. If, we link that in
away we can solve it. We need Rs. 8,000 crore. We can go in for the Project and
address the fringe issues. That is one way how we can get the money".
32. However, during the further evidence on the subject held on 5th March, 2010,
the Member-Secretary, NTCA, clarified the number of families to be relocated as under:
"Based on the discussions with the Chairman and Hon'ble Members, we along
with the Wildlife Institute of India Scientist reworked the whole proposal. So,
based on 2008 tiger estimation in the GIS domain we have identified 46,000 odd
families".
33. On being asked about the utilization of amount of Rs. 100 crore released this
year and another Rs. 100 crore released last year for rehabiliting the people elsewhere,
the Member Secretary during briefing stated as under:
"They gave it to two or three States like Rajasthan. They have relocated Bangani
Village from Sariska. This year they have given to Ranthambor. The process is
on. We gave to one more reserve in Madhya Pradesh. The process is on where
we have given the money".
34. Asked about the status of relocation of people from Tiger Reserves post 2008
when the compensation for relocation was increased from Rs. 1 lakh to Rs. 10 lakh per
family, the Ministry of Environment and Forests in their post evidence reply have
stated as under:
"Since the inception of Project Tiger in the early 1970s till June, 2005, a total of 80
villages (2904 families) have been relocated from different tiger reserves. An
amount of Rs. 17 crores was provided to Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan,
Maharashtra, Orissa and Karnataka during the period 2002-03 to 2006-08 for
relocation of 2123 families from 9 tiger reserves. During the XIth Plan period,
under the enhanced package, an amount of Rs. 236.79 crores has been provided
to States towards resettlement/acquisition of rights of 7782 families. The process
is ongoing. Consequent to the enhancement of the relocation package from
Rs. One lakh per family, most of the tiger  States are keen to undertake relocation
of human settlements from the crore critical tiger habitats of tiger reserves.
Proposals amounting to Rs. 302.45 crores have already been received in this regard".
35. The Committee have come to learn that some indigenous or tribal people in some
States have learnt to live with wild life and tigers also live along with human being in
wild areas. The Committee asked whether it would be appropriate to remove such
peole from the core area and spend huge amounts of money to settle them elsewhere.
In response, the Member Secretary NTCA during evidence stated as under:
"At least 800-1000 sq. km. of inviolate core is required for the tiger to complete its
life cycle in a proper manner. So, 20 breeding tigers constitute a viable population
and 20 breeding tigresses need something like 800-1000 sq. km. of inviolate area.
The coexistence is fostered in the peripheral area, we have an exclusive agenda
in the core area and an inclusive agenda in the buffer area. In the core area, there

10
is hardly any scope for coexistence because we cannot do any developmental
work for the people. They suffer from malaria, they suffer from lack of any basic
amenities. So, if we want to develop them in a sustainable manner, we have to at
least put them in the buffer area and give them a better deal with livelihood
options".
VIII. Protection of Tigers
36. As per the data available at Project Tiger Directorate out of 173 deaths of tigers
during 1999-2004, 83 were due to poaching. Out of the remaining, 60 deaths were due
to natural causes, 13 due to electrocution, 7 due to poisoning and 10 due to
infighting.Thus, loss of tiger life due to poaching, poisoning and electrocution works
out to 103, which accounts for more than 60 per cent of the tiger deaths. The accuracy
of the data is doubtful, as an independent survey had reported 200 tiger deaths during
the same period of which 121 were due to poaching. However, both statistics indicate
that the tiger deaths due to poaching far outweigh deaths from natural causes. The
independent survey further reported that an annual average poaching figure of
22 tigers over a period of 6 years was alarming. These figures indicate failure of PTD
and the States to take adequate stringent measures for preservation of tiger.
37. Project Tiger Directorate (PTD) admitted in March 2006 that though it had
issued detailed guidelines and instructions in June 2002 to the States for protection of
tigers and wild animals, these were not implemented effectively and it was helpless in
the enforcement of its own guidelines due to the absence of any statutory empowerment.
PTD further stated that this situation is being remedied with the creation of National
Tiger Conservation Authority with adequate statutory backing.
IX. Measures to Combat Poaching
38. Audit scrutiny revealed several cases of inaction in the face of tiger poaching in
the Tiger Reserves over 2000-2005. The cases indicate lack of intelligence networking
and monitoring failure at the field level. No special anti-poaching drive or any stringent
action except to register the cases in the offence register was taken.
39. Audit scrutiny revealed that arms and ammunition which are required to combat
poaching and illicit trade effectively were inadequate in 12 Tiger Reserves namely
Namdapha, Indravati, Bandipur, Tadoba-Andhari, Melghat, Ranthambore, Sariska,
Simlipal, Kanha, Bandhavgarh, Manas and Sunderbans. While arms were insufficient
in some reserves, in others discrepancies/shortages in ammunition were noticed.
40. As per the National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016), the States should have
adequately trained personnel to man all positions right from Park Director down to
forest guards. However, Audit examination revealed that nine Tiger Reserves, namely,
Manas, Periyar, Tadoba-Andhari, Pench (Maharashtra), Melghat, Kanha, Pench
(Madhya Pradesh), Bandhavgarh and Panna Tiger Reserves did not provide training
to their staff on regular/periodic basis. In Manas Tiger Reserve, the training imparted
to staff was inadequate as it did not cover the areas of field craft, obstacle crossing and
unarmed combat. The weapon training was limited to. 315 rifles only. In Periyar Tiger
Reserve, the system of pre-service training was not prevalent and only 27 forest
guards out of 86 were imparted training during 2000-2005.

11
41. Enumerating the measures taken to initiate committed anti-poaching drives for
ensuring a viable tiger population, the Ministry in note furnished to Committee have
stated as under:—
* Amending the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 for constituting the Wildlife Crime
Control Bureau, which is operational since June, 2007, while encompassing the
existing regional offices and having additional posts for effective functioning,
with the total sanctioned staff strength (all categories) amounting to 110.
* Strengthening of antipoaching activities, including special strategy for
monsoon patrolling, by providing funding support to Tiger Reserve States, as
proposed by them, for deployment of antipoaching squads involving ex-army
personnel/home guards, apart from workforce comprising of local people, in
addition to strengthening of communication/wireless facilities.
* Detailed guidelines have been issued for preparation of reserve specific Tiger
Conservation Plan involving core, buffer and corridor areas.
* A tripartite Memorandum of Understanding, linked to fund flows, has been
executed with tiger States for better/concerted implementation of conservation
inputs.
* In collaboration with TRAFFIC-INDIA, action has been taken for an online
wildlife crime data base, and Generic Guidelines for preparation of reserve
specific Security Plan has been evolved.
* Rapid assessment of tiger reserves has been done (13 good, 9 satisfactory and
16 poor).
* All India meeting of Field Directors convened on 25 and 26 July, 2009 udner the
Chairmanship of the Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Environment
and Forests for reviewing the status of field protection and related issues in
tiger reserves.
* Chief Ministers of tiger States addressed at the level of the Minister of State
(Independent Charge) for Environment and Forests on urgent issues, viz.
implementation of the tripartite MoU, creation of the Tiger Conservation
Foundation, stepping up protection etc.
* Steps taken for modernizing the infrastructure and field protection.
* Report of the Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted for looking into the
local extinction of tiger in the Panna Tiger Reserve sent to the State (Madhya
Pradesh) for the needful action.
42. Audit scrutiny further examination revealed that in case of Corbett, Kanha and
Bandipur Tiger Reserves, though there existed 125, 172 and 31 patrolling chowkis,
only 106, 148 and 47 forest guards were available. The partrolling camps in Kanha and
Pench (Madhya Pradesh) were operated by unskilled labourers. Project Tiger
Directorate admitted in March 2006 that the protection measures in the Tiger Reserves
were adversely affected due to shortage of manpower and the situation has not

12
impropved despite addressing the States at various levels. PTD further stated that the
National Tiger Conservation Authority would address the issue by providing statutory
provision in the Memorandum of Understanding with the project States.
43. The Committee desired to know the policy initiatives taken to ensure deployment
of adequate patrolling staff and non-deployment of aged staff in frontline duties in
Tiger Reserves. In response, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"The policy initiatives announced by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
of 29.2.2008, inter alia, contains action points relating to tiger protection. Based
on the one time grant of Rs. 50.00 crore provided to the National Tiger
Conservation Authority (NTCA) for raising, arming and deploying a Special
Tiger Protection Force, the proposal for the said force has been approved by the
competent authority for 13 tiger reserves. Rs. 93 lakhs each has been released to
Corbett, Ranthambhore & Dudhawa Tiger Reserve for creation of STPF during
2008-09. Central Assistance will be provided to States for creation of STPF in
remaining 10 Tiger Reserves in 2009-10".
44. Expressing their concern over the extinction of tigers in certain areas because of
poaching, disease etc. the Committee enquired whether the Ministry is going to adopt
those forest areas so as to develop tiger population and whether ecological effect has
anything to do with the extinction of tiger in those areas. To this, the Ministry in their
post evidence reply stated that Tiger reintroduction through translocation has been
done at Sariska and Panna Tiger Reserves where tigers became locally extinct. Such
local extinctions are due to poaching/poisoning rather than any ecological causative
factors.
45. When asked about the Maoist (naxalite) problem affecting the operations in the
tigers reserves of Nagarjuna Sagar and SriSailam parts of Andhra Pradesh, Indravati in
Chhattisgarh, Palamau in Jharkhand and also the core area of Similipal of Orissa, the
member Secretary, NTCA during evidence stated as under:
"7-8 of our   reserves are faced by left-wing extremism, including Simplipal in
Orissa, Indravati has been out of bounds for the last seven years. We have sent
crack teams. We tried to go there. We could go only as far as Indravati is concerned
up to Geetam. We could not go beyond that. V ery recently we have sent a crack
team of outside experts, outside of the Government system they have come out
with a lot of good suggestion. Our minister has written to all the Chief Minister
he has discussed with them individually and so, some action is emerging. But for
places like Indravati and Palamau in Jharkhand it is going to be difficult, Indravati
in particular".
X. Tiger Census and its Methodology
46. As per guidelines prescribed in June 2001 by the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, tiger census was to be carried out annually. The guidelines were to be
scrupulously followed for estimation of tigers and other prey species in all Tiger
Reserves and reported to PTD latest by 30 June of the next year.

13
47. During the evidence held on 5th March, 2010, the Member Secretary, NTCA
stated that as of February, 2008, the total number of tigers in the wild in the Country is
1411.
48. The Member Secretary added:
"it (tiger population) is increasing at the rate of 16.6 per cent or something and
the depletion including poaching and other natural and unnatural mortality is
14.8 per cent. There is a very small increase of 2.6 per cent."
49. Audit found that the tiger estimation was not done annually in most of the Tiger
Reserves. Audit further revealed regular decline in tiger population. Reasons for
decrease in number of tigers were neither investigated nor analysed.
50. The Committee desired to know as to what methodology have been put in place
to carry out census of tiger and how far the same can be regarded as fool proof
methodology. In response, the Ministry in their post evidence reply stated as under:—
"The new methodology for estimating tiger population is based on determining
spatial occupancy of tigers throughout potential tiger forests and sampling
such forests using camera traps in a   statistical frame-work. This assessment is
not comparable to the earlier total count using pugmarks owing to several
shortcomings in the latter. This methodology has been evolved by the Project
Tiger Directorate (now the NTCA) in collaboration with the wildlife Institute of
India through a pilot study and has been approved by the Tiger Task Force,
besides review by external and internal peers. This is a fool proof technique
which is reasonably accurate and dependable and the outcome is available in
the GIS domain".
51. As regard the amount of money spent in a year on having tiger census the
Ministry informed the Committee that the all India tiger estimation is conducted once
in every four years. An amount of Rs. 11.60 crore was spent through the wildlife
Institute of India and tiger States for the last tiger estimation using the refined
methodology in 2006-07.
XI. Captive Breeding of Tigers
52. While underscoring the need to protect the tigers in the wild, the Committee
asked whether the tigers can be bred in captivity and reintroduce them in the wild
wherever they have become extint. In response, the Member Secretary during evidence
held on 27 November, 2009 stated as under:
"..........Captive ones would not be able to predate and stock. That is the problem.
It is because that is taught by the mother and that happens only in the wild
conditions."
The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests supplemented as under:
Sir, as regards these 1411 tigers we are looking at the wild. Without getting into
the science, I would like to say that there is a qualitative difference between a
tiger in the wild and the entire character of the tiger. The tiger as we want to see

14
it, it is that tiger which has the run of the wild, and the tiger which is in captivity,
including those 5,000 tigers in the tiger farms of China, which we have been
presssing China to disband. The way their system works, the way they eat and
the way they run are quite different from what we see in the trait of the tiger with
which we associate."
53. When asked about the steps taken to ensure tiger breeding in captivity and
reintroduce them in their designated habitat, the Ministry in post evidence reply stated
that:
"There is no attempt by the Ministry to breed tigers in captivity for reintroducing
them in their designated habitat. Tigers bred in captivity cannot be reintroduced
in the wild for want of the innate predatory/stalking habits in such animals,
leading to their elimination on account of man-tiger conflicts. Tigers breed very
well in captivity and the Indian Zoos have the technical expertise to foster such
breeding".

PART - II
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed that as of 28th February,
2010 remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on a total number of 3450 Audit
Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/Departments. Out of these
12 Paragraphs relate to the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The scrutiny of the
pending Action Taken Notes of the Ministry revealed that in respect of 5 Audit Paras
Action Taken Notes were not received in the Audit even for the first time. In regard to
one Audit para though Audit had given their comments the revised reply is awaited
from the Ministry. Action Taken Notes in respect of five paras are under examination
in the Audit. The Committee express their displeasure over the inordinate delays in
furnishing the Action Taken Notes by the Ministry. The Committee are not inclined
to accept the plea taken by the Ministry that the delays in furnishing Action Taken
Notes were due to delay in vetting by the Office of C&AG. Though, it is understandable
that in certain cases there may be delays from the side of the Audit, nevertheless it is
not correct to make such a sweeping statement and put the blame on the Audit. The
Ministry's statement does not hold water for the simple reason that in respect of five
paras, ATN were not furnished to Audit even for the first time. The Committee, urge
upon the Ministry of Environment and Forests to streamline their procedures and
strengthen their monitoring system with a view to ensuring that the remedial/
corrective Action Taken Notes on Audit Paras are invariably submitted within the
prescribed time-frame. The Committee further desire that responsibility should be
fixed, for the inordinate delays in the submission of Action Taken Notes on the Audit
Paras. The Committee express the hope that the remedial/corrective Action Taken
Notes on the pending Audit Paras are obtained from the Nodal Officers expeditiously
and furnished to the Committee, duly vetted by Audit, within a month from the
presentation of this Report.
2. "Project Tiger" was launched by the Government of India as a Centrally
sponsored Scheme in April 1973 to protect tigers and to ensure a viable population of
tigers in India. Under the Scheme, 28 Tiger Reserves were created in 17 States
between 1973-74 and 1999-2000. Presently, "Project Tiger" is being implemented
in 38 Tiger Reserves falling in 17 States. The Committee's examination of this
Project revealed several deficiencies in its implementation. The Ministry's figure
relating to extant population of tigers in wild cannot be said to be reliable and verifiable
as census is not conducted annually in many Tiger Reserves, besides census data is
not up to date. 15 out of the 28 Tiger Reserves created head area less than half the
prescribed area which is not conducive for conservation, protection and sustenance
of a viable tiger population. Efforts for relocation of the people living within the Tiger
Reserves as well as removal and prevention of encroachment which is essential to
ease the biotic pressure on the tiger population did not succeed primarily because of
15

16
lack of resources. Against the requirement of around Rs. 11000 crore to relocate
64951 families living within the Tiger Reserves, the allocation in the Tenth Five Year
Plan was a meagre Rs. 10.50 crore. The implementation of the Project Tiger was
severely hampered by understaffing at the level of Tiger Reserves and the personnel
actually employed were also found to be overaged, undertrained and underequipped in
many cases. The intelligence and communication network at the Tiger Reserves
level was also found to be inadequate and the steps for protection of tigers in the Tiger
Reserves were weak in the absence of measures to combat poaching, lack of adequate
arms and ammunition, deficiencies in creation of strike force, poor intelligence
gathering and inadequate patrolling camps etc. As a result, poaching of tigers
continued and touched an annual level of 22 over a period of six years. The Committee's
examination of some of these deficiencies and their findings are dealt with at length
in the succeeding paragraphs.
3. Mitigation of negative human impacts is quite essential for revival of natural
habitat and eco systems in Tiger Reserves. The success of Project Tiger, therefore,
to a great extent, depends on the relocation of persons living in the core and buffer
area of the Tiger Reserves. During evidence held on 23.2.2010 the Member—
Secretary, National Tiger Conservation Authority has informed the Committee that
80,000 families are residing in the core/buffer tiger habitats of 26 Tiger Reserves
and the relocation of these families would require Rs. 8000 crore. However, during
further evidence on the subject held on 5.3.2010 the witness clarified that the Ministry
of Environment and Forests/NTCA have identified 46,000 odd families, which are to
be relocated. This clearly indicates that there is no clarity on the part of Ministry/
NTCA with regard to the exact number of families that are required to be relocated as
well as the amount required for their relocation. Obviously , due diligence has not
been carried out by the Ministry/NTCA in this regard, which is anything but
regrettable. The Committee expect the Ministry of Environment and Forests to arrive
at the correct figure relating to the number of families that are to be relocated as well
as the amount needed for their relocation/rehabilitation and the most effective/practical
manner thereof, in consultation with the concerned State Governments and other
agencies. The Ministry informed that since inception of Project Tiger till June 2005,
a total of 80 villages (2904 families) have been relocated from different Tiger Reserves.
An amount of Rs. 17 crores was provided to Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra,
Orissa and Karnataka during the period 2002-03 to 2006-08 for relocation of 2123
families from 9 Tiger Reserves. During the XIth Plan, under the enhanced package,
an amount of Rs. 236.79 crores has been provided to States towards resettlement/
acquisition of rights of 7782 families. Proposals amounting to Rs. 302.45 crores
have already been received in this regard. The Committee regret to note that the
relocation of families is going on at a snail's pace and at this rate it will take more
than a decade to relocate all the families from the core/buffer areas. The Committee
feel that the Planning Commission may be unable to grant Rs. 8000  crore in one go
in which case the target of relocation of families would be like chasing a mirage. The
Ministry however, expressed the optimism that they would be able to generate the
resources for relocation by undertaking a special project i.e. Donor Driven Project
and link this to the benefits which will accrue to the community by not cutting trees.

17
The Committee are of the considered view that the Ministry of Environment and
Forests ought to be realistic and pragmatic and work out a credible financial package
for relocation of families which could be spread over a period of five years. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by the Ministry in this
regard within three months from the presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
The Committee also recommend that Government should lay down a  clear-cut agenda
for co-existence by addressing the needs of the people sharing habitat with tigers and
at the same time ensuring that eco-sensitive areas are protected from human
disturbances, without diluting the conservation efforts. The Committee further
recommend that Government should ensure that villagers/tribals are involved in the
task of protecting tigers.
4. The Committee are constrained to note that there is a severe shortage of forest
guards for protecting the tigers from poachers. Most of the guards are stated to be
very old, unfit and not properly equipped. The Committee recommend that Ministry
should come out with a comprehensive proposal for deploying the guards at places
and for the activities where they can be suitably utilized. The Committee also
recommend that for effective patrolling of the reserves, the number of camps/chowkis
and forest guards and foresters in the camp should be augmented. The staff deployed
should be physically fit, capable of carrying out patrolling duties and adequately
trained. Vulnerable exit points should invariably be covered by the Regional Deputy
Directors (RDDs). Futher, the co-ordination among the various agencies involved in
control of illegal wildlife trade also needs to be improved.
5. The Committee note with concern that census was not conducted annually in
most of the Tiger Reserves and it was also not upto date. In the 15 Tiger Reserves
created up to 1984, the total number of tigers increased from 1121 in 1984 to 1141 in
2001-02. Stagnation in their population indicates the ineffectiveness of the measures
taken, if any, under the Project Tiger to attain a viable tiger population. During the
same period, the overall tiger population in the country declined from 3623 to 2906.
Further, the census of tigers was generally carried out by counting pugmarks which
is not considered to be a foool proof method. In this regard, the Ministry have informed
the Committee that National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) in collaboration
with Wildlife Institute of India has evolved a new methodology for estimating tiger
population based on determining spatial occupancy of tiger throughout potential
tiger forests and sampling such forests using camera traps in a statistical framework.
This methodology has been approved by Tiger Task Force. The Committee hope that
with the adoption of this new methodology, the figures related to tiger population
would be reliable and accurate. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome
of the new methodology evolved by NTCA.
6. The Committee note that India has 60 per cent population of its tiger living in
the wild forests. Unlike China, USA, France and Russia where tigers are breed in
captivity there is no such captive breeding of tigers in the country. According to the
Ministry of Environment and Forests tigers breed in captivity look different and
behave differently from those in the wild. Notwithstanding the difference in the
characteristics of the tiger that are breed in captivity and that are born in the wild, the

18
Committee are of the considered view that in light of the fast dwindling of tiger
population in tiger reserves, the NTCA may explore launching a National Tiger
Breeding Programme and reintroduce these tigers in designated habitats.
7. The Committee believes that many informed commentators have, in the columns
of the press and in different journals suggested various steps to achieve the objectives
of 'Project Tiger'. The suggested measures need to be carefully factored in and
where possibile included in the action programme by the Government to achieve the
mandate of 'Project Tiger'. The Project's success is critical to larger environmental
concerns and all steps should be taken to address the gaps and deficiencies witnessed
thus far in the implementation and/or conceptualization of 'Project Tiger'.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 Vaisakha 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES TO THE THIRD SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-V OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10) ON "NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF REPLIES TO THE AUDIT
PARAGRAPHS OF C&AG OF INDIA HELD ON 27TH NOVEMBER, 2009
The Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the
27th November, 2009 from 1800 hrs.  to 1920 hrs. in Room No. '139', Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (Report Central)
2. Shri Raj Vishwanathan — Pr. Director of Audit (Scientific Department)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
1. Shri Vijai Sharma — Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
Forests
2. Shri Saurabh Chandra — Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
3. Shri M.B. Lal — Additional Director General (Wild Life)
4. Dr. P.B. Gangopadhyay — Additional Director General (Forests)
5. Dr. Rajesh Gopal — Member Secretary (National Tiger
Conservation Authority)
6. Shri A.K. Goyal — Joint Secretary, (Administration)
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee,
Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar welcomed the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of
India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
19

20
"Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the
Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India."
3. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened for
taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
on the subject relating to "Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India". The Convenor also
informed the Members that the meeting will proceed with a discussion on "Conservation
and Protection of Tigers in Tiger Reserves under the Ministry of Environment and
Forests" as contained Audit Report No. PA 8 of 2006.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests were
called in and the convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The
representatives then, briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry
in timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG. The briefing was
preceeded by power point presentation on the conservation and protection of tigers.
They also, inter-alia, threw light on the current status of pending paras in their Ministry.
The representatives also explained on the various issues and concerns raised by the
Sub-Committee. To certain queries, which the representatives of the Ministry could
not give immediate clarification or explanation, the Sub-Committee directed the
representatives to furnish written information/replies at the earliest with a view to
timely finalisation of the Report on the subject.
5. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests for appearing before the Sub-Commitee and for furnishing information that the
Sub-Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-V OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10) ON "NON-COMPLIANCE
BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
REPLIES TO THE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS OF C&AG OF INDIA
 HELD ON 23RD FEBRUARY , 2010
The Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday, the
23rd February, 2010 from 1430 hrs. to 1610 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
Rajya Sabha
Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri Subir Mallick — P r. Director (INDT)
2. Shri Anadi Mishra — Director (Customs)
3. Shri Raj G . Viswanathan — P r. Director of Audit Scientific Deptt.
4. Ms. Nameta Prasad — Director (Report)
A.*** *** ***
B . *** *** ***
C . *** *** ***
D. REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
1. Dr. P .J. Dilip Kumar — DGF & SS
2. Shri J.M. Mauskar — Additional Secretary
3. Shri M.B. Lal — ADG(WL)
***Part not related to the report.
21

22
4. Shri P.B. Gangopadhyay — ADG(FC)
5. Shri Saurabh Chandra — AS&FA
6. Dr. Rajesh Gopal — MS(NTCA)
7. Dr. Rajneesh Dube — Joint Secretary
8. Shri A.K. Goyal — Joint Secretary
9. Shri S.P. Yadav — DIG
10. Shri Atul Chadha — DIG
11. Mrs. Renu C. Deshpande — CA
12. Shri N. Muruganandam — Director
13. Shri S.K. Agarwal — Director
14. Dr. Subba Rao — Director
15. Shri A.K. Johri — DIG
16. Shri M. Hota — Additional Director
17. Dr. B. Sikka — Director
18. Shri B.B. Barman — Additional Director
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee,
Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar  welcomed the representatives of the Officers of the C&AG of
India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
"Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the
Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India".
3. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened
for taking further oral evidence of the representatives of the (i) Ministry of Finance
— Department of Revenue and the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (DGFT);
 (ii) Department of  Space; and the (iii) Ministry of Environment and Forests on the
subject relating to "Non-Compliance by Minstries/Deparments in timely submission
of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India" especially on those issues
where select information were sought by the Committee in their earlier sitting held on
5th February, 2010.
4. The Convenor also informed the Members that the meeting will proceed with a
discussion on (i) Para 2.2.1 of Audit Report CA 7 of 2008 relating to "Incorrect
Classification of Excisable Goods Resulting in Short Levy of Duty-Hair Oil" and
of Para 7.1 of Audit Report No. 10 of 1998 relating to  "Non-fulfilment of Export
Obligation"; (ii) Chapter II of Audit Report No. PA 2 of 2008 relating to "Procurement
of Stores and Inventory Control in Department of Space" and (iii) Audit Report No. 18
of 2006 relating to "Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger Reserves"
5 . *** *** ***
*** Part not related to the report.

23
6 . *** *** ***
7 . *** *** ***
8. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests were
called in and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The
representatives then, briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry
after the last sitting with regard to timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs
of C&AG. They also, inter-alia, threw light on the current status of pending paras in
their Ministry. The Committee asked the representatives of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests to appear before the Committee again for further evidence at a later date.
9. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests for appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing information that
the Sub-Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.
***Part not related to the report.

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-V OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10) ON "NON-COMPLIANCE
BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
REPLIES TO THE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS OF C&AG OF INDIA
 HELD ON 5TH MARCH, 2010.
The Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the
5th March, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room No. '139', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri R.G . Viswanathan — Pr. Director of Audit (SD)
2. Ms. Nameeta Prasad — Director (Report)
3. Shri Raja Lakshmi R. — Director General, Railways
4. Shri P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (Report Central)
5. Shri Subir Mallick — P r. Director (INDT)
6. Ms. Rebecca Mathai — Pr. Director (DT)
A. REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
1. Shri Vijai Sharma — Secretary
2. Dr. P .J. Dilip Kumar — DGF & SS
3. Shri R.H. Khwaja — Special Secretary
4. Shri M.F. Farooqui — Additional Secretary
5. Shri P.B. Gangopadhyay — ADG (FC)
24

25
6. Shri M.B. Lal — ADG (WL)
7. Shri Saurabh Chandra — AS&FA
8. Shri A.K. Goyal — Joint Secretary
9. Shri Rajiv Gauba — Joint Secretary
10. Shri Rajesh Gopal — MS (NTCA)
11. Prof. S.P. Gautam — Chairman, CPCB
12. Shri Ansar Ahmed — IGF
13. Shri B.S. Bonal — Me mber Secretary (CZA)
14. Shri K.B. Thampi — IGF (NAEB)
15. Smt. Renu Desh Pandey — CA
16. Shri  A.K. Johri — DIG
17. Shri  A.R. Chadha — DIG
18. Shri Narain Dass — Deputy Secretary
B . *** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee,
Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar welcomed the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of
India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
"Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the
Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India".
3. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened for
taking further oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests especially on those issues where select information were sought by the
Committee in the last sitting. The Convenor also informed the members that the Ministry
of Finance – Department of Expenditure has also been summoned today to take oral
evidence on the subject relating to "Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in
timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India".
4. The Convenor informed the Members that the meeting will proceed with a
discussion on Audit Report No. 18 of 2006 relating to "Conservation and Protection
of Tigers in Tiger Reserves"  which will be followed by oral evidence of the
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance—Department of Expenditure.
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests were
called in and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The
representatives then, briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry
after the last sitting with regard to timely submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs
of C&AG. They also, inter-alia, threw light on the current status of pending paras in
***Part not related to the report.

26
their Ministry. The representatives also explained on the various issues and concerns
raised by the Sub-Committee with regard to Village Tree Plantation Project, Ganga
Action Plan, Yamuna Action Plan etc.
The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests for appearing before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the information that
the Sub-Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then withdrew
6 . *** *** ***
7 . *** *** ***
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.
***Part not related to the report.

APPENDIX IV
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 26TH APRIL, 2010
The Committee sat on Monday, the 26th April, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1650 hrs. in
Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Satpal Maharaj
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Yashwant Sinha
9. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
11. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG Central (RC)
2. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
3. Ms. Usha Sankar — Director General (Autonomous Bodies)
4. Shri Gautham Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence  Services)
5. Shri P.K. Kataria — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central (RC)
6. Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central
(Economic & Services Ministries)
27

28
7. Shri R.G . Viswanathan — Pr. Director of Audit,
(Scientific Departments)
8. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director of Audit
(Air Force & Navy)
9. Shri H.K. Dharmadhekari — Pr. Director (State Report Audit)
10. Shri Rajvir Singh — Accountant General (Audit) Delhi
11. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Pr. Director of Audit (Railways)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members of the Committee and
the Audit Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then apprised the
Committee that out of the eleven Draft Reports stated for consideration, eight have
been finalized by Sub-Committee V. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration and adoption.
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
(vii) Draft Report on "Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger Reserves"
(Ministry of Environment and Forests) based on C&AG Report No. 18 of
2006;
(viii) *** *** ***
(ix) * * * * * * * * *
( x ) *** *** ***
(xi) * * * * * * * * *
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above-mentioned Draft
Reports with some modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports
in light of the suggestions made by the Members and the consequential changes
arising out of the factual verification by the Audit and present the same to Parliament.
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active participation
in the Committee's deliberations. He also thanked the PAC Secretariat and the Audit
Officers for the assistance rendered to the Committee in the examination of the subject
and finalization of the Reports.
5. The Members of the Committee thanked the Chairman for his guidance in the
smooth conduct of the meetings of the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Part not related to the report.