12
FUNCTIONING OF A.D.G.E.S. RADAR, PROCUREMENT
OF SPECIAL CLOTHING AND MOUNTAINEERING
EQUIPMENT AND DELAY IN EXECUTION/
RENEWAL OF LEASE
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC   ACCOUNTS   COMMITTEE
(2009-2010)
TWELFTH  REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

TWELFTH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
FUNCTIONING OF A.D.G.E.S. RADAR, PROCUREMENT OF
SPECIAL CLOTHING AND MOUNTAINEERING
EQUIPMENT AND DELAY IN EXECUTION/
RENEWAL OF LEASE
MINISTRY  OF  DEFENCE
Presented  to  Lok  Sabha  on  29 April, 2010
Laid in Rajya  Sabha  on  29 April, 2010
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2010/V aisakha, 1932 (Saka)

PAC  No. 1907
Price: Rs. 36.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government
of  India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110  002.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-2010)....................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-V OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-2010).................................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (vii)
REPORT
PART  I. Narrative Portion
 I. Introductory ........................................................................ 1
II. Pendency of Audit Paragraphs of Ministry of Defence ...... 2
 III. Chapter I of  C&AG’s  Report No. PA 5 of  2008  (Defence
Services—Air Force and Navy) relating to “Functioning of
Air Defence Ground Environment System (ADGES) Radar
in signal units in the Indian Air Force” ............................... 5
Radar Availability and Performance .................................... 5
IV . Paragraph No. 3.1 of  Chapter III of C&AG’s Report No. CA  4
of  2008, Union Government (Defence Services) Army and
Ordnance  Factories  relating to ‘Procurement of  Special
Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment’ ....................... 8
V. Para No. 2.1 of  C &AG Report No. 4 of 2007 (Union
Government—Defence Services) on “Delay in Execution/
Renewal of  Lease” .............................................................. 12
P
ART  II. Observations and Recommendations................................. 17
APPENDICES
I. Minutes   of  the  Fifth sitting  of  Sub-Committee-V  held  on
15th February, 2010...................................................................... 25
II. Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2009-10) held on 26th April, 2010................................................ 27

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-2010)
*Shri Gopinath Munde  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
$18. Vacant
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof.  Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin   — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma   — Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma   — Deputy Secretary
* Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee  w.e.f.  6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant Singh
   resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
$ Vice Shri Ashwani Kumar retired from Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 9th April, 2010 .
(iii)

COMPOSITION  OF  SUB-COMMITTEE-V  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2009-2010)
*Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convener
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
                   Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
*Ceased to be a Member of the Committee/Sub-Committee on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha
w.e.f. 9th Apr il, 2010.
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Twelfth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Functioning of A.D.G.E.S. Radar,
Procurement of Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment and Delay in Execution/
Renewal of Lease' based on Chapter 1 of C&AG Report No. PA 5 of  2008 (Air Force and
Navy), Para No. 3.1 of C&AG Report No. CA 4 of 2008 (Army) and Para No. 2.1 of
C&AG Report No. 4 of  2007 (Army) respectively, relating to the Ministry of Defence.
    2. The above-mentioned Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
were laid on the Table of the House on 24th October, 2008, 14th March, 2008 and
14th May, 2007 respectively.
3. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time frame, the Public Accounts
Committee (2009-2010) took up the subject for detailed examination and report. A
Sub-Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation with
the Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of the Ministry of Defence
alongwith some other Ministries/Departments.
4. In the process of the scrutiny of the Audit Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports pending
with the Ministry of Defence, the Sub-Committee came across certain pending
Paragraphs/Chapters on very important issues and considered it prudent to examine
and report the same alongwith the Non-Compliance issue. Accordingly, the
Sub-Committee took up the above-mentioned Chapter/Paragraphs of the respective
Audit Reports for indepth examination.
5. The Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence on 15th February, 2010. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at
their sitting held on 26th April, 2010. Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the
Report.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
7. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for their efforts in examining the subject
in detail and finalizing and placing the Report before the main Committee.
8. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Defence for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and furnishing
information that the Sub-Committee/Committee desired in connection with the
examination of the subject.
9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH  MUNDE,
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(vii)

REPORT
PART I
Introductory
The Finance Accounts and the Appropriation Accounts of the Union Government
for a particular financial year as well as various transactions in those accounts are
audited by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) in accordance with
the C&AG's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. C&AG certifies
these accounts and also submits separate Audit Reports there on to the President in
terms of Article 151 of Constitution of India. In addition, C&AG has also been
submitting Performance Audit Reports on important Schemes and Programmes of
the Union Government which are laid on the Table of the House and stand referred
to Public Accounts Committee. These Reports after being laid in Parliament in
accordance with Article 151 of the Constitution of India, stand referred to the Public
Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. As it becomes practically impossible for the
Public Accounts Committee to examine each and every paragraph contained in the
Audit report, the Committee adopt a selective approach and take up a few relatively
more important paragraphs for in depth examination at the beginning of the term
every year. As regards the paragraphs which are not formally selected for examination
by the Committee, these are dealt with by means of a procedure where by the
Ministries/Departments are required to furnish the remedial/corrective Action Taken
Notes to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).
2. But as there was inordinate delay on the part of the Ministries/Departments in
furnishing the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee in their
105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that with effect from 31st March,
1996 the Action Taken Notes on all the Paragraphs of the Reports of the C&AG,
which are not formally taken up by the PAC for examination, should be furnished to
the Committee within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports.
3. During 2000-01, vide their 9th Report the Committee decided that the remedial/
corrective Action Taken Notes furnished by the respective Ministries/Departments
should be categorized by the Audit under three broad heads namely 'Accepted',
'Partially Accepted’ and 'Not Accepted'. In subsequent developments, the Committee
also decided that a brief of those Action Taken Notes which are categorized as 'Not
Accepted' should be furnished by the Office of C&AG, clearly indicating the reasons
for such categorization as well as the points of difference between Audit and the
Ministry/Department concerned. After categorization by Audit, these remedial Action
Taken Notes along with the briefs on " not accepted " paras are circulated to the
Members for their perusal.

2
4. It has come to the notice of the Committee that various Ministries/Departments
have not furnished the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to the Committee
through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within the prescribed
time line of four months. For example, as on 15th September, 2009 remedial/corrective
Action Take Notes on a total number of 2827 Chapters/Paragraphs were pending
with various Ministries/Departments.
5. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject for detailed
examination during the year 2009-10. A Sub-Committee was constituted to go deep
into the matter, prepare separate Reports on each of the eight Ministries/Departments
concerned with the subject and place the same before the Main Committee for their
consideration. In the process, the Sub-Committee obtained Background Notes/
Preliminary Material and Written Replies from the Ministries/Departments concerned.
The Sub-Committee also took separate evidence of the representatives of the
Ministries/Departments on different dates.
II. Pendency of Audit Paragraphs of Ministry of Defence
6. This Report pertains to the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on the Audit
Paragraphs pending with the Ministry of Defence. Supplying the latest figures the
Ministry of Finance — Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) intimated the
position as of 15.03.2010. Out of the 4934 Chapters/Paragraphs for the period
1997-98 to 2007-08 pending with various Ministries/Departments 202 Paragraphs
pertained to the Ministry of Defence where Action Taken Notes had not been
furnished to the Committee and as such they did not reach finality keeping in view
the procedure devised by the Public Accounts Committee and as highlighted in the
opening paragraphs of this Report.
7. At the instance of the Committee the Audit also supplied the latest figures in
regard to the audit paragraphs/Performance Audit reports on which Action Taken
Notes (ATNs) are pending. As regards the status of ATNs pending as on
28th February, 2010 Audit informed that total paras/Performance Audit reports on
which ATNs were pending stood at 3450. These pertained to the period 1995-96 to
2008-09. Out of these, 229 audit paras pertain to the Defence Wing. The break up
being ATNs not received even for the first time — 62; ATNs received but returned
with observations by Audit and re-submission is awaited — 70; finally vetted by
audit but not submitted to PAC — 60 and ATNs under vetting in Audit — 37.
8. The Sub-Committee considered it prudent to examine three cases pertaining to
Ministry of Defence, as a test case, to gauge the compliance of the Ministry to the
Audit observations/suggestions contained therein, alongwith the status of remedial/
corrective Action Taken Notes to be furnished by the Ministry. These three cases
are "Functioning of Air Defence Ground Environment System (ADGES) Radar in
signal units in the Indian Air Force", "Procurement of Special Clothing and
Mountaineering Equipment" and "Delay in Execution/Renewal of Lease". The full
details of these Audit Paragraphs are contained in the succeeding paragraphs where
in each case is examined separately.

3
9. When enquired from the Ministry to indicate the exact number of audit
paragraphs pending with them, and the reasons for not complying to the limit of
four months, a representative of the Ministry during evidence stated:
"I do not know whether my answer will be correct or not but since the impression
which I gathered from going into these three cases was, since paragraphs were
selected by the PAC for detailed examination and the questionnaire was received,
the Ministry replied to the questionnaire. In one case, I had observed that where
the questionnaire was sent, the A TN was not vetted by the Director General of
Audit Defence Services (DGADS). So, when the questionnaire was received, we
started giving replies to it. It appears so from the records. But I agree that the
ATN should have been sent on time."
He further added:
"The subject-matter was confined to these three. But still I carry this statement
and probably on this 61 A TN I will definitely investigate why there is a delay. We
will come out with a specific timeframe and that we will intimate."
When asked specifically why furnishing of ATNs was not done within four months
the Special Secretary Director General (Acquisition) informed the Committee as under:
".....as far as the Department is concerned, we have furnished all the relevant details
to the audit para up to May, 2008 to the Ministry of Defence because we are not
supposed to furnish the ATN, it is for the MoD."
The witness also stated:
"It may be there that ATNs have not been submitted in time or the questionnaire
have not been replied on time but on each of the subject-matter, there has been
substantial progress. The Ministry has taken steps sincerely to look into the
observations and take remedial measures where it was possible to improve the
system."
In this connection, the witness clarified to the Sub-Committee that Ministry of
Defence had a wrong impression that if the subject-matter had been selected for oral
evidence and replies to the advance information etc. had been sent there was no
need to send the A TNs on paras so selected. The witness was in fact referring to
Report No. PA 5 of 2008 (Air Force and Navy) 'Functioning of ADGES Radar in Signal
Units in the Indian Air Force' which was Tabled in Parliament in October, 2008. The
subject was subsequently selected for detailed examination by the Public Accounts
Committee and a questionnaire was issued to the Ministry in January/February 2009.
The reply to this questionnaire was received only in December 2009. No ATN was
received by the Committee within the four month period i.e., by February, 2009.
10. Asked to indicate the exact number of Audit Paragraphs pending, the Ministry,
in a written note intimated that there were 212 Audit Paras in respect of which A TNs
had not been sent to the Monitoring Cell. In regard to query to indicate the final
date by which these A TNs would be submitted for compliance, the Ministry in a
written reply assured that Action Taken Notes in respect of remaining audit

4
paragraphs would be furnished by the end of May. When enquired whether any
responsibility had ever been fixed for not furnishing remedial Action Taken Notes
on the pending audit paragraphs, the Ministry, in a post-evidence reply stated:
"The existing instructions require compliance and non-compliance is viewed
seriously."
11. The Sub-Committee desired to know about the mechanism devised or proposed
by the Ministry to ensure timely submission of ATNs within the stipulated time frame
(of four months) and whether any constraints/difficulties were encountered in this
regard. The Ministry, in a written note stated as under:
"As per existing instructions, the administrative wing is required to take action
for preparation of the A TNs on the audit paragraphs appearing in the C&AG's
Report. The draft A TNs prepared by the administrative wing are sent to the Finance
Wing for vetting before they are sent to the Audit Authorities. The Finance Wing
periodically reviews the pendency of A TNs and reminders are sent on regular
basis to the administrative wing for compliance.
The Defence Ministry is perhaps the largest Ministry in the Government of India.
There are large number of offices situated in remote parts of the country. In many
cases information required for the ATNs have to be collected from such formations.
Collection of information takes a very long time as the information has to be vetted
and approved by the superior officers at various levels. It has also been seen
that the information furnished by the various field formations are often not complete
and requires additional inputs. Collection of such additional inputs has to again
follow the same process, as a result of which, the ATNs cannot be furnished within
the stipulated four weeks time."
12. In regard to the non-furnishing ATNs in respect of paragraph on 'Procurement
of Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment', (discussed in detail in the
succeeding paragraphs) Audit has stated in regard to the Non-Compliance that Action
Taken Note (A TN) was received by Audit in November 2008 but the same was
returned to the Ministry with certain observation. The revised A TNs have not since
been received by Audit for vetting.
13. The Sub-Committee wanted to know the specific reasons for delay in furnishing
the revised A TN. The Minister in a written reply intimated that this audit para was
received in the last week of March, 2008 and the draft ATN was sent to DGADS on
10.11.2008 after getting it vetted by Defence (Finance). DGADS vetted the ATN on
15.1.2009 and thereafter a meeting was held with DGADS on 17.2.2009 in which it
was decided to take immediate steps for responding to audit criticism. The matter
was reviewed again in February, 2010 and after appending the vetting comments in
the ATN it was sent on 12.2.2010.
14. Taking note of the inordinate delay in furnishing of the A TNs the Committee
opined that the time limit for furnishing the ATNs cannot be open ended and a situation
where submission is inordinately delayed needs to be viewed seriously.

5
III. Chapter I of C&AG's Report No. PA 5 of 2008 (Defence Sevices—Air Force
and Navy) Relating to "Functioning of Air Defence Ground Environment System
(ADGES) Radar in Signal Units in the Indian Air Force".
15. In the light of the pendency of the Audit Paragraphs on which remedial action
by Ministry of Defence did not reach the stage of finality, the Committee decided  to
enquire into the above-mentioned Chapter as that first case pertaining to Indian Air
Force and two other Chapters pertaining to Army and Ordnance Factories and
Defence Services respectively the details of which are contained in the succeeding
paragraphs.
16. The Audit Chapter focusses on the 'Functioning of ADGES Radar in Signal
Units in the Indian Air Force'. It has been stated by audit that the Air Defence Ground
Environment System (ADGES) is an integrated network of surveillance radars, air
defence control centres, air and missile basis and anti aircraft guns intended to provide
an efficient and reliable defence against air attacks. This System, which functions
within the IAF, came into existence in 1976 and continues to be at the heart of the
nation's Air Defnce (AD) system. The radars deployed under this system are of three
types i.e. High Power Radar (HPR), Medium Power Radar (MPR) and Low Level
Transportable Radar (LLTR). Each category of radar differs in its role, range, height
detection and mobility. Working in concert, these are designed/structured to provide
the country with round-the-clock, gap-free AD cover. Deployment of AD radars at
various locations in the country is aimed at providing a conducive flying environment,
adequate surveillance and effective command and control of AD assets. The present
inventory of these radars was acquired at an aggregated cost of Rs. 1031 crore.
Audit examination disclosed weaknesses in planning and deficiencies in
performance/functioning of radar units of the IAF. In addition, modernization and
replacement activities were not commensurate with the needs of the IAF. Repair and
maintenance activities also revealed significant delays and an unstructured approach
towards unertaking tasks.
Radar Availability and Performance
17. Audit has brought out that Air Defence is critical to nation's security. Despite
this, the IAF is holding less than adequate number of surveillance radars needed for
providing efficient and reliable detection.
Audit scrutiny revealed that none of the plans prepared after 1971 received
approval of the Government. Some of the elements of the ADGES plans have, however,
been sanctioned on piece-meal basis from time to time. Acquisitions and replacements
have thus been few, unplanned, ad-hoc and delayed, creating a serious mismatch
between availability and IAF's requirements of radar systems.
According to Audit, the Ministry did not furnish explanation/reasons for non-
approval of the revised AD Plans submitted by IAF.
18. The Sub-Committee desired the Special Secretary and Director General
(Acquisition) to give a brief background on the weaknesses in planning and

6
deficiencies in performance, functioning of radar units in the Indian Air Force.
Explaining the position on behalf of the Ministry of Defence the witness stated:
"............it was observed in the (Audit) Report that modernization and replacement
activities were not commensurate with the needs of IAF....The plans which are
made for the ADGES are revised on the basis of re-assessment of the threat
perception, operational requirements and emerging technologies. A long term
perspective plan which includes the ADGES plan for the period covering up to
2022 has also been formulated. In the meantime several major acquisitions have
been completed to strengthen the Air Defence system and I will name some of
these major acquisitions. Medium Power Radars—A contract for Medium Power
Radars was signed in October 2007. Low-Level Transportable Radar—A contract
for Low-Level Transportable Radars was signed in July 2009. Rohini Radar—A
contract for Rohini Radars was signed with BHEL in March 2006 and thereafter
another contract for radars was signed in 2009. Aerostat Surveillance System—In
the C&AG's para a mention was made of HPRs. Air Force later on revised its
assessment and they opted for the Aerostat Radars and these radars have already
been procured and have been installed and a case for four additional Aerostat
Radars is presently under process. Low-Level Light Weight Radar which is called
LLLWR-A contract for LLLWR has been signed. LLLWR are also being developed
indigenously by the DRDO."
19. The witness also informed that the project of integrated air command control
system is being installed indigenously and would become operational by the end of
2010.
20. Asked to state the reason for non-approval of the revised Air Defence (AD)
and piece-meal sanctions of some of the elements of the Air Defence Ground
Environment System (ADGES) Plans, the Ministry intimated the Sub-Committee,
through a written replay:
"Two major reviews were carried out on the plan ADGES 1970 by Air HQ (Revised
Plan ADGES 1983, updated to plan ADGES 1987 followed by plan ADGES 2000).
These reviews envisaged upgrade and new induction consequent to
re-appreciation of threat perception, availability of resources and emerging
technology. The recommendation of the revised Plan ADGES 2000 were thereafter
implemented taking into account availability of funds. The radars that were
procured during 1987-2000 period are PSM -33, ST-68, TRS 2215 and INDRA
radars."
21. On a query regarding fixing of responsibility on any official for non-approval/
inordinate delay in approval of the revised AD Plans, the Ministry in a written reply
stated that the Plans were revised on the basis of re-assessment of threat perception,
operational requirements, availability of resources and emerging technology and this
cannot be attributed to any lapse on the part of any individual.
22. The Sub-Committee took a serious note of the delay in procuring MPRs and
drew attention of the Ministry to the fact that IAF proposed 23 MPRs in June 2002

7
at an estimated cost of Rs. 2300 crore and the acceptance of the necessity was agreed
to by Competent Financial Authority (CFA) in January, 2004. It took virtually one
year and eight months for the CFA to give an acceptance of necessity report. To this
observation of the Sub-Committee the Special Secretary, DG (Acquisition) candidly
admitted during evidence by stating:
"But that is the reality. At times it happens."
Briefing on the changes that have taken place in the procurement procedures, the
witness stated:
"The Defence procurement procedure which was being followed in 2001 provided
for this type of decision which used to take in files the acceptance of necessity,
quantity vetting, etc. After 2005, the Defence procurement procedure was
formulated and then it has been revised in 2007-08 and presently, we do not take
that much time."
23. Elaborating further the witness added:
"Then the acquisition people come into the picture. But before that the Acquisition
Wing's role is there by way of giving inputs, observations, etc. only to facilitate
the decision leading to quantify vetting, etc. Once these decisions are taken then
Service Headquarters frame a draft Request for Proposal (RFP). Even before that
the Service Headquarters is supposed to make a General Staff Qualitative
Requirement (GSQR) and the RFP is based on GSQR. Hereafter the timeframe
starts."
24. On a query, as to how much time frame was reduced after 2005, the witness
intimated that now it was three months.
25. The Committee wanted to know about the risk/threat perception and operational
preparedness of Indian Air Force (IAF) to counter threats and also enquired about
the time when the threat was last reviewed and whether the current acquisition plans
were in line with such perception. To this query of the Sub-Committee, the Ministry
through a written reply intimated that threat perception/security environment was
influenced by several factors like Emerging World Order, Spread of Information
Technology system, Energy aircraft and weapon system and Acquisition plan of
enemy etc. They also intimated that last review was carried out in January, 2010 and
the current Acquisition plan were in line with the threat perception and also the
Acquisition plans is based on the LTPP 2007—22. Five years acquisition plans were
culled out of the LTPP.
26. In response to a specific query of the Sub-Committee regarding measures taken
for strengthening the AD system, the Defence Ministry stated that a number of state
of art Radar systems like Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS), Aerostats,
Medium Power Radar (MPR), Low Level Transportable Radar (LLTR), Low Level Light
Weight Radars (LLLWR) and Mountain Radar were being procured/proposed to be
procured in order to strengthen the AD system. The procurement process of the
above said Radar systems was in different stages of finalization.

8
27. The Sub-Committee wanted to know about the delivery schedules of those
radars for which contracts have been signed and their anticipated commissioning
time. To this specific query of the Sub-Committee, the Ministry could not provide
any exact schedule/dates.
28. It was also informed in a written reply that a contract has been signed in
October, 2007 for MPRs. A contract to procure LLTR was signed on 29.07.09 and the
balance was to be manufactured indigenously by M/s BEL through transfer of
technology.
29. As regards modernization of AD System during the course of oral  evidence,
the representative of the Ministry of Defence stated that they were not in a position
to give a fixed time frame in regard to the plan to modernize the air defence system.
30. Audit has brought out that Aircraft on Ground (AOG) demands for spares are
required to be met within 24 hrs so that the equipment is repaired and made serviceable
at the earliest. Only 0.4 per cent of AOG demands were met within 24 hrs. and 59 per
cent of AOG demands could be met within 2 to 30 days. During the course of evidence,
the Sub-Committee drew attention of the Ministry to the fact that less than 1% of
the AOG demands for spares were met within 24 hrs. and asked whether Ministry
had any plans to stick to the time frame of 24 hrs. Subsequently, Ministry of Defence
intimated through a written reply that the provisioning reviews were carried out to
cater for spares for a period of 21 months and lead time of 18 months for the supply.
However, due to the unpredictable nature of failure of electronic items, Special
Reviews and Aircraft on Ground (AOG) indents were raised by the Base Repair Depot
(BRD) on as required basis. Supply and Provisioning CANNON 5B/2001 has been
amended in 2008 to facilitate provisioning reviews to be carried out system-wise and
Radar-wise instead of one generic category of Air Defence Ground Environment
System (ADGES) Radars.
IV . Paragraph No. 3.1 of Chapter III of C&AG’s Report No. CA 4 of 2008, Union
Government (Defence Services) Army and Ordnance Factories Relating to
‘Procurement of Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment’
31. The second case which the Sub-Committee decided to enquire in detail is the
above-mentioned Chapter on 'Procurement of Special Clothing and Mountaineering
Equipment'.
32. Audit has stated that special clothing and mountaineering equipment are
provided to the troops posted in the extreme cold climate conditions at Siachen,
Kargil and  Sikkim etc. Out of the 55 items authorized, 19 critical items such as
down feather jackets, trousers, sleeping bags, multipurpose boots, woollen
socks, rucksacks etc. were being imported as no indigenous source has
emerged.
33. Special clothing is a vital equipment for troops deployed in extreme cold climatic
conditions, as in Siachen glacier. Despite the fact that Army HQ has been procuring
these clothing items for over two decades, the procedure for formulation of technical

9
specifications, evaluation of offers and selection of vendors have not been
streamlined of ten contracts concluded during 2002—06 for purchase of special
clothing for Rs. 48.88 crore, items valuing Rs. 28.81 crore (59%) were rejected either
in receipt inspection or by end users.
34. Audit has stated that despite the purchase of special clothing/equipment being
in practice for over two decades; Army HQ/MOD has yet to streamline the procedure
for formulation of technical specifications, selection of vendors and evaluation of
tenders. Asked about the reasons for the unusual delay in streamlining the procedures,
the Ministry stated, in written note that several steps have been taken during last
2-3 years for streamlining the procurement process for Special Clothing &
Mountaineering Equipment such as constituting an Empowered Committee, making
an attempt to formulate broad-based technical specification enabling participation
by several vendors, maintaining a database of all standard vendors, revising of
procedure laid down for evaluation of tenders and requesting Ordnance Factories
Board (OFB) to commence indigenous production of critical items of Special Clothing
either through transfer of technology or licensed production.
35. The Sub-Committee stressed upon the fact that although procedures do exist
but their application and implementation was improper by citing four specific cases
in regard to the rejection of items procured by the Ministry. These were purchase of
multipurpose model boots from M/s Koflach—Austria, multipurpose boot model
shoveling from a French Company, purchase of socks from LEH Enterprises and
supply of boots by an Italian company rejected by the Northern Command. In this
connection, the Sub-Committee pointed out that for four items like boots, jackets,
vests and socks indigenous capabilities would be developed through DRDO/PSUs/
Ordnance Factories. On this observation a representative of the Ministry stated:
"..................... the ground reality is that, although we are making rockets and
everything else, a simple thing like socks we have not been able to produce for
Siachen. That is the reality on ground.
Secondly, a simple thinking like lower altitude snow boot is not being
produced in requisite quality. We are facing a crisis today because for lower
altitudes we are getting the boots but I find there are quality issues. They
cannot produce these numbers or in the desired quality for me today.
Therefore, next week I am putting up an Request for Information (RFI) to
even go and import boots for lower altitudes whereas we are supposed to
go indigenous on this issue. On this, indigenous vendors have been actually
dilly-dallying for the last one year my tenure and a little earlier than that.
They have not been able to produce boots with requisite quality. That is
the surprising part."
36. The Sub-Committee drew attention of the Ministry to the fact that the
procurement process was being done in certain cases between 14 to 16 months and

10
enquired as to whether such a time period was reasonable. Replying to the query a
representative of the Ministry during evidence stated:
"As far as amendment to the procurement procedures is concerned, currently after the
bidding process has been done, we place an order on a successful vendor. Currently
the option clause is only 50 per cent. If we want to continue the entire flow, I think we
need to revisit it; we are taking up the case separately with the Ministry. After studying
the system we could have an option clause of 100 per cent and a repeat order for 100
per cent. I can assure you that the time period will come down. In short, what I am
recommending is a long term business agreement with the successful vendor."
37. Audit had observed that the Ministry should take appropriate step to formulate
General Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQRs) as well as important qualifying
specifications of all items of special clothing and equipment for ensuring purchase
of quality items required for protection of troops deployed in hostile climatic
conditions. This assumed greater importance in the backdrop of the heavy casualties,
388 in five years. The Sub-Committee wanted to know the steps taken to formulate
GSQRs and important qualifying specifications in order to enable the Ministry to
achieve imperative requirement of essential items such as special clothing and
equipment. To this query of the Committee the Ministry stated in a written reply:
"Considerable progress has been achieved by army HQ in formulating GSQR and
important qualifying specifications of special clothing items during the last two years.
Both Specific and Desirable QR of most of the items of the special clothing and equipment
have been formulated. Based on these, Directorate General of Quality Assurance (DGQA)
has already prepared broad technical specifications in respect of 12 out of 19 items
being procured ex-import. Specifications in respect of balance seven items also are
expected to be ready within next four to six months. Within a period of the last six months,
four global RFPs have been issued on these QR for items like Jacket and Trouser Down,
Karabiner, Avalanche Victim Detector and Ice Axe and Shovel".
38. The Committee drew the attention of the Ministry to the fact that Ministry
had prescribed in their Procurement Manual specified time frames for each activity
in relation to procurement and wanted to know whether the Ministry had analysed
the reasons for the slippages in adherence to the procedure in respect of the special
clothing/equipment. To this query of the Sub-Committee, the Ministry explained in a
written reply that delays were mainly attributabe to unforseen developments like failure
of advance samples submitted by the vendor or a dispute over technical specification
and test methods. Some of the delays could be procedural also. The procurement
procedure has been hampered more by rejection of stores on technical grounds rather
than delay on any other account. They also stated that an Empowered Committee
has been constituted for fast track procurement.
39. During the course of examination the Sub-Committee learnt that one of the
major problem in procuring clothings of this nature was the narrow vendor base.
When asked to explain the steps taken to expand the vendor base, the Ministry
through a written reply intimated that Special Clothing items were highly specialized
and very few manufacturers were available worldwide. Even these vendors are

11
primarily manufacturing for adventure activities. Demand of India Army, though
consistent in numbers, may not be enough to sustain commercial production and
this was the reason for the reliance on the product which were vendor specific. They
also intimated that Ordnance Factories Board (OFB) has been requested to commence
indigenous production of critical items of Special Clothing either through transfer of
technology or licensed production.
40. The Committee noted that rejection rate of the item purchased was as high as
59% and enquired the Ministry to explain the reasons for the same. Explaining the
position on behalf of the Ministry their representative stated:
"........... In majority of the cases, the technical specifications had been worked out
based on the sample which had been accepted by the user. At the same time of
bulk supply, the vendor or the supplier, somehow or the other, deviated from the
specifications which were given, and these deviations, even if it was on one
parameter out of 15, 20 or 30 odd parameters on which they were to be tested,
then the item was rejected as having not met the laid down specifications."
The witness further added:
"Sir, in the past, the procedures were somewhat different. As of now, what is
happening is that we are carrying out a pre-despatch inspection as against a joint
receipt inspection which was in force earlier, prior to 2007, since the pre-despatch
inspection is being carried out, rejection also takes place in the host country itself,
the stocks are not delivered and there are no payments made."
41. The Committee learnt that there were several instances where Ministry procured
items from suppliers other than the Original Equipment Manufactures (OEMs) which
was against the extant procurement policy of the Ministry. A strange case came to
light where procurement continued from vendor M/s Aptec for 15 years despite the
fact that Aptec was a vendor registered in Noida and was operated by retired Army
Officers. The Army Headquarter realized the fact that M/s Aptec was not Original
Equipment Manufactures (OEM) after a lapse of 15 years. Asked whether Ministry
have ever enquired into the matter with an angle to find any possible link between
the serving and the retired officers in this particular case, replying to the query a
representative of the Ministry stated:
"Sir, this is a very old case of 2002, and I also read out about this from the Report.
We will look into this part."
Subsequently, the Ministry through a written note informed that verification of
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) status is being undertaken regularly through
the Defence Attaches/Military Attaches posted at Indian Embassies in various
countries. However, Defence Procurement Manual 2009 stipulated that apart from
foreign OEMs, procurement could be effected from their authorized vendors/stockists
also. In this particular case the Ministry clarified that M/s Aptech was a sole agent
of a foreign manufacturer for supply of boots and two contracts were entered with
this manufacturer. Subsequently, when the wider base developed this company was
de-registered from the list of approved vendors.

12
42. In context of the clothing requirement by the Army vis-a-vis the research
undertaken by DRDO, the Ministry intimated through written reply:
"DRDO R&D lab Defence Materials & Stores Research & Development
Establishment (DMSRDE) is mandated for clothing items. It has worked on 5 Staff
projects over a period of time from 1988 onward pertaining stores clothing/textiles
items for Glaciers and high Altitude Areas. These developed clothing items were
trial evaluated in 1988 and 11 items were accepted for introduction. The production
of various clothing items was done under empowered Committee to meet out
emergent requirements of the Army and bulk productions of items were established.
In subsequent years DRDO/DMSRDE carried out R&D on clothing items and
executed various indents from Army for some such items. V arious items were
evaluated by the users. Some are accepted and some are under modifications and
trials. Out of 55 items authorized/issued to troops in Siachen, only 19 items are
procedured ex-import."
43. The Committee were also informed by the Ministry through a written note
that Ordnance Clothing Factory, Shahjahanpur had been assigned the task for
establishing indigenous production of special clothing items and it was decided to
undertake productionisation of the seven Category-I items such as Sleeping bag,
Jacket Down, Trouser Down etc. RFP was accordingly issued for three items namely,
Jacket Down, Trouser Down and Sleeping bag but Northern Command did not
recommend the items for induction into service. Thereafter, it was decided to cancel
the present RFP and float a new Global RFP.
44. On specific query to indicate what action did the Ministry propose for disposal
of rejected items costing Rs. 28.81 crore, the Ministry informed that in three cases
vendor was asked to repair the stores which had been rejected in inspection. The
vendor has repaired the stores, but liquidated damages will be imposed for the delay
occurred. In one case which pertains to procurement of Thermal Insoles, arbitration
proceedings were being initiated against the firm in accordance with the advice of
Legal Advisor (Defence). In the case pertaining to Jacket Down, the performance
bank guarantee and warranty bank guarantee have not been returned to the firm and
validity of the guarantees were being extended to explore the possibility of imposing
penalty. In case of Sleeping Bags valued at Rs. 19.6 crore procured from M/s CAMP
spa, the vendor has been directed to replace the entire quantity of Sleeping Bags
failing which appropriate action would be initiated for recovery of the amount paid.
V . Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 4 of 2007 (Union Government—Defence
Services) On “Delay in Execution/Renewal of Lease"
45. The third important paragraph which the Sub-Committee deemed appropriate
to examine is the above-mentioned paragraph relating to 'Delay in Execution/Renewal
of Lease'. In this case it has been brought out by Audit that Director General Defence
Estates (DGDE) is responsible for management of the defence lands both inside and
outside the Cantonments. Total Defence land holding is about 17 lakh acres of this,

13
Defence has leased out lands at different locations to various public and private
users. Audit has reported four cases of inordinate delay of six to 36 years in renewal
of lease highlighting inefficiencies at all levels in the DGDE organization and the
Ministry. The inaction and lack of monitoring on the part of DGDE and the Ministry
resulted in non-recovery of rent and premium of crores of rupees from the lessees/
unauthorized users. Unauthorised occupation of defence land without renewal of
lease and without payment of rent continued with the help of the DGDE organization
who do not process and decide these cases for decades despite request for renewal
of lease by the users. The Ministry in their reply to the Advance Questionnaire of
the Committee had stated that as a remedial measure, instructions have been reiterated
to all the field offices of Director General Defence Estates (DGDE) to take stock of
the expired leases and prepare a calendar of disposal of such cases of renewal of the
leases in a time-bound manner.
46. Reiterating on the Audit observations the Sub-Committee drew the attention
of the representatives of the Ministry over the fact that from 19 to 36 years there has
been no renewal and old rents continued to be paid. In addition to the four cases of
non-renewal categorically brought out by Audit i.e., Lease of Defence Land to Madras
United CLub, Chennai; Lease of  land to IOC in Jabalpur Cantonment; Lease of
Defence Land to SBI at Avadi, Chennai and Defence Land at Belgaum, the Sub-
Committee opined that there would be many more cases of this nature out of the
cases awaiting renewal. Agreeing with the observation of the Sub-Committee a
representative of the Ministry stated:
".................a very logical inference was drawn that the delay would not be confined
only to these four cases and there would be many more. Besides that, they made
some observations which were identify all the cases pending for renewal and
prescribe a timeframe after finalization; institute a monitoring mechanism for timely
renewal of lease before expiry; fixing land value/rental for Defence Land correctly
in a transparent manner, provision for periodic enhancement of rent to be made in
the long term lease arrangement; unjustified delay in finalization of lease, etc."
47. In regard to the four cases the representative of the Ministry stated:
".................when we talk of petrol pumps and the cases like Madras United Club,
Turf Club etc., the fact is that these leases were sanctioned long time back, but
there was no in-built clause either for renewal or for enhancement of rent at that
point of time. They were initially given for a fixed period. Now they should have
been renewed. I absolutely agree with you. There is absolutely no justification or
explanation for their non-renewal, as pointed out by the Audit. I am in agreement
with you. The fact now is that after the Audit has pointed out, we have taken
serious note of it and one by one, we are taking up all these cases. We have also
brought three out of these four cases to their logical conclusion. Now we have
recovered rent........................in some cases, not all cases, as on today.”
48. In regard to a query on the dates of issue of instructions and the current
status of renewal of lease in the four cases, Ministry in a detailed written reply have

14
stated that" The instructions were issued on 25 June, 2007, 12 September, 2007 and
15 January, 2008. 464 leases have been renewed after the issue of these instructions,
involving an area of approximately 220 acres. As a consequence of these renewals
of expired leases, approximately Rs. 338.5 lakhs have been recovered as lease rent
which includes approximately Rs. 305 lakhs on account of lease rent from leases given
for petrol pumps. In addition to the rent, approximately Rs. 342 lakhs have been
recovered as premium from leases for petrol pumps.
The current status in respect of four cases as pointed out in audit report is as
follows:—
(i) Madras United Club
The lease has been renewed upto 31.12.07. As per the sanction, a sum of
Rs. 39,585/- has been recovered from the Club on account of rent including arrears.
IOC, Jabalpur
Lease has been renewed for a period of five years w.e.f. 4.11.2006. Premium amounting
to Rs. 46,68,460/- along with rent of Rs. 9,33,692/- per annum for two years i.e. Rs.
18,67,384/- uptil 3.11.08 has been recovered from IOC. IOC have represented against
the abnormal increase in the quantum of rent and have requested for its recalculation.
(ii) SBI, Avadi
The delay in renewal was primarily on account of non-execution of the lease deed.
While initially this was by oversight however, subsequently with the Heavy V ehicle
Factory (HVF) having occupied a large part of the leased site unauthorizedly and
matter taken up between HVF and SBI for offering an equal area so occupied, the
execution of lease could only take place once this area was finalized between HVF
and SBI and the Government sanction of 1967 amended. The problem was further
compounded by the HVF/Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) insisting that the renewal
should be as per the policy guidelines dated 10.8.1990 issued by Ministry of Defence,
and the Deptt. of Defence Production treating the case as one of grant of fresh
sanction. Since the lease was sanctioned by Ministry of Defence in 1967 in
Schedule VIII of the CLAR, 1937 for an initial term of  30 years, and such leases
provide for renewal of lease for two similar terms at the option of the lessee by
enhancement of rent by a maximum of 50% of the existing rent, therefore, the
interpretation of HVF/OFB regarding applicability of the 10.8.1990 guidelines issued
by Department of Defence Production guidelines was incorrect. However, the case
has now been taken up for finalization of the area, amendment to the Government
sanction, execution of the lease agreement and its subsequent renewal.
HVF has requested SBI to execute a fresh lease agreement with rent being fixed at prevailing
market rates. This has not been agreed to by SBI, and the matter is being negotiated with them.
However, the SBI is paying the rent as per sanction issued by DGDE i.e.
Rs. 1125/- per year and they have agreed to pay the difference rent w.e.f. 1999. The
enhanced rent can be collected after finalization/approval of lease agreement.

15
(iii) IOC/HPCL at Belgaum
The details of lease renewal and, recovery of rent and premium in respect of each
of the five pieces of defence land at Belgaum which were leased to Indian Oil
Corporation (IOC) and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (HPCL) are as follows:
Survey No. Lessee Lease Premium Rent recovered
renewed recovered
upto
324/A IOC 22.01.2010 Rs. 21,29,040/- Rs. 17,03,232/-
303/A IOC 24.10.2010 Rs. 1,61,980/- Rs. 1,61,980/-
277/C IOC 20.06.2011 Rs. 1,55,775/- Rs. 93,465/-
328/B HPCL 22.07.2009 Rs. 2,57,640/- Rs. 2,06,112/-
313/B HPCL 05.12.2010 Nil* Nil*
Total: Rs. 27,04,435/- Rs. 21,64,789/-
*HPCL have intimated about discontinuation of use of the land since 1993 when demand  was
raised. Matter being processed for taking back the site.
49. Asked whether any responsibility has ever been fixed for this lapse of
non-renewal of lease within the time frame, the representative of the Ministry stated
during evidence that there were various reasons for delay in renewal of expired leases
such as inheritance related issues, transfer of leasehold property in violation of lease
terms requiring regularization, Defects in transfer document leading to non-mutation,
Sub-division of leases requiring regularization, Other breaches of terms of lease and
Non-receipt of requests for renewal from the lessee and considering the fact that
many agencies/authorities were involved in the process for renewal of leases, it might
not be possible to fix responsibility on any individual for the delays.
50. Asked whether the calendar for disposal of cases of renewal been drawn out
and whether the achievement in this regard tally with the calendar as drawn, the
Ministry, in a written reply stated that the instructions for adopting a calendar by
the field offices were with the objective of identification of leases, which would
become due for renewal in near future and timely action for renewal to be taken
accordingly. It was also meant as a tool to monitor such cases. As a result of this
exercise, identification of such leases has been done and wherever possible, leases
have been renewed. Leases which could not be renewed for various reasons such
as litigation, violation of the conditions of the lease requiring condonation/
regularization by the competent authority, non-receipt of complete requisite documents
etc. were being regularly monitored and efforts were being made to remove the
impediments in renewal of leases.

16
51. The Committee pointed out that the figures supplied to them in regard to the
recovery of rentals pertain to the year 1980. Giving clarification in this regard the
Director General, Defence Estate stated:
‘‘............When I said, 1980, it is only the figure of Rs. 91 lakh which has been
given in the presentation. The figure is based taking that particular period into
consideration but when we actually recover, the petrol pump leases, for example,
every five years, they are supposed to be renewed. So, every five years, the market
value of land is taken into consideration and the latest five years which we take
into consideration is the latest market value. That is why, there is a disparity
between the amounts shown here and what we have recovered. So, we have shown
only Rs. 91 lakh when we say recovered, it runs into a few crores. That is why the
difference is there.’’
52. In the context of the four cases in which renewal was delayed the Committee
pointed out that none of the reasons enumerated earlier by the Ministry were
applicable in the four cases.
53. In reply to a specific query about the total value of the Defence land the Ministry
supplied the figures of market value of the land through a written note as under:—
"The market value i.e. Rs. 11,033 crores and the annual rent of about Rs. 2.13 crores
is in respect of total defence land given on lease under different types of leases."
54. When asked to provide details of total number of expired lease the Ministry
also through a written note stated that the total number of expired leases was 3,780.
Age-wise analysis of delay in renewal of leases was as under:—
0-1 year 2-5 years 6-10 years >10 years T otal
83 267 437 2,993 3,780
55. The Sub-Committee have been informed that in respect of 1800 cases, no
request for renewal had been received. According to them this more alarming than
the cases where requests received for renewal were pending. Asked to furnish the
reasons for not receiving the request in respect of the above cases and what was
their categorization the Ministry, in a written reply stated that 1,800 cases of expired
leases where no requests for renewal have been received also include leases that
were non-renewable which did not have a clause for renewal at the option of the
lessee and therefore no request for renewal was required to be made by the lessee.
Reasons for non-receipt of requests for renewal in cases of renewable leases would
be case specific. These may include, inter alia, inheritance related disputes, ignorance
of the terms of lease or apathy on the part of the lessees. The leases where requests
for renewal were yet to be received were mostly building leases inside the Civil Area
of the Cantonments. In the case of sites within the Civil Area, the policy of the
Ministry of Defence was that these be converted to freehold.
Age-wise break up of cases where requests for renewal of leases not received,
was as under:—
<1 year 1-5 years 5-10 years >10 years T otal
37 143 160 1,326 1,666

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1. As per the system devised by the Public Accounts Committee all Ministries/
Departments are required to furnish to the PAC remedial/corrective Action Taken
Notes on all the audit paragraphs which are not formally taken up by the Committee
for examination and Reports presented thereon, duly vetted by Audit through the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a period of four months
from the date of laying of Audit reports on the Table of the House (starting from
31 March, 1996 onwards).
2. The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed that as on
28th February, 2010 remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes in respect of 3450 Audit
Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/Departments for the
period—1996-97 to 2008-09. Since it was not possible to examine a large number of
Ministries, the Committee took up for examination only the illustrative cases relating
to some of the important paragraphs of some of the Ministries for which remedial/
corrective action taken notes have not been furnished. Three such cases regarding
Ministry of Defence are dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs of this report.
3. The Committee note that the figures supplied by the Ministry of Defence in
regard to number of audit paragraphs pending with Ministry does not tally with the
figures supplied by the Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) and Audit.
While the Monitoring Cell had indicated the number of pending paras as 202, the
Ministry of Defence stated it to be 212. Audit has,  however, shown this figure as
229. The Committee desire that this discrepancy in the number of pending audit
paragraphs should be settled by the Ministry of Defence in consultation with the
Audit and the Monitoring Cell and correct figures intimated to the Committee whilst
furnishing the action taken replies on this Report.
4. The Committee note with concern that the Ministry of Defence did not have a
clear idea on the methodology to be followed by them in furnishing the Action Taken
Notes to the Committee. This is evident from the fact that the Special Secretary
and Director General Acquisition candidly admitted before the Committee that in
the opinion of the Ministry, ATNs were not required to be sent to the Committee in
regard to the Audit Chapter on 'Functioning of ADGES Radar in Signal Units in
the Indian Air Force' as the Committee had selected this subject for examination in
2009. Although, it is a fact that Committee had selected this Audit Chapter/Para in
January, 2009 and a questionnaire was issued to the Ministry, but the reply to this
questionnaire was received only in December, 2009. Here, it is pertinent to note
that the Performance Audit Report on the subject was Tabled in Parliament in
October, 2008. This subject was subsequently dropped by the Committee and no
17

18
evidence was taken. The Ministry cannot be absolved of this responsibility on the
ground that the subject was selected by the Committee and so no ATNs were required
to be furnished. The Committee feel that even though, the replies sent in response
to the Committee's questionnaire were not the proper ATNs but even in case these
were to be treated as substantive. ATNs, these were substantially delayed and were
furnished by the Ministry after 14 months, which is unacceptable.
5. The Committee are constrained to observe at the absence of coordination within
the Ministry in regard to the furnishing of ATNs. In his own admission, the Special
Secretary and Director General Acquisition stated that their Department has sent
the ATNs upto May, 2008 to the Ministry of Defence probably implying that the
wing which is supposed to collect and furnish ATNs from all the wings of the Ministry
of Defence and that their Department cannot furnish them directly to the Committee.
Furnishing of ATNs in respect of Audit Paragraph on 'Procurement of special
Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment' apparently demonstrate a casual approach
on the part of the concerned officials of the Ministry of Defence as is evident from
the fact that the audit para on this subject was received in the last week of
March, 2008 and the draft ATN was sent to the DGADS on 10.11.2008, after a lapse
of eight months. Eventually, this paragraph was sent to audit on 12.02.2010 i.e. after
23 months, whereas the procedure stipulates that these are to be sent within four
months. The Committee, therefore, recommend that immediate and effective action
be taken by the Ministry to streamline the process to deal with Audit Reports/paras
within the Ministry. The Ministry should endeavour to reply to all audit observations
within the timeframe laid down for the purpose and should not spare any effort to
furnish the ATNs to the Audit as prescribed. It is imperative that the Ministry view
the ATNs not as a mere formality and submit proper explanations on the remedial
measures taken within the timeframe of four months. The Committee, in this regard
desire that reasons for the delay in furnishing ATNs to Audit should be investigated
and accountability ensured. The Committee would also like to be intimated about a
specific timeframe by which the backlog of the pending ATNs would be cleared.
6. The Committee observe that the Air Defence is critical to the nation's security.
Even so, IAF possess less than the adequate number of surveillance radars needed
for providing efficient and reliable detection. The Committee are surprised to note
that none of the Air Defence Ground Environment System (ADGES) Plans prepared
after 1971 received approval of the Government although some components have
been sanctioned on a piece-meal basis. In totality, a serious mismatch exists between
availability and IAF's requirements of Radars System. Although the Ministry have
intimated that a long term perspective plan which includes ADGES Plan for the
period covering upto 2022 has been formulated but it is not clear whether the plan
is as yet operational or not. The Committee are seized of the fact that several
contracts for different type of radars have been signed and several cases for
procuring the Radars are under process. This includes a project on Integrated Air
Command Control System, which would become operational by 2010. The Committee
are constrained to point out that even though contracts have been signed in this

19
regard, the officials could not provide scheduled dates of delivery for the Radars
and also by when these would be eventually commissioned and to what extent do
these procurements fill the existing gap in the Air Defence system and how will the
present threat perception be addressed.
7. The Committee are of the view that existence of formulated and approved plans
for timely acquisition, maintenance and replacement of existing assets is absolutely
essential to ensure full satisfaction of the critical needs of the Defence
establishment. The Committee recommend that Planning for acquisitions and
deployment of AD radars be done well in advance, in a manner that would ensure
timely purchase as per procurement plan and also take care of emergency
requirements so that critical requirement of the armed forces are always satisfied
consistent with the need to ensure transparency of procurement procedures. The
gap in the Air Defence system in the past is a matter concern. Non-sanctioning of
the ADGES Plan and the procedures of procurement of Radars etc. indicate systemic
deficiencies which need to be rectified by the Ministry. The Committee, accordingly,
feel that the Ministry should review its planning/procurement processes to address
the concerns raised here above.
8. The Committee observe that signing of contracts is only the first step in
ensuring that Air Defence related security requirements are met. The Committee
recommend that procurement of the Radars and equipments for which contracts
have been signed, are completed within the stipulated time frame and without delays.
To be specific, the Committee would like to emphasise that Commissioning/
installation of Medium Power Radars (MPRs)/Low Level Transportable Radars
(LLTRs) and completion of associated civil and development projects be expedited
so that gaps in provision of AD assets can be avoided. The Committee would also
like to be kept informed about the necessary steps taken in this regard.
9. The Committee have learnt of the frequent breakdowns of the existing old
radars and non-availability of spares etc. They also note that hours of watch allocated
to the units of all types of radars are much below the hours prescribed for these
units. The fact that additional radars are being procured itself indicates that the
present position regarding planned hours versus what is actually being achieved by
existing radars is not adequate for proper air defence coverage of the country. The
Committee recommend that utilisation of radars in terms of watch hours may be
enhanced through timely replacements, upgradations and efficient product support.
It may be ensured that watch hours as prescribed by Government are adhered to
once new acquisitions materialise and the IAF does not operate with any shortfalls
as on date, thereby eliminating any compromise with security considerations.
10. The Committee also observe that Air Defence radars are facing obsolescence
and need urgent upgradation/modernization. The response of the Ministry that the
Defence Procurement Procedure is being followed and time taken in processing
acquisition cases has been reduced does not satisfy the Committee given the hostile
environment in which we live. The fact remains that the need for defence
preparedness and capability was never so acute as it is today. It is, therefore,

20
essential that the purchases are timed and so sequenced that the armed forces are
never short of their requirements. In this context, the Committee recommend that
the Ministry should ensure that all upgradation programmes of AD system are taken
up without any further delay to avoid cost escalation and to ensure that operational
efficiency is maintained at all times.
11. The Committee note that against the requirement of spares for Aircraft on
Ground (AOG) which are mandatorily to be met within 24 hours so that the
equipment is repaired and made serviceable at the earliest, only 0.4 per cent of
AOG demands were met within the specified period and 59 per cent of demands
could not be met within 2 to 30 days. The Committee are informed that provisional
reviews were being carried out by the Ministry to cater to spares for Aircraft on
Ground for a period of 21 months and a lead time of 18 months for the supply. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the provisioning reviews put in place for spares
should be made more efficient so that delays in overhauls, servicing and clearing
Aircraft on Ground (AOG) are completely eliminated.
12. A close scrutiny of the examination of the subject on ‘‘Procurement of Special
Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment" has revealed several deficiencies which
merit the attention of the Committee. The Committee learn that the special clothing
and mountaineering equipment are provided to the troops posted in the extreme cold
climate conditions in Siachen, Kargil, Sikkim etc. to cater to the needs of forces at
high altitudes. Out of the 55 items authorised, 19 critical items such as down feather
jackets, trousers, sleeping bags, multi-purpose boots, woollen socks, rucksacks
etc. were being imported as no indigenous source was available. Special clothing is
a vital requirement of the troops deployed in extreme cold climatic conditions like
in Siachen Glacier. The Committee are dismayed to learn that despite the fact that
Army HQ has been procuring these clothing items for over two decades, the
procedure for formulation of technical specifications, evaluation of offers and
selection of vendors have not been streamlined so far. The whole approach towards
procurement of such supply, appears casual so that neither quality nor timely
availability of critical items could be ensured thereby compromising safety as well
as comfort of the troops deployed in harsh climatic conditions. The Committee also
learnt that there were 388 casualties reported due to cold injuries such as frost
bite, chill-blinds etc. The examination of the subject revealed that out of ten contracts
concluded during 2002-06 for the purchase of special clothing for Rs. 48.88 crore,
items valuing Rs. 28.81 crore (59%) were rejected either in receipt inspection or
by end users. The Committee find that the procurement process was fraught with
serious delays at every stage impacting on the timely availability of adequate clothing
and equipment each time during deployment of troops to Siachen. From the time of
raising of demand to the delivery of items to the troops, it took 32 months. This was
mainly because of the severe delay in trial evaluation, finalisation of specifications
by DGQA, tendering and signing of contract.

21
13. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that for streamlining
the procedure, the time limits have now been compressed from 32 months to 14 or
15 months. Taking into account all the shortcomings in procurement process, the
Committee recommend that the entire procurement procedures be revised so that
from the time of recognizing the need for procuring clothing and mountaineering
equipment etc. till these are finally delivered to the end users is minimized to the
maximum extent consistent with ensuring transparency in procurement process
and quality of equipment needed.
14. The  Committee also note that Army HQ has not formulated any General
Staff Qualitative Requirement (GSQR) so far, for special clothing and
mountaineering equipments, even though these items were being procured for the
last 20 years. The GSQR would be helpful in the sense that the quality of the product
would be ensured so that these could be used at very high altitudes having high
wind velocity. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to take appropriate
steps within a timeframe to formulate GSQR as well as important qualifying
specifications of all items of special clothing and equipments for ensuring purchase
of quality items required for protection of troops deployed in hostile climatic
conditions. The Committee also desire that all technical evaluations of a product
should be done prior to price negotiations leading to selection of the suitable vendor
in future procurements. The Committee note that Siachen is the world's highest
battle ground and even foreign suppliers are at times unable to produce equipment
with the requisite features for the security, comfort and operational efficiency of
our jawans. In view of this and considering the Indian Army's experience of being
stationed at such high altitudes under extreme weather conditions, the Committee
recommend that domestic production capabilities be strengthened at least in the
Public Sector, even if the Indian Private Sector is not forthcoming ostensibly due to
lack of economic viability considerations, as was pointed out. The defence of the
Nation is a non-negotiable national imperative and under no circumstances can
commercial and economic considerations be allowed to compromise the Nation's
foremost priority. Immediate action be initiated in this regard under intimation
to the Committee.
15. The Committee note with concern the high rate of rejection of defence
equipment/spares as brought out in the earlier paragraphs. The Committee find
that in majority of cases, technical specifications had been worked out based on the
sample accepted by the user at the time of bulk supply. Accordingly, the vendor
deviated from the given specifications on several occasions. Of these deviations,
even if it was one parameter out of several odd parameters on which they were to be
tested, the item was rejected as having not met with the laid down specifications. In
this regard  the Committee have been informed that as of now, the Ministry are
carrying out a pre-despatch inspection (PDI) as against a joint receipt inspection
(JRI), which was in force earlier, prior to 2007. In addition to pre-despatch, stage
inspection could also be carried out. Since the pre-despatch inspection is being
carried out from 2007, rejection also takes place in the host country itself, the
stocks are not delivered and there are no payments made. In this connection, the
Committee can at this stage only recommend that the trend of pre-dispatch inspection

22
should invariably be followed and enforced and in case of rejections, recovery of
payments should be made. The Committee, therefore, desire that efforts for recoveries
should now be made in all cases of rejected stocks and action taken thereon be
reported to the Committee.
16. The Committee are dismayed to learn that a country which is capable of
successfully launching satellites, manufacturing missiles, tanks and other state-
of-the-art defence equipments is still struggling with the problem of a narrow
vendor base in the procurement of Special Clothing Mountaineering Equipment
and Boots. In the opinion of the Committee there are several Public Sector
Undertakings, the Ordnance Factories  and Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO) who could be encouraged to manufacture these items even if
there is no profit to be made on some of the items. The decision of the Ministry to
produce them in Ordnance Factories under Transfer of Technology (TOT) is the
right step in this direction but the underlying emphasis must be to ensure the
creation of domestic capabilities whereby essential equipment can be produced
in the country as per request. The Committee also, therefore, desire that the Ministry
explore all possibilities to enhance domestic manufacturing capabilities in the area
so that the Defence of the country is not compromised in matters of socks, jackets,
boots etc. and other requisite equipment required for the troops at high altitudes.
17. Fixing of responsibility is seen as a very important step for correcting the
acts of omissions and commissions. Hence, the Committee would like the Ministry
to fix responsibility on all concerned who were found to be responsible for flaws in
procurement procedures, technical evaluations and rejection of ordered clothings
and equipments. The Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken in this
regard within a period of six months. More importantly, corrective measures should
be initiated forthwith.
18. The Committee note that the Director General of Defence Estates (DGDE) is
responsible for management of the defence lands (about 17 lakh acres) both inside
and outside the contonments. The vacant or unused land is leased out by the Ministry
of Defence to various public and private users at different locations. An Audit scrutiny
of renewal of leases concerning defence land has revealed glaring inaction on the
part of the Director General of Defence Estates causing delays ranging from six to
thirty six years (as of December 2006) in renewal of leases of Defence lands
occupied inter alia by Madras United Club at Chennai, Indian Oil Corporation at
Jabalpur, State Bak of India at Avadi, Indian Oil Corporation and Hindustan
Petroleum Corporation Ltd. at Belgaum. This resulted in non-recovery of
substantial amount of rent and premium of several crores of rupees and loss of
interest thereon, the exact value of which was yet to be assessed. In all these four
cases, the lease period had already expired and the lessees have been occupying the
defence land without paying any rent or with valid lease. It is found that after the
expiry of the original lease period, the lessees had requested for extension of the
lease period but due to serious procedural delays and a rather casual approach on
the part of the concerned authorities in initiating processing and finalization/

23
according renewal of the leases, inordinate delays had occurred in renewal of the
leases. In this regard, the Committee have been informed that the Ministry issued
instructions on 25.06.2007, 12.09.2007 and 15.01.2008 for renewal of leases
following which leases in respect of Madras United Club, IOC Jabalpur, IOC
Belgaum and HPCL Belgaum, the leases had been renewed upto 31.12.2007,
04.11.2006, 20.06.2011 and 05.12.2010 respectively, while the case pertaining to
SBI Avadi is still under renewal process. No further renewals have been executed
in the cases  of Madras United Club and IOC Jabalpur though these entities continue
to occupy the plots of defence land unauthorisedly. The Committee observe that the
much belated execution of lease renewal cannot be condoned and the inexplicable
delays/inaction/lapses  on the part of the concerned officials have to be accounted for.
19. Further, the Committee find that prevailing system of lease execution of
defence lands is afflicted with systemic loopholes. This perception is substantiated
by the fact that out of 3780 total number of expired leases involving defence land of
an area of about 2500 acres, requests for renewals were received in respect of
899 cases but no proper follow up action has been initiated. In 1800 cases where no
request for  lease renewal was received, the cases have not been pursued vigorously
for eviction of the lessees who have since become trespassers in defence land.
Further, in respect of the remaining 1081 cases, no status report has been submitted
by the Ministry. The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry of Defence
have not yet put in place a systematic mechanism for streamlining their lease
execution/renewal process. The Committee view this to be a serious lacunae
requiring immediate/urgent attention of the Ministry. The Committee would  also
like the Ministry to furnish detailed information regarding follow-up action taken
on all the cases where the request for lease renewal was received and also the action
taken in respect of the remaining cases alongwith the reasons for non-initiation of
any appropriate action wherever necessary.
20. As an essential part of str engthening the lease execution and renewal
system in the Ministry of Defence, the Committee desire that the Ministry need
to evolve an effective mechanism to ensure that all field offices of DGDE prepare
a proper record of the details regarding execution of defence lease deeds and
maintains a calendar for disposal of cases of lease renewal to help identifying
leases which will become due for renewal in the near future and timely action for
renewal. This will help in monitoring timely finalization/renewal of each and every
lease before expiry of the previous lease. Besides, the unjustified delays in renewal
of lease would be easily identifiable to enable early fixation of responsibility for
such lapses and would serve as a deterrent for others. This would also prevent
the unautorized lessees from occupying defence land for long periods without valid
lease agreements and the wastage of public money  would be minimized drastically.
The Committee further recommend the Ministry to identify all cases of lease of
defence land or other properties pending for more than six months and prescribe
a time frame within which such long pending lease agreements should be finalized
by the Ministry.

24
21. The Committee are dismayed to note that while the annual rent received by
the Ministry from their leased out land was Rs. 213 crore, the market value of the
land stood at Rs. 11,033 crore. Long term lease rentals must be such as to give
reasonable returns to the Government on the value of their assets. The Committee
would like the Ministry to adopt a policy of renewing the leases on due dates with
an inbuilt clause for reasonable enhancement of rates every five year.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH   MUNDE
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE V OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ON "NON-COMPLIANCE BY
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
REPLIES TO THE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS OF C&AG  OF
INDIA HELD ON 15TH FEBRUARY , 2010
The Sub-Committee V of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Monday, the
15th February, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Room No. '62', Pariliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
Member
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES  OF  THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  AND
AUDITOR  GENERAL  OF  INDIA
1. Shri Gautam Guha — DGADS
2. Shri Sube Singh — S r. Audit Officer
3. Shri Tejinder Singh — Sr. Audit Officer
REPRESENTATIVES  OF  THE  MINISTRY  OF  DEFENCE
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Spl. Secretary & DG (Acq.)
2. Smt. Indu Liberhan — Secretary (Defence Finance)
3. Shri Shekhar Agarwal — Addl. Secretary
4. Lt. Gen. Vinay Sharma — MGO
5. Air Mshl. N.V . Tygi — DCAS
6. Air Mshl. A.K. Gogoi — DG (Ops)
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Gupta — Joint Secretary (C&W)
8. Shri Subhash Chandra — JS (Air)
9. Shri R.K. Ghose — JS&AM (Air)
10. Shri Binoy Kumar — JS(O)
11. Shri P .K. Mishra — JS & Addl. FA (M)
12. Shri Balsharn Singh — DGDE
25

26
13. Shri R.P . Singh — Addl. DG
14. A VM R.K. Sharma — ACAS (Plans)
15. Air Cmde. Shri V . D. Iswar — Pr. Dir (Plans)
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee V of the Public Accounts Committee,
[Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar] welcomed the representatives of the Office of the  C&AG
of India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the subject
on "Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to
the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India". During the internal meeting, Memorandum
No. 2 dated 3rd February, 2010 regarding the request of the Ministry of Finance—
Department of Expenditure to consider 1092 audit paragraphs as settled and closed
was placed before the Sub-Committee. The Sub-Committee considered the request
of Ministry and after consideration asked the Audit to summarize all the audit paras
in question and submit to the Committee at the earliest.
3. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened
for taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the
subject relating to "Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission
of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India". The Convenor also informed
the Members that the meeting will proceed with a discussion on (i) Chapter-I of
C&AG's Report No. PA 5 of 2008 (Defence Services—Air Force and Navy) relating
to 'Functioning of Air Defence Ground Environment System (ADGES) Radar in
Signal units in the Indian Air Force'; (ii) Para 3.1 of C&AG's Report No. CA of 2008,
(Compliance Audit) Union Government (Defence Services—Army & Ordnance
Factories) on 'Procurement of Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment';
and (iii) Para 2.1 of C&AG's Report No. 4 of 2007, Union Govenment (Defence
Services—Army & Ordnance Factories) on 'Delay in execution/renewal of lease'.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence were called in and the
Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The representatives then,
briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry in timely submission
of replies to the Audit paragraphs of C&AG. They also, inter alia, threw light on the
current status of pending paras in their Ministry. The representatives also explained on
the various issues and concerns raised by the Sub-Committee. To certain queries, which
the representatives of the Ministry could not give immediate clarification or explanation,
the Sub-Committee directed the representatives to furnish written information/replies at
the earliest with a view to timely finalisation of the Report on the subject.
5. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Defence for
appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing information that the Sub-
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES  OF  THE  ELEVENTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2009-10)  HELD  ON  26TH  APRIL,  2010
The Committee sat on Monday, the 26th April, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1650 hrs.
in Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
      Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
Member
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Satpal Maharaj
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Yashwant Sinha
9. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
11. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES  OF  THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  COMPTROLLER  AND
AUDITOR  GENERAL  OF  INDIA
1. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG Central (RC)
2. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
3. Ms. Usha Sankar — Director General (Autonomous Bodies)
4. Shri Gautham Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence Services)
5. Shri P .K. Kataria — Pr.  Director of Audit, Report Central (RC)
6. Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central (Economic
& Services Ministries)
7. Shri R.G . Viswanathan — Pr. Director of Audit (Scientific Departments)
27

28
8. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director of Audit (Air Force & Navy)
9. Shri H.K. Dharmadhekari — Pr. Director (State Report Audit)
10. Shri Rajvir Singh — Accountant General (Audit) Delhi
11. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Pr.  Director of Audit (Railways)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members of the Committee
and the Audit Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then apprised
the Committee that out of the eleven Draft Reports stated for consideration, eight
have been finalized by Sub-Committee V . Thereafter, the Committee took up the
following Draft Reports for consideration and adoption:
(i) Draft Report of "Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected Audit Paragraphs"
(Ministry of Finance—Department of Expenditure);
(ii) Draft Report on "Functioning of A.D.G.E.S. Radar, Procurement of Special
Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment and Delay in Execution/Renewal of
Lease" (Ministry of Defence) based on Chapter 1 of C&AG Report No. PA 5
of 2008 (Air Force and Navy), Para No. 3.1 of C&AG Report No. CA 4 of 2008
(Army) and Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 4 of 2007 (Army) respectively;
(iii) Draft Report on "Revenue loss due to delay in levy of Toll Fees" (Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways) based on Chapter XIV of C&AG Report
No. CA 2 of 2007;
(iv) Draft Report on "Administration of Universal Service Obligation (USO)
Fund" (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology—
Department of Telecommunications) based on Chapter 1 of C&AG Report
No. PA 1 of 2008;
(v) Draft Report on " Loss of Revenue due to Short Levy of Tax, Incorrect
Classification of Excisable Goods and Non-fulfilment of Export Obligation"
(Ministry of Finance—Department of Revenue) Based on Para No. 3.24.4 of
C&AG Report No. 8 of 2007 (Direct Taxes), Para No. 2.2.1 of C&AG Report
No. CA 7 of 2008 (Central Excise) & Para No. 7.1 of C&AG Report No. 10 of
1998 (Customs) respectively;
(vi) Draft Report on "Disaster Management and Land Management in Indian
Railways" (Ministry of Railways) based on Chapter I and Chapter II
respectively of C&AG Report No. 8 of of 2008;
(vii) Draft Report on "Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger Reserves"
(Ministry of Environment and Forests) based on C&AG Report No. 18 of 2006;
(viii) Draft Report on "Procurement of Stores and Inventory Control" (Department
of Space) based on Chapter II of C&AG Report No. PA 2 of 2008:
(ix) Draft Report on "Freight and Wagon Management on Indian Railways"
(Ministry of Railways) based on Chapter I of C&AG Report No. 6 of 2007
(Railway—Performance Audit);

29
(x) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Development of Land by Delhi Development
Authority" (Ministry of Urban Development); and
(xi) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty-third Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways"
(Ministry of Railways).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports with some modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports
in light of the suggestions made by the Members and the consequential changes
arising out of the factual verification by the Audit and present the same to Parliament.
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active
participation in the Committee's deliberations. He also thanked the PAC Secretariat
and the Audit Officers for the assistance rendered to the Committee in the examination
of the subject and finalization of the Reports.
5. The Members of the Committee thanked the Chairman for his guidance in the
smooth conduct of the meetings  of the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.
GMGIPMRND—2504LS(S4)—31.05.2010.