48
CANTEEN  STORES  DEPARTMENT
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FORTY-EIGHTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
CANTEEN  STORES  DEPARTMENT
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28 December, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 December, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa, 1933 (Saka)

PAC No. 1957
Price:  ` 52.00
© 2011  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012)  . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-2011)  . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (vii)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
II. Bringing URCs under the Accountability Regime  . . . . . . . . . . 6
III. Appropriate Accounting Policies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
IV . Timely Credit of Funds and Recovery of Outstanding Dues  . . . . 21
V. Review of the Pricing Policies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
VI. Effective Measures for Quality Control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
VII. Review of the Concept of a Centralised Base Depot  . . . . . . . . 24
VIII. Supply of Liquor to the URCs as per Authorization  . . . . . . . . 25
IX. Management Information System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
X. Other Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
PART II
Observations and Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the  Eighteenth Sitting of the  Public  Accounts
Committee (2010-11) held on 12th January, 2011.  . . . . . . . . 39
II. Minutes of  the Twelfth Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2011-12) held on 21st December, 2011  . . . . . . . 42

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
(iii)
* Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2010-2011)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
*16. V acant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
*V acancy occurred vice Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
19th January, 2011.
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Forty-eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Canteen
Stores Department’ based on the C&AG Report No. 14 of  2010-11 (Performance
Audit), Union Government (Defence Services—Army) for the year ended March, 2009
related to Ministry of Defence.
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2009 was laid on the Table of the House on 3rd August, 2010. The Public
Accounts Committee (2010-11) selected the subject for examination and report. The
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence and the
three Service Chiefs on the subject at their sitting held on 12th January, 2011. As the
examination of the subject could not be completed due to paucity of time, the Public
Accounts Committee (2011-12) re-selected the subject for examination. Subsequently
the Hon’ble Chairman, held two meetings (7th September, 2011 and 5th October, 2011)
in his Chamber with the Defence Secretary and the Service Chiefs/representatives
alongwith Audit Officers to take stock of the progress made on the Audit observations
on some specific issues on the subject. The Public Accounts Committee (2011-12)
decided to continue the examination and present a Report thereon based on the earlier
evidences taken by their predecessor Committee. Accordingly a Draft Report was
prepared and placed before the Committee for their consideration. The Committee
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 21st December, 2011. Minutes
of the sittings form Appendices to the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of
Defence, three Service Chiefs/representatives of Army, Air Force & Navy for tendering
evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in
connection with the examination of the subject.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
23 December, 2011 Chairman,
02 Pausa, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(vii)

REPORT
PART  I
I. Introductory
Prior to the World War II, the retail trade in the Defence Services was in the hands
of the contractors. During the War, a regular cadre called the Indian Canteen Core came
to be formed under the Canteen Services (India) to handle retail trade in the operational
areas where the contractors were  not expected to go. After the independence of India,
the Indian Canteen Service was split into two organizations i.e. Canteen Stores
Department (India) and Canteen Stores Department (Pakistan).
2. Thus, the Canteen Stores Department (CSD) came into being as a Department
under the Ministry of Defence in January, 1948 vide their letter No. 12068/Q.I. (C)
(INDIA) dated 19th December, 1947. The retail trade, however, was reverted to the
contractors. When Major General K.S. Thimaya took over as Quarter Master General,
he found that the margin between the wholesale price and the retail price of goods
went to the contractors as the retail outlets were being run and managed by them. The
case was therefore made out jointly by the Army, Navy and Air Force for taking over of
the Contractor-Run Canteens by Units or Formations, as the case may be, so that the
profits from the sale of canteen stores could be retained within the Unit/Formation for
the welfare of the troops. The Government agreed to the proposal of General Thimaya
and orders were issued. The concepts of Unit-Run-Canteens, thus, became an accepted
doctrine though it took considerable time for implementing the change over.
3. A brief evolution of the Canteen Stores Department (CSD) is as under:—
(i) It is almost a Century old.
(ii) Prior to August, 1927 it was known as Army Canteen Board.
(iii) In 1927 it became 'Canteen Contractors Syndicate' as a limited Company
under the Government control.
(iv) W ith the onset of the World War II, the Government took over and established
the Canteen Services on 1st July, 1942 which was renamed as CSD (India) in
1948.
(v) It became a full-fledged Government Department and renamed as CSD w.e.f.
1st April, 1977.
(vi) The motto of the CSD is "Service to the Services".
4. The CSD is entrusted with the functioning of procuring and selling consumer
goods and other household articles of common use to the personnel of the Defence
Services and certain other entitled categories at a price lower than the prevailing
market price due to bulk purchases. The CSD caters not only to the Army, Navy and

2
Air Force but also to other organizations like the Coast Guard, Defence Research
Development Organisation (DRDO), Border Roads Organisation, Assam Rifles etc.
Defence Civilians are also covered by the CSD. From a modest beginning made
approximately six decades ago, the CSD has grown rapidly. The operations of the CSD
are carried out from its Head Office in Mumbai and five Regional offices at Leh, Dimapur,
Ahmedabad, Port Blair and Kochi. It has a Base Depot in Mumbai and a Chain
of 34 Area Depots. About 3600 Unit Run Canteens (URCs) some of which are located
in extremely remote areas, cater to around 44 lakh beneficiaries. From a turnover of
Rs. 1.65 crore in 1948, the CSD has now more than, a turnover of Rs. 8,500 crore.
5. The CSD procures approved consumer goods from listed vendors. The stores are
received by the Base Depot in Mumbai/Area Depots. Goods are sold to the beneficiary
consumers through the network of the URCs which collect such stores from the
assigned Area Depots through Indent cum Invoice. Though the URCs are governed
by the guidelines framed by the Ministry, the operational jurisdiction of the CSD does
not extend to these URCs. In other words, the URCs are independent of CSD but their
functioning is governed by the policies laid down by the Ministry of Defence.
6. The CSD has a three tier organizational structure with the Board of Control
Canteen Services (BoCCS) in the Ministry of Defence at the apex level with Raksha
Mantri as the Chairman, now chaired by Raksha Rajya Mantri. The BoCCS lays down
the overall policies of the CSD and advises the Government on the disbursement of
profits. The BoCCS is assisted by an Executive Committee (EC) which periodically
reviews the functioning of the CSD. The day to day management of the CSD is vested
in the Board of Administration (BoA) with the General Manager, CSD as the Chairman
and members representing the Ministry of Defence (Finance) Army Headquarters
(QMG's Branch) and other services. The GM reports to the BoCCS through the QMG.
7. The C&AG carried out a Performance Audit from June, 2008 to October, 2008
covering the transanctions of the CSD for the period 2003-04 to 2007-08 at BoCCS,
New Delhi, CSD HQRs Mumbai, Base Depot Mumbai and 9 of 34 Area Depots viz.
Agra, Bengaluru, Dehradun, Delhi, Jaipur, Kirkee, Kochi, Kolkata and Secunderabad.
The Audit report was updated in November, 2009 covering transactions for six years
i.e. from 2003-04 to 2008-09. The 9 Area Depots were selected based on their sales
volume and geographical location and only one Depot in a particular State was selected.
These nine Depots catered to 941 URCs.
8. It is pertinent to mention that the URCs had to be kept out of the scope of audit
as access to the URCs was denied by the Army Headquarters on the ground of these
being run from Non-Public Fund. The Audit Report did not, therefore, include any
comment on the functioning or financial results of the URCs.
9. The performance Audit was conducted to obtain reasonable assurance that:—
/head2rightFinancial operations of the CSD were carried out in accordance with the financial
and accounting rules and principles as applicable to Government Organisations;
/head2rightConsumer goods of high quality were being provided to the service personnel,
at a price cheaper than the prevailing market rates;

3
/head2rightConsumer demand satisfaction was maintained; and
/head2rightBusiness operations of CSD had been managed efficiently and effectively.
10. Audit criteria for the evaluation of performance were derived from CSD Stores
Manual, CSD Purchase Procedures, CSD Pricing Policy and URC manual. The
distribution of profits as Grants-in-Aid was examined in the light of the General Financial
Rules of the Government. After a preliminary study to collect background information,
the Performance Audit commenced with an entry Conference in the Ministry of Defence
on 10 July, 2008. Detailed audit scrutiny was conducted at the CSD Headquarters,
selected Area Depots/Base Depot including BOCCS to evaluate the performance against
the audit criteria. Audit findings were discussed with the Ministry of Defence on
5 February, 2009. The reply of the CSD management had been taken into
account in finalizing the report. The final Audit Report was laid in Parliament on
13th August, 2010.
11. The main findings of the C&AG Report were as follows:—
Unit Run Canteens (URCs)
URCs continue to remain outside the purview of the Parliamentary oversight as
they are considered to be regimental institutions.
Financial Operations of CSD
Gross turnover of CSD increased from Rs. 4481 crore in 2003-04 to Rs. 6955 crore in
2008-09, an increase of 55 percent. But the gross and net profit has not shown
commensurate increase, mainly due to increase in cost of goods purchased for sale as
also increase in Quantitative Discount given to the URCs.
(i) Grants-in-Aid
(a) The Ministry of Defence had been reflecting approximately 50 percent of the
profits of CSD in the Demands for Grants as 'Contribution' (earlier reflected as 'Grants-
in-Aid') and disbursing to the services and other bodies as Grants-in-Aid. These were
transferred to Non-Public Funds by the services for welfare activities of service
personnel and their families.
(b) Instead of Grants-in-Aid, in 2005-06, the Ministry of Defence created a new head
"Contribution" to disburse these profits, thus further diluting financial control as
under General Financial Rules, Utilization Certificate could be initiated only for Grants-
in-Aid. Only after the anomaly was pointed out by the Audit, BoCCS in February, 2010
replied that the requisite certificates were obtained before sanction of Grants-in-Aid
for the year 2008-09.
(ii) Quantitative Discount (QD)
During the six years from 2002-03 to 2007-08, Rs. 883.46 crore was transferred in the
form of Quantitative Discount from the Consolidated Fund of India to the URCs.
Evidence also indicated that benefit of QD was never passed on to the consumer. Such
discount could not be viewed as a trade discount as URCs operated in captive market
with pricing determined in accordance with the existing policies. QD was infact another

4
way of transferring money from CFI to Non-Public Fund without conforming to the
provisions of the General Financial Rules.
Pricing Quantity of Goods
During audit, several cases of incorrect application of pricing policies were noticed.
While in some cases CSD made undue profit at the cost of URCs and in turn of the
customers, there were cases where CSD also incurred losses. Of particular significance
was the erratic implementation of the provision of V alue Added tax (V A T).
Quality Control
Evidence gathered in audit indicated that in the absence of relevant controls, there
was a significant risk of sale of perished stores to the consumers.
Inability of Area Depots to Supply All the Items Indented by the URCs
Most Depots did not supply full range of items to the URCs. These are termed as
denials, ranging from 4.48 percent to 33.21 percent.
Reasons for Introduction and Rejection of New Items Not Recorded
69 to 87 percent of the items offered by suppliers were not recommended by the
Preliminary Screening Committee for introduction. However, the reasons for rejection
or for that matter reasons for acceptance of the remaining, were not found on record
and as such the basis on which an item was or was not recommended could not be
ascertained. To that extent, the process of introduction or rejection of an item lacked
transparency.
Business Operations of CSD
(i) Functioning of Base Depot in Mumbai
Base Depot is functioning as a feeder depot to all Area Depots. Rates of transportation
are very high. It had not shifted to the new location at Toloja even after 13 years of
taking over the land. Audit examination indicated that the operation of Base Depot had
become uneconomical.
(ii) Excess Drawal of Liquor
Evidence in audit indicated that several units under jurisdiction of five Area Depots
were drawing liquor in excess of that authorized on the basis of the strength of the unit.
CSD and the Army authorities allowed excess drawal of concessional liquor worth
Rs. 7.82 crore. The market value of excess liquor was Rs. 19.45 crore.
12. Audit accordingly gave their recommendations for overall improvement in the
CSD. Some of the major recommendations contained in the Audit Report were as
under:—
Unit Run Canteens
/head2rightThe URCs should be recognized as the retail outlets integral to CSD. The
operational results of the URCs should be disclosed in the proforma accounts
of CSD to provide a true and fair view of the complete operations of the

5
organisation. Ministry of Defence should also take immediate steps to bring
the URCs under the accountability regime that is applicable to all operations
funded by the Consolidated Fund of India.
Financial Operations
/head2rightThe Chief Accounting Authority should ensure that no change in the accounting
policy is made without prior consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India as required under Article 150 of the Constitution of India. The
disbursement of profit to eligible organisations should be made as Grants-in-
Aid within the ambit of General Financial Rules. The use of the object head
"Contribution" should be discontinued forthwith.
/head2rightThe regular and ad hoc Grants-in-Aid should be sanctioned in a transparent
manner on the basis of detailed proposals and these grants should be used
only for the welfare of service personnel as per the CSD objectives. The Ministry
should issue suitable instructions in this regard to ensure compliance with the
provisions of GFR.
/head2rightQuantitative Discount should not be an instrument to transfer funds from
public fund to non-public fund without accountability. Such transfers should
be carried out in a transparent manner within the ambit of General Financial
Rules.
/head2rightThe CSD needs to closely monitor the timely credit of funds into its account. It
should pursue with the Banks for payment of interest for delay in crediting
amount telegraphically transferred by Area Depots Banks and for indicating
credit balances with details of cleared and uncleared cheques.
/head2rightThe accounting policies may be reviewed so that the income from non-trading
activities is correctly accounted for.
/head2rightCSD and the URCs should adopt a set of accounting standards with disclosure
requirements akin to those adopted by Organisations having commercial
operations.
Pricing and Quality Control
/head2rightThe Ministry should take immediate steps to review the pricing policies and
closely monitor its implementation. Prices should be fixed in a fair and
transparent manner by correctly factoring actual costs incurred and accurately
applying existing taxation provisions so that benefit accrues to the intended
parties.
/head2rightThe Ministry may put in place an effective mechanism to oversee strict
implementation of the quality control measures at all levels of supply chain in
the CSD including URCs.
/head2rightThe CSD HO should ensure speedy testing and reporting of test results so as
to avoid sale of sub-standard items.
/head2rightReasons for acceptance or rejection of an item proposed for introduction in the
CSD inventory should be recorded.

6
Business Operations
/head2rightThe concept of a centralized Base Depot needs to be reviewed.
/head2rightComputerized Management Information System, with automated
documentation and control functions should be implemented early. This should
include the operations of URCs.
Examination by the Committee
13. Against the above backdrop, the Committee selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. In the process, the Committee obtained Background Note,
Advance Reply and some post evidence clarifications from the Ministry of Defence.
The Secretary, Ministry of Defence and the three service Chiefs appeared before the
Committee on 12th January, 2011 to tender oral evidence. The Chairman, PAC had also
held two meetings in his Chamber with the Defence Secretary and the Service Chiefs/
representatives alongwith the Audit Officers to take stock of the progress made on the
Audit observations and the assurances given to the Committee during evidence on
some specific issues on the subject. Subsequent to these meetings, the Committee
obtained the Minutes of the meetings between the representatives of the Ministry/
Services and the Office of the C&AG of India, as discussed and decided in the meetings
with the Chairman, PAC.
II. Bringing URCs under the Accountability Regime
14. The Committee were informed that the CSD is a revenue neutral Department of
the Government of India. The financial performance of the CSD during the six fiscals
Under Audit review was stated to be as under:—
(Rupees in crores)
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
Sale 4480.99 4749.42 4163.21 4791.72 5614.69 6955.11
Purchase 3850.90 4033.26 3525.71 4087.69 4898.52 6185.57
Trading Exp. 308.48 380.47 329.53 331.98 320.25 392.42
Q D Provision 140.27 148.87 137.49 152.08 175.00 216.50
Staff Expense 38.03 45.51 43.25 46.28 48.10 72.98
Operating Exp. 10.14 11.17 10.81 11.50 13.90 14.39
Gross Profit 243.90 208.42 196.58 242.50 234.15 282.34
Net Profit 196.73 154.76 146.23 183.65 168.88 203.69
Closing Stock 362.58 384.17 410.33 432.93 446.17 567.91

7
Similarly, the withdrawals from and deposits in the CFI by the CSD during the last
five financial years are as under:—
(Rupees in crores)
Financial Year Withdrawals Deposits Excess Deposited
from CFI in CFI in CFI
2005-06 4045.69 4170.38 124.69
2006-07 4458.34 4682.33 223.99
2007-08 5351.15 5511.24 160.09
2008-09 6373.91 6829.50 455.59
2009-10 8212.71 8773.91 561.20
15. In view of the above continuous withdrawals from the CFI, Audit recommended
as stated above that the URCs should be recognized as the retail outlets integral to the
CSD. The operational results of the URCs should be disclosed in the proforma account
of CSD to provide a true and fair view of the complete operations of the organization.
The Ministry of Defence should also take immediate steps to bring the URCs under the
accountability regime that is applicable to all operations funded by the Consolidated
Fund of India.
16. Audit further recommended that Quantitative Discount (QD) should not be an
instrument to transfer funds from the public fund to non-public fund without
accountability. Such transfers should be carried out in a transparent manner within the
ambit of General Financial Rules.
17. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the action taken by the
Ministry on the above cited Audit recommendations. In reply, the Ministry stated as
under:—
(i) The capital to fund CSD was partly out of liquidation of the predecessor
organization and partly from Government loan. The loan has since been
returned in full with interest.
(ii) Certain important issues brought out in the paper for consideration by the
Cabinet, dated 26th August, 1976, in relation to the merger of CSD funds
with Consolidated Fund of India (CFI), by Mr. P. Krishnamurthy, the then
Additional Secretary, (the contents of which were agreed to by the then
Raksha Mantri, Vitta Mantri and Vidhi Mantri) need to be reiterated. The
same are quoted below:
/head2right"The CSD will continue to maintain the system of accounts on a
commercial basis.
/head2rightProforma accounts on an annual basis would continue to be drawn up
as heitherto fore and this will form an integral part of the appropriation
accounts.

8
/head2rightIn particular, the service headquarters have expressed concern at the
possibility of the beneficiaries to whom the profits are allocated,
suffering in future merely because the CSD transactions have been
brought within CFI.
/head2rightThe Services have expressed the view that the availability of funds
for the troops welfare and amenities should not suffer but the level
thereto fore should be improved upon and not curtailed.
/head2rightSo long as the profits shown in the proforma accounts do not show
any appreciable shortfall, the Services need not have any anxiety that
the level of availability of funds for troops welfare might suffer.
/head2rightThe profits will be distributed as heitherto fore by the Board of Control
and payments made on the basis of a specific government sanction to
be issued each year as is done at present.
/head2rightThe quantum of distributable profits will, as at present, be determined
by the Board of Control.
/head2rightOnce such grants are distribursed to the beneficiaries, the question of
their lapsing at the end of the financial year would not arise as they are
credited to non public funds and are outside the Government accounts.
/head2rightArrangements already exist for audit of these non-public funds and
these arrangements will continue, as heitherto fore."
(iii) CSD became a full-fledged government department under the Ministry of
Defence w.e.f. 01 April, 1977.
(iv) The existing accounting procedures which are in vogue in CSD, do not
stipulate to reflect the operational results of URCs in the proforma accounts
of CSD.
(v) Besides, it would not be operationally possible to compile, collate and
incorporate the operational results of approximately 3600 URCs in the
proforma accounts of CSD.
(vi) The organizational structures of the CSD and URCs are totally different in
that CSD comes directly under Ministry of Defence whereas URCs are an
integral part of units of Defence Forces.
(vii) The URC is an integral and essential part of a unit wherein a jawan buys his
daily use necessities and other items from the URC which is located within
the unit area.
(viii) This affects a soldier more in remote field and high altitude locations/on
board ships where no other civilian facilities are available.
(ix) It is felt that the time-tested routines and procedures of the armed forces
should not be altered as they have never even let down the nation in any
manner whatsoever.

9
(x) Any such changes may affect the morale of the troops.
(xi) URCs are established from non public funds (with statutory backing of the
regulations for the Army, Navy and Air Force) by respective Service
formations out of their regimental funds created by contribution from defence
personnel.
(xii) These accounts are audited by various boards of officers at station/formation
level besides Chartered Accountants.
(xiii) URCs are operated from non-public fund/regimental funds of the three
Services and the profit is spent on the welfare of troops.
(xiv) Expenditure by URCs is closely monitored by boards of officers, commanding
officers and formation commanders at various levels.
(xv) This has stood the test of time and is transparent.
(xvi) The profits from the sale of CSD stores to all ranks are used for various
welfare activities like:
/head2rightImmediate death relief to family of deceased jawans.
/head2rightGrants to disabled jawans.
/head2rightGrants to maternity and child welfare centres.
/head2rightGrants to World War II veterans.
/head2rightGrants to daughters of widows of Service personnel.
/head2rightScholarships to special (Handicapped) children.
/head2rightSubsidies to widows for purchase of dwelling unit.
/head2rightGrants for medical treatment not reimbursed from public fund.
/head2rightFinancial support to drop out children for industrial training.
/head2rightStation sainik and officers institutes.
/head2rightFinancial assistance to military hospitals for enhancing facilities like
hiring lady gynaecologist, additional doctor/specialist/medical
attendant.
/head2rightAssistance for family welfare activities.
/head2rightSupport to senior citizen homes established by the defence services.
/head2rightScholarship for meritorious persons.
/head2rightGrants for procuring medical equipments not scaled to hospitals.
(xvii) Quantitative Discount (QD) is a trade discount provided by CSD to the
URCs.
(xviii) QD is given in the form of stores to URCs and not in cash.

10
(xix) QD is essentially given to mitigate overheads, breakages, shortages and
other trading losses incurred during the year by the URCs.
(xx) The requirement of increasing working capital, sustain reasonable growth
and development of URCs' infrastructure is possible only through QD
disbursement.
(xxi) The benefit of QD is not passed directly to individual customers of URCs
by further reducing the cost of the CSD items, but the profit from sale of
stores received against QD along with other profits generated from sale of
CSD items are used for various welfare activities as brought out earlier.
(xxii) This is done in consonance with instructions from the Government.
18. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Ministry/Services on the
specific aspect of bringing the URCs under the Audit purview of the C&AG , the
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence stated in evidence:—
".........The C&AG, in fact, had written a letter to the Ministry suggesting that
URCs should be made available for audit by the C&AG. The Ministry had indeed
written to the three Chiefs requesting that this opportunity may be given to the
C&AG . We had a response from the Chairman, COSC giving very detailed reasons
as to why this does not appear to be in order."
19. He further stated:—
"........ Based on what response we had received from the Chairman, COSC, we
had immediately shared the information and the arguments with the C&AG and
we had also requested the C&AG if we could be advised and guided on how to
proceed further in the matter."
20. Asked to state the grounds on which the Chairman, Chiefs of Staff Committee
(COSC), was reluctant for auditing of the URCs by the C&AG, the Air Chief Marshal
(Chairman, COSC) submitted in evidence:—
"Sir, I am not an Accountant. I will give a layman's version of what our perception
in the services was. The basic difference lay in the definition of the Unit Run
Canteens; whether it comes under the ambit of the C&AG's purview or it does
not. There are some reasons why we felt that these do not fall under the ambit.
These are the enterprises run through non-public funds of the three Services
under the control of the three Services."
21. He further stated:—
"Sir the basic issue, I feel, is the difference in definition between what is called,
'Grants-in-Aid' and what is called 'Contribution', and whether the URCs are using
public funds or not.
In the considered opinion of the three Services, the Unit Run Canteens provide
a service especially for the soldiers who are sailors and airmen and who are in an
isolated place where there is no alternative available. It is a very important
service for their morale..... ."

11
22. As regards the money coming in from the Consolidated Fund of India, the
Air Chief Marshal submitted:—
"As far as the money coming in from the Consolidated Fund of India is concerned,
it comes to the CSD Headquarters. It enables them to buy goods and other
provisions to be sold to the Unit Run Canteens. That money is returned in full.
In fact, it is returned in excess. I have some figures here which would demonstrate
that.
In 2005-06, withdrawal was Rs. 4,045 and odd crore from CFI and deposit was
Rs. 4,170 crore, and the excess amount was to the tune of Rs. 124.69 crore. In
2009-10, it had naturally increased. Withdrawal was Rs. 8,212.71 crore from CFI;
deposit was Rs. 8,700 and odd crore causing excess deposit in CFI of Rs. 561.20
crore. Now, this excess amount was the profit that CSD had generated from
URCs. How have they generated that profit? They have generated that profit
because they charged normal buyer-seller profit to URCs. When the Unit Run
Canteens go to CSD, they take an advance; they do not get credit. They take an
advance, they place an order, and CSD supplies it to the Unit Run Canteens.
Now, from the profit that is charged to the Unit Run Canteens, this excess
amount is refunded to CFI. Therefore, unlike other grants-in-aid like Sarkari
Bhandars and all that, where the money from the Consolidated Fund is used;
and in this case it is returned. So, that transaction ends there.
Now, we talk about the excess money or trade surplus that we call. This
excess money is ploughed back into the Consolidated Fund of India. From there,
50 per cent profit is returned to the Central Welfare Fund of the three Services.
There is actually no need to plough it back into the Consolidated Fund of India,
and CSD could as well hand over 50 per cent profits to the three Services.
However, because it is returned to that, there comes in the catch whether it is a
grants-in-aid or whether it is a contribution. Profit generated by the URCs is
through the things I buy or my soldiers buy or his soldiers buy. It is not public
fund money. So, this is the basic distinction we would like to bring out. The
grants-in-aid is paid out of the public fund whereas this excess profit that is
coming in is paid out of the contributions of the Services. This is the basic
difference why we feel that the URCs are non-public fund ventures and not with
the public fund."
23. The Committee asked, in view of substantial amount of Government funds being
transferred to non-government and non-public funds, whether it would not be prudent
to subject such funds to Parliament scrutiny and thus scrutiny by the C&AG. In reply,
the Army Chief stated:—
"......The Comptroller and Auditor General is auditing all public funds. Public
funds in the CSD finish off where the depots are concerned. The URCs are run as
private ventures from the non-public funds, which are contributions from me as
a soldier and my juniors as soldiers, and airmen and others."

12
24. The Committee retorted even if the Army ran a cooperative whether they would
not be answerable to Parliament. The Army Chief responded:—
"Sir, I am saying that these are run as per regulations of all the three Services
which are statutory, which have been passed by Parliament. They are in
accordance with that. They are audited by Chartered Accountants as per the
procedures laid down."
25. The Committee then pointed out that apart from all the supports from the State
like Quantitative Discounts, Soft Loans and the Budgetary provisions for their operation,
all the URCs functioned from Government premises free of cost besides using
Government transport. Even the service personnel were often assigned duties to man
the URCs. In view of all the above pecuniary benefits from the State, the Committee
desired to know the rationale for treating URCs as purely private institutions. The
Air Chief Marshal replied:—
"......I would like to respond to the last two statements that have been made. The
first part is that Service transport, Government transport is used in URCs. It is
incorrect. Except in J&K where the situation is bad, public transport is not used
and private transport is used even in J&K also. Secondly, people employed
from the services in the URC's are doing their duties over and above their duties.
Otherwise, it is fully staffed by civilian members......"
26. The Air Chief Marshal further stated:—
"The last point is that they run through service premises. Now the need of the
soldier is there. If their canteen is situated far away, obviously there will be a
problem. They pay rent and allied charges, so do the banks, laundries and other
facilities which are run. But that does not mean that they form part of the public
funds.
Now we come to how the money is received by the URCs....... The URCs generate
money, but they generate money through the contribution of the soldiers, sailors
and airmen. They do not get any grant. It is grant-in-aid like loan that the CSD
gets. It is returned and returned in excess."
27. The Committee asked about the mechanism devised to ensure the correctness
of the excess amount returned. In reply, the Air Chief Marshal submitted that it was
from the profits charged by the CSD. Not satisfied, the Committee desired to know
whether the profit charged by the CSD and the amount earned by the URCs were in
perfect sync. The Air Chief Marshal responded:—
"The amount earned by the URC is profit. It is not public money. That is the
contention."
28. Asked to state whether Quantitative Discount was given or not, the Army Chief
replied:—
"Yes, Quantitative Discount is given at the end of the year, but initially we have
to pay........"

13
29. Elaborating the matter, he added:—
"Now, the Quantitative Discount is an issue because we have taken this money
initially from the CFI to run the CSD depot which takes the things and pushes
down to various regional Depots, from where the URCs are taking these things
by giving advance and this money is being credited immediately into the
CFI."
30. When the Committee desired to be further enlightened on the issue of
Quantitative Discount, the Integrated Headquarters of the Ministry of Defence (Army),
Canteen Services Department (QMG's Branch) in a written submission stated that the
concept of canteen stores giving its share of profit to unit canteens in the form of
Quantitative Discount (QD) as an incentive to URCs was approved by the Board of
Control, in February, 1976. It was decided that the QD to the units against their annual
purchases made by them from CSD might be paid to them automatically at the end of
each year @2%. QD was a bulk discount which was released in the form of stocks
against indent and it was never given in cash.
31. It was further stated that the CSD (I) had grown manifold in its operations and in
its fund position, attracted the Government attention. After prolonged deliberation on
the growth, its fund and its accounting procedures, the Cabinet approved the merger
of CSD (I) funds with Consolidated Funds of India. One of the important decisions
taken on finalization was that the transaction of CSD would pass through CFI and it
was necessary to obtain the vote of Parliament in regard to its expenditure.
32. On the issue of transfer of Trade Surplus from CFI to the Services for welfare
activities of troops and ex-servicemen, a decision was taken in the 56th meeting of
BOCCS held in March 1986 that 50% of the Trade Surplus of CSD deposited with CFI
for a particular year would be distributed as Grants-in-Aid in the subsequent year from
CFI and this would be utilized by CSD for regular Grants and Adhoc Grants. After
meeting these grants, left over Grant-in-Aid was to be distributed within three Services
in the ratio of 85% (Army), 10% (AF) and 5% (Navy). However, the thought process
changed in the year 2006, wherein it was realized that the 50% of the Trade Surplus
received from CFI in the form of Grant-in-Aid was nothing but the Trade Surplus
generated by CSD paid into CFI and was not a 'fund allocated' in the budget by the
Finance Ministry. Thus, the amount received as Grant-in-Aid, was not in real term 'a
budget allocation from Public Fund' but it was giving back to the Services a part of the
Trade Surplus which was actually generated through indirect contributions from troops
by fixing higher sales price on goods sold in URCs.
33. It was further stated that the said Trade Surplus was not paid to the individual
URC's but was used by the respective Service HQ for the welfare of the troops. Hence,
usages of the term 'Grant-in'Aid' would be inappropriate. Accordingly, the MoD (BOCCS)
in its prudence had termed it as 'Contribution'. This was done with the aim to clearly
distinguish it from grant-in-aid which was from the Government Budget. The QD
received was not Public Fund but share of CSD profit re-invested in the business for
its growth and to supplement its overhead expenditure. The benefits arising out of
such arrangement were automatically transferred to the troops. Hence, the trade surplus

14
distributed from the CFI to Services was not Grant-in-Aid, instead it was ploughing
back the profit contributed by URCs to the CSD which has been deposited in the CFI.
34. Clarifying the matter further, the Integrated HQRs apprised the Committee that
the contention that URCs got significant amount from CFI was misplaced. When CSD
sold goods to the URCs it added certain percentage of profit. At the end of the year
after meeting all overhead expenses of CSD from the profit, the balance was shared
between CFI and the Services in the form of share of Trade Surplus. Hence, it was not
funding of URC by CFI and instead the reverse was true i.e. a part of URC profit which
funded the CFI. From the above, it could be concluded that it was only an accounting
procedure followed by the Government and factually there was no Grant-in-Aid/Public
Fund flowing into URCs.
35. The Committee queried whether any money going through the CFI should be
considered as public money or not. In reply, the Air Vice Marshal submitted:—
"I would like to submit that it is only channelized through CFI. CSD at Mumbai
is the body which is effecting the bulk purchases using public money and here
is URC which is purely a regimental fund which has been created out of the
uniformed personnel's contributions."
36. When the Committee asked what type of contributions they were, the Air Vice
Marshal replied that it was the personal contribution of the soldier, sailor and airman.
The Committee then desired to know whether it would not be prudent to keep a tab on
the details of these contributions viz. the amount contributed, the money spent
therefrom, the maintenance of the records of such contribution, the framing and
adherence to the rules in this regard etc. In reply, the Air Vice Marshal submitted:—
"Sir, there are various welfare activities. There are so many other vehicles also."
37. At this point of time, the Committee desired to know from the C&AG whether
any fund could be routed through the CFI. In response, the C&AG stated:—
"What is CFI? CFI is the fund passed by Parliament and it is part of Budget.
There is no way in which any funds can be routed through the CFI. It can not be
so. The point that you said about non-public fund being routed through the CFI
also is totally not possible. In fact, it is incorrect whatever your argument may
be."
38. When the Committee wanted the witnesses to respond to the above observation
of the C&AG, the Air Vice Marshal replied:—
"So far as public fund operations are concerned, they begin at CSD level and
they end at CSD level. URCs are buying their requirement making advance
payment, and for that funds are not provided by the Government of India. These
are the contributions from over the years that these funds have been built up."
39. The Committee then asked what made it obligatory on the part of the Military to
transfer a part of their excess profit to the CFI. In reply, the Army Chief submitted:—
"Sir, it is because the Chairman, COSC made a request that we can run the
welfare measures through our own steam by taking loan from the banks and by

15
not depending on the CFI because it is creating too much of a hassle. The Unit
Canteens that give advance, it goes straightaway on that day to the CFI, which
should not be done........."
40. Supplementing his colleagues, the Vice Admiral, Navy stated:—
"Sir I just wanted to provide a little more clarification as to how does the URC
come into existence. Whenever a unit is approved by the Government of India
anywhere in India or any unit is established with the approval of the Government
and when it starts functioning, then they are permitted to run a small URC by the
funds provided from the non-public fund of Navy, Army or Air Force."
41. The Committee asked whether the non-public funds were obtained from business
or from the compulsory contributions. In response, the Vice Admiral submitted:—
"Sir, I will say both, that is, the contribution as well as the various measures that
have been instituted for collecting money. It adds both of them."
42. Asked to state categorically whether the above-said measures were under the
Act of Parliament, the Vice Admiral deposed:—
"I will not be able to say that for sure, but URC is authorized under the Local
Field Commander's orders."
43. In response to another related query on the matter, the Air Chief Marshal,
defending their stance of keeping the URCs out of the purview of the C&AG, stated as
under:—
“‘..........Sir, if you will permit me, I would like to quote from the Supreme Court
judgment of an SLP of 2005......... It says the relation between URCs and CSDs is
that of buyer and seller and not of principal and the agent..........’.
This was a previous decision by the Court. They are commenting on that. It
further says:
'This Court further went wrong in holding that URCs are parts of CSDs when it
has been clearly stated that URCs are purely private ventures.'
Then amongst other things, I would like to quote another part of the judgment.
It says:
'The question whether the URC can be treated as an instrumentality of the State
does not fall for consideration, that aspect has not been considered by CAT or
the High Court apparently, on that score alone we could have dismissed the
appeal.'
It goes on further to talk about the employers of URCs not being Government
Servants."
44. The Committee pointed out that the way the Air Chief Marshal had read the
judgment was not what was purported of the judgment. In fact, the judgment went on
to confine itself to the limited issue of whether an employee of the URC was to be
treated as really a Government servant or not. The Court had abstained itself from

16
making any observation on the business of the URC being an instrument of the State
or not. The Committee, therefore, desired to know the principle difficulty on the part of
the Military in letting the highest Accountant of the Government of India to have a
look at the funding pattern of the URCs, since a large amount of money was involved
in the operation of the URCs.
45. In reply, the Army Chief submitted:—
"Sir,.......... a couple of years back, when the URCs bought the goods and gave
this advance, this money was utilized for running the entire CSD operation, but
at some point of time for reasons that at least I do not know, it was decided that
this money will go into the Consolidated Fund of India and then from that the
QDs will come, and that is why this problem is coming up."
46. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence supplemented:—
"........The CSD makes an important contribution to the troops' welfare measures........"
47. The Committee asked whether it would not be prudent on the part of the Military
to increase the welfare activities for the jawans beyond their own contributory funds
by coming before the Parliament and getting money under a budgetary head to spend
it for the welfare measures.
48. In reply, the Air Vice Marshal submitted:—
"My submission is that funds from the Government would be welcome and that
would, of course, be subjected to audit."
49. Supplementing his colleague, the Air Chief Marshal stated:—
"If you give us sometime, Sir, we would like to discuss (the issues) with the
Defence Minister and come back to you."
50. It was in the above context that the Chairman, PAC held a meeting with the
Defence Secretary and the Chiefs of the Services/their representatives in his Chamber
on 7th September, 2011 to take stock of the matter as no information was furnished to
the Committee as assured during evidence. The above narrated points were again
discussed and it was decided in the meeting that the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence/Services and the Office of the C&AG should hold a meeting, as per their
convenience, to arrive at an amicable and mutual solution. A meeting was accordingly
held on 14th September, 2011 at the Office of the C&AG of India. The Minutes of the
said meeting was obtained by the Committee. The complete text of the Minutes is as
under:
"Minutes of the Meeting regarding access of Audit to the URCs
Venue and Time: Office of the C&AG of India; 1000 hrs. on 14th September, 2011.
Present:
Office of the C&AG of India
Smt. Rekha Gupta, Deputy Comptroller & Auditor General of India
Shri Jayant Sinha, Principal Director, O/o of the C&AG of India

17
Services Organisations
Lt. Gen. A.S. Lamba, PVSM, A VSM, ADC, VCOAS
Air Marshal K. K. Nohwar, PVSM, VM, ADC, VCAS
Vice Admiral M.P. Muralidharan, A VSM, NM, COP
A VM C.V . Subramaniam, ACAS (Accts.)
Brig. S. S. Jakhar, Secy. BOCCS & DDG , CS
Col. P.K. Singh, Addl. Officer, Canteen Services
Gp. Captain K.U.K. Reddy, VSM, Dir. (CSD/Audit), Air Hq.
Capt. (IN) Dr.  Sharma, Secy. INCCB
Wg. Cdr. R.K. Joshi, DGM (F&A), CSD Hq Mumbai
Ministry of Defence and Defence (Finance)
Ms. Shobhana Joshi, Addl. FA (S) & JS MoD
Ms. Sungita Sharma, Dir. (Q)/MoD/D (Mov.)
Office of the DGADS
Shri Gautan Guha, Director General of Audit, Defence Services
Shri V .A. Patwardhan, Director, Office of the DGADS
Minutes
Smt. Rekha Gupta, Dy. C&AG welcomed the participants in the meeting.
DDGCS made a presentation in which the recommendations in the performance
audit of CSD were discussed along with the action taken on them. It was mentioned
that most of these recommendations have been agreed to and action has been
initiated to implement the same. Detailed discussions took place on three
recommendations on which there was divergence. These recommendations were:
(a) Change of nomenclature from Grants-in-Aid to Contributions.
(b) Quantitative Discount.
(c) Access of audit of the URCs.
As regards (a), it was pointed out that the nomenclature was changed for
Grants-in-Aid to Contributions with the approval of the Ministry of Defence and
Ministry of Finance. Dy. C&AG mentioned that such changes cannot be made
without the concurrence of the C&AG of India, which was not taken. It was
also pointed out by DGADS that the Cabinet decision referred to grants and
not contributions. Dy. C&AG wanted to know whether any fresh reference
was made to the Ministry of Finance. It was informed that it has been made.
Ministry of Finance will have to take a decision in this regard in consultation/
concurrence of C&AG.
As regards (b), it was pointed out by Dy. C&AG that QD cannot be treated as a
trade discount as it is not passed to the consumers. It was pointed out that since
QD was a transfer from the Consolidated Fund of India, it has to be done in
accordance with the General Financial Rules. Regarding (c) i.e. access of audit to
the URCs, DDGCS brought to the notice the following landmark rulings in support
of the contention that "URCs are not under the ambit of audit":—

18
(a) GoI ruling dated 28 March 1977 on CSD functioning,
(b) Supreme Court order dated 28 April 2009,
(c) URCs are non-public entities and not funded by CFI,
(d) Opinion given by Minister of Law and Justice in May 11,
(e) URCs are not under RTI Act,
(f) IT Act 1961 exempts URCs.
Dy. C&AG reiterated that even in the PAC meeting when the Performance Audit
Report of CSD was discussed several members opined that the Supreme Court
judgment was limited to the issue whether an employee of a URC is a government
employee. The said judgment, does not deal with the access of audit to the
URCs. Similarly, the Cabinet decision does not refer to the issue at all. Dy C&AG
further pointed out that exemption of Income Tax Act is not the criterion in this
context as CSD itself is exempted from payment of some taxes but subjected to
audit. It was also confirmed that the audit department has a procedure of not
sharing any information with any member of the public if the information relates
to organisations which are exempt from RTI Act.
Dy. C&AG further pointed out that while doing the performance audit of CSD,
audit wanted to assess whether the URCs were following the instructions issued
by the BOCCS/SD and the beneficiaries were receiving quality service at the
price intended. She mentioned that a questionnaire was issued and intimations
were sent to Ministry of Defence regarding the URCs to be chosen by audit.
Dy. C&AG assured that the objective of auditing the URCs was not to audit the
non-public fund of any unit and there should not be any apprehensions about it.
Dy. C&AG further assured that the checklist enumerating what would be seen in
audit would be shared with the services and the results will also be shared with
the concerned commanders as per the existing procedures. As a model, the
questionnaire earlier prepared was handed over to the VCOAS.
The VCOAS stated that pursuant to the discussions, the response of the services
would be firmed up. As such, it was agreed that another meeting will be held as
soon as possible at mutually convenient time for early settlement of the issue."
51. As it was decided in the meeting held on 14th September 2011 to have another
meeting as soon as possible at mutually convenient time for early settlement of the
issue, another meeting was held on 28th September, 2011 between the Ministry/Service
representatives on one hand and the Audit Officers on the other. The text of the
Minutes of the above meeting is as under:—
"The meeting held on 28th September 2011 was attended by
1. DGADS,
2. Director (Audit) O/o DGADS,
3. Director (Q)/MoD,
4. Rep. of MoD (Fin.),

19
5. ACAS (Accts.),
6. DDGCS,
7. Director (CSD/Audit), Air HQ.
The following is a brief of the discussions:
DGADS welcomed all the participants. Drawing attention to the three agenda
points namely (a) Grants-in-Aid vis-à-vis contributions;  (b) Quantitative Discount
and (c) Audit access to the URCs, DGADS clarified that these three issues
needed to be looked at separately. DDGCS brought out that though they are
separate issues, these had been interlinked by MoD resulting in withholding of
distribution of Canteen Trade Surplus (CTS). DGADS clarified that the
recommendations given in the PAC Report on CSD are specific to each issue and
need to be decided by Ministry of Defence. He further clarified that once the
audit report is tabled in parliament, it is no longer within the jurisdiction of
C&AG to decide on these recommendations.
The DGADS also clarified that the issue of not obtaining the prior concurrence
of the C&AG had been raised consistently in the C&AG's Report on the
Appropriation Accounts for the previous few years before it was mentioned in
the PA Report on CSD. All the three issues were discussed at length as appended
below:
(I) Distribution of Canteen Trade Surplus
CSD, every year distributes its trade surplus by way of Grant in aid/contribution.
The head of account was changed to Contribution from the year 2006-07 without
the prior concurrence of C&AG but with the approval of Ministry of Finance.
DGADS pointed out that change in nomenclature without concurrence of C&AG
was in violation of the Constitutional provisions.
DDGCS sought clarification from DGADS regarding distribution of CTS pending
resolution in the matter. DGADS clarified that it is for the Ministry to decide on
the issue. In this regard, Director (Q) stated that an exhaustive self contained
note has been forwarded to Ministry of Finance. Based on reply of Ministry of
Finance, the same would be forwarded to PAC after obtaining the view of C&AG
as per extant practice. DGADS while making it clear that the CAG Report in no
way states that CTS is not to be distributed to the services, stated that since
funds are flowing out of CFI, the rules contained in GFR need to be observed.
(II) Quantitative Discount
DGADS brought to the notice of the representatives of Services that audit has
recommended that transparency in accordance to the rules of GFR must be
observed while distributing and utilizing QD Dir. (Q) stated that a Comprehensive
SOP and guidelines have been prepared in consultation with Services keeping in
view the spirit of the provisions of GFR. It was also stated that the same will be
formalized shortly and will be observed while distribution of CTS and QD. DGADS
stated that MoD should send a reply accordingly to the PAC and wait for their
decision.

20
(III) Audit access to URCs
DDGCS informed that they have obtained the view of Law Ministry in 2011 after
the PAC meeting wherein the Law Ministry advised that URCs need not be
audited by C&AG. DGADS stated that the matter is in the purview of the PAC
and as per the directions of the PAC, only the modalities of how audit is to be
conducted are to be worked out by the Services and the C&AG . The questionnaire
prepared before conduct of Performance audit was also discussed. The various
doubts raised by representatives of Services were clarified by DGADS. It was
also suggested that guidelines can be formulated and audit can be carried out
accordingly. The Services representatives stated that they would brief their
higher authorities for taking a final decision in the matter."
52. As would be seen from the above Minutes of the meeting held on 28th September
2011, the Service representatives assured that they would brief their higher authorities
for taking a final decision in the matter. In the above context, the Chairman took
another meeting of the representatives of the Services in his Chamber on 5th October
2011 to know about the further progress made on the matter. The same issues were
discussed again. The representatives of the Ministry/services promised to get back
with some concrete action. But, nothing was heard from them till December 2011.
III. Appropriate Accounting Policies
53. Pointing out various shortcomings in the accounting policies in the CSD and
URCs, Audit recommended that the CSD and URCs should adopt a set of accounting
policies with disclosure requirements akin to those adopted by the Organisations
having commercial operations. Audit further recommended that the Chief Accounting
Authority should ensure that no change in the accounting policy is made without
prior consultation with the C&AG of India, as required under Article 150 of the
Constitution of India. The disbursement of profit to the eligible organisations should
be made as 'Grants-in-Aid' within the ambit of General Financial Rules and further use
of the object head 'Contribution' should be discontinued forthwith.
54. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the action taken by the
Ministry on the Audit recommendations. In reply, the Ministry stated that they had
accepted the Audit recommendation for adopting a set of accounting policies with
disclosure requirements. As regards discontinuation of the object head 'Contribution',
the Ministry stated that the change in nomenclature from 'Grants-in-Aid' to 'Contribution'
was done with the concurrence of the Ministry of Finance.
55. Asked to state the impediments faced in discontinuing the object head
'Contribution' and disbursing the profit as 'Grants-in-Aid' to the eligible organisations,
the Ministry replied that the issue had been referred to the DGADS for their advice. A
view on the same shall be taken thereafter, in consultation with the Ministry of Finance,
who are the competent authority on the matter.
56. As regards the Audit recommendation to sanction the regular and ad-hoc
Grants-in-Aid in a transparent manner on the basis of the detailed proposals and use
of these Grants for only the welfare of the Service personnel, the Ministry informed

21
that they were issuing suitable instructions in this regard to ensure compliance with
the provisions of the GFR. The Ministry, however, further stated that while due diligence
was exercised in the procedure for grant of funds to the Service entities; the existing
arrangements did not attract provisions of the GFR.
57. Similarly, the Ministry apprised that action was being initiated on the Audit
recommendation to review the accounting policies so that the income from  the
non-trading activities was correctly accounted for.
IV . Timely Credit of Funds and Recovery of Outstanding Dues
58. Audit recommended that the CSD was required to closely monitor the timely
credit of funds into its account. Further, it should pursue with the Banks for payment
of interest for delay in crediting the amount telegraphically transferred by Area Depot
Banks and for indicating credit balances with details of cleared and uncleared cheques.
59. Audit further recommended that the CSD should take immediate action to clear
the outstanding credit and debit items and recover the amounts outstanding for more
than five years or write off the same as per the procedure laid down. The cases where
records relating to purchases were not available and the creditors were not demanding
payment, should be written back to the profit in accordance with the commercial
accounting principles.
60. Responding to the above suggestions of the Audit, the Ministry apprised the
Committee that they were in agreement with the Audit observations and action was
being taken to implement the same.
V . Review of the Pricing Policies
61. Audit was of the view that the Ministry of Defence should take immediate steps
to review the pricing policies and closely monitor their implementation. Audit suggested
that prices should be fixed in a fair and transparent manner by correctly factoring the
actual cost incurred and accurately applying the existing taxation provisions so that
benefits accrued to the intended parties.
62. When the Committee desired to know the response of the Ministry to above
suggestions of the Audit, it was stated that the Ministry agreed with the Audit
recommendations and action was in hand to implement the same.
VI. Effective Measures for Quality control
63. Observing several shortcomings in the quality control measures adopted, Audit
recommended that the Ministry should put in place an effective mechanism to oversee
strict implementation of the quality control measures at all levels of the supply chain in
the CSD and URCs.
64. Audit further suggested that the CSD Head Office should ensure speedy testing
and reporting of test results so as to avoid sale of substandard items to the customers.
Also, reasons for acceptance or rejection of an item proposed for introduction in the
CSD inventory should be recorded.

22
65. Asked to state the action taken on the above cited Audit recommendations, the
Ministry replied that measures were being taken to strengthen the procedures prescribed
for overseeing the strict implementation of the quality control measures and also to
ensure close monitoring of the time-lines in this regard.
66. The Ministry further stated that action would be taken to improve the testing
procedure of the items for speedy reporting. Asked to spell out the specific measures
contemplated in this regard, the Ministry replied that all items of the CSD inventory
range were tested as per fixed periodicity in terms of existing policy. The testing &
reporting of test results had been further streamlined to conform to the requirements of
the organization. The test centres as well as CFLs co-located with the depots had been
requested to forward the quality check report within the time schedule of two months.
67. In response to another query, the Ministry stated that in a few cases, due to the
wide range of products and limited Composite Food Laboratories (CFLs) located only
at Jammu, Delhi & Mumbai, the receipt of quality test reports from these test centres
got delayed. In some cases, there had been delay due to factors like non-availability of
particular batch number of the product, inadequate TDS from the suppliers, etc.
68. The Ministry further stated that the matter had been taken up to increase the
number of Government recognized test centres to facilitate faster routine testing to
avoid issue of substandard stores.
69. As regards recording of the reasons for acceptance or rejection of an item
proposed for introduction in the CSD inventory, the Committee desired to know the
reasons for not doing so prior to the Audit scrutiny. In reply, the Ministry stated that
the recording of reasons for rejection of items was made in the Master Folder for most
of the years barring a few meetings held during 2007-08. It was further stated that as a
large number of products were offered and difficulty was experienced in recording, the
same was inadvertently not recorded. However, the recording of reasons for acceptance
or rejection of items proposed for introduction in the CSD inventory was being done
from February, 2009.
70. Asked to state whether non-recording of the reasons for acceptance or rejection
of items was a deliberate move to favour the existing suppliers, the Ministry replied as
under:—
"CSD has a well laid down system for introduction of new items and deletion of
existing items. The Board of Approval, headed by GM, CSD, consists of members
from CSD and the three Services. The representatives from Services are changed
for each BOA to maintain better transparency to ensure no corrupt practice
creep in to the sytem. Hence a transparent system exists to ensure that there is
no favouritism towards existing or new suppliers."
71. The Committee then desired to know the steps taken to ensure that Stack Cards
indicating the date of manufacture  were invariable displayed in respect of the perishable
stocks. In reply, the Ministry stated that existing instructions regarding maintenance
and display of Stack Cards duly mentioning the date of manufacture in respect of
perishable stocks were reiterated from time to time to ensure that the consumption at

23
the ultimate customer's end remained well within the residual shelf life period. The
same was checked during the periodic visits/annual inspection by Regional Managers
also.
72. When the Committee queried about the specific measures taken not to supply
perished goods to the consumers of the CSD, the Ministry stated that items having
shelf life were issued in the following manner:—
"Total Shelf Life Period of the Item upto 12 months. Any item with a shelf life of
12 months and below shall not be issued to URCs without a residual shelf life of
minimum 50% of shelf  life, as hither-to-fore.
Total Shelf Life Period of the Item beyond 12 months. Any item with more than
12 months of shelf  life can be issued upto 6 months of residual shelf life.
CSD also follows the policy with regard to acceptance of items from the vendors
with not less than 85% residual shelf life at the time of receipt/storage. Hence,
mechanism is in place to prevent supply of perished stores to the consumers of
CSD.
Instructions on the subject will be reiterated as well as further reviewed to
ensure compliance."
73. Asked to state the steps taken post audit to increase the availability of items in
the CSD inventory so as to avoid denials, the Ministry submitted that some of the
major reasons for denial of the CSD stores were as follows:—
"(a) Non-supply by firms due to product changes, technological up-gradations,
change in formulations, consumer schemes, product withdrawals, transportation
problems, shortage of raw materials etc.
(b) Spurts in demand of certain products due to consumer schemes, advertisement
effect, sudden seasonal changes, change in consumer preference etc.
(c) Changes in state regulation such as imposition of entry tax, supply restrictions
in liquor like label registration, insistence by States preferring local brands etc.
(d) Inability of firms to give adequate Bank Guarantee to cover orders and assets."
74. The Ministry further stated that the consumer goods market was dynamic due
to constant product innovation and different strategies by firms on brand building.
Thus, consumer preference used to change and was hence dynamic. This also led to
short-term denial of stores.
75. Asked to specify the measures taken to increase the availability of items and
reduce denials, the Ministry replied that the following steps were taken in that
direction:—
“(a) Periodic review of inventory.
(b) Raising of Supplementary Demands, where the sale is higher than anticipated.
(c) Preponement of orders where sale is higher than anticipated.

24
(d) Prompt clearance of cases affecting supplies such as Gram mage reductions,
Graphic change in the packing, Price revisions, Replacement to the new
product etc.
(e) Issuance of items by Depots against follow up indents of URCs where
supplies are received after executing the original indent of the URCs.
(f) Increasing awareness amongst URCs regarding availability of functional
substitutes.
(g) Constant interaction with the firms to increase availability of fast moving
items.”
VII. Review of the Concept of a Centralised Base Depot
76. Audit pointed out that in the extant scenario, the CSD had to block the funds in
terms of the V A T paid for the items routed through the Base Depot to other States.
Audit, therefore, suggested that the concept of a centralized Base Depot be reviewed
in view of the blockage of funds towards V AT as well as uneconomical transportation
of times and meager receipt of the rebate amount.
77. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Ministry on the above
cited Audit observation, the Ministry replied as under:—
"(i) Base Depot at Sewri, Mumbai, has been functioning since 1971 as a feeder
Depot to all CSD Area Depots for stores other than those which are dispatched
directly to the Area Depots by the suppliers against the orders placed by CSD
HO, Mumbai or those which are placed locally against Local Supply Orders
(LSOs) by the Managers of Area Depots. Out of total 558 suppliers, only 14 small
suppliers are supplying their stocks entirely through Base Depot and
333 suppliers supply only partly through Base Depot to cater to the requirement
of troops being serviced by our small and medium depots and those located in
far flung areas. Only about 19% value of supplies are routed through Base
Depot and the rest approx. 81% worth of stocks of major suppliers are supplied
directly by them to our Area Depots. However, as recommended by C&AG , this
aspect is being reviewed.
(ii) The Following categories of supplies are routed through Base Depot for
dispatch to CSD Area Depots located across the length and breadth of the
Country:
(a) Small and Micro Enterprises (SMEs).
(b) Ex-servicemen Enterprises.
(c) Medium and Large Scale Enterprises which do not have their supply chain
network co-located or in the vicinity of our CSD Area Depots situated in far-
flung areas viz. North-East, J&K and Port Blair etc.
(d) Suppliers who do not have the supply-chain network to cater to the
requirement of CSD Depots located even in peace/well connected stations.
(e) Dispatches to those Area Depots whose monthly requirement does not
constitute full truck-load.

25
(iii) In all such cases, Centralized Orders are placed by CSD HO, Mumbai on the
suppliers for supply at Base Depot in bulk. Quantities/consignments so received
from various suppliers are then clubbed Depot-wise to constitute full truck-load
and dispatched to various Area Depots through Transporters as per the Transport
Contract. The Contract for transportation is entered with the various transporters,
duly following relevant Govt. Rules/Procedures and CVC guidelines, in a
transparent manner."
The Ministry, however, further stated that all the issues highlighted by C&AG were
being reviewed and suitable actions as required would be initiated.
VIII.  Supply of Liquor to the URCs as per Authorization
78. Audit recommended that the CSD and the Services should ensure that liquor
was demanded by and issued to the URCs strictly as per their authorisation to prevent
its leakage into the civil market.
79. Agreeing with the above recommendation, the Ministry, in response to a query
of the Committee, stated that by resorting to several measure like raising liquor indent
strictly in accordance with the strength of the URCs, sale of liquor through smart cards
and taking strict disciplinary action against the delinquent personnel, effective control
had been exercised to prevent the leakage of Defence liquor into civilian market.
80. Asked to state whether the CSD had conducted any investigation into the issue
of excess drawal of liquor by some URCs as pointed out in the Audit Report, the
Ministry stated that the Formations/Units concerned had been asked to investigate
the issue and submit a detailed report at the earliest.
IX.  Management Information System
81. Audit suggested that a computerized Management Information System with
automated documentation and control functions of the CSD including the operation of
the URCs should be implemented early.
82. Apprising the Committee of the action taken in this regard, the Ministry stated
that the MIS was being implemented at the earliest. The Ministry, however, specified
that the MIS proposal did not include the URCs.
X. Other Issues
(i) Delay in responding to the Audit findings
83. The performance audit of the CSD was conducted over a period of five months
during June, 2008 to October, 2008 and the report was updated in November, 2009
covering transaction of six years. Records of the Ministry of Defence and Canteen
Stores Department were scrutinized and Audit observations made thereafter. Although
the Audit findings were referred to the Ministry on 30th December, 2008, the Ministry
could furnish their reply in June, 2010 only.
84. In the above context, when the Committee desired to know the reasons for such
inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry in responding to the Audit observations,
the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence deposed in evidence:—

26
"......I would like to submit, Sir, that in almost all the recommendations which
have been made by the C&AG we have discussed extensively with the Services—
there is a harmony of thought. We do feel that these are valuable observations
and we can make further improvements in the operation of CSD by virtue of
these recommendations. There are just one or two issues, we felt, which need to
be addressed and discussed so that we can get your guidance in the matter."
85. Asked to state categorically whether there was delay on the part of the Ministry
and if so, the reasons therefor, the Additional Secretary Ministry of Defence
submitted:—
"I agree about the fact that there has been a delay in submitting."
86. He further stated:—
"I would only like to submit that there are two issues which I would explain
where perhaps we feel that something needs to be discussed.
The first issue is a minor one which is that the C&AG has suggested that the
sub-depot at Mumbai needs to be used much less than what it has been used as
of today, and there are certain reasons which have been given in terms of
transportation cost, convenience and so on. I think GM, CSD would explain why
we have a slightly different view on what has been projected."
87. The GM, CSD accordingly supplemented by stating:—
"Sir, there is a base depot at Mumbai which actually acts as a feeder for the
34 Area Depot deployed in different parts of the country. There are various
companies whom we deal with, almost close to 600 suppliers, and majority of
them supply stores directly to the Area Depots. The observation by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General has been basically on a few issues. First one is
that the need for this Base Depot needs to be reviewed, which is what we are
doing."
88. The Committee asked whether it could not have been prudent to intimate the
C&AG that the Ministry were taking action or had decided to take action on the Audit
findings, more so when there was a convergence of interest, the representatives of the
Ministry and the Services agreed to the observation made by the Committee.
(ii) Treating the employees of the URC at par with the Government employees
89. During the course of the examination of the subject, the Chairman, PAC received
a representation from the Central Government Employees Co-ordinating Committee
regarding the grievances of the Unit Run Canteen (URC) employees.
The main points contained in the said representation were as follows:—
(i) Recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission (CPC) have not been
implemented for the UFRC employees whereas on the basis of the
implementation of the 5th CPC, the URC employees were getting Basic Pay
only.

27
(ii) Daily Allowance, House Rent Allowance, Medical Allowance etc. as paid to
the Central Government, State Government and Public Sector Undertakings
were not being paid to the URC employees.
(iii) Employees Provident Fund and Insurance Schemes were also not being
made applicable to the URC employees although they have been working in
remote and far flung areas.
90. In view of the above, they requested the Committee to take up their grievances
with the Central Government. Accordingly, their representation was forwarded to the
Ministry of Defence for comments. The Ministry of Defence furnished pointwise
comments as under:
“(a) 6th CPC is not applicable to URC employees, as they are not Government
Servants.
(b) Daily Allowance, House Rent Allowances, Children Education and Transport
Allowances sought are applicable for Central Government, State Government
and PSU employees only. URC employees do not fall in any of these categories.
(c) The medical allowance sought is applicable for central Government, State
Government and PSU employees only. URC employees do not fall in any of
these categories.
(d) Other Service Benefits such as Payment of Gratuity, Bonus and Applicability
of EPF Scheme are admissible to URC employees as per para-6 of AHQ's letter
No. 96029/Q/DDGCS date 29th April 2003, if all conditions as mentioned in the
Gratuity Act, 1972, Bonus Act, 1965, EPF Scheme, 1952 are met. As regards the
Insurance of URC civilian employees is concerned, there is no laid down policy
on the issue and it is entirely upto the discretion of respective URC management
Committee to have insurance cover or otherwise for their URC employees.”
91. The Ministry further stated that one of the URC employees namely Md. Aslam
approached Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhpur pleading that such employees
should be treated as Central Government employee's and accordingly their pay should
be fixed at par with the salary of the CSD employees. The CAT, Jodhpur directed that
the URC employees are Government employees and are entitled for pay and allowances
and other benefits similar to the pay & allowances and other benefits available to the
employees of CSD. The CAT further directed that the employees of URCs should get
the minimum of the salary being paid to their counterpart.
92. This judgement was challenged in the Supreme Court of India by the Ministry
vide Civil Appeal No. 1039-42 of 1999 on the grounds that URCs are operated by Non-
Public Funds and that the Tribunal did not have the jurisdiction to entertain these
applications and decide upon grievances of these employees. The Supreme Court in
its judgement dated 04.01.2001 held as under:—
"We are of considered opinion that the status of the employees in URCs must be
held to be that of Government employee and consequently the CAT would have
the jurisdiction to entertain applications by such employees."
******

28
"Notwithstanding the fact that we have recorded the conclusion that the
employees serving under the URC could be treated as Government servants, but
that does not necessarily mean that the service conditions of such employees
are governed by the Fundamental Rules. It would be upon for the employer to
frame separate conditions of service of the employees or to adopted the
Fundamental Rules."
93. On the basis of the above judgement, rules regulating the terms and conditions
of service of employees of URCs were issued by Army Headquarter on 28.04.2003.
These rules also mentioned the pay scales which were given to different categories of
URCs employees which were at par with the pay scales of CSD employees as per
5th CPC recommendations.
94. Subsequent to the case of Md. Aslam, RR Pillai File SLP No. 8568/2003 against
the Commanding Officer (Air Force) in which the Supreme Court passed an order on
08.05.2003 that "the decision taken in Mohd. Aslam's case is being reconsidered by
us,  three judge bench."
95. A three judge bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court has given a judgement dated
28th April 2009 regarding status of URC employees; the salient aspects of this judgement
are mentioned hereunder:—
(a) URCs are purely private ventures and their employees are by no stretch of
imagination, employees of the Government or CSD.
(b) There is no prescribed qualification or age limit (for employees of URC).
(c) Similary, there is no grade or cadre. Therefore, it cannot be said that the
concerned employees are holder of civil posts.
96. The Ministry stated that it could be established from the judgement dated
28th April, 2009 of the Hon'ble Supreme Court that it was no longer appropriate to link
the terms and conditions of service and the pay scales of URC employees with their
counterparts in CSD, for the following reasons:—
(a) URCs are operated from Non-Public Funds/Regimental Funds.
(b) Employees of URCs are paid from the profit generated by the URCs and not
from the Public Funds.
(c) CSD has no administrative control over the URCs for their personnel who are
employed by the units under various terms and conditions mutually settled
between their units and its URC employees.
(d) The terms and conditions of service of both the categories of employees are
grossly different.
(e) There is no authorized establishment of URC employees at any station. These
appointments are made as per the requirement and they are paid their wages as
per the financial viability of each URC, subject to meeting the minimum basic
pay scale criteria as per policy issued by this office, from time to time.

29
(f) The CSD employees are granted appointment or merit through a qualifying
examination, whereas no such recruitment tests are conducted for URC
employees prior to their appointment.
(g) There is no upper age limit and required qualification laid down for the initial
appointment of URC employees.
97. The Ministry further apprised the Committee that in the past, consequent upon
the implementation of 6th CPC award, the All India Defence Civilian Canteen Employees
Union (AIDCCEU), on behalf of the URC employees had demanded scales of
pay applicable to CSD employees. On humanitarian grounds, after a meeting at
tri-services level, 50 percent hike was approved on the starting Basic Pay drawn by the
URC employees, with effect from 1st February, 2009. However, not satisfied with the
50 percent hike, AIDCCEU continued with its demand for pay parity with CSD employees
and got the intervention of Hon'ble RM on the issue. Thereafter, tri-services granted a
further hike of 15 percent in the Basic Pay of URC employees with effect from
1st December 2009, in addition to the 50 percent hike, granted to them earlier.
98. The Ministry stated that any further hike in pay scale of civilian employees of
URCs might impact the economic viability of URCs Whilst some of the larger URCs
might be able to bear some increase in the pay and allowances of their employees and
were doing so as per the discretion of respective URC Management Committee, most
of the smaller URCs would not be in a position to bear any additional liability.
99. In the above contex, the Committee learnt that the Committee on Subordinate
Legislation Rajya Sabha in their 87th Report, presented to Parliament on 13th September
1991, had inter-alia recommended that 'From all facts placed on record, the Committee
has come to the conclusion that for all intent and purposes, these (URC) employees
are Government employees and should be treated as such by working a suitable
mechanism.'
100. In this regard, when the Committee desired to have the comments of the Ministry,
it was stated that a reply was given by the then Raksha Mantri to the then Chairman,
Committee on Subordinate Legislation, Rajya Sabha stating that “the Unit Run Canteens
are not Government organizations. Ministry of Defence can have no jurisdiction to
determine the terms and conditions of service of these employees. It is not feasible to
treat these employees at par with Government employees. Since there are neither
uniform working hours nor a uniform staffing pattern, uniform pay scales cannot be
prescribed for all URCs.”

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Canteen Stores Department (CSD) came into being as a Department under
the Ministry of Defence in January, 1948. The CSD remained responsible for
procuring and selling consumer goods and other household articles of common use
to the personnel of the Defence services/civilians and certain other entitled categories
like the Coast Guard, Defence Research Development Organisation (DRDO), Border
Roads Organisation, Assam Rifles etc. at a price lower than the prevailing market
price. The operations of the CSD are carried out from its Head Office at Mumbai and
five Regional Offices at Leh, Dimpaur, Ahmedabad, Port Blair and Kochi. The CSD,
through its chain of one Base Depot at Mumbai and 34 Area Depots at various places
in the country services as the wholesaler. The retail operations through which the
stores reach the Service personnel and their families are carried out through the
Unit Run Canteens (URCs) which are under the control of the local armed forces
authorities. The concept of URC became an accepted doctrine due to the initiatives
taken by General K.S. Thimaya with a view to retaining the profits from the sale of
canteen stores within the Unit/Formation itself and not passing on the same to the
Contractors, as was the case earlier. About 3600 URCs some of which are located in
far flung and extremely remote areas, cater to around 44 lakh beneficiaries. From a
modest beginning and turnover of Rs. 1.65 crore in 1948, the CSD has now a turnover
of more than Rs. 8,500 crore. The CSD transfers money from the Consolidated Fund
of Inda (CFI) in the form of Quantitative Discount, which is distribution of stores   free
of cost to the URCs. The Committee find that during the six years from 2002-03 to
2007-08, Rs. 883 crore was transferred to the URCs as Quantitative Discount alone.
The Committee further observers that the CSD provides soft loans at subsidized
rates of  interest varying from 4.5 to 6.5 per cent per annum for setting up these
Canteens and to keep sufficient inventory. As on 31st March, 2010, Rs. 4.15 crore
was outstanding with the URCs as subsidized loan. During the years 2005-06 to
2007-08 the budgetary provision for the operations of the CSD was Rs. 4138 crore,
Rs. 4541 crore and Rs. 5420 crore respectively. It was in the above context that the
C&AG decided to conduct a performance audit of the functioning of the CSD covering
its transactions from 2003-04 to 2007-08. Records of the Ministry of Defence
and Canteen Stores Department were examined. The Audit scrutiny centred around
broadly on three areas viz. (i) Financial Operations, (ii) Business Operations,  and
(iii) Pricing and Quality of goods. The Committee's examination of the subject is
discussed in detail and commented upon in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Audit was denied access to the
records of the URCs by the Army Headquarters in spite of repeated requests on the
ground that the URCs are regimental units and are being run from the non-public
Fund. What is more intriguing is the fact that such denial was made despite the
30

31
directions of the Ministry of Defence to make the records of URCs accessible to
Audit. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence, while tendering evidence before
the Committee confirmed that the Ministry had indeed written to the three Service
Chiefs to give the opportunity to the C&AG to audit the URCs. It is pertinent to
mention here that it was on the recommendation of the PAC (1964-65) that the finances
of the CSD were brought within the ambit of the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI)
w.e.f. 1st April, 1977. But such parliamentary oversight was restricted upto the CSD
Depot level only and it was not extended to the URCs, the retail outlets of the CSD.
Such a disjoint and disconnect is unjustifiable as without the URCs, the CSD cannot
reach the consumers i.e. the Service personnel. Surprisingly and for no cogent
reasons, the URCs continue to be treated as private regimental institutions outside
the purview of the Parliamentary control. Neither the budget documents nor the
proforma accounts of the CSD reflect the operations of the URCs. With a view to
enabling the financial statements of the CSD to depict the entire operation of the
organization truly, it is imperative to ensure that all the URCs follow uniform
accounting policies/principles and their operational results are disclosed in the
proforma accounts of the CSD. Such a uniform and correct accounting principle can
be adhered to only if the records of the URCs are made available to the C&AG. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Financial parameters Services must be
harmonized with financial principles of the Government and the URCs be brought
under the unified accountability regime so that they do not escape the unremitting
the Parliamentary financial oversight. Let there be no apprehension on the part of
Services if the accounts of URCs are audited by the C&AG in view of the assurance
that the C&AG would not audit the non-Public fund of any Unit and that the checklist
enumerating what would be seen in audit would be shared with the Services and the
results of such audit would also be shared with the Commanders concerned as per the
existing procedure. Considering that the URCs are the only interface between the
CSD and its customers and the level of satisfaction of such consumers being
completely dependent upon the efficient functioning of the URCs, the Committee are
of the considered view that an assessment of the overall functioning of the URCs by
the C&AG is of paramount importance and therefore must be subject to statutory
Audit.
3. The Committee do not agree with the Ministry's contention that the operational
jurisdiction of the CSD does not extend to the URCs. In fact, the operations and
management of the URCs are carried out as per the instructions of the Ministry of
Defence and Army Headquarters. Not only that, the rules for creation/setting up of a
URC and its day-to-day management are laid down in AHQ orders and the CSD
recognizes and registeres  a URC only after the conditions enunciated in the above
said orders are fulfilled. In addition, the orders issued by the BOCCS of which the
Raksha Rajya Mantri is the Chairman, govern the rates/prices of the goods sold by
the URCs and the profit margin charged thereon. Thus, as a matter of fact, the URCs
are not independent of the control of the CSD. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the URCs, being the extension of the CSD and working in remote and restricted
areas, be brought under the purview of the Parliamentary scrutiny like the CSD. In
this context, the Ministry's statement that it would not be operationally possible to

32
compile, collate and incorporate the operational results of approximately 3600 URCs
in the proforma accounts of  the CSD is not tenable in view of the manpower and
expertise in accounting matter available with the Office of the C&AG whose help and
guidance can very well be sought to ensure financial propriety and discipline.
4. The Ministry/Services are of the view that the URCs are established from non-
public funds, with statutory backing of the regulations for the Army, Navy and Air
Force, by respective Service formations out of their regimental funds created by
contributions from the Defence personnel. Thus, according to the Ministry/Services,
URCs are operated from non-public funds/regimental funds of the three Services and
the profit is spent on the welfare of the troops they,  therefore, argue that the URCs
should be kept out of the purview of the C&AG. But, the Committee's in-depth
examination of the subject has revealed that there is a definite umbilical cord between
the source of funding of the CSD and the URCs. The Committee find that during the
last five fiscals there has been consistent withdrawal of money from the Consolidated
Fund of India (CFI) by the CSD to enable them to buy goods to be sold to the URCs. The
argument that the amount withdrawn from the CFI is returned in excess  i.e. profit
generated by the URCs, does not make the money non-public fund in view of the
C&AG's remark during evidence of the Ministry that there is 'no way in which any
non-public funds can be routed through the CFI'. The assertion of the Services that
the involvement  of the CFI begins at the CSD and ends there, is therefore, not
sustainable.
5. The Committee are informed that the accounts of the URCs are closely monitored
and audited by the boards of Offices, Commanding Officers etc. at various levels
besides the Chartered Accountants which has stood the test of time and is transparent.
The Services are of the view that the time-tested routines and procedures of the
armed forces should not be altered as they have never ever let down the nation in any
manner whatsoever and as any such changes may affect the morale of the troops. The
Committee fail to understand how auditing of the URCs would be so intrusive as to
have an adverse impact on the functioning of the URCs or for that matter on the
morale of the troops. Respecting the professional efficiency of the Services and the
challenges of their core function, the Committee are of the considered view that the
audit of URCs by the C&AG would only redound to the common zeal of the troops and
as such the Services should have no objection or slightest reservation on this score.
Such an Audit will provide greater assurance to the superior commands, the
Government and the Parliament. Moreover, the expert advice of C&AG would involve
no extra cost and there should be no qualm or compunctions about their visit to
remote and restricted areas vis-a-vis the non-governmental persons.
6. The Committee note that the CSD provides Quantitative Discount (QD) in the
form of free stores to all the URCs which is disbursed through the budgetary grant of
the Ministry of Defence. During the six years from 2002-03 to 2007-08 an amount of
Rs. 883.46 crore was transferred in the form of QD. One disquieting aspect that has
come to the notice of the Committee is that the benefit of such QDs is not passed on to

33
the consumers and instead added to the profits of the URCs and as such, the incentive
in the form of QD cannot be considered as trade discount. Such a discreet transfer
from the CFI to the non-public fund does not conform to the provisions contained in
the General Financial Rules, as also pointed out by the Audit. The  Ministry's
contention that QD is a bulk discount which is released in the form of stocks against
indent and it is never given in cash does not make it a case for transferring of funds
from the CFI to the non-public fund. It does not matter whether the said discount is
given in cash or in kind. It is disconcerting to note that the benefit accrued from such
discount is never passed on to the customers and hence it cannot be termed as trade
discount as intended. The Committee are, therefore, of the opinion that QD should not
be used as an instrument to transfer funds from the CFI to non-public fund and if such
transfers are made they must conform to the provisions of the GFR and the advice
tendered by the C&AG .
7. The Committee note that a decision was taken by the BOCCS in 1986 that
50 percent of the Trade Surplus of the CSD deposited with the CFI for a particular
year would be distributed as 'Grants-in-Aid' in the subsequent year from the CFI and
this would be utilized by the CSD for regular Grants and adhoc Grants. This practice
continued unbroken for two decades. In 2006, the BOCCS suddenly realized that the
usage of the term 'Grant-in-Aid' was inappropriate and in their wisdom they changed
it to 'Contribution' reportedly with the aim to clearly distinguish it from Grant-in-
Aid which is from the Government budget. But before making such a drastic change,
surprisingly, the Ministry did not consult the C&AG , as mandated under Article 150
of the Constitution of India. However, now that a fresh reference on the issue has been
made to the Ministry of Finance, as noted from the Minutes of the meetings between
the representatives of the Ministry/Services and the Office of the C&AG , and a final
decision will have to be taken by them in consultation with and the concurrence of the
C&AG , the Committee would like to be expeditiously apprised of the final decision in
this regard. Until such time, the Committee desire that further use of the term
'Contribution' be discontinued since it has been done by flouting the established
norms and procedures and the disbursement of profits to the eligible organizations
should be made as 'Grant-in-Aid', as was the practice for decades in accord with the
standing accounting policy.
8. The Committee also desire that the Ministry as assured by them, should expedite
taking effective measures and issuing suitable instructions to sanction the regular
and adhoc Grants-in-Aid in a transparent manner on the basis of detailed proposals
in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of the GFR. The Ministry should
also impress upon all concerned to ensure that the grants so sanctioned are utilized
only for the welfare and betterment of the service personnel, commensurate with the
objectives of the CSD. Any aberration in this regard must be viewed seriously and
responsibility be fixed on the delinquent officials, if found deviating from the prescribed
rules and financial procedures.
9. The Committee find that a three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court while
hearing the Civil Appeal No. 3495 of 2005 has inter-alia observed (para-10) "The

34
question whether the URC can be treated as an instrumentality of the State does not
fall for consideration as that aspect has not been considered by CAT or the High
Court".  It is evident from this judgement that it confines itself to the limited issue of
whether an URC employee was to be treated as really a Government servant or not and
the Court abstained from making any observation on the business of the URC being
an instrument or otherwise of the State. But, much to the consternation of the
Committee, the Service Chiefs, while tendering evidence, took recourse to the above
said Supreme Court judgement to justify that profits generated by the URCs are non-
public fund and hence it should be kept out of the purview of the C&AG , even though
such profits are deposited in the CFI. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the
way the judgement has been interpreted by the Services is not what the purport of the
judgement is. The funding pattern of the URCs and the nature of the funds were
neither an issue before the Supreme Court nor were they called upon to decide such
issues. Although the Service consistently maintain that the large amount of money
involved in the operation of the URCs comes from non-public funds or sources, the
fact remains that the whole genesis of the URC is integrally connected to the CSD. As
a matter of fact, with the pecuniary benefits that the URCs get from the State in terms
of Soft Loans, Quantitative Discounts, Budgetary Provisions, free land, Government
transport, albeit reportedly in insurgency prone areas like J&K, deputation of the
Service personnel to man the URCs etc., the Committee are of the view that these
URCs cannot be deemed to be private institutions since they have all the trappings of
Government/semi-Government organization. Therefore, the Defence establishment
should not have any difficulty or hesitation and certainly not on the basis of the above
cited Supreme Court judgement to let the URCs audited by the C&AG so that the end
shape of the large amount of money involved in the operation of the URCs  is taken to
its logical conclusion in accordance with appropriate accounting policy.
10. One of the most peculiar characteristics of the functioning of the CSD/URC in
general and the welfare measures for the troops in particular, that has come to the
notice of the Committee from the examination of the subject, is that such welfare
activities are extended to the jawans from their own contributions. To say that the
welfare measures for the jawans from their own contribution  is against the very
principle of social welfare would be an understatement. The Committee wonder how
long the Ministry of Defence would continue to claim justifiably that they are taking
welfare measures for the troops with the hard earned money of the soldiers themselves.
There is an apparent and inherent contradiction in the statement of the Services that
they provide welfare measures for the jawans but they do it with private funds i.e.
burdening the troops to self-contribute for their own welfare. The Committee fail to
understand what restrains the Ministry/Services to come before Parliament and get
requisite funds as sought and sanctioned, regardless of the quantum, for the welfare
of the jawans. The Committee are confident that no organ of the State would have
objection if funds for the socio-economic welfare of those who make supreme sacrifices
for the  country.  The Committee, therefore, fervently urge the Ministry not to delink
the welfare measures of the jawans from the CFI, being detrimental to their interest.

35
On the contrary, linkage with the CFI would enable grant of funds to meet the much
needed welfare requirements of the jawans reflective of the commitment of the
Government and the generosity and adulation of Parliament  for the armed forces.
11. Taking note of the shortcomings/deficiencies pointed out by the Audit with
regard to the pricing policies, credit of funds and recovery of the outstanding dues
and the remedial measures suggested by the Audit to improve the position which have
been agreed to by the Government, the Committee ardently appeal to the Ministry to
impress upon the CSD to fix the prices of goods/articles in a fair and transparent
manner taking into consideration the actual cost incurred and accurate application
of the existing taxation provisions so that the intended benefits accrue and pass on to
the defence personnel. The Committee further desire that immediate and appropriate
measures be taken to closely monitor the timely credit of funds into the CSD's
account, clear the outstanding credit and debit items and recover the outstanding
amounts.
12. The Committee note that the recording or reasons for acceptance of  rejection
of items proposed for induction into the CSD inventory is being done from February
2009, only after Audit pointed out the deficiencies in this regard. The Ministry's
explanation that as a large number of products were received, the reasons could not
be recorded inadvertently being far from convincing is unacceptable. It is imperative
for any business establishment to record meticulously the items received so that the
inventory is faultfree and inspires confidence. It is also equally important to record
the reasons for rejection of any item proposed for induction into the inventory for
keeping at bay the allegations of favouritism to any particular suppliers. The
Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry/Services to ensure that the CSD invariably
records the reasons for acceptance or otherwise of any item proposed for inclusion in
the CSD, irrespective of the volume of the products.
13. The Committee are highly concerned to note that in some cases the receipt of
quality test reports of the goods/items got delayed due to the wide range of products
and limited number of Composite Food Laboratories (CFLs) located only at Jammu,
Delhi & Mumbai. Delays have also attributed to non-availability of particular batch
number of the product, inadequate TDS from the suppliers etc. The Ministry informed
the Committee that measures were underway to increase the number of Government
recognized test centres to facilitate faster routine testing of stores to avoid issue of
substandard stores. Since delay in receipt of quality test reports defeats the very
purpose of the quality assurance, the Committee recommend that the measures initiated
to set up more CFLs be expedited and routine and procedural rigmaroles like non-
availability of batch number, inadequate TDS etc. be sorted out promptly so that test
reports are received in time and  the jawans get quality stores. Further, displaying
zero tolerance for any compromise in the supply of perished stores to the troops, the
monitoring and review mechanism be strengthened to ensure that the consumption of
the perishable stocks at the ultimate consumer's end remain well within the residual
shelf life period.

36
14. The Committee note that some of the major reasons for denial of the CSD
stores to the toops are non-supply of sufficient stocks by the firms due to various
factors, spurt in demand for certain products, changes in  State regulation such as
imposition of entry tax etc. and inability of the firms to give adequate Bank Guarantee.
In order to overcome the above problems, the Ministry are reportedly taking a
number of measures which inter-alia include periodic review of inventory and constant
interaction with the firms to increase availability of fast moving items. As denial of
demanded stores to the jawans is a serious matter, the Committee impress upon the
Ministry to strengthen the measures already initiated besides innovating other
appropriate measures to effectively address the impediments in the supply of all
indented stores to the jawans.
15. The Committee find that the CSD has to block the funds in terms of the V AT
paid for the items routed through the Base Depot to other States. In response to the
Audit suggestion to review the concept of a centralized Base Depot in view of the above
anomaly, the Ministry have inter-alia reported that they after reviewing the Audit
suggestion they would initiate suitable action as required. Taking into consideration
the functioning of the Base Depot at Mumbai since 1971 and the services rendered by
it in the supply of CSD stores, the Committee desire that an amicable solution be
arrived at so that neither the entire supply chain management is adversely affected
nor the payment of V AT is blocked or delayed.
16. The Committee note that by resorting to several measures like raising liquor
indent strictly in accordance with the strength of the URCs, sale of liquor through
smart cards and taking strict disciplinary action against the delinquent personnel,
the Ministry intend to prevent the leakage of Defence liquor into the civilian market.
The Committee appreciate the measures taken by the Ministry for the purpose and
desire that such measures be continued unabated to exercise an effective control for
the prevention of the leakage of the liquor meant for the Defence personnel into the
civilian market.
17. The Committee note that although the Ministry are reportedly taking early
action to implement a computerized Management Information System (MIS) with
automated documentation to control the functions of the CSD, they are not extending
the same facility to the URCs. The Committee find no reason why the business
transactions and commercial operations of the URCs, the retail outlets of the CSD,
should not be provided with a computerized Management Information System. They,
therefore, recommend that URCs, being the integral part of the CSD, should be
extended the facility of computerized MIS with automated documentation so that the
entire Supply Chain Management is streamlined and controlled efficiently.
18. The Committee are unhappy to observe inordinate delay on the part of the
Ministry of Defence in responding to the Audit observation as contained in the C&AG
Report on the subject. The Audit findings were referred to the Ministry on
30th December, 2008, but the reply thereto could not be furnished till June, 2010.

37
Such a callous attitude on the part of the Ministry belies the statement made by the
representatives of the Ministry that they have accorded utmost importance to the
Audit findings on the functioning of the CSD. The engagement of the C&AG of India
as the Chairman of the UNO Audit team to conduct external audit of organizations of
repute like WHO and UNESCO should send a positive signal to the Government how
our C&AG is acclaimed internationally. Considering the immense potential for
further improvements in the operation of the CSD pursuant to the valuable observations
made by the C&AG, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to respond to Audit
observations with due dispatch and take necessary corrective and remedial action.
19. The Committee are informed that the employees of the URC are getting the
basic pay as per the recommendations of the 5th Central Pay Commission (CPC)
whereas other Allowances like DA and HRA, as applicable to the Central Government
employees are not being paid to them. After the implementation of the recommendations
of the 6th CPC, even the basic pay has not been given to the URC employees on several
grounds like operation of URC & payment of salary to the employees from the non-
Public funds, no administrative control of the CSD over the URCs different terms and
conditions of service for both the categories, no recruitment test or upper age limit or
educational qualification for the URC employees etc. In this context, the Committee
find that the Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhpur directed that the URC
employees are Government employees and are entitled to pay and allowances and
other benefits similar to the pay and allowances as available to the CSD employees.
This judgement of the CAT was challenged in the Supreme Court by the MoD, but the
Apex Court in its judgement dated 4th January, 2001 upheld the CAT decision, but
left it to the Government either to frame separate conditions of service or to adopt the
Fundamental Rules. The Ministry preferred the first option and framed separate
rules regulating the service terms and conditions of the URC employees.
Subsequently, the Supreme Court in its judgement dated 28th April, 2009 had
inter-alia observed that URCs are purely private ventures and their employees are by
no stretch of imagination, employees of the Government or CSD. Having taken all
these developments into accounts, the Committee are concerned to find that by virtue
of the Supreme Court judgement of 2001, the Government could have very well adopted
the Fundamental Rules for the URC employees. Instead they framed separate rules,
of course in accordance with the other option given by the Supreme Court governing
the terms and conditions of the service of the URC employees. The Committee feel
that it was primarily done on the erroneous plea that the operations of URCs are
carried out through the non-Public funds, which is devoid of truth, as discussed in the
preceding paragraphs. The Committee's apprehensions are reinforced in view of the
persistent reluctance on the part of the Services, despite the Ministry's willingness,
to get the accounts of the URCs audited by the C&AG. Secondly, the recommendations
of the 6th CPC were implemented in 2008 with retrospective effect from 2006, whereas
the Supreme Court observation was made in 2009, by which time the basic pay as per
the 6th CPC could have been implemented for the URC employees, as had already
been done in case of the 5th CPC. As regards the Raksha Mantri's letter to the Chairman

38
CoSL, Rajya Sabha that URCs are not Government organizations in response to the
CoSL's 87th Report which recommended the Government to treat the URC employees
as Government employees, the Committee are of the view that the case might not have
been appropriately presented to the then Defence Minister. In view of the yeoman's
service rendered by the employees of the URC towards the welfare and overall
betterment of the jawans, including in far flung and remotest areas, the Committee
recommend that their case may be considered sympathetically and on humanitarian
grounds. There is no cogent reason why the benefits of the 6th CPC should be denied
to the employees of the URCs when they were given the benefits of the 5th CPC. The
Committee wish to forewarn and caution that unjustifiable discrimination with the
employees of the URCs, the lurking fear of an uncertain future and sense of deprivation
in them does not augur well and must be addressed urgently. The Government,
therefore, need to frame suitable terms and conditions of service and provide reasonable
pay scales and promotional avenues for the employees of the URCs servicing the
jawans in remote, often hostile and restricted areas.
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
23 December, 2011 Chairman,
02 Pausa, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2010-11) Held on 12TH JANUARY , 2011
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 12th January, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to
1640 hrs. in Room No. '63', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr.  Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Satpal Maharaj
3. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
4. Shri Jitendra  Singh (Alwar)
5. Shri Arun Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Ashwani Kumar
7. Shri Kalraj Mishra
8. Shri N.K. Singh
9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
Representatives of  the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller & Auditor General of India
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta — D y. CAG (Report Central)
3. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
4. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General (Defence Services)
5. Shri V . Patwardhan — Director of Audit
39

40
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Shri R.K. Mathur — Additional Secretary (M)
2. Smt. Nita Kapoor — Secretary, Defence (Finance)
3. Shri Binoy Kumar — Joint Secretary (O/N)
4. Shri Upmanyu Chatterjee — Joint Secretary (Trg.) & CAO
5. Smt. Shobhana Joshi — Addl. FA & JS, Defence (Finance)
6. Smt. Sungita Sharma — Director (Q)
Representatives  of the Army
1. Genl. V .K. Singh — COAS
2. Lt. Gen. Chetinder Singh — QMG
3. Lt. Gen. G.S. Dhillon — DGST
4. Maj. Gen. S.P.S. Katewa — ADGST
5. Brig. S.T. Upasani — MA to COAS
6. Brig. R.K. Kohli — CDP , APO
7. Maj. Gen. R. Suresh — GM, CSD
Representatives of the Air Force
1. Air Chief Mshl. P.V .  Naik — CAS
2. Air Mshl.  J.N. Burma — AOA
3. Air Vice Mshl.  S.K. Gagneja — Asstt. Chief of Air Staff (Accts.)
4. Air Cmde.  Joseph Paul — Pr. Dir.,  Accounts
Representatives of the Navy
1. V .  Adm. D.K. Dewan — VCNS
2. V .  Adm. M.P . Muralidharan — COP
3. V .  Adm. Paras Nath — Controller of Logistics
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India and other Audit Officers to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter,
the representatives of Ministry of Defence, Chiefs  of Staff of Army and  Air Force and
other Senior Officers of Army, Air Force and Navy were called in. The Chairman, then
drew  the attention of  the Chiefs of Staff of the Defence Services present to some
reports appeared in Press and TV Channels stating that they have been summoned by
the  Public Accounts Committee and that they never wanted to be here and felt as to
why they were being called by this Committee. The Chairman clarified that Chiefs of
Staff of Defence Services and other  Officers have not been summoned in the sense of
summoning  and their presence was required because the subject under examination

41
related  to supply of quality household goods by the Canteen Stores Department to
the Defence personnel  and that it is incumbent upon the Members of the PAC  as the
Members of the Parliament  to see the welfare of the constituents who are serving in
the Defence Forces. He also made it clear that PAC  being a mini Parliament is empowered
to call any person, any officer, any bureaucrat  excluding a Minister to appear before
the Committee. Hence the notion that  the Army Chief  or the Navy Chief or the Air
Force Chief is beyond  the purview of the Parliament is not correct. The Chairman
allayed the fears of the Chiefs of Rio Staff of Defence  Services that  their presence
before the Committee should not be taken as if the Committee want to demean or
denigrate the Defence Forces  or the dignity of their officers. The Chairman impressed
upon  the Chief of Staff  that it is as  much a part of their duty to appear before the
Committee as it is a part of the Committee's duty to examine the subject. He also stated
that the Committee hold the Chiefs of Staff and other Officers and jawans in high
respect and they want to keep the confidence of the people in the Defence Forces
intact.
3. The Committee, thereafter proceeded to have a briefing of the representatives of
Ministry of Defence, Service Chiefs and  other  Officers of Army, Air Force and
Navy on the subject "Canteen Stores Department" based on C&AG  Report No. 14 of
2010-11. The Chairman requested the Members and impressed upon the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence, Army, Air Force and Navy and all others present in  the
meeting not to disclose the contents of the deliberations of the sitting  to any outsider,
especially the Press. The Additional  Secretary, Ministry of Defence and Chiefs of Staff
of Air Force and Army and  other Senior Officers of the three services replied to the
queries of the Members on various points relating to the subject. As some  queries
required detailed and  statistical replies the Chairman asked the representatives of
Ministry of Defence and Service Chiefs to furnish written replies on the same
expeditiously.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of Ministry of Defence and Service
Chiefs and all other Officers of Army, Air Force and Navy  for their deposition before
the Committee and for furnishing the available information on the subject. He has also
thanked the Comptroller and Auditor General of India  and other Audit Officers.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy  of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) Held  on 21ST  DECEMBER,  2011
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 21st December, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to
1545 hrs. in Chairman's  Room (No. 51), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr.  Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai
10. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Prakash Javadekar
14. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
42

43
Representatives of the  Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General (Defence Services)
2. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Principal Director (Railway Audit Board)
3. Shri V . Patwardhan — Director (Defence)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee convened to consider and
adopt the following Draft Reports.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following Draft Reports,
one by one and adopted the same without any modifications:
( i ) ******
(ii) Draft Report on 'Canteen Stores Department' (Ministry of Defence) based
on C&AG Report No. 14  of 2010-11;
(iii) ******
(iv) ******
( v ) ******
4. Thereafter, the Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports in
the light of factual verification done by the Audit and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
****Matters not related with this report.
GMGIPMRND—3804LS(S-3)—12.3.2012.