Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2009
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)
FOURTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
PROJECT MANAGEMENT PRACTICES IN GAUGE
CONVERSION AND
NEW LINE PROJECTS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-first Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY  OF  RAILWAYS
(RAILW AY  BOARD)

P.A.C. No. 1899
Price Rs. 30.00
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10)...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government .............................................. 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from  the
Government......................................................................... 12
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  replies
of  Government have not been accepted by the Committee
 and which require reiteration .............................................. 14
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which
Government have furnished interim replies ......................... 20
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2009-10) held on 02.12.2009................................................ 22
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Sixty-first Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ...................................................... 24

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009—10)
Shri Jaswant Singh  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Gopinath Munde
9. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2009-10), having been authorised  by
the Committee, do present on their behalf this Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken   by Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Project
Management Practices in Gauge Conversion and New Line Projects".
2. This Sixty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2007.
Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report were received on 2nd September, 2009 and updated replies on 17th September,
2009. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Fourth Report at
their sitting held on 2nd December, 2009. Minutes of the sitting are given at
Appendix. I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommenda-
tions of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the  Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix II.
N
EW DELHI; JASWANT  SINGH,
8 December, 2009 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Sixty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on the Report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India for the year ended 31st March, 2005 (No. 5 of 2006), Union
Government (Performance Audit) relating to "Project Management Practices in Gauge
Conversion and New Line Projects".
2. The Sixty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2007. It contained 7 Observations/Recommendations.
Action  Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Railways in respect of all
the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government.
Sl. Nos. 2 & 6
Total : 2
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government.
Sl. No. 5
Total : 1
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration.
Sl. Nos. 1,  3 and 4
Total : 3
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies.
Sl. No. 7
Total : 1
Chapter-V

2
3. The Sixty-first Report of the Committee was based on Audit review of management
practices followed by Indian Railways in planning and execution of  gauge conversion
and new line projects. The Audit review was conducted to assess whether the projects
have been executed with a view to achieving the objectives in the  most economic,
efficient and effective manner. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee
had revealed various shortcomings/lapses in the management of the railway projects
by the Ministry of Railways and the Committee had accordingly given their
Observations/Recommendations in their Sixty-first Report.
Gist of Committee's Observations/Recommendations
4. Some of the important Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee
in their Sixty-first Report are as under:—
/circle6The Ministry of Railways should distinctly enunciate the core objectives of
the ongoing gauge conversion and new line projects, frame clear project
schedules at the initial stages to determine the completion dates, categorise
all the pending projects and complete the same within a definite time line;
/circle6The Ministry should review all on-going gauge conversion and new line
projects taken up on socio-economic consideration with a view to ensuring
that only such projects which are substantially complete and have a
reasonable throw forward should be continued and the rest of them shelved;
/circle6The Ministry should apprise the Committee of the efficacy of the Project
Management Information System (PMIS), developed by them, as a monitoring
tool. The Ministry should also ensure strict observance of the codal provisions
for maintenance of information systems and proper documentation at the
Zonal level so as to enable proper monitoring of the projects.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the
Committee have dealt with the action taken by the Government on some of their
Observations/Recommendations which need reiteration or merit comments.
A. Review of Ongoing New Line and Gauge Conversion Projects
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1, Para 65)
6. Consequent upon the detailed examination of the subject, the Committee in their
Sixty-first Report had observed that the management practices in gauge conversions
and new line projects undertaken by the Ministry of Railways had several deficiencies
like taking up of financially unviable projects with minimum rate of return, thin spread
of resources among large number of on-going projects leading to time and cost overruns,
sanctioning of projects without adequate justification and taking decisions during the
implementation of the projects unmindful of the original objectives underlying the
projects and uncertainties in project funding and inadequate project planning which
had an adverse impact on the efficacy of the project implementation.

3
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note on the aforementioned recommendation
have stated as under:—
"The concern expressed by the Committee has been noted. However it is
mentioned that Railways have taken up large numbers of projects on socio-
economic considerations to subserve its objective of providing better rail
transport  facilities to backward and under-developed areas. It is agreed that due
to fund constraint and taking up of large number of projects, the funds are
getting thinly spread over various projects. While the gauge conversion activities
have been given a major push and outlays have increased considerably in the
GC Plan Head over last few years, the new line funding remains an area of
concern. The State Governments have been requested to share at least 50% of
the cost of ongoing projects but response has not been encouraging."
The Ministry have further stated that Audit have desired that following lines may
be appended to the Action Taken Notes:—
"Once Projects/Works are taken up, the Organisation should make available
resources required for completion within a reasonable time frame. To initiate/
consider projects without assuring availability of adequate resource is
meaningless. Therefore, Ministry of Railways may ensure availability of funds
and plan the works in such a way that these are completed as per schedule."
8. The Committee are of the view that taking up of large number of projects on
socio-economic considerations does not anyway mean that there should be inadequate
planning and improper funding pattern impacting adversely their implementation. In
fact, it is the obligation of the Railways to subserve its objective of providing better
rail transport facilities to the backward and under-developed areas on socio-economic
considerations. The Ministry have admitted that due to fund constraints and taking
up of large number of projects, funds are getting thinly spread over various projects
as was pointed out by the Committee in the original Report. The Audit has also
reinforced the Committee's views by stating that it is meaningless to consider/initiate
projects without assuring availability of adequate resources. Making available
adequate resources for taking up projects becomes more imperative on the part of the
Railways as they themselves have admitted that the funding for new line projects
remains an area of concern and the response of the State Governments, who have been
requested to share at least 50 per cent of the cost of the ongoing projects, has not been
encouraging. The Committee , therefore, once again impress upon the Ministry of
Railways to ensure that adequate funds are made available for the targeted projects so
that the same are completed/implemented within the scheduled time line and the
intended objectives are achieved.
B. Partial Completion of Projects Taken Up on Socio-economic Consideration
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2, Para 66)
9. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that though project
management in respect of four projects relating to gauge conversion and new lines
were initiated with some definite objectives in view, decisions were taken at subsequent
stages in deviation of the envisaged objectives resulting in non-achievement of core
objectives of the projects. Taking note of the fact that most of the 149 ongoing gauge
conversion and new line projects which were commenced as long back as 5 to 20 years
were less than  50 per cent completed, the Committee wondered how the Ministry

4
would be able to achieve the intended objectives. Commenting that only the completed
and commissioned projects could facilitate achievement of the envisaged objectives
in toto,  the Committee had recommended that the core objectives of the projects
should be distinctly enunciated and subsequent planning and decision making process
should be aligned towards achievement of the stated objectives. The Committee had
further recommended that clear project schedules should be framed at the initial stages
and completion dates determined accordingly. Moreover, Budget allotments should
be adequate and in accordance with the time frame set for the completion of the
projects.
10. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:—
"The projects taken up on socio-economic considerations have rate of return
much below the cut off value and are primarily for development of the region
served. The partial completion also connects the various areas serving the people
of the region. As regards the two projects mentioned in the recommendation, it
is stated that Rupsa-Baripada of Rupsa-Bangriposi has already been completed
and trains are running upto Baripada, which is the District Headquarter of
backward Mayurbhanj District of Orissa. The work on balance project has also
been taken up and it is likely  to be completed in next two years time. There is also
a proposal to provide a new line form Buramara to Chakulia on Kharagpur-
Tatanagar route.  This line will then be serving Kirtania and Dhamra port which
are upcoming on the East Coast. As regards Miraj-Latur gauge conversion, it is
mentioned that gauge conversion of Latur to Kurduwari and Kurduwari to
Pandharpur alongwith new line from Latur to Latur Road has already been
completed. This completion has provided direct BG connectivity to the backward
region of Latur, Sangli, Solapur etc. of Maharashtra State. The work on the last
phase between Pandharpur and Miraj is also in full swing and is targeted for
completion by 31.03.2010. The concern expressed by the Committee in delay in
completion of the projects and to fix clear project schedules with adequate
budget allotment has been noted. However, there is heavy throw forward of
projects with limited availability of resources and in such a scenario, it is not
feasible to indicate time schedules for all the projects keeping in view the fact
that there are demands from all  over the country for implementing the projects in
their Region/State at a faster pace."
11. The Committee note that Rupsa-Baripada Gauge conversion of the Rupsa-
Bangriposi Project has already been completed and the work on the balance project
has also been taken up and is likely to be completed in another two years time i.e.
April, 2011. Similarly, under the Miraj-Latur Gauge conversion project, Latur-
Kurduwari and Kurduwari-Pandharpur alongwith the Latur-Latur Road new line
have already been completed. The work on the last phase between Pandharpur and
Miraj has been stated to be targeted for completion by 31st March, 2010. The
Committee hope that the Pandharpur-Miraj gauge conversion work and the balance
work of the Rupsa-Baripada gauge conversion project would be completed by March,
2010 and April, 2011 respectively as anticipated by the Railways. However, the
Committee are not inclined to accept the statement of the Ministry that it is not

5
feasible to indicate the time schedules for all the projects as there is heavy throw
forward of projects with limited availability of resources and  there are demands from
all over the country for implementing the projects in various Regions/States at a
faster pace. The Committee are of the firm opinion  that projects commenced as long
back as one/two decades should not be allowed to languish. Prudence, therefore,
requires that initial planning for undertaking various projects by the Railways should
be proper and commensurate with the resources available so that the prioritization
and completion dates of the projects are determined accordingly and the objectives
achieved fully.
C. Delay in Completion of Ongoing Gauge Conversion and New Line Projects
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3, Para 67)
12. The Committee in their Sixty-first Report had observed that in respect of 105 out
of 149  ongoing projects, the progress was less than 50 per cent. In 12 projects, the
progress was between 75 to 90 per cent and in the case of 24 projects the work was
more than 90 per cent complete. The Committee had further observed that although the
cost of the projects which were more than  a decade old had increased three fold from
Rs. 5,700/- crore to 17,300/- crore, the Ministry of Railways had allocated only a meagre
amount  of Rs. 690/- crore for gauge conversion projects and Rs. 652/- crore on new
line projects. Based on the information furnished by the Ministry of Railways that they
had rationalized the system of allotment of funds by prioritising the various ongoing
projects into four categories, the Committee hoped that the Ministry would come out
with a specific action plan for completion  of the projects belonging to Categories I &
II within the stipulated time period of one to two years. The Committee had also
recommended that the Ministry should specify the time schedule for the completion of
the projects belonging to Categories III & IV as well.
13. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as follows:—
"There were total 12 projects which were categorized in Category I & II and were to
be completed in a period of 2-3 years. Out of these projects, 8 projects (5 of Category-I
and 3 of Category-II) have already been completed. The projects completed are:—
A. Category-I
(i) Secunderabad-Mudkhed and Jankhampet-Bodhan
(ii) Bishrampur-Ambikapur
(iii) Eklakhi-Balurghat (main line)
(iv) Guntur-Guntakal and Guntakal-Kalluru
(v) Gandhinagar-Adrej Moti-Kalol
B. Category-II
(i) Nimach-Ratlam
(ii) Samastipur-Khagaria
(iii) Ajmer-Udaipur-Chitaurgarh

6
Other many projects are being monitored closely and the target dates for the
remaining project of Category-I & II are as follows:—
A. Category-I
(a) Guna-Etawah—This work is targeted for completion by 31.12.10 (There has
been delayed in getting clearance of Wild Life Sanctuary Land);
(b) Shimoga-Talguppa—The target date is 31.03.10 for Shimoga Anandpuram
(57 Km.) and 30.06.10 Anandpurm-Talguppa (40 Kms.); and
(c) Tiruchirapalli-Nagore-Karaikal- 31.03.10 (Trichy-Thanjavur-Nagore
completed).
B. Category-II
Rajgir-Hisua-Tilaiya—The target date is 31.10.09 for main line.
As regards the Committee's observations that Railway have categorized only
120 projects and did not mention anything about the categorization of the remaining
pending projects, it is pointed out that these 120 projects are new line and gauge
conversion projects for which there are constraint of resources. The remaining works
are primarily throughput enhancement works which includes Doubling and Railway
Electrification works. There are no constraints of funds for these categories of works
which are generally getting completed in a period of 4 years from the saction of the
work. Hence, it was not considered necessary to categorize these works. The Committee
have further recommended that all the pending gauge conversion and new line projects
should be categorized and completed within a definite time period. In this regard, it is
pointed out that as on 01.04.2009, Railway has a throw forward requiring over
Rs. 90,000 cr. for completion without matching availability of  recources. This is also
based on estimated sanction cost and will get revised upward on updation. In view of
the resource constraints, it is not feasible to complete the projects within a definite
time schedule."
14. The Committee note that out of the 12 projects categorized in Categories I & II,
eight projects i.e. five in Category I and three in Category II have already been
completed. The remaining projects are reportedly being monitored closely and the
revised target dates for completion of these projects vary between 31st October, 2009
and 31st December, 2010. The Committee hope that at least now the Railways would
accord due importance to the remaining projects belonging to Categories I & II and
complete them within the revised target dates, as mentioned above. Observing
categorization of only 120 projects,  the Committee in their earlier Report had
impressed upon the Ministry to categorise all the pending gauge conversion and new
line projects and complete them within a definite time schedule. They, therefore, do
not accept the Ministry's contention that it was not considered necesary to categorise
the projects beyond 120, as these projects are primarily throughput enhancement
works for which there is no fund constraint and which are generally getting completed
within a period of four years. Even though there are no fund constraints for the
remaining projects i.e. over and above the categorized 120 projects, the Committee
still believe that categorization of all the gauge conversion and new line projects

7
would obviate chances of time and cost overrun of the projects leading to their
completion within a reasonable time line and achievement of the objectives thereby.
15. The Committee are not satisfied with the contention of the Ministry that it is
not feasible to complete the projects within a definite time schedule in view of the
resource constraints. In this context, the Committee find that as on 1st April, 2009,
the Railways have a throw forward of projects requiring over Rs. 90,000/- crore
which might be revised upwards. The Committee fail to understand the rationale
behind initiating projects of such scale without making proper provision therefor.
However, now since the projects have already been initiated, the onus lies with the
Railways to make provision for adequate resources and get all the categorized projects
completed in time and in consonance with the objectives.
D. Selection of Financially Unviable Gauge Conversion and New Line Projects
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4, Para 68)
16. In their sixty-first Report, the Committee had observed that out of the 133 gauge
conversion and new line projects that were taken up on various commercial and socio-
economic considerations, 34 per cent (46 projects) had negative Rate of Return (RoR)
and 46 per cent (61 projects) were un-remunerative and had Rate of Return less than
the prescribed rate of 14 per cent. Thus 107 out of 133 projects were taken up by
Railways despite being financially unviable and in contravention of the established
norms of minimum Rate of Return which had an adverse impact on the financial health
of Railways. The Committee had further noted that out of the 95 projects that were
taken up on socio-economic considerations during the Ninth and Tenth Plans, only 8
projects had been completed. Appreciating the commendable intention of the Railways
to provide connectivity to the backward and remote areas, the Committee, however,
were of the considered view that the project once started should be completed within
a specified time period lest the very purpose of selection of projects for connecting
backward, under developed and remote areas got defeated. Observing the constitution
of a Working Group consisting of the representatives of the Ministries of Railways,
Finance and Planning Commission to evolve criteria for taking up various Railway
projects on socio-economic considerations, the Committee had recommended that the
Working Group should not only lay down the criteria for taking up future Railway
projects on socio-economic consideration, but also review all the ongoing new line
and conversion projects that were taken up on socio-economic consideration by the
Railways and were pending completion. The Committee had desired that as far as
possible, only such projects, which were substantially completed and had a reasonable
throw forward should be continued and the rest of them be shelved.
17. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
"The Working Group consisting of representatives of Ministry of Railways,
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission which was set up to evolve
criteria for taking up of Railway projects on socio-economic consideration,
submitted its report in 2007. The Working Group suggested that in respect of the
proposals not having the requisite cut off financial rate of return of 12%, the
State Governments shall be required to contribute to project cost and also bear

8
operational and maintenance charges to the extent of making FIRR as 12%.The
Committee also suggested that proposals shall be required to be examined and
commented upon by State Planning Boards/Commission. During the survey
stage, proposal shall be referred to State Governments for consideration by
State Planning Board for furnishing information about zone of influence of the
proposed line, its socio-economic impact on the area and the potential of
development of industries in the catchment area. They shall give their
recommendations on the project proposal with cost-sharing arrangements, before
the project is processed for appraisal of Planning Commission. The
recommendations of the Committee were put up to Hon'ble Minister of Railways
for consideration. He did not agree to Committee's recommendations as the
response of the State Governments for the cost-sharing of  Railway projects has
been extremely poor and most of the State Governments have not come forward
to share the cost. As regards the Committee's recommendations of review of all
ongoing new line and gauge conversion projects taken up on socio-economic
consideration and continue only those projects which are substantially complete
and shelve the rest of the projects, it is pointed out that new line and gauge
conversion projects are taken up based on the demands and aspiration of local
people. Shelving such projects will have wider ramifications as it will not be
accepted by the local people and will invite criticism."
18. The Committee are concerned to note that the Minister of Railways did not
agree to the recommendations of the Working Group consisting of the representatives
of the Ministries of Railways and Finance and the Planning Commission which was
constituted to evolve criteria for taking up Railway projects on socio-economic
consideration and had submitted their Report in 2007. The Minister's disagreement
with the recommendations of the Working Group was reportedly due to the extremely
poor response of the State Governments for sharing the cost of Railway projects. On
one hand the Railways are not prepared to shelve such projects which are yet to take
off on the plea of inviting criticism for betrayal of the aspiration of the local people,
while on the other the State Governments are not ready to share the cost of such
Railway projects. The Committee are of the view that taking up a large number of
projects based on the socio-economic considerations and not completing them within
a definite time frame will have more adverse ramifications and certainly invite greater
criticism. In short, the very purpose of selecting socio-economic projects for connecting
the backward, underdeveloped and remote areas in various States gets defeated when
the Railways are unable to make available adequate resources and the concerned
State Government themselves are reluctant to share the cost resulting in these much
lauded socio-economic projects languishing for years together. The Committee would,
therefore, again like to impress upon the Ministry to review all the new line and
gauge conversion projects that were taken up on socio-economic consideration but
pending completion so that a fair assessment of continuing or shelving these projects
is made and other commercially viable projects, which are important from operational
point of view, get the much needed funds for their timely completion.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 66
The Committee observe that Project management in respect of four projects relating
to Gauge Conversion and new Lines that have been examined by Audit has revealed
that though the projects were initiated with some definite objectives in view, the
decisions at subsequent stages were taken in deviation of the envisaged objectives
resulting in non-achievement of core objectives of the projects. In respect of the
Rupsa-Bangriposi gauge conversion project on South Eastern Railway, the Committee
note that the project was conceived as an alternate to the third line between Kharagpur
and Tatanagar and was broken into two phases, i.e. Phase I-Gauge Conversion of
Rupsa-Bangriposi and Phase II-connecting Bangriposi with either Gurumahisani or
Dalbhumgarh by laying a new line. While a part of the phase I (Rupsa-Baripada) was
on the verge of completion, the remaining part of Phase I (Rupsa-Bangriposi) and the
connecting new line from Bangriposi were not sanctioned, thus defeating the original
objective. The Ministry in their reply have stated that Gauge Conversion of only a part
i.e. Rupsa-Baripada has been completed and Railways have yet to decide on extension
of connecting line. In a subsequent reply the Ministry have stated that the balance
section is expected to be completed during 2008-09. The Committee do not accept the
Ministry's contention that the intended benefit to serve the backward areas of Orissa
has been partially fulfilled by conversion of Rupsa-Baripada section when the entire
project was supposed to have been completed within the stipulated period, thereby
defeating the original objective. Similarly, in the case of Miraj-Latur Gauge Conversion
and Latur to Latur Road new line projects on Central Railway, the priority of the work
was changed from gauge conversion of Latur to Kurduwadi in the first phase to
Kurduwadi-Pandharpur as there was demand to provide BG connectivity to famous
pilgrim Centre of Vithal temple at Pandharpur. This indicates that the prioritization was
changed at the later stage thereby defeating the Original objective. However, the
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) in their reply have stated that they are by and
large satisfied with the achievement of desired objectives and in some cases works of
main portions have already been completed and benefits have been derived. In some
other cases, part section have been completed and the same has provided connectivity
to backward and other areas thereby providing reliable transport system to the public
of the area. The Committee are of the opinion that the objectives for each of New line
and Gauge Conversion projects are different and can be achieved only when the whole
projects are completed and commissioned. The Committee cannot understand as to
how the Ministry have been able to achieve the intended objectives while most of the
149 ongoing gauge conversion new line projects included in the Works Programme
2005-06 of the Railways commenced as long back as 5 to 20 years are less than 50 per
cent completed. Partial completion of the projects cannot help to achieve the desired
9

10
objectives fully. Most of the times, incomplete projects are abandoned and end-up in
a fiasco resulting in sheer wastage of public money. The Committee are of the firm
opinion that only the complete and commissioned project can help in achieving the
envisaged objectives of the projects in toto. The Committee recommend that the core
objectives of the project should be distinctly enunciated and subsequent planning
and decision making should be aligned towards achievement of the stated objectives.
Further, clear project schedules should be framed for the projects at the initial stages
and completion dates determined. Budget allotments should be adequate and in
accordance with the time frames set for completion of the projects.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 2, Para No. 66 of 61st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The projects taken up on socio-economic considerations have rate of return much
below the cut off value and are primarily for development of the region served. The
partial completion also connects the various areas serving the people of the region. As
regards the two projects mentioned in the recommendation, it is stated that Rupsa-
Baripada of Rupsa-Bangriposi has already been completed and trains are running upto
Baripada, which is a district Headquarter of backward Mayurbhanj District of Orissa.
The work on balance project has also been taken up and it is likely to be completed in
next two years time. There is also a proposal to provide a new line from Buramara to
Chakulia on Kharagpur-Tatanagar route. This line will then be serving Kirtania and
Dhamra port which are upcoming on the East Coast.
As regards Miraj-Latur gauge conversion, it is mentioned that gauge conversion of
Latur to Kurduwari and Kurduwari to Pandharpur alongwith new line from Latur to
Latur Road has already been completed. This completion has provided direct BG
connectivity to the backward region of Lautr, Sangli, Solapur etc. of Maharashtra
State. The work on the last phase between Pandharpur and Miraj is also in full swing
and is targeted for completion by 31.3.10.
The concern expressed by the Committee in delay in completion of the projects and
to fix clear project schedules with adequate budget allotment has been noted. However,
there is heavy throw forward of projects with limited availability of resources and in
such a scenario, it is not feasible to indicate time schedules for all the projects keeping
in view the fact that there are demands from all over the country for implementing the
projects in their region/state at a faster pace.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 150-RA II/8-4/2005 dated 09.9.2009 have desired that
following lines may be appended to the ATN:
"Once Projects/ Works are taken up the Organization should make available
resources required for completion within a reasonable time frame. To initiate/
consider projects without assuring availability of adequate resources is

11
meaningless. Therefore, Ministry of Railways may ensure availability of
funds and plan the works in such a way that these are completed as per
schedule."
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2007-BC-PAC/XIV/61 dated 17.09.2009]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I
Observation/Recommendation No. 70
The Committee note that as per the Ministry's own admission the total cost required
for the completion of pending projects as on 01.04.2006 is Rs. 54000 crore and the
money available to the Ministry through Budgetary resource is stated to be Rs. 13000
crore.  Another Rs. 17000 crore is being planned to raise from the market, Public-Private
Partnership, Ministry of Defence and State Governments. For the mobilization of
remaining funds, a scheme namely "Remote Area Rail Sampark Yojana" has been
formulated envisaging an investment to the tune of Rs. 20000 core in the next 5 years
to complete the 60 sanctioned new line and gauge conversion projects. The Committee
was informed that the Minister of Railways had written to all the State Chief Ministers
requesting them to share at least 50% of cost of the ongoing projects in their States for
their early completion. However, response of the States has been stated to be not
encouraging. Only for States viz. Jharkhand, Tamil Nadu, Haryana and Karnataka have
agreed to the proposal in respect of 8 new line and 3 gauge conversion projects. The
Committee desire that the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) should pursue the
matter with all the other concerned State Governments vigorously and convince them
to provide funds to the projects in their own interest. The Committee hope and trust
that the Ministry would leave no stone unturned in pursuing the matter with the State
Governments and desire that the Committee may be informed of the steps taken and
the outcome of these efforts.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 6, Para No. 70 of 61st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Concern of the suggestions of the Committee that the Ministry should pursue the
matter with concerned State Government more vigorously and leave no stone unturned
have been noted. All concerned State Governments have been approached for cost
sharing of at least 50% cost of the socio-economic projects. Letters have been written
to all concerned State Chief Ministers by Minister of Railways, but the response has
not been encouraging. This issue of cost sharing by State Government is also raised
regularly at all forums.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 201-RA II/8-4/2005 dated 25.9.2008 have vetted the Action
Taken Note.
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2007-BC-PAC/XIV/61 dated 17.09.2009].

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 69
Another disquieting feature relating to Project Management in Railways relates to
uncertainties in funding of the four selected projects. As  a result of this micro-
management of the projects was seriously hampered and the project authorities could
neither accurately estimate the costs involved nor were they in a position to draw up
detailed project schedules. Due to drastic fluctuations in the funding pattern, these
projects dragged on unnecessarily.  These projects were kept starved of funds, but
retained in the works programme by making token provisions  resulting in  delay in
completion and also significant increase in costs. Though these gauge conversion
projects were taken up more than 10 years back only 42 per cent to 84 per cent of the
work has been completed. While the survey reports in gauge conversion projects
generally prescribed a total time frame of four to five years for completion, it was seen
that the level of funding in most of these projects have been much below Rs. 5 crore
per year in the first five years and even subsequently there have been drastic
fluctuations in the funding pattern. Thus there was no possibility  of these projects
getting completed within the prescribed time frame. While accepting that the main
reason for dragging of work has been the uncertainty regarding the availability of
fund, the Ministry of Railways have stated that they have initiated several steps such
as enhancement of tender acceptance  powers, delegation of the power of sanction of
estimates etc. to field units and changes in General Condition of Contract (GCC) such
as modification in price variation clause, provision of performance guarantee in lieu of
risk and cost  etc. for expediting the completion of  works. The Ministry have stated
that all gauge conversion projects are now being planned for completion in next 2 to
3 years. The Committee express the hope that the measures taken by the Railways
would bear fruit leads to desirable results. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the progress of all the aforesaid projects within 3 months from the presentation of the
Report. The Committee further recommends that Railways should plan the projects in
a more comprehensive manner. The scope of the project, technical specifications,
quantities and cost estimates should be accurately delineated on the basis of parameters
brought out in technical surveys so as to ensure smoother project implementation
within the estimated cost and time.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 5, Para No. 69 of 61st Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Ministry of Railways has always taken the stand that in view of huge throw forward
and lack of adequate resources, it is not possible to fix the target date for completion of
New Line and Gauge Conversion Projects. It was stated by the Ministry that all Gauge
12

13
Conversion Projects in Category-I & II only to be completed in next two to three years.
The period of completion of two to three years was not given in respect of other
remaining Gauge Conversion Projects. The Committee's suggestions regarding the
Planning of the projects in a more comprehensive manner have been noted. It is,
however, mentioned that due to technological advances the technical specification
and consequent quantities and cost estimation undergo changes mainly due to  long
gestation of the projects.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 150-RA II/8-4/2005 dated 09.09.2009 have desired that
following lines may be appended to the ATN:
"Once Projects/works are taken up, the Organization should make available
resources required for completion within a reasonable time frame. To initiate/
consider projects without assuring availability of adequate resources is
meaningless . Therefore, Ministry of Railways may ensure availability of funds
and plan the works in such a way that these are completed as per schedule."
[Ministry of  Railways’ case No. 2007-BC-PAC/XIV/61, dated 17.09.2009]

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation No. 65
The Committee note that Indian Railways undertake a large number of construction
projects for creation of new assets and up gradation of existing assets for augmentation
of existing services as well as extension of services to new areas so as to act as a
catalyst for growth for  in the far flung undeveloped and under-developed areas of the
country. In pursuance of these broad objectives, "Project Unigauge" was launched by
Indian Railways in 1992 with the objective of the relative conversion of Metre Gauge
and Narrow Gauge into Broad Gauge for capacity enhancement and smooth flow of
traffic by creating alternate routes to the congested Broad Gauge trunk lines. The
National Transport Policy Committee also announced a policy in 1980 for taking up
New Line Projects for various operational, commercial, social and strategic reasons.
The performance review of the Project Management practices in Railways with regard
to Gauge Conversion and New Line Projects had revealed several deficiencies such
as—taking up of  financially unviable Projects despite well established norms for
selection of projects with minimum rate of return; thin spread of resources among large
number of ongoing projects leading to time and cost overruns; sanctioning of projects
without adequate justification and decisions were  taken during implementation
unmindful of the original objectives resulting in non-achievement of core objectives
under laying the projects; uncertainties in projects funding and inadequate project
planning had an adverse impact on the efficiency of Project implementation etc. These
along with other important issues have been discussed in detailed in the succeeding
paragraphs.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 1, Para No. 65 of 61st Report of PAC, (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The concern expressed by the Committee has been  noted. However, it is mentioned
that Railways have taken up large numbers of  projects on socio-economic
considerations to subserve its objective of providing better rail transport facilities to
backward and under-developed areas. It is agreed that due to fund constraint and
taking up of large no. of projects, the funds are getting thinly spread over various
projects. While the gauge conversion activities have been given a major push and
outlays have increased considerably in the GC Plan Head over last few years,but the
new line funding remains an area of concern. The State Governments have been
requested to share at least 50% of the cost of ongoing projects but response has not
been encouraging.
14

15
Audit vide their U.O. No. 150-RA II/8-4/2005 dated 09.09.2009 have desired that
following lines may be appended to the ATN:
"Once projects/works are taken up, the Organization should make available
resources required for completion within a reasonable time frame. To initiate/
consider projects without assuring availability of adequate resources is
meaningless . Therefore, Ministry of Railways may ensure availability of funds
and plan the works in such a way that these are completed as per schedule."
[Ministry of  Railways’ case No. 2007-BC-PAC/XIV/61 dated 17.09.2009]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter-I
Observation/Recommendation No. 67
The Committee are concerned to note that a large number of guage conversion and
new line projects undertaken by Railways have been languishing for decades. An
analysis of data regarding 149 ongoing gauge conversion and  new line projects,
included in Works Programme 2005-06 revealed that the cost of these projects, which
was originally estimated at Rs. 39, 287.13 crore has been revised time and again due to
delay in completion and is now estimated at Rs. 54,716.5 crore. In respect of  105 out of
149 ongoing projects, the progress was less than  50 per cent. In 12 projects the
progress was between 75% and 90%. Only in 24 projects the work was more than 90 per
cent complete. Due to delay in completion, the cost of the projects which were more
than 10 years old had increased three times from Rs. 5,700 crore to Rs. 17,300 crore.
However, the Ministry of Railways had allocated only a meagre amount of Rs. 690
crore and Rs. 652 crore on gauge conversion and new line projects respectively. The
Committee feel that, at this rate of funding, it will take another 15 years from now to
complete the pending gauge conversion projects and another 38 years to complete the
new line projects. The Ministry of Railways have candidly admitted that the  completion
of projects in time and within the estimated cost is feasible. only when timely funding
is assured and in the present scenario this is not possible. Based on public demands,
a large number of new line and gauge conversion projects have been taken up and as
on 01.04.2006, Railways have through forward of projects requiring over Rs. 54,000
crore. The allocation of funds for projects have been increased considerably during
2006-07 but is not adequate to complete all the  projects in a reasonable time frame.
However, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) have informed the Committee that
they had rationalized the system of allotment of funds in March, 2005 by prioritizing
the various ongoing projects into four categories. All the twelve projects belonging to
category-I and II have been planned to be completed in 1-2 years. Going by the current
pace at which these projects are progressing, the Committee are quite skeptical about
their completion within  a span of 1 to 2 years. The Committee, however, expect that the
Ministry would come out with a specific action plan for completion of the projects
belonging to category-I and II within the stipulated time period of 1 to 2 years. In
respect of the other categories, i.e., categories III and IV , the Ministry have maintained
silence over the target dates for their completion. The Committee recommend that the
Ministry should specify the time schedule for completion of the projects belonging to

16
these categories as well. What is disappointing to the Committee is the fact that the
Ministry have categorized only 120 projects and did not mention anything about the
categorization of the remaining pending projects. The Committee, further recommend
that all the pending gauge conversion and new line projects should be categorized and
completed within a definite time schedule.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 3, Para No. 67 of 61st Report of PAC, (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
There were total 12 projects which were categorized in Category-I & II and were to
be completed in a period of 2-3 years. Out of these projects, 8 project (5 of Category-I
and 3 of Category-II) have already been completed. The projects completed are:—
(A) Category-I
(i) Secunderabad-Mudkhed and Jankhampet-Bodhan
(ii) Bishrampur-Ambikapur
(iii) Eklakhi-Balurghat (main line)
(iv) Guntur-Guntakal and Guntakal-Kalluru
(v) Gandhinagar-Adrej Moti-Kalol
(B) Category-II
(i) Nimach-Ratlam
(ii) Samastipur-Khagaria
(iii) Ajmer-Udaipur-Chitaurgarh
Other projects are being monitored closely and the target dates for the remaining
projects of Category-I & II are as follows:—
(A) Category-I
(a) Guna-Etawah-This work is targetted for completion by 31.12.10 (There has
been delayed in getting clearance of Wild Life Sanctuary Land).
(b) Shimoga-Talguppa — The target date is 31.3.10 for Shimoga-Anandpuram
(57 K.M.) and 30.6.10 for Ananadpuram-Talguppa (40 Km.).
(c) Triuchirapalli-Nagore-Karaikal — 31.3.10 (Trichy-Thanjavur-Nagore
completed).
(B)  Category-II—Rajgir-Hisua-Tilaiya—The target date is 31.10.09 for main line.
As regard the Committee's observations that Railway have categorized only
120 projects and did not mention anything about the categorization of the remaining
pending projects, it is pointed out that these 120 projects are new lien and gauge
conversion projects for which there are constraint of resources. The remaining work
are primarily throughput enhancement works which include Doubling and Railway
Electrification works. There are no constraints of funds for these categories of works

17
which are generally getting completed in a period of 4 years from the sanction of the
work. Hence, it was not considered necessary to categorize these works.
Committee has further recommended that all the pending Gauge Conversion and
New Line Projects should be categorized and completed within a definite time period.
In this regard, it is pointed out that as on 1.4.09, Railway has a throw forward requiring
over Rs. 90,000 crore for completion without matching availability of  resources. This
is also based on estimated sanction cost and will get revised upward on updation. In
view of the resource constraints, it is not feasible to complete the projects within a
definite time schedule.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 150-RA II/8-4/2005 dated 09.09.2009 have desired that
following lines may be appended to the ATN:
"Once Projects/works are taken up, the Organization should make available
resources required for completion within a reasonable time frame. To initiate/
consider projects without assuring availability of adequate resources is
meaningless . Therefore, Ministry of Railways may ensure availability of funds
and plan the works in such a way that these are completed as per schedule."
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2007-BC-PAC/XIV/61 dated 17.09.2009]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph Nos. 14 and 15 of Chapter-I
Observation/Recommendation No. 68
The Committee note that the minimum Rate of Return (RoR) is fixed for various
Railway projects to decide their financial viability. Till, July 1992, the project proposal
whether for gauge conversion or new line, was considered financially justified unless
net gain expected out of the proposed outlay, after meeting the work expenses or
average annual cost of services, yielded a return of not less than ten per cent under
Discounted Cash Flow Method. Later on, the return was revised upwards to 14 per
cent from July 1992 onwards. The Committee are perturbed to note that out of
133 projects that were taken up on various commercial and socio-economic
considerations 34 per cent (46 projects) had negative rate of return and 46 per cent (61
projects) were unremunerative and had Rate of Return (RoR) less than the prescribed
rate. Thus 107 out of 133 projects were taken up by Railways despite being  financially
unviable and in contravention of established norms of minimum Rate of Return (RoR).
This obviously has an adverse impact on the health of Railways. The Ministry of
Railways have informed the Committee that Railways are not only a commercial
organisation but has to subserve its objective of providing rail connectivity to backward
and under developed areas for their socio-economic development. To fulfil this
responsibility, Railways are therefore, often required to take up projects, where the
returns are much below the level of prescribed Rate of Return (RoR) of 14%. The
Committee note that out of 95 projects that were taken up on socio-economic
considerations during 9th and 10th plans only 8 projects have been completed so far,
which is anything, but regrettable. The Committee are of the opinion that though the
efforts of the Railways for providing connectivity to under developed/undeveloped

18
and backward regions of the Country on socio-economic considerations are well
intended and appreciated, however, thin spread of resources or lack of funds to these
projects had led to abnormal delay ranging from 5 years to 20 years and consequent
cost overruns thereby defeating the very purpose of their commencement. This has
resulted not only in sheer wastage of public money but also deprives other commercially
viable projects that are important from operational point of view, the much needed
funds for their early completion. The Committee are of the considered view that the
project once started should be completed within specified time period otherwise the
very purpose of selection of the projects on the plea of connecting backward, under
developed and remote areas gets defeated. The Committee are informed that a Working
Group consisting of representatives of the Ministries of Railways and Finance and
Planning Commission has been set up to evolve out criteria for taking up various
railways projects on socio-economic consideration. The Committee recommend that
the Working Group should not only lay down the criteria for taking up future Railways
projects on socio-economic consideration, but also review all the ongoing new line
and gauge conversion projects that were taken on socio-economic consideration by
Railways and are pending completion. As far as possible, only such projects which are
substantially complete and have a reasonable throw forward should be continued and
the rest of them may be shelved. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made by the Working Group in this regard within 3 months frrm the date of
the presentation of the report.
[Recommendation  Sl. No.4, Para No. 68 of 61st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The working group consisting of representatives of Ministry of Railways, Ministry
of Finance and Planning Commission set up to evolve criteria for taking up of Railway
projects on socio-economic consideration, submitted its report in 2007. The working
group suggested that in respect of the proposals not having the requisite cut off
financial rate of return of 12%, the State Govt. shall be required to contribute to project
cost and also bear operational and maintenance charges to the extent of making FIRR
as 12%. The Committee also suggested that proposals shall be required to be examined
and commented upon by State Planning Boards/Commission. During the survey stage,
proposal shall be referred to State Govt. for consideration by State Planning Board for
furnishing information about zone of influence of the proposed line, its socio-economic
impact on the area and the potential of development of industries in the catchment
area. They shall give their recommendations on the project proposal with cost-sharing
arrangements, before the project is processed for appraisal of Planning Commission.
The recommendations of the Committee were put up to Hon'ble Minister of  Railways
for consideration. He did not agree to Committee's recommendations as the response
of the State Govt. for the cost-sharing of Railway projects has been extremely poor and
most of the State Governments have not come forward to share the cost.
As regard the Committee's recommendations of review of all ongoing new line
and gauge conversion projects taken up on socio-economic consideration and
continue only those projects which are substantially complete and shelve the rest of

19
the projects, it is pointed out that new line and gauge conversion projcts are taken
up based on the demands and aspiration of local people. Shelving such projects will
have wider ramifications as it will not be accepted by the local people and will invite
criticism.
Audit vide their U.O.No.150-RA II/8-4/2005 dated 09.9.2009 have desired that
following lines may be appended to the ATN:
''Once Projects/Works are taken up, the Organization should made available
resources required for completion within a reasonable time frame. To initiate/
consider projects without assuring availability of adequate resources is
meaningless. Therefore, Ministry of Railways may ensure availability of funds
and plan the works in such a way that these are completed as per schedule.''
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2007-BC-PAC/XIV/61 dated 17.09.2009]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT  OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HAVE  FURNISHED  INTERIM  REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation No. 71
Monitoring is a sine qua non for successful completion of any project and Railways
are no exception to it. The Committee, therefore, are constrained to note that role of
Railway Board in monitoring of implementation of various ongoing projects is not
proactive. Once a project is sanctioned, it is primarily left to the various zonal railways
for monitoring and no structures have been created at the Ministry/Board level for
regular monitoring of their progress. The Railway Board's role is being limited to
responding to specific issues raised by the zonal railways through Periodical Demi-
Officials letters (PCDOs) or otherwise. Even at the zonal railway level the progress
report cum financial review which is used as an important monitoring tool for reviewing
the projects is not being prepared. In some Railway Zones, the ''Work Registers'' were
not being maintained properly and details of work-wise estimates, budget allotments
and up to date totals for expenditure on all works were not struck due to which Railways
failed to exercise control over expenditure on these works. In a written reply, the
Ministry of Railways have contended that at Board level the progress of each project
is regularly reviewed through a monthly progress report. Apart from this review,
meetings are conducted by Board officials. It has further been stated that they have
now developed a Project Management Information System (PMIS), which is
computerized web-based system that can monitor projects and related data on a real
time basis. This is still under trial and is yet to be fully implemented. The Committee
hope that Railway Board would be able to monitor the ongoing projects effectively
through PMIS system so that they may be completed within the estimated cost and
stipulated time. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the efficacy of the
PMIS as a monitoring tool within three months of the presentation of the Report. The
Committee also recommends that the Ministry should ensure strict observance of
codal provisions for maintenance of information system and documentation at the
zonal level so as to enable proper monitoring of the projects.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 7, Para No.71 of 61st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The Hardware for implementation of PMIS system had been partly procured for
conducting trials on one project but the same had been disrupted due to technical snag
at the field levels i.e. at Udhampur. The implementation and arrangement of software for
Map Based PMIS was entrusted to M/s IRCON & N. Railway. As regard efficacy of
PMIS, it is mentioned that the system will be able to provide project related information
on real time basis. It will serve as an important tool to plan and monitor the projects.
20

21
Audit vide their U.O. No.150-RA II/8-4/2005 dated 09.09.2009 have desired that
following lines may be appended to the ATN:
''Once Projects/Works are taken up, the Organization should make available
resources required for completion within a reasonable time frame. To initiate/
consider projects without assuring availability of adequate resources is
meaningless. Therefore, Ministry of Railways may ensure availability of funds
and plan the works in such a way that these are completed as per schedule.''
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2007-BC-PAC/XIV/61 dated 17-09-2009]
N
EW DELHI; JASWANT  SINGH,
8 December, 2009 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka)  Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES  OF  THE  FIFTH  SITTING  OF THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 2ND DECEMBER, 2009
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 2nd December, 2009 from 1500 hrs to
1600 hrs. in Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Jaswant Singh — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
4. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Shri Naveen Jindal
7. Shri Satpal Maharaj
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
Rajya Sabha
 9. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
10. Shri Ashwani Kumar
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
Representatives of the offfice of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller & Auditor General
of India
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG Report Central (RC)
3. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report
Central)
22

23
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar — Defence Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Singh — Secretary (Defence
Production)
3. Smt. Indu Liberhan — Secretary (Defence Finance)
4. Vice Adml. D.K. Dewan — VCNS
5. Shri S.K. Sharma — DG (Acquisition)
6. Shri Ajoy Acharya — Additional Secretary (DP)
7. Shri S. Chandrasekaran — FA (Acquisition)
8. Smt. Preeti Sudan — JS & AM (MS)
9. Shri Gyanesh Kumar — JS (SY)
2 . *** *** ***
3 . *** *** ***
4 . *** *** ***
The witnesses then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
5. The Committee, then, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:—
(i) Draft Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-first Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Project Management Practices in Gauge Conversion and New Line
Projects';
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
6. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above mentioned draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the draft Reports in
the light of the factual verifications received from the Office of the C&AG and present
the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Matters not related to this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 07
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Sl. Nos. 2&6
Total: 2
Percentage: 29.6
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the reply of the Government:
Sl. No. 5
Total: 1
Percentage: 14.3
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 1,3,4
Total: 3
Percentage:  42.8
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furhished interim replies:
Sl. No.  7
Total: 1
Percentage:  14.3
GMGIPMRND—9LS—16.03.2010.
24