  72
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS
(2009-2010)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fortieth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2012-2013
SEVENTY-SECOND REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SEVENTY-SECOND REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS
(2009-2010)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of  the
Committee contained in their Fortieth  Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  21.03.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21.03.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)

PAC No. 1999
Price:  ` 150.00
© 2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of  India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)........................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ...................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which have been accepted
by the Government .................................................................. 11
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which  the  Committee  do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government............................................................................. 111
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ................................................... 112
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which  the
Government have furnished interim replies ............................. 137
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Twenty-seventh sitting of the Public Accounts
 Committee (2012-13) held on 19th March, 2013........................... 138
II. Statement of Observations/Recommendations ............................ 141
III. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee  contained  in  their  Fortieth  Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) ................................................................................... 145

COMPOSITION OF THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
  3. Dr. Baliram
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
   15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
   16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
   17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
   18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
   19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
   20. Shri J.D. Seelam
   21. Shri N.K. Singh
   22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012  vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected w.e.f.  6th December, 2012 vice  Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th  October, 2012.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Seventy-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fortieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Excesses Over
Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2009-10)'.
2. The Fortieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
19th December, 2011. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommenda-
tions contained in the Report were received from the Ministries of Finance, Communi-
cations and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications),
Home Affairs, Defence, Communications and Information Technology (Department of
Posts) and Railways on 9th August, 2012, 6th March 2013, 18th February, 2013,
18th June, 2012, 18th April, 2012 and 31st July, 2012 respectively. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Seventy-second Report at their sitting held on
19th March, 2013. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommen-
dations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and
have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix-II to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-III.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Fortieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2009-10)".
2. The Fortieth Report (15th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2011, contained fourteen Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations
have been received from the Ministries/Departments concerned and are categorized
as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Observations/Recommendations Para Nos.—1, 2, 4, 6-11, 13 and 14.
Total: 11
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:
—Nil— T otal: Nil
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Observations/Recommendations Para Nos. 3, 5 and 12.
Total: 3
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
—Nil— T otal: Nil
Chapter V

2
I. Delay in submission of Action Taken Notes
3.  In accordance with the time line prescribed by the Committee, Notes indicating
the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in their Reports were required to be furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned
within six months of the presentation of the Reports. But an analysis of the instant
Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned has revealed
that there has been a delay ranging between 1 month and 13 days to 8 months and
16 days beyond the stipulated period of six months. The Ministry-wise position of
delay has been tabulated as under:—
Sl. Ministry/Department Due Date of Date when Delay
No. furnishing complete ATNs
ATNs were furnished
1. Finance 18.06.2012 09.08.2012 1 month and
22 days
2. Telecommunications -do- 06.03.2013 8 months and
16 days
3. Defence -do- 18.06.2012 Nil
4. Home Affairs -do- 18.02.2013 8 months
5. Posts -do- 18.04.2012 Nil
6. Railways -do- 31.07.2012 1 month and
13 days
4.  The Committee deplore that despite assurances given by the Ministries/
Departments especially by the Ministry of Finance that necessary remedial measures
would be taken to ensure timely submission of Action Taken Notes to the Public
Accounts Committee, the Ministries/Departments, barring the Ministry of Defence
and the Department of Posts furnished the Action Taken Notes on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) after a delay
ranging over one month to 8 months. Ironically, the Ministry of Finance, expected to
act as a role model, was a defaulter as they furnished the Action Taken Notes after a
delay of almost two months. Worse, no extension of time was sought by the two main
defaulters i.e. the Department of Telecommunications and the Ministry of Home
Affairs for delayed submission of their Action Taken Notes. Evidently, this smacks
of sheer disregard to the principle of the fiscal descipline and financial propriety.
The Committee express their strong displeasure over the inordinate delay in the
submission of Action Taken Notes by the Ministries/Departments concerned resulting
in the avoidable delay in the preparation and presentation of the relevant Action
Taken Reports by the Committee. While deploring the callous and indifferent approach
of the defaulting Ministries/Departments, the Committee impress upon the Ministries/
Departments concerned to urgently initiate requisite remedial and corrective
measures so as to ensure that Action Taken Notes on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee are finalized and furnished invariably within the
stipulated time limit of six months.

3
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries/Departments have been
reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with
the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations
made in their Fortieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) which either need reiteration or
merit comments.
II. Innovative Steps for Eliminating Budgetary and Financial Irregularities
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
6. Taking note of the huge variations in the quantum of excess expenditure
incurred under 18 Grants/Appropriations during the financial year 2009-10, the
Committee in their Fortieth Report had cautioned that expenditure over and above the
budgetary provisions sanctioned by Parliament at different stages of the budget did
not augur will for fiscal prudence and fiscal consolidation besides undermining the
Parliamentary financial control. The Committee had observed that the unabated large
excess expenditure by these defaulting Ministries/Departments was axiomatic of the
fact that they had not taken any tangible corrective measures and also had not accorded
due importance to the guiding principles of budgeting i.e. plugging of the existing
loopholes and deficiencies with a view to restricting the quantum of excess expenditure
to the barest minimum so as to ensure judicious and equitable distribution of scarce
financial resources for achieving all round growth of different sectors. The Committee
had urged upon the defaulting Ministries/Departments to find innovative steps for
ushering in a system of budgeting whereby the exercise was not only made more
accurate, logical and practicable but also able to eliminate all budgetary and financial
irregularities. In view of the persisting trend of excess expenditure and considering the
fact that the problem was not intractable with effective application of IT and
e-governance, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Finance make it
incumbent upon the Financial Advisers and Budget Controlling Authorities to ensure
no recurrence of excess expenditure.
7. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance have stated as under:—
"Ministry of Finance issues Budget Circular every year bringing out various
Government instructions and also steps to be undertaken to formulate the Budget.
While seeking proposals for Suplementary Demands for Grants also, instructions
are issued to realistically project for the Budget, so that neither there is an
occasion for huge surrender of Budget nor there are huge excesses. The Budget
circular is followed up with meeting the Financial Advisers of various Ministries/
Departments, so that a micro review is undertaken at the apex level of Ministry of
Finance for realistic Budget requirement;
During the pre-budget discussions held by Ministry of Finance, review of
expenditure is done Scheme-wise in respect of all Ministries/Departments, so
that realistic budget is framed and approved by the Parliament. Ministry of
Finance during the three batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants, also take
an opportunity to frame realistic assessment of the expected expenditure for the
year;

4
Trend of excess Grants for the past five years reveal that the incidence of excess
expenditure has reduced considerably in respect of Ministries/Departments other
than Railways--from '42,227.20 crore in FY 2003-2004 to' 14,575.08 crore in
FY 2009-2010;
Ministry of Finance has been issuing instructions in the past emphasising the
need of control of expenditure with reference to the sanctioned Grant/
Appropriation. Recently, on 11th July, 2011, an Office Memorandum was issued
to all the Ministries/Departments emphasising this and suggesting the following
measures:—
(a) Preparation and circulation of Monthly Financial Review Analysis to
the Administrative Heads for monitoring the progress of expenditure,
and also to enable them to take remedial action wherever required;
(b) Convening regular internal meetings with all spending units for effecting
expenditure control;
(c) Ensuring realistic projection of Budget Estimates/Supplementary
Estimates and also ensuring that expenditure incurred is within the
Budget as envisaged in General Financial Rules, 2005 so that there is
no occasion for incurring excess expenditure;
(d) Putting in place/reviewing/strengthening systems for monthly
monitoring of the flow/trends of expenditure so as to avoid recurrence
of excess expenditure.
As brought out above, a comprehensive and detailed Budget Circulars duly,
indicating the measures required to be taken by the Ministries/Departments has
been issued by the Ministry of Finance. During the recently held pre-budget
meeting this time, as an innovative measure, approved budgetary ceilings were
reviewed and corrected till as late as mid-February, 2012, keeping in view the
lastest trend of expenditure. For this purpose, Ministry of Finance (Budget
Division) relied upon the booking of expenditure data available in the e-Lekha
software maintained by the Office of Controller General of Accounts, Department
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.
Given the complex nature and variety of Government spending, it is not feasible
to precisely estimate in advance all the expenditure requirements for the financial
year, as well as the requirements arising out of the unanticipated/unforeseen
developments during the course of the year. However, Ministry  of Finance is
taking proactive action in precisely estimating the expenditure and will continue
to do so in future also, so that the incidence of excess is kept minimum, if not
completely eliminated."
8.  The Department of Telecommunications have stated in their Action Taken
Note as under:—
"The Department of Telecommunications strives to ensure that due care is being
taken to maintain fiscal discipline. Instructions have been issued to all the
subordinates units of the Department to ensure fiscal discipline in expenditure.
All corrective measures are being taken to ensure accurate, logical and realistic
budgeting. Efforts are also being made to ensure that expenditure is limited to
the budgetary allocation."

5
9.  In respect of Grant No. 20 — Ministry of Defence (Civil), the Ministry of
Defence have stated that with a view to plugging of the existing loopholes, deficiencies
and to restrict the quantum of excess expenditure to the barest minimum, the Ministry
have circulated to all the Budget controlling authorities and IFA concerned, from time
to time, the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance, to exercise strict control on
progress of expenditure in  order to avoid any large scale savings or excess. Moreover,
the observations made by PAC has been noted for future guidance and compliance.
The Ministry have also informed that they would take necessary follow up action on
the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance.
10.  As regards Grant No. 21 — Defence Pensions, the Ministry of Defence have
stated that as a measure of control, they have been advising the budget estimating
authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget proposals on realistic basis
taking into consideration all the related aspects such as commitments, trend of
expenditure and the anticipated expenditure remedial action must be taken immediately
to arrest the excess to an optimum level. In this regard, the office of the Joint Secretary
and Additional Financial Advisor (VP), Ministry of Defence has issued instruction
vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2009-10/721, dated 29.06.2010 to avoid any excess expenditure
over the sanctioned Grant and to assess the requirement of funds properly. In order to
have strict control, the instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Economic Affairs, were also circulated vide this Divsion ID No. (s)(i) MoD (Fin.) ID
No. 1(9)/Fin.(MO)/2011-12/708, dated 07.06.2011 & (ii) ID No. 1(9)/Fin.(MO)/2011-2012/
933, dated 21.07.2011 on the subject—"Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management
in 2011 regarding taking various steps in order to adhere to fiscal targets set out in the
Budget 2011-12 and for better expenditure management. Further, Pension disbursement
agencies viz. Banks have been approached for transmission of pension payment data
electronically so as to enable PCDA(P) Allahabad to ensures correct and timely booking
of pension expenditure by automating classification and accounting system through
computerized system.
11. With regard to Grant  No. 22—Defence Services—Army and Grant No. 23—
Defence Services —  Navy, the Ministry of Defence have stated in their Action Taken
Note as under:—
"This Ministry makes all efforts to ensure strict budgetary discipline among all
the budget holders to curb excess expenditure. Further, necessary action in this
regard is to be taken by Ministry of Finance. This Ministry would certainly
follow the instructions of Ministry of Finance in curbing excess expenditure in
letter and spirit."
12. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Home Affairs have stated as
under:—
"Huge variations in the quantum of excess expenditure incurred was due to
requirement of additional funds to meet cost of increase in pension and dearness
relief and grant of pension to the participants of freedom fighters and their
dependents on various liberation movements. The disbursement of pension  to
freedom fighters/spouses of deceased freedom fighters/eligible dependants of

6
deceased freedom fighters is made through treasuries and over 32,000 branches
of Nationalized Banks spread all over the country. The Ministry does not make
any payment directly to the beneficiaries. Individual Banks make the payment of
pension to the beneficiaries and get their reimbursement from RBI, Nagpur. The
RBI in turn intimates the CPAO the expenditure booked to the Government
account. All Accountants General prefer their claims with CPAO which in turn
reimburse the amount to State Government."
13. The Department of Posts have stated in their Action Taken Note as under:—
"Department of Posts ensures to make realistic requirement of funds and to
maintain fiscal discipline in spending the public money in future. For this purpose
the instructions have been issued to all the subordinates units/Budget Controlling
authorities to project realistic demand for fund and to monitor the expenditure
accordingly. Moreover the proposal of the Department was re-assessed by the
Ministry of Finance  to reduce the ceilling of expenditure during the Pre-budget
discussions which resulted in excess expenditure. However the Department of
Posts, besides issuing instructions to observe austerity measure in incurring
expenditure to the fund controlling authorities reviews the expenditure by
conducting Video Conference with the Heads of Circles to monitor the same in
terms of Grant. This has an effective control over expenditure vis-a-vis Grant."
14. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:—
"Most of the excess incurred by Ministry of Railways is attributable to steep rise
in the staff cost consequent upon implementation of the recommendations of
the 6th Central Pay Commission (6th CPC). Bulk of the excess has been incurred
in four Grant i.e. 4,5,6 & 13. The Committee may appreciate the fact that despite
the difficulty in accurately assessing the impact of implementation of the
recommendations of the 6th CPC, the excess under Grant No. 4, 5 & 6 is minor in
terms of percentage to the total sanctioned amount under each grant. However,
the same under Grant No. 13 is high at 10%.
The concerns of the Committee are noted."
15.  The Committee are shocked to note that the Ministries/Departments
concerned have not taken any concrete steps except giving a stock reply that the
recommendation of the Committee has been noted and necessary instructions have
been issued to all concerned to observe fiscal discipline and not to exceed budget
allocation. The fact that the instructions have been issued time and again without
achieving any tangible result warrants that more robust and innovative measures are
required for strict enforcement and compliance so as to avoid the perennial problem
of unauthorized excess expenditure over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations.
The Committee disapprove the tendency of the Ministries/Departments concerned to
unsuccessfully justify excess expenditure and violation of Financial Rules instead of
revamping their existing mechanism with a view to achieving concrete improvement
in budget estimation exercise. The Committee find that the Ministries/Departments
which scrupulously adhere to the General Financial Rules and have unwavering
commitment to financial discipline and propriety contain their expenditure within
the budget allocated and approved by Parliament. Moreover, in an age of e-governance

7
made feasible by computerization and instant connectivity between field formations,
Subordinate Offices and Head-quarters, there is no valid justification for irregularities
like unauthorized excess expenditure. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the
defaulting Ministries/Departments should be constantly on guard and take innovative
steps so that budgeting becomes more accurate and that there are no budgetary and
financial irregularities. Considering the fact that the problem is not intractable with
effective application of IT and e-governance, the Committee desire that the Minsitry
of Finance should devise effective measures and make it incumbent upon the Financial
Advisers and the budget controlling authorities to ensure that no excess expenditure
takes place in future.
III. Excess Expenditure Despite obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
16.  In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted with profound concern that
out of the total 18 cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations, an excess
expenditure of Rs. 12071.08 crore was incurred in as many as 15 cases even after
obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations to the extent of Rs. 10628.59 crore.
The percentage of excess expenditure over the Supplementary Grants in respect of
these 15 Grants/Appropriations ranged from 4.12 per cent (Grant No. 9 (Railways) —
Operating Expenses — Traffic) to 456.67 per cent (Grant No. 54 — Other Expenditure of
the Ministry  of Home Affairs) and in 8 cases this percentage was more than 50 per
cent. In respect of six Grants and Appropriations, the quantum of excess expenditure
incurred was even higher than the Supplementary Grants sought. The Committee had
deplored the tendency of the defaulting Ministries/Departments in resorting to excess
expenditure in a routine manner despite three stages of obtaining Supplementary
Grants, the latest being February —  March 2010 i.e. the fag end of the  financial year.
The Committee had observed that this was a clear indication of not only of bad
budgeting but also of deeply pervading malaise in the extent budgeting method/
mechanism, which had failed to ensure proper assessment and accurate projection of
the fund requirement despite ample opportunities for seeking parliamentary approval
besides exposing the hollow claim of the Ministries/Departments that they used to
monitor the flow of the excess expenditure. The Committee, had recommend that the
Ministries/Departments concerned probe into the casues of this chronic malaise and
find effective ways and means to make the mechanism of estimating Supplementary
Grants more realistic and the budget controlling officers responsible so that no excess
expenditure was incurred and strict fiscal discipline was maintained.
17.  In their Action Taken Note, the Department of Telecommunications have
stated as under:—
"The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. All corrective
measures are being taken to ensure framing of balanced and realistic budget
estimate. Efforts are also being made to ensure that expenditure is limited to the
budgetary allocation. As a result of the measures taken no excess expenditure
was incurrred during 2010-11."
18.  In respect of Grant No. 20 —  Ministry of Defence (Civil) and Grant No. 21 —
Defence Pensions, the Ministry of Defence have stated in their Action Taken Note that

8
they have issued, from time to time, instructions to exercise strict control on progress
of Expenditure in order to avoid any large-scale savings or excess under any grant
relating to Civil Estimate. In so far as putting in place effective ways and means to make
the mechanism of estimating Supplementary Grants more realistic and pragmatic is
concerned, this Ministry would take follow up action in accordance with the instructions
of Ministry of Finance in this regard.
19.  As regard Grant No. 22—Defence Services—Army and Grant No. 23—
Defence Services —  Navy, the Ministry of Defence have stated in their Action Taken
Note as under:—
"Budgetary allocations provided by the Ministry of Finance are generally less
than the projected requirements. Nevertheless, all efforts are made to ensure
that the prescribed budgetary ceilings are adhered to. Further, with effect from
2012-13, the Demands for Grants under Ministry of Defence, namely Demand
No.(s) 22-Army, 23-Navy, 24-Air Force, 26-Research & Development and 27-
Capital Outlay on Defence Services have been brought under the ambit of modified
exchequer control — Cash Management System. Detailed instructions have
been issued in this regard. It is expected that implementation of the cash
management system would bring in the desired financial discipline."
20. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Home Affairs have stated as
under:—
"The Ministry has initiated an exercisie to prepare the data base of Central
Samman Pensioner/their eligible dependents who are living and actually drawing
pension as on date by calling information from all the Public Sector Banks and
Treasuries. Most of the information has been received and uploaded on the
MHA's website. Similarly compilation of re-verified data of the freedom fighters/
dependents drawing pension from the State Treasuries is in the progress. The
offices of C&AG and RBI have been advised to carry out comprehensive audit
of disbursal of Samman Pension by State Treasuries and Public Sector Banks
respectively."
21. The Department of Posts have stated in their Action Taken Note as under:—
"Department of Posts ensures to make realistic requirement of funds and to
maintain fiscal discipline in spending the public money in future. For this purpose
the instructions have been issued to all the subordinates units/Budget Controlling
authorities to project realistic demand for fund and to monitor the expenditure
accordingly. Moreover the proposal of the Department was re-assessed by the
Ministry of Finance to reduce the ceiling of expenditure during the Pre-budget
discussions which resulted in excess expenditure. However the Department of
Posts, besides issusing instructions to observe austerity measures in incurring
expenditure to the fund controlling authorities reviews the expenditure by
conducting Video Conference with the Heads of Circles to monitor the same in
terms of Grant. This has an effective control over expenditure vis-a-vis Grant."
22. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:—
"As has already been submitted to PAC in the other Paras and in the ATNs to
22nd Report of PAC on 'Excess over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations

9
(2008-09)’ the excess in 2008-09 & 2009-10 has arisen mainly due to the difficulty in
assessing the impact of implementation of the recommendations of the 6th CPC.
Bulk of the excess has been incurred in four Grants i.e. 4, 5, 6 & 13. The Committee
may appreciate the fact that despite the difficulty in accurately assessing the
impact of implementation of the recommendations of the 6th CPC, the excess
under Grant No. 4, 5 & 6 is minor in terms of percentage to the total sanctioned
amount under each grant being 0.73%, 2.62% and 2.10% respectively. However,
the same under Grant No. 13 is high at 10%. The recommendations of the Committee
is noted to be more accurate in estimating the Supplementary Grants."
23.  The Committee are constrained to note that none of the Ministries/
Departments have initiated any probe into the causes of excess expenditure despite
obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations which reinforces that no specific and
concrete measures have been put in place as yet to avoid unauthorized expenditure.
Worse, the Ministry of Railways, which had incurred excess expenditure despite
obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations in as many as eight Grants/
Appropriations during 2009-10 fiscal, have merely stated that they have noted the
recommendation  of the  Committee instead of making any firm commitments to
streamline their budgetary process  and overhaul the procedures adopted for estimation
of budget at the Supplementary Grant/Appropriation stage. As there are no cogent
reasons for the inevitability of excess expenditure when the Ministries/Departments
get opportunities to present the Supplementary Demands for Grants during the three
sessions of Parliament in a year, the Committee would once again like to remind the
defaulting Ministries/Departments about the sanctity of General Financial Rules which
stipulate that no expenditure should be incurred which might have the effect  of exceeding
the total Grant or Appropriation authorized by Parliament by law for a financial year
except by way of obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations or an advance from
the Contigency Fund. The Committee reiterate that the Ministries/Departments
concerned probe into the causes of this chronic malaise and find effective ways and
means to make the mechanism of estimating Supplemnetary Grant more realistic and
fix responsibility on the budget controlling officers and the Financial Advisors so as to
avoid recurrence of excess expenditure even after obtaining Supplementary Grants/
Appropriations.
IV . Excess Expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
24.  In their Fortieth Report, the Committee had noted that during the financial
year 2009-10, the Ministry of Railways incurred a total excess expenditure of Rs. 1922.84
crore in 10 cases of 9 excess registering Grants/Appropriations. This amount of excess
expenditure was more than double the preceding financial year's total of Rs. 532.12
crore incurred in 9 cases of 8 excess registering Grants/Appropriations. Out of the total
excess expenditure of  Rs. 1922.84 crore, the bulk of the expenditure amounting to
Rs.  1816.68 crore constituting 94.48 per cent of the total Grant was incurred under
4 Grants only i.e. (i) Grant No. 4 — Working Expenses — Repairs and Maintenance of
Permanent —  Way and Works (Rs. 54.50 crore); (ii) Grant No. 5 — Working Expenses—
Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Powers (Rs. 88.71 crore); (iii) Grant No. 6 —

10
Working Expenses —  Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons (Rs. 161.20
crore); and Grant No. 13 — Working Expenses — Provident Fund, Pension and Other
Retirement Benefits (Rs. 1512.27 crore). According to the Ministry, the reasons for
excess expenditure were — implementation of the 6th Central Pay Commission Report,
more expenditure on direct purchases, stores from stock, contractual payment, increased
expenditure on Periodical Over Hauling (POH), materialisation of more contractual
payments than anticipated. The Committee had observed that while anticipating the
requirement of funds by the Railways, estimations for various Sub-Heads could had
been projected more realistically by  analysing properly the total monetary effect of
salary hike, prevailing expenditure trail,  upcoming demands/requirements, rising cost
etc. The Committee had concluded that the indolent Ministry of Railways  had not
taken any timely corrective measures to improve their budgeting mechanism with a
view to avoiding such a huge unauthorized expenditure.  As there  was no mention in
the  Explanatory Notes about the specific remedial measures taken by the Ministry to
contain this persisting excess expenditure, the Committee had observed that the Ministry
had paid scant respect to enforce fiscal discipline while incurring want only excess
expenditure. Taking serious note of lack of concern and sustained efforts on the part of
the Ministry in observing fiscal discipline, the Committee had recommended that the
Ministry of Railways strive earnestly for ensuring realistic estimation of their budgetary
requirements under various sub-heads of the Grants/Appropriations operated by them
so that the existing lapses/loopholes were identified and concrete remedial measures
taken to obviate excess expenditure.
25.  In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:—
"It is a fact that bulk of the excess (94.48%) has been incurred under only
4 Grants, viz., 4,5,6, & 13. The Committee may appreciate the fact that despite the
difficulty in accurately assessing the impact of implementation of the
recommendations of the 6th CPC, the excess under Grant No. 4, 5 & 6 is minor in
terms of percentage to the total sanctioned amount under each grant being
0.73%, 2.62% and 2.10% respectively. Only under Grant No. 13, it is high at 10%
and the excess under this Grant alone is 78.65% of the total excess. The excess
under this Grant is also attributable to the difficulty in accurately assessing the
impact of implementation of the recommendations of the 6th CPC on pensions.
However, concerns of the Committee have note noted."
26.  The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry of Railways have
merely noted the Recommendation of the Committee and sought to justify their excess
expenditure incurred during the financial year 2009-10 on the ground that the amounts
of excess under Grant Nos. 4, 5 and 6 were very small and in respect of Grant No. 13,
it was  difficult to accurately assess the impact of implementation of the
recommendation of the VI Central Pay Commission. From the Ministry's reply, it is
apparent that the Railways, instead of taking appropriate punitive measures to obviate
excess expenditure, have allowed things to drift for want of strict  financial control.
The Committee are of the considered view that excess expenditure in any form,
regardless of the quantum, is unacceptable and violative of prudent budgetary exercise
and therefore urge the Ministry of Railway to adhere to the General Financial Rules
and avoid unauthorized expenditure.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee's examination of the Appropriation Accounts of the Union
Government relating to the Civil, Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways for
the financial year 2009-10 has revealed that a total excess expenditure of Rs. 14581.86
crore was incurred in 20 cases under 18 Grants/Appropriations. The defaulting Ministries
are Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (2 Grants i.e. Grant
No. 14—Department of Telecommunications and Grant No. 13—Postal Services);
Ministry of Defence (5 cases under 4 Grants i.e. Grant No. 20—Ministry of Defence,
Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions, Grant No. 22—Defence Services—Army and Grant
No. 23—Defence Services—Navy); Ministry of Home Affairs (Grant No. 54—Other
Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs); and the Ministry of Railways (12 cases
under 11 Grants/Appropriations  i.e. Grant No. 4—Repairs and Maintenance of
Permanent Way and Works; Grant No. 5—Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Powers;
Grant No. 6—Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons; Grant No. 8—
Operating Expenses—Rolling Stock and Equipment; Grant No. 9—Operating
Expenses—Traffic; Grant No. 12—Miscellaneous Working Expenses; Grant No. 13—
Provident Fund, Pension and other Retirement Benefits; Grants No. 15—Dividend to
General Revenues, Repayment of Loans taken from General Revenues and Amortisation
of Over Capitalization; Appropriation No. 3—General Superintendence and Services;
Appropriation No. 5—Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Powers, Appropriation
No. 10—Operating Expenses—Fuel; and Appropriation No. 16—Assets, Acquisition,
Construction and Replacement). This amount of excess expenditure incurred during
the financial year under review showed a steep increase over the preceding year
wherein a total excess expenditure of about Rs. 1532.63 crore in 15 cases of 14 Grants/
Appropriations was recorded. Though the Committee are aware of the difficulties
faced by the Ministries/Departments in exactly estimating the expenditure due to
situational exigencies, nevertheless incurring huge amount of excess expenditure to
the tune of thousands of crore year after year despite the provision for obtaining
Supplementary Demands for Grants in the course of a financial year is untenable and
cannot be attributed to unforeseen factors or the extraordinary situations alone. The
Committee deprecate such an endemic failure arising out of want of essential alacrity in
budgetary estimations, sheer dereliction of duty on the part of budget controlling
authorities and failure on their part to ensure observance of strict fiscal discipline.
[Observation/Recommendation Para 1 of the Fortieth Report of the Public
Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
11

12
Action Taken (Department of Telecommunications)
The Department of Telecommunications strives to ensure that requirement of
funds are made on a realistic basis. Due care is being taken to maintain fiscal discipline.
Instructions have been issued to all the subordinates units of the Department to
ensure fiscal discipline in expenditure and to ensure that budgetary estimation is done
on a realistic basis.
It is also apprised that the excess expenditure during 2009-10 was incurred due
to the payment on account of implementation of VIth Pay Commission
recommendations.
Sd/-
Deputy Director General (TPF)
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of
Telecommunications, O.M. No. 1-20/2012-B, dated 25 April, 2012]
This has been vetted by D.G. Audit (P&T) with remarks "Department of
Telecommunications may ensure fiscal discipline and control of expenditure and
budgetary estimation may be done on realistic basis"; vide their No. Report-Tele-II (b)
400 Appropriation Acctts./2009-10/DoT/141, dated 04.06.2012.
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 20)]
In this Paragraph, the Committee have observed that the amount of excess
expenditure incurred during the FY under review showed a steep increase over the
preceding year. In so far as Ministry of Defence (Civil) are concerned,—out of total
excess expenditure of Rs. 14581.86 crore, an excess expenditure of Rs. 95.32 cr. only
was incurred during the year 2009-10 under Grant No. 20—Ministry of Defence (Civil).
The Committee have expressed that though the difficulties faced by the Ministries/
Departments in exactly estimating the expenditure due to situational exigencies,
nevertheless incurring huge amount of excess expenditure to the tune of thousands of
crore year after year despite the provision for obtaining Supplementary Demands for
Grants in the course of a financial year is untenable and cannot be attributed to
unforeseen factors or the extraordinary situations alone.
The excess expenditure of Rs. 95.32 cr. under Grant No. 20—Ministry of Defence
(Civil) was mainly due to Setting up of regional Armed Forces Tribunal Benches located
at various stations, in r/o CGO; Payment towards 60% arrears of the 6th CPC, Large
number of promotion in all categories and 30% increase in overall existing strength as
approved by CCS, towards posting/transfer of manpower to new 05 ships, 04CG ashore
units and 01 RHQ establishment during the fiscal in compliance with CCS approvals,
Travel expenses of the officers to conduct special recruitment drives in major cities of
India to fill up vacancies arrived due to new CCS approval of Ships and units post
26/11, Towards procurement of Naval Store items for new 05 Ships, 04 CG ashore units
and establishment of newly commissioned RHQ (NW) during FY 2009-10 in compliance
with CCS approval, Due to repair/refit of operational unit i.e. CG Ships, aircraft due to
enhanced deployment of these assets, post 26/11 scenario, and the major excess
expenditure has been incurred in Salary head under budget provision in r/o JAKLI due
to Payment of 6th CPC 60% arrear and due to additional movement of troops took place

13
in the last month of Financial year and more demand and supply of stores to their units
due to their involvement in counter insurgency operation etc. Further, it is submitted
that the excess is under prescribed permissible limit i.e. 5% as the variation is upto
0.88% only under Grant No. 20—Ministry of Defence (Civil) over Total/Final Grants.
Moreover, it is mentioned that incurring of excess expenditure under Ministry of Defence
(Civil)—Grant No. 20 is not a recurring instance and excess under this Grant has not
been registered for earlier financial years toll 2008-09.
However, as a measure of control, the Govt. of India in the Ministry of Defence
have been advising all the budget estimating authorities of Civil to keep strict watch
on the expenditure and ensure that expenditure should be as per the Grant and in case
any excess is visualised, its provision should be made at RE stage. In this regard, this
office vide ID No. 1(8-ATN)/MO/2009-10/721, dated 28.06.2010 have issued instructions
to user Departments and IFAs concerned to prepare their Budgetary proposals on
realistic basis. In order to have strict control, the instructions issued vide the Ministry
of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, were also circulated vide this Division
ID No. (s) (i) MoD (Fin.) ID No. 1(9)/Fin.(MO)/2011-12/933, dated 21.07.2011 on the
subject—"Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management in 2011 for taking various
steps in order to adhere to fiscal targets set out in the Budget 2011-12 and for better
expenditure management. Ministry of  Defence (Fin.) vide ID No. 1(1)/Fin. (MO)/2011-
2012, dated 23.08.2011 have also issued instructions on the subject "Expenditure
Management—Economy Measures and Rationalization of Expenditure" to the entire
budget holding authorities as well as IFA concerned. Necessary monitoring and follow
up action in this regard would be ensured.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)

Immediate
Budget Matter
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(Main Office)
Subject:Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management in 2011-12.
In continuation of this division ID No. 1(9)/Fin. (MO)/2011-2012/708, dated
07.06.2011 regarding taking various steps in order to adhere to the fiscal targets set out
in the Budget 2011-12 and for better expenditure management, the undersigned is
directed to forward herewith Ministry of Finance OM No. 4(5)—W&M/2011, dated
07.07.2011 on the above subject, for information and strict compliance.
2. This issues with the approval of JS & Addl. FA(R).
Sd/-
(S.K. Jassal)
Asstt. Financial Adviser (MO)
Phone: 2301 4890/2404
Encl:— As above
1. Dir. (E)/US (Genl.) -in r/o DOD & DR&D
2. DS (Res-I) -in r/o DESW
3. D (B&C) -in r/o DDP
4. Principal Registrar (AFT) -in r/o AFT
5. AFA(E/Genl.)SO (E-II)/Dir. (Fin./DS) -in r/o Finance Division
6. Director, IDSA through PO (Def.) -in r/o IDSA
7. Dy CGDA (Projects)/OSD (Coord.) -in r/o DAD (Salaries & Works)
8. Jt. CGDA (Accounts & Budget) -in r/o Defence Pensions
9. Addl. DGDE (Admn.)/Dir. (Fin./Q) -in r/o DEO
10. G .M. CSD through BOCCs, L-II
Block/Dir. (Fin./Q) -in r/o CSD
11. CDP, (APO), Krishi Bhawan -in r/o APO
12. Dir. (Plans) Coast Guard Orgn./
DFA (CG) -in r/o CGO
13. Dir. (PSUs) -in r/o Defence PSUs
14. Dir. (FP-II), Army HQ -in r/o JAK LI
15. Dite. of  Naval Plan (NHQ) -in r/o MH-7615 only
16. AG (Budget), South Block - "''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
17. PCDA (P) Allahabad -in r/o Defence Pensions
[MOD (Fin.) ID No. 1(9)/Fin. (MO)/2011-2012/933, dated 21.07.2011]
14

Immediate
Budget Matter
O.M. NO. 4(5)-W&M/2011
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
North Block New Delhi-110 001
Dated the July 7, 2011
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject:Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management in 2011-12.
In continuation of this Ministry's O.M. of even number dated May 2, 2011
regarding taking various steps in order to adhere to the fiscal targets set out in the
Budget 2011-12 and for better expenditure management, it is once again reiterated that
all required measures should be undertaken so that the estimated receipt targets in BE
2011-12 are achieved. The Non-tax receipt estimates tax receipt estimates projected for
the Ministries/Departments in BE 2011-12 viz., departmental receipts, dividends from
PSUs etc. should be closely monitored to avoid any shortfall. All Ministries/Departments
need to achieve targeted non-tax revenue collection and avoid new proposals for
expenditure.
2. This has the approval of the Finance Minister.
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
To,
All Financial Advisers
Copy to Joint Secretary (Per), Department of Expenditure, New Delhi-110 001
15

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(Main Office)
Subject:  First Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2011-12 in
r/o Grant No. 20—MoD (Civil) & Grant No.-21—Defence Pensions.
The First Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2011-12 is to be
presented to Parliament in the ensuing Monsoon Session. In this connection please
find enclosed a copy of AS (Budget), Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of
Finance DO Letter No.4(11)-B(SD)/2011, dated June 1, 2011 & OM No. 4(5)-W&M/
2011, dated 02.05.2011 from Finance Secretary for information and further necessary
action. The proposals as per enlisted types of Supplementary Demands only, if any, in
the prescribed format along-with the draft statement justifying Supplementary Demands
(especially keeping in view the instructions issued by MOF vide aforesaid OM) to be
included in the ensuing batch and may be forwarded to this Division duly vetted by
respective IFA, latest by 13th June, 2011 for onward transmission of the same to
Ministry of Finance by due date. It may be ensured that the above timeline is strictly
adhered to, as the delayed proposals will not be entertained by the Ministry of Finance.
In case there is no proposal in r/o your Department/Organisation a "nil" report in
the matter may even be sent by due date.
Sd/-
(T.H. Franklin)
Dy. Financial Adviser (E/MO)
Phone: 2301 2180/2404
Encl:— as above
1. Dir (E)/US (Genl.) -in r/o DOD, DP, DR&D, DESW
2. Principal Registrar (AFT) -in r/o AFT
3. AFA (E/Genl.)/SO (E-II) -in r/o Finance Division
4. Director, IDSA through PO (Def.) -in r/o IDSA
5. Dy. CGDA (Projects) -in r/o DAD (Salaries & Works)
6. Jt. CGDA (Accounts & Budget) -in r/o Defence Pensions
7. Addl. DGDE (Admn.) -in r/o DEO
8. G .M. CSD through BOCCS, L-II Block -in r/o CSD
9. CDP, (APO), Krishi Bhawan -in r/o APO
10. Dir. (Plans) Coast Guard Orgn. -in r/o CGO
11. Dir. (PSUs) -in r/o Defence PSUs
12. Dir. (FP-II), Army HQ -in r/o JAK LI
13. Dite. of Naval Plan (NHQ) -in r/o MH-7615 only
14. AG (Budget), South Block - "''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
15. PCDA (P) Allahabad -in r/o Defence Pensions
[MOD (Fin.) ID No. 1(9)/Fin. (MO)/2011-2012/708, dated June, 7th, 2011]
16

SHAKTIKANTA DAS, IAS Hkkjr ljdkj
Additional Secretary foÙk ea=ky;
vkfFkZd dk;Z foHkkx
ubZ fnYyh&110 001
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
New Delhi-110 001
Telephone: 23092804 Fax: 23094052
E-mail: s.das@nic.in
D.O.F. No. 4(11)-B(SD)/2011
June 1, 2011
Dear Smt. Gupta,
The first batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2011-2012 is to be
presented to Parliamentary in the ensuing Monsoon Session.
2. The Following types of Supplementary Demands may only be considered for
inclusion in this batch:—
(i) Cases where advances from Contingency Fund of India have been granted,
which are required to be recouped to the Fund.
(ii) Payment against a court decree, which cannot be postponed;
(iii) Cases of additional requirement of funds for meeting immediate expenditure
commitments/payments which attract the limitation of New Service/New
Instrument of Service, which have been approved by competent authority
and are proposed to be met by reappropriation of savings in the Grant and
have been approved by competent authority; and
(iv) Any other case where Ministry of Finance has approved moving of
Supplementary Demand in the Monsoon Session.
3. Steps/measures to be taken for better fiscal and expenditure management for
2011-12 as circulated with this Ministry's O.M. No. 4(5)-W&M/2011, dated May 2,
2011, may kindly be followed strictly. As brought out in the O.M., no proposal for cash
supplementary be forwarded to this Ministry during the current financial year, except
in absolutely unavoidable cases or those proposals which relate to the Budget
17

18
announcements in 2011-12. Even in such cases, the effort should be to identify matching
savings within the Ministry/Department.
4. The proposals along with the draft statement justifying Supplementary
Demands to be included in the ensuing batch and appropriate background notes may
be forwarded to Budget Division in the prescribed form by June 24, 2011 (Friday),
after which date, proposals may not be entertained. Cases, which are required to be
reported to Parliament in terms of the guidelines circulated with this Ministry's O.M.
No. F. 1(23)-B (AC)/2005 dated May 25, 2006 may also be furnished to Budget Division
in a summarised form by the same date.

Immediate
Budget Matter
O.M.  No. 4(5)-W&M/2011
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
North Block, New Delhi-110001
Dated the May 2, 2011
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject:Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management in 2011-12.
In order to adhere to the fiscal targets in Budget 2011-12 and for better expenditure
management the following measures may kindly be taken:—
(a) All Ministries/Departments are advised  to adhere strictly to the budgeted
estimates in 2011-12;
(b) New expenditure proposals, if at all essential, should be proposed only
through identified Savings within the Ministries/Departments allocations in
BE  2011-12.
(c) No proposal for cash supplementary be forwarded to this Ministry during the
current financial year, except in absolutely  unavoidable cases or those
proposals which relate to the Budget announcements in 2011-12. Even in
such cases, the effort should be to identify matching saving within the
Ministry/Department.
(d) Considering that the 12th Five Year Plan will commence from the financial
year 2012-13, all new programmes/schemes on the Plan side may be deferred
to the next financial year. In the above scenario, proposals for funding of new
schemes both under Plan and Non-Plan, will not be entertained during the
current financial year;
(e) The Non-tax receipt estimates projected for the Ministries/Departments in BE
2011-12 viz. departmental receipts, dividends from PSUs etc. should be closely
monitored to avoid any shortfall;
(f) All Ministries/Departments should strictly adhere to the Monthly Expenditure
Plan as well as Quarterly/March expenditure ceilings so as to avoid bunching
of expenditure/cash out flows in the last quarter/last months of the year; and
19

20
(g) Unspent balances of the previous financial year need to be reviewed and
adjusted against the current year's Budget allocation by all the Ministries/
Departments.
2. All Ministries/Departments are requested to plan for the expenditure in the
financial year 2011-12 keeping in view the above instructions.
3. This is issued with the approval of the Finance Minister.
Sd/-
(Sushama Nath)
Finance Secretary
To
All Secretaries to the Government of India (By Name)
All Financial Advisers

Most Immediate
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(Main Office)
Subject: Expenditure Management—Economy Measures and Rationalization of
Expenditure.
Ref: Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure's OM no(s). 7(1) E-Coord./
2011, dated 11/07/2011 & 02/08/2011.
Copies of the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure's O.M. cited at
reference are enclosed herewith for information and strict compliance.
Sd/-
Encl.:—as above (S.K. Jassal)
Asstt. Financial Adviser (MO)
Tel. Ph. No.-2301 4890/2404
1. Dir. (E) US (Gen.) -in r/o DOD & DR&D
2. Dir. (Res.-I) -in r/o DESW
3. D (B&C) -in r/o DDP
4. Principal Registrar (AFT) -in r/o AFT
5. AFA (E/Genl.)SO(E-II)/Dir. (Fin./DS) -in r/o Finance Division
6. Director, IDSA through PO (Def.) -in r/o IDSA
7. Dy. CGDA (Projects)/OSD (Coord.) -in r/o DAD (Salaries & Works)
8. Addl. DGDE (Admn.)/Dr.(Fin./Q) -in r/o DEO
9. G .M. CSD through BOCCS, L-II Block/
Dir. (Fin./Q) -in r/o CSD
10. CDP, (APO), Krishi Bhawan -in r/o APO
11. Dir. (Plans) Coast Guard Orgn./DFA(CG)-in r/o CGO
12. Dir. (PSUs) -in r/o Defence PSUs.
13. Dir. (FP-II),  Army HQ -in r/o JAKLI
14. Dite. of  Naval Plan (NHQ) -in r/o MH-7615 only
15. AG (Budget), South Block -....... —
[MOD (Fin.) ID No. 1(1)/Fin.(MO)/2011-2012 dated 23.08.2011]
21

NO. 7(1)/E. COORD./2011
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
North Block, New Delhi
Dated: 2nd August, 2011.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject:Expenditure Management—Economy Measures and rationalization of
expenditure in autonomous bodies—reg.
In consonance with the economy instructions issued by this Department vide
OM of even No. dated 11th July, 2011, appropriate economy measures need also be put
in place to rationalize the expenditure of autonomous bodies.
2. Accordingly, it has been decided to extend the economy measures outlined in
the OM dated 11th July, 2011 to autonomous bodies funded by Government of India
also.
Sd/-
(Sumit Bose)
Secretary (Expenditure)
To
All Secretaries to the Govt. of India
All Financial Advisers
Copy to:
Cabinet Secretary
Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister
Secretary, Planning Commission
22

NO. 7(1)/E. COORD./2011
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
New Delhi, the 11th July, 2011
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject:Expenditure Management—Economy Measures and Rationalisation of
Expenditure.
1. Background
Instructions on expenditure management have been issued from time to time by
the Ministry of Finance Department of Expenditure with a view to ensure
availability of adequate resources for meeting the objectives of critical
development and priority schemes. These measures are intended at promoting
fiscal discipline without restricting the operational efficiency of the Government.
2. Economy  Measures
In view of the commitment of the Government to carry on the process of fiscal
consolidation vigorously and to meet the fiscal are revenue deficit targets
announced in the Budget 2011-12, there is need for economy and rationalisation
of expenditure in this context, the Budget Division, Department of Economic
Affairs has, vide Office Memorandum No. 4(5)-W&M/2011, dated May 2, 2011
issued instructions on the steps to be taken for fiscal and expenditure management
in 2011-12 in continuation of those instructions, the following measures for
fiscal prudence and economy will come into force with immediate effect.
2.1 Seminars and Conferences
(i) Utmost economy shall be observed in organizing conferences/seminars/
workshops. The prescribed expenditure ceiling for holding seminars, conferences,
workshops etc. should be enforced and only such conferences workshops,
seminars, etc. which are absolutely essential should be held. A 10% cut on
budgetary allocation for seminars/conferences shall be effected.
(ii) Holding of exhibitions/seminars/conferences abroad is strongly discourged
except in the case of exhibitions for trade promotion.
(iii) There will be a ban on holding of meetings and conferences at five star hotels.
2.2 Purchase of vehicles
(i) Except for the operational requirements of Defence Forces, Central Paramilitary
Forces and security related organisations purchase of vehicles including those
against condemnation of the existing vehicles, will not be permitted.
23

24
2.3 Foreign Travel
(i) It would be the responsibility of the Secretary of each Ministry/Department to
ensure that foreign travel is restricted to most necessary and unavoidable official
engagements based on functional necessity and extant instructions are strictly
followed.
(ii) Ministries/Departments shall lay down quarterly ceilings based on the annual
budget under foreign travel expenses which they may not exceed during the
quarter in question this will enable the Ministries/Departments to priorities and
phase their expenditure during the whole year.
(iii) Where travel is unavoidable it will be ensured that officers of the appropriate
level dealing with the subject are sponsored instead of those at higher levels.
The size of delegation and the duration of visit will be kept to the absolute
minimum.
(iv) Proposals for participation in study tours workshops/conferences/seminars/
presentation of papers abroad at Government cost will not be entertained except
those that are fully funded by sponsoring agencies.
2.4 Creation of posts
There will be a total ban on creation of Plan and Non-Plan posts except for new
organizations which are set up during the course of the current year based on
already approved schemes.
2.5 Consultancy Assignments
As per the extant instructions, consultancy assignments are to  be awarded
based on the provisions of the GFRs. In this context, the provisions of GFRs
may be strictly followed  and consultancy assignments may be awarded only for
specific jobs which are well defined in terms of content and time-frame for their
completion. Engagement of consultants may be resorted to only in situations
requiring high quality services for which the concerned Ministry/Department
does not have requisite expertise.
All Ministries/Departments may carry out a review of the Consultants appointed
by that Ministry/Department in the light of the provisions of the GFRs, and
reduce the number of Consultants to the minimum requirement. Where individual
Consultants are appointed by nomination, due economy may be observed while
determining their fee and such fees may not be disproportionate to the work to
be carried out by the Consultant.
3. Observance of discipline in fiscal transfers to States, Public Sector
Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies at Central/State/Local level
3.1 No amount shall be released to any entity (including State Governments), which
has defaulted in furnishing Utilisation Certifications for grants-in-aid released
by the Central Government without prior approval of the Ministry of Finance.

25
3.2 Ministries/Departments shall not transfer funds under any Plan schemes in
relaxation of conditionalities attached to such transfers (such as matching
funding).
3.3 The State Governments are required to furnish monthly returns of Plan
expenditure — Central, Centrally Sponsored or State Plan — to respective
Ministries/Departments along with a report on amounts outstanding in their
Public Account in respect of Central and Centrally Sponsored Schemes. This
requirement may be scrupulously enforced.
3.4 The following specific steps may be adopted:—
(a) The unspent balances available with the States and implementing agencies
must be taken into account before further releases are made.
(b) The sanction for payment must clearly specify either that the payee has no
utilization certifications as ‘due for rendition’ under the Rules under the
scheme in question or that the payment has been authorised by Department
of Expenditure.
(c) For any deviation from the above, the case should be referred to the
Department of Expenditure.
(d) The Chief Controller of Accounts must ensure compliance with the above
as part of pre-payment scrutiny.
4. Balanced Pace of Expenditure
4.1 Rush of expenditure towards the end of the financial year continues to be an
area of concern. As per extant instructions, not more that one-third (33%) of the
Budget Estimates may be spent in the last quarter of the financial year. Besides,
the stipulation that during the month of March the expenditure should be limited
to 15% of the Budget Estimates, is reiterated. Ministries/Departments which are
covered by the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) may ensure that the MEP is
followed strictly.
4.2 It is also considered desirable that in the last months of the year payments may
be made only for the goods and services actually procured and for reimbursement
of expenditure already incurred. Hence no amount should be released in advance
(in the last months) with the exception of the following:—
(i) Advance payments to contractors under terms of duly executed contracts
so that Government would not renege on its legal or contractual obligations.
(ii) Any loans or advances to Governments servants etc. of private individuals
as a measure of relief and rehabilitation as per service conditions or on
compassionate grounds.
(iii) Any other exceptional case with the approval of the Financial Adviser.
However a list of such cases may be sent by the FA to the Department of
Expenditure by 30th April of the following year for information.

26
5. Compliance
Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments being the Chief Accounting Authorities
as per Rule 64 of GFR shall be fully charged with the responsibility of ensuring
compliance of the measures outlined above. Financial Advisers shall assist the
respective Departments in securing compliance with these measures and also
submit an overall report to the Minister-in-Charge and to the Ministry of Finance
on a quarterly basis regarding various actions taken on these measures/guidelines.
Sd/-
(Sumit Bose)
Secretary (Expenditure)
All Secretaries to the Govt. of India.
Copy to:
1. Cabinet Secretary.
2. Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister.
3. Secretary, Planning Commission.
4. All Financial Advisers.
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)]
In this Paragraph, the Committee have observed that the amount of excess
expenditure incurred during the FY under review showed a steep increase over the
proceeding year. In so far as Defence Pensions are concerned, out of total excess
expenditure of Rs. 14581.86 crore, an excess expenditure of Rs. 8999.54 cr. only were
incurred during the year 2009-10 under Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions. The Committee
have expressed that though the difficulties faced by the Ministries/Departments in
exactly estimating the expenditure due to situational exigencies, nevertheless incurring
huge amount of excess expenditure to the tune of thousands of crore year after year
despite the provision for obtaining Supplementary Demand for Grants in the course of
a financial year is untenable and cannot be attributed to unforeseen factors or the
extraordinary situations alone.
The excess expenditure of Rs. 8999.54 cr. under Grant No. 21 — Defence Pensions
was mainly due to payment of revised pension at higher rate under VI CPC than
assessed and booking of pending pension scrolls received from banks to clear amount
under suspense.
Although the requests for augmentation of funds were made by the PCDA (P)
Allahabad/CGDA but the same could not be acceded to on account of shortage of
funds by Ministry of Finance.
Further, in view of the fact that expenditure, for which cash flow has already
taken place in the books of RBI, was required to be brought to account, the pending
pensions scrolls amounting to Rs. 8999.54 cr. had to be booked under the

27
Defence Pensions Head to clear the amount laying under RBI Suspense to reflect the
true picture of cash flow from the Govt. account.
Moreover, the payment of pension to the Defence Pensioners is a committed
expenditure and cannot be stopped for the want of Budget.
However, as a measure of control, the Govt. of India in the Ministry of Defence
have been advising the budget estimating authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare
their budget proposals on realistic basis taking into consideration all the related aspects
such as commitments, trend of expenditure and the anticipated expenditure and concrete
remedial action must be taken immediately to arrest the excess to an optimum level. In
this regard, this Office have issued instructions vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2009-10/721,
dt. 29.06.2010 to avoid any excess expenditures over the sanctioned Grant and to
assess the requirement of funds properly. In order to have strict control, the instructions
issued by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, were also circulated
vide this Division ID No.(s)— (i) MoD (Fin.) ID No. 1(9)/Fin.(MO)/2011-12/708,
dated 07.06.2011 and (ii) ID No. 1(9)/Fin.(MO)/2011-12/933, dated 21.07.2011 on the
subject—"Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management in 2011” regarding taking
various steps in order to adhere to fiscal target set out in the Budget 2011-12 and for
better expenditure management. Necessary monitoring and follow up action in this
regard would be ensured.
Further, Pension disbursement agencies viz. Banks have been approached for
transmission of pension payment data electronically so as to enable PCDA (P) Allahabad
to ensure correct and timely booking of pension expenditure by automating
classification and accounting system through computerized system.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)

Most Important
Budgetary Matter
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(Main Office)
Subject: Instructions/Cautions for preparation of Revised/Budget Estimates on
realistic basis to avoid savings or excess w.r.t. total allocations/grant under
each sub/detailed head.
It has been noticed by this Division that Excess expenditure of Rs. 8999.49 crore
occurred against the sanctioned provision during the financial year 2009-2010 which
indicate systemic weakness in budgetary control.
It is, therefore, stressed that utmost caution and accuracy be adopted while
estimating requirement of funds for RE 2010-11 BE 2011-12 after taking into account all
the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance from time to time and adhere to the
expenditure control during the current/ensuing financial year as well. In order to ensure
that the budgetary projections are made after an accurate and realistic assessment of
the requirements and visualization of the actual/anticipated expenditure, details reasons
by giving the numerical impact in respect of each components of the respective detailed/
sub-head should invariably be recorded where the estimations are increased or
decreased by 10% or more w.r.t. the actual expenditure during the last financial year
(i.e. 2009-10), etc.
These instructions may please be circulated to all concerned for avoiding savings
or excess over the approved grant. Remedial measures/corrective action taken in this
regard may kindly be intimated to this division for apprising the positions to DGA, DS.
Sd/-
(T. Joseph)
Dy. Financial Adviser (MO/E)
Tel. No.: 23014890/2404
1. Jt. CGDA(AN)/OSD(DAD/Coord.)
2. Pr. CDA(P) Allahabad
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 2(6)/MO/2009-10/721, dated 29.06.2010]
28

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(Main Office)
Subject:First Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2011-12 in r/o Grant
No.  20—MoD (Civil) and Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions.
The First Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2011-12 is to be
presented to Parliament in the ensuing Monsoon Session. In this connection please
find enclosed a copy of AS (Budget), Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of
Finance DO Letter No. 4(11)-B(SD)/2011 dated June1, 2011 & OM No. 4(5)-W&M/2011
dated 02.05.2011 from Finance Secretary for information and further necessary action.
The proposals as per enlisted types of Supplementary Demands only, if any, in the
prescribed format along with the draft statement justifying Supplementary Demands
(especially keeping in view the instructions issued by MoF vide aforesaid OM) to be
included in the ensuing batch and may be forwarded to this division duly vetted by
respective IFA, latest by 13th June, 2011 for onward transmission of the same to the
Ministry of Finance by due date. It may be ensured that the above timeline is strictly
adhered to, as the delayed proposals will not be entertained by the Ministry of Finance.
In case there is no proposal in r/o your Department/Organisation a "nil" report in
the matter may even be sent by due date.
Sd/-
(T.H. Franklin)
Dy. Financial Adviser (E/OM)
Tel. No.: 23012180/2404
Encl. as above.
1. Dir. (E)/US (Genl.) - in r/o DOD, DP, DR&D, DESW
2. Principal Registrar (AFT) - in r/o AFT
3. AFA (E/Genl.)/SO (E-II) - in r/o Finance Division
4. Director, IDSA through PO (Def.) - in r/o IDSA
5. Dy. CGDA (Projects) - in r/o DAD (Salaries & Works)
6. Jt. CGDA (Accounts & Budget) - in r/o Defence Pensions
7. Addl. DGDE (Admn.) - in r/o DEO
8. G .M. CSD through BOCCS, L-II Block - in r/o CSD
9. CDP, (APO), Krishi Bhawan - in r/o APO
10. Dir. (Plans) Coast Guard Orgn. - in r/o CGO
11. Dir. (PSUs) - in r/o Defence PSUs
12. Dir. (FP-II), Army HQ - in r/o JAK LI
13. Dite. of Naval Plan (NHQ) - in r/o MH-7615 only
14. AG (Budget), South Block -
15. PCDA (P), Allahabad - in r/o Defence Pensions
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 1(9)/Fin. (MO)/2011-12/708, dated 07.06.2011]
29

SHAKTIKANTA DAS, IAS
Additional Secretary
Hkkjr ljdkj
foÙk ea=ky;
vkfFkZd dk;Z foHkkx
ubZ fnYyh&110 001
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
New Delhi - 110 001
Telephone : 23092804 Fax: 23094052
E-mail: s.das@nic.in
D.O.F. No. 4(11)-B(SD)/2011 June 1, 2011
Dear Smt. Gupta,
The first batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2011-2012 is to be
presented to Parliament in the ensuing Monsoon Session.
2. The following types of Supplementary Demands may only be considered for
inclusion in this batch:
(i) Cases where advances from Contingency Fund of India have been granted,
which are required to be recouped to the Fund;
(ii) Payment against a court decree, which cannot be postponed;
(iii) Cases of additional requirement of funds for meeting immediate expenditure
commitments/payments which attract the limitation of New Service/New
Instrument of Service, which have been approved by competent authority
and are proposed to be met by re-appropriation of savings in the Grant and
have been approved by competent authority; and
(iv) Any other case where Ministry of Finance has approved moving of
Supplementary Demand in the Monsoon Session.
3. Steps/measures to be taken for better fiscal and expenditure management for
2011-12 as circulated with this Ministry’s O.M. NO. 4(5)-W&M/2011, dated May 2,
2011 may kindly be followed strictly. As brought out in the O.M., no proposal for cash
supplementary be forwarded to this Ministry during the current financial year, except
in absolutely unavoidable cases or those proposals which relate to the Budget
announcements in 2011-12. Even in such cases, the effort should be to identify matching
savings within the Ministry/Department.
4. The proposals along with the draft statement justifying Supplementary
Demands to be included in the ensuing batch and appropriate background notes may
30

31
be forwarded to Budget Division in the prescribed form by June 24, 2011 (Friday), after
which date, proposals may not be entertained. Cases, which are required to be reported
to Parliament in terms of the guidelines circulated with this Ministry's O.M. No. F.1(23)-
B (AC)/2005, dated May 25, 2006 may also be furnished to Budget Division in a
summarized form by the same date.

O.M. NO. 4(5)-W&M/2011
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
North Block, New Delhi-110 001
Dated the May 2, 2011
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject:  Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management in 2011-12.
In order to adhere to the fiscal targets in Budget 2011-12 and for better expenditure
management the following measures may kindly be taken:
(a) All Ministries/Departments are advised to adhere strictly to the budgeted
estimates in 2011-12;
(b) New expenditure proposals, if at all essential, should be proposed only
through identified savings within the Ministries/Departments allocations in
BE 2011-12;
(c) No proposal for cash supplementary be forwarded to this Ministry during the
current financial year, except in absolutely unavoidable cases or those
proposals which relate to the Budget announcements in 2011-12. Even in
such cases, the effort should be to identify matching savings within the
Ministry/Department.
(d) Considering that the 12th Five Year Plan will commence from the financial
year 2012-13, all new programmes/schemes on the Plan side may be deferred
to the next financial year. In the above scenario, proposals for funding of new
schemes both under Plan and Non-Plan will not be entertained during the
current financial year;
(e) The Non-tax receipt estimates projected for the Ministries/Departments in
BE 2011-12 viz. departmental receipts, dividends from PSUs, etc. should be
closely monitored to avoid any shortfall;
(f) All Ministries/Departments should strictly adhere to the Monthly Expenditure
Plan as well as Quarterly/March expenditure ceilings so as to avoid bunching
of expenditure/cash out flows in the last quarter/last month of the year.
(g) Unspent balances of the previous financial year need to be reviewed and
adjusted against the current year's Budget allocation by all the Ministries/
Departments.
32

33
2. All Ministries/Departments are requested to plan for the expenditure in the
financial year 2011-12 keeping in view the above instructions.
3. This is issued with the approval of the Finance Minister.
Sd/-
(Sushama Nath)
Finance Secretary
To
All Secretaries to the Government of India (By Name)
All Financial Advisers

Immediate
Budget Matter
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(Main Office)
Subject: Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management in 2011-12.
In continuation of this division ID No. 1(9)Fin.(MO)/2011-2012/708 dated
07.06.2011 regarding taking various steps in order to adhere to the fiscal targets set out
in the Budget 2011-12 and for better expenditure management, the undersigned is
directed to forward herewith Ministry of Finance OM No. 4(5)-W&M/2011 dated
07.07.2011 on the above subject, for information and strict compliance.
2. This issues with the approval of JS & Addl. FA(R).
Sd/-
Encl.—as above. (S.K. Jassal)
Asstt. Financial Adviser (MO)
Tel. No.: 23014890/2404
1. Dir. (E)/US (Genl.) - in r/o DOD, DR&D
2. DS (Res.-I) - in r/o DESW
3. D (B&C) - in r/o DDP
4. Principal Registrar (AFT) - in r/o AFT
5. AFA (E/Genl.)/SO (E-II)/Dir. (Fin./DS) - in r/o Finance Division
6. Director, IDSA through PO (Def.) - in r/o IDSA
7. Dy. CGDA (Projects)/OSD (Coord.) - in r/o DAD (Salaries & Works)
8. Jt. CGDA (Accounts & Budget) - in r/o Defence Pensions
9. Addl. DGDE (Admn.)/Dir. (Fin./Q) - in r/o DEO
10. G .M. CSD through BOCCS, L-II Block/
      Dir. (Fin./Q) - in r/o CSD
11. CDP (APO), Krishi Bhawan - in r/o APO
12. Dir. (Plans), Coast Guard Orgn./DFA (CG) - in r/o CGO
13. Dir. (PSUs) - in r/o Defence PSUs
14. Dir. (FP-II) Army HQ - in r/o JAK LI
15. Dite. of Naval Plan (NHQ) - r/o MH 7615 only
16. AG (Budget), South Block -
17. PCDA (P), Allahabad - r/o Defence Pensions
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 1(9)/Fin.(MO)/2011-2012/933, dated 21.07.2011]
34

Immediate
Budget Matter
O.M. NO. 4(5)-W&M/2011
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
North Block, New Delhi-110 001
Dated the May 7, 2011
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management in 2011-12.
In continuation of this Ministry's O.M. of even number dated May 2, 2011
regarding taking various steps in order to adhere to the fiscal targets set out in Budget
2011-12 and for better expenditure management, it is once again reiterated that all
required measures should be undertaken so that the estimated receipt targets in
BE 2011-12 are achieved. The Non-tax receipt estimates projected for the Ministries/
Departments in BE 2011-12 viz., departmental receipts, dividends from PSUs, etc. should
be closely monitored to avoid any shortfall. All Ministries/Departments need to achieve
targeted non-tax revenue collection and avoid new proposals for expenditure.
2. This has the approval of the Finance Minister.
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
To
All Financial Advisers.
Copy to Joint Secretary (Per.), Department of Expenditure, New Delhi-110 001.
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant Nos. 22 & 23)]
In this paragraph, the Committee has inter alia  observed that in respect of
Defence Services, excess expenditure occurred under Grant No. 22—Army and Grant
No. 23—Navy during 2009-2010.
Keeping in view the recurrence of excess expenditure and the observations/
recommendations of the Committee on the issue the Ministry has been issuing, time
and again, necessary instructions to all concerned for controlling Defence Expenditure,
stressing the need for avoiding any excess over and above the grant approved by the
35

36
Parliament. The latest of such instructions were issued vide MoD (Fin.) ID No. 17(4)/
Cir./Bud.-I/2006 dated 25th September, 2009, MoD (Fin.) ID No. 9(1)/Bud.-I/2010,
dated 22nd January, 2010 and MoD (Fin.) ID No. 17(4)/Cir./Bud.-I/2006 dated 31st May,
2010 (copies enclosed). In addition, the matter has been taken up with the budget
holders for specific action in this regard, vide this Ministry's ID No. 5(3)/Bud.-I/2011,
dated 31st May, 2011 & ID No. 7(5)/Bud.-I/2011, dated 29th November, 2011 (copies
enclosed) and is being followed up. Apart from this, the Ministry is constantly
monitoring the Defence expenditure on monthly basis to ensure that funds allocated
are fully utilized to achieve the objective and at the same time excess is avoided. Efforts
are also on to ensure compliance of various instructions issued on this matter in letter
and spirit.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
Addl. FA (VP) & JS
[Ministry of Defence (Finance) O.M. F. No. 7(6)/Bud.-I/2012, dated 18th June, 2012]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
(FINANCE/BUDGET)
Subject: Monitoring and Control of Defence Expenditure.
Instructions have been issued from time to time regarding monitoring of progress
of defence expenditure. For this purpose Departmental Monitoring Groups headed by
FA(Acq) in respect of Acquisition heads and JS & Addl. FAs in respect of other heads
are required to hold regular meetings so as to prevent excesses/savings under various
Heads and bunching of expenditure towards the fag end of financial year.
2. As per the existing instructions, minutes of these meetings are required to be
submitted to the Secretary (Defence Finance) for information and a copy of the minutes
is also required to be sent to the Budget Section. However, during the current financial
year, Budget Section has not received copies of the minutes of any such meetings. It
is, therefore, requested that the meetings may be held regularly.
3. While reviewing progress of expenditure, it may be kept in view that:
(a) Funds are not parked with the PSUs and that there is proper jointness among
the three Services.
(b) Rush of expenditure towards the end of the financial year continues to be an
area of concern. As per extant instructions, as brought out in the economy
instructions issued by Deptt. of Expenditure on 5th June, 2008, not more than
one-third (33%) of the Budget Estimates may be spent in the last quarter of
the financial year.
(c) As stipulated in the economy instructions issued by Deptt. of Expenditure
on 5th June, 2008, all advance payments to implementing/production agencies
for any scheme/project/acquisition are limited to 10% of the approved financial
outlay in the fiscal year. Subsequent payments must be strictly related to
deliverables/milestones. This restriction may be applicable in the case where
expenditure is effected through a contract.
(d) Prior approval of Department of Expenditure is required for re-appropriation
under a sub-head by a sum of Rs. 5 crore or more and it must indicate matching
savings under the relevant sub-head.
(e) Economic measures as per instructions issued by Department of Expenditure
from time to time are observed. As there is need for further economy and
rationalization of expenditure, the guidelines issued by Deptt. of Expenditure
on 7th September, 2009 towards austerity measures especially towards 10%
cut on Non-Plan expenditure under the following heads may be observed:
(i) Domestic and Foreign Travel expenses.
37

38
(ii) Publications.
(iii) Professional Services.
(iv) Advertising and Publicity.
(v) Office expenses.
(vi) POL (except for security related requirement).
(vii) Other administrative expenses.
4. It has been observed that instance of excesses/savings under different grants
of the Defence Services are reported in the Report of C&AG of India highlighting
improper management of Defence expenditure. With a view to ensuring a constant and
uniform pace of expenditure vis-à-vis the sanctioned provisions it is essential that the
progress of expenditure is monitored at all levels and contained within the sanctioned
allocations in order to avoid any large scale savings or excesses. It is therefore,
reiterated that regular meetings may please be held to monitor the progress of
expenditure so as to prevent excess/savings under various Heads and bunching of
expenditure towards the end of financial year. The minutes of the meeting explaining,
inter alia, the position regarding budgetary targets/deviations, if any, and corrective
measures adopted may please be submitted to Secretary (Defence Finance) regularly
and copy endorsed to Director (Fin./Budget).
5. The above instructions as well as the earlier instructions issued on the subject
should be followed scrupulously in order to avoid any excess expenditure against any
Grants. Service Hqrs./Department are also requested to issue necessary instructions
in this regard to all the budget controlling authorities under their administrative control
to eliminate the instances of excess expenditure/savings. Office of the CGDA may also
issue suitable instructions to all concerned to ensure that payments are authorized
only against availability of funds.
Sd/-
(Amit Cowshish)
JS & Addl. FA(A)
FA(Acq.)
All Joint Secretaries/JS & Addl FAs/FMs
DG FP, PDNP, D Fin. P , DGOF
CCR&D DGQA, DGNCC, DGMF, DGAQA, Dte. of standardization,
CGDA
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 17(4)/Cir/Bud.-I/2006, dated 25th September, 2009]
Copy for information to:—
1. Deptt. of Economic Affairs (Budget Division), Ministry of Finance
2. DGADS.

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(BUDGET DIVISION)
SOUTH BLOCK, NEW DELHI
Subject: Guidelines on expenditure in the last quarter of the current financial year.
Reference: Secretary, DOE, MoF DO No. 21(1)-B(PD) 2009 dated 05.01.2010.
A copy of the DO letter cited under reference, reiterating that the expenditure in
the last quarter of the current financial year should not exceed 33% of the budgeted
amount and the expenditure during the month of March, 2010 should be limited to 15%
of Budget Estimates is enclosed for compliance. Where the RE for 2009-10 is lower
than Budget Estimates, actual expenditure may be kept within the RE ceilings.
2. While complying with the above instructions of the Ministry of Finance, the
instructions issued by this Division from time to time on monitoring and control of
Defence expenditure may also be adhered to.
Sd/-
(Amit Cowshish)
JS & Addl. FA(A)
Tel: 23012915
FA(Acq.)/DG(Acq.)/SS(DDP)/AS(M)/AS(A)
All Joint Secretaries/Addl. FAs & JS/FMs
DGFP Army HQ, ACIDS(PPFD); ACNS (P&P) Naval HQ; ACAS (D Fin. P) Air HQ;
DGOF; DGBR; DGCG; CCR&D, DGQA, DGNCC; DGAQA; CGDA; Dte. OF
Standardisation
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 9(1)/Bud.-I/2010, dated 22nd January 2010]
Copy to:—
JS & Addl. FA(R)
39

lfpo
O;; foHkkx
foÙk ea=ky;
Hkkjr ljdkj
SECRETARY
Department of Expenditure
Ministry of Finance
Government of India
ubZ fnYyh/New Delhi
TEL.: 23092929, 23092663
Fax : 23092546
Dear Smt. Liberhan, January 05, 2010
Ministry of Finance has been repeatedly advising prudent expenditure
management with a view to ensuring availability of adequate resources for meeting the
needs of critical development and priority schemes. You would be aware of the guidelines
for Expenditure Management—Economy Measures and Rationalization of Expenditure
issued by the department of Expenditure from time-to-time in this regard. Moreover,
cash management being an integral part of expenditure management policy, Ministry
of Finance has been emphasizing upon the importance of achieving an even pace of
expenditure throughout the year and necessity to curb rush of expenditure in the last
quarter of the financial year, which in most cases results in parking of funds. This
Ministry had also issued instructions reiterating strict adherence of instructions issued
on Monthly Expenditure Plan/Quarterly Expenditure Allocation in respect of Demands
for Grants which are covered by the Modified Cash Management System during the
last quarter of the financial year.
2. Notwithstanding the above, in the meeting of Hon'ble Finance Minister with
the Financial Advisers held on 29.10.2009 FM has, inter alia, reiterated that parking of
funds and rush of expenditure has to be avoided.
3. It is, therefore, reiterated that the expenditure in the last quarter of the current
financial year should not exceed 33% of the budgeted amount and the expenditure
during the month of March, 2010 should be limited to 15% of the Budget Estimate.
Where the Revised  Estimates for 2009-10 are lower than Budget Estimates, actual
expenditure may be kept within the RE ceilings.
4. With best wishes for the New Year.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Sushama Nath)
Smt. Indu Liberhan,
Secretary (Defence Finance)
Ministry of Defence,
Room No. 140,
South Block, New Delhi.
40
lq"kek ukFk
SUSHAMA NATH

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(BUDGET DIVISION)
Subject: Monitoring and Control of Defence Expenditure
Ref. (i) MoD (Fin) ID No. 17(4)/Cir/Bud-I/2006 dated 25th September, 2009
(ii) MoD (Fin) ID No. 10(7)/Bud-I/2007 dated 9th September, 2008
(iii) MoD (Fin) ID No. 17(3)/B-I/2004 dated 1.8.2007
(iv) MoD (Fin) ID No. 17(3)/B-I/2004 dated 24.7.2006
(v) MoD (Fin) ID No. 17(1)/B-I/1999 dated 13.12.2005
Instructions have been issued from time to time vide above-mentioned references;
as well as the previous ones, to monitor the progress of Defence Expenditure at all
levels to avoid any large scale savings or excesses. For this purpose, Departmental
Monitoring Groups headed by FA(Acq) in respect of Acquisition heads and JS &
Addl. FAs in respect of the other heads are  required to hold regular meetings to review
the progress and trends of expenditure and to identify steps to be taken to prevent
excess/savings under various heads and bunching of expenditure towards the end of
the financial year.
2. Public Accounts Committee as well as the C&AG of India have been
commenting on recurring instances of excess expenditure in some Grants of Defence
Services in their reports. Most recently an excess expenditure of Rs. 71.19 crore in the
Grant No. 22—Defence Services (Army) for the year 2007-08 has been pointed out in
the 7th Report of the PAC (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘‘Excesses over voted Grants and
Charged Appropriations (2007-2008)", which requires regularization by the Parliament
under Article 115(1)(b) of the Constitution.
3. As per the existing instructions, a copy of the minutes of the meeting of the
Monitoring Group is to be sent to the office of the Secretary (Defence Finance) for the
information of the Secretary (Defence Finance). However, such copies are being received
infrequently, which indicates that the Monitoring Groups for controlling Defence
expenditure are not meeting regularly.
4. It is, therefore, again reiterated that in order to ensure even flow of expenditure
and to avoid any excess expenditure/savings in any Grant, the instructions issued on
'Monitoring and Control of Defence Expenditure' should be followed strictly and
meetings of the Monitoring Groups should be held regularly. The proceedings of such
meetings should invariably be endorsed to the Secretary (Defence Finance).
Sd/-
(Amit Cowshish)
JS & Addl. FA(A)
41

42
FA(Acq.)
All Joint Secretaries/Addl. FAs & JS/FMs
DG FP  ACNS (P&P), ACAS ( Fin P) DGOF
CCR&D (R&M),  DGQA, DGNCC, DGMF, DGAQA, Dte. of Standardization
CGDA
[MoD (Fin) ID No. 17(4)/Cir/Bud-I/2006, dated 31st May, 2010]
Copy for information to:— PS to Secretary (Def. Fin.)

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(BUDGET DIVISION)
Subject: Monitoring and Control of Defence Expenditure.
The compiled expenditure figures for March supplementary 2011 reveal that
there has been excess expenditure to the tune of 1962.81 cr. under the revenue segment
and 1166.84 cr. under the capital segment of the Defence Budget.
2. Attention is invited in this regard to the observations of the Public Accounts
Committee (XV Lok Sabha) in their XXII Report in the context of excess of expenditure
over the voted grants and charged appropriations:
"The Committee feel that incurring such huge amounts of excess expenditure
over and above the budgetary provisions sanctioned by the Parliament at different
stages of budget do not augur well for ensuring proper and judicious utilization
of public funds besides undermining the Parliamentary financial control. The
unabated large excess expenditure by these Ministries is manifestation of the
fact that they are still far from taking any noteworthy and suitable remedial
measures to ensure proper budgeting and subsequent monitoring of the
expenditure flow. This is deplorable considering the fact that the Committee
have been emphasizing over the years for plugging the existing loopholes and
deficiencies with a view to  restricting the quantum of excess expenditure to the
barest minimum in future." [Para 1].
3. While the matter is being taken up with the respective FP Directorates and
also the CGDA, it is felt that the monitoring being done by the Finance Division also
needs to be streamlined and strengthened.
4. At the level of the Ministry, instructions have been issued from time to time
regarding monitoring of progress of defence expenditure. For this purpose,
Departmental Groups headed by FA (Acq.) in respect of Acquisition heads and
Addl. FAs in respect of other heads are required to hold regular meetings so as to
prevent excesses/savings under various heads and bunching of expenditure towards
the end of the financial year. Minutes of the monthly meeting are required to be
submitted to the SDF for information and a copy is required to be sent to Budget
Division.
5. Quarterly expenditure plans of the Services may be obtained at the beginning
of the financial year and can be used as benchmarks for the monthly reviews. The
following points should be brought out in the reviews:
(i) Progress of the expenditure on account of pay and allowances and whether
the existing allocation is adequate keeping in mind the past trends, new
raisings if any, change in entitlements and deployment of units.
43

44
(ii) Other obligatory expenditure — progress of outgo vis-à-vis projected quarterly
outgo.
(iii) Pro curement of stores, equipment and services — progress of expenditure
on account of committed liabilities and progress of new schemes.
(iv) Progress of works including maintenance/repairs and new works.
(v) Progress of land acquisition cases.
(vi) As far as the Capital Acquisition Budget is concerned, details of all the
committed liabilities (contract-wise) may be obtained in advance from the
respective services as also the proposed new schemes and the progress of
expenditure may be reviewed with reference to these.
6. The reviews should take into account factors like status of committed liabilities,
schemes in the pipeline, supply position against contracted schemes, actual drawal
from LCs, progress of civil works etc. Expenditure on account of already contracted/
committed schemes as also the progress of fresh schemes needs to be closely monitored.
It would be desirable to have a database of committed and new schemes from the
respective Services in advance, on the formats at A & B which could be refined to suit
the specific requirements. The feasibility of the exercise may be examined.
7. Instructions issued by the Finance Ministry regarding austerity measures and
cash management, which are circulated by the Budget Division from time to time,
should also be factored in.
8. The reviews may be carried on a monthly basis by the 10th of the following
month and on a fortnightly basis for January and February. In the month of March
however, the reviews may be carried out on a weekly basis. Any significant deviations
from the targeted expenditure and corrective measures if any, that are proposed to be
adopted, should be clearly brought out.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP).
FA(Acq.) & AS
All Joint Secretaries/Addl. FAs & JS/FMs
DG FP , ACNS (P&P), ACAS ( Fin. P) DGOF
CCR&D (R&M),  DGQA, DGNCC, DGMF, DGAQA, Dte. of Standardization
[MoD(Fin.) ID No. 5(3)/Bud.-I/2011, dated 31st May, 2011]

45
ANNEXURE  A
Monitoring of Committed Liabilities
Sl. Contract/S.O. No. and Item to T otal PDC as per Revised Payments Amount Likely Whether the
No. date be contracted contract PDC if any already made likely to month of inspection/
supplied value during the be paid outgo acceptance
previous year during testing etc. are
if any the on schedule
current
year

46
ANNEXURE  B
Monitoring of New Schemes
Sl. Name of the T otal Outgo Likely Stage of procurement process* PDC
No. scheme V alue planned month of
during outgo
the year
Acceptance RFP TEC PNC CFA Approval
of Necessity
*May be modified in line with the stages of procurement process on the Capital Acquisition  side for review of Capital Acquisit ion.

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(BUDGET I)
Subject: Monitoring and Control of Defence Expenditure.
Attention is invited to this Division's ID No. 5(3)/Bud.-I/2011, dated 31st May,
2011 on the above cited subject vide which instructions were issued that  steps may be
taken by the FP Directorates, CGDA and at the level of the Ministry of Defence,
Departmental Groups headed by FA (Acq.) in respect of Acquisition heads and Addl.
FAs in respect of other heads in order to prevent excesses/savings under various
heads.
2. The Public Accounts Committee, in Para 12 of its 36th Report on action
taken by the Government on their observations/recommendations contained in the
7th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘‘Excess over voted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2007-08), has observed that.... no firm measures have been put in place as yet by the
Ministries/Departments concerned to avoid excess expenditure by the defaulter
Ministries. The Committee's scrutiny reveals that the Ministries which scrupulously
adhere to the General Financial Rates and have unwavering commitment to financial
discipline and propriety do succeed in avoiding excess expenditure. The Committee
find no cogent reasons for the inevitability of excess expenditure when Government
get opportunities to present the Supplementary Demands for Grants during the three
sessions of Parliament in a year. In an age of e-governance made feasible by
computerization and instant connectivity between field formations, Subordinate Offices
and Head Quarters, irregularities like excess expenditure should not recur. The Committee
express their displeasure over the tepid approach of the defaulter Ministries/
Departments particularly for bad planning, lack of foresight and ineffective monitoring
on the part of budget controlling authorities while preparing both budget estimates as
well as Supplementary Demands for Grants. The Committee, therefore, reiterate the
need for scrupulous scrutiny of the budget proposal both at the time of preparation of
Demands for Grants, rigorous monitoring of the pace of expenditure and strict compliance
of General Financial Rules to eliminate the possibility of excess expenditure, under
spending, wrongful appropriation etc.’’
3. In the light of the observations of the PAC, all concerned authorities are once
again requested to take all necessary measures, including use of electronic systems, to
ensure proper planning and monitoring of expenditure vis-a-vis voted grants so that
excess expenditure is avoided. Further, scrupulous scrutiny of the budget proposal,
both at the time of preparation of Demands for Grants and Supplementary Demands for
Grants, and compliance to provisions of the General Financial Rules may also be
ensured to eliminate the possibility of excess expenditure, under-spending, wrongful
appropriations etc.
4. It is, therefore, against reiterated that in order to ensure even flow of expenditure
and to avoid any excess expenditure/savings in any Grant, the instructions issued on
'Monitoring and Control of Defence Expenditure' should be followed strictly and
47

48
meetings of the Monitoring Groups should be held regularly. The proceedings of such
meetings should invariably be endorsed to the Secretary (Defence Finance).
5. While complying with the above instructions, the instructions issued earlier
by this Division on Monitoring and Control of Defence expenditure may also be
adhered to.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA(VP)
FA(Acq.) & AS
All Joint Secretaries/Addl. FAs & JS/FMs
DGFP, ACNS(P&P), ACAS(Fin. P),  DGOF
CCR&D (R&M), DGQA, DGNCC, DGMF, DGAQA, Dte. of Standardisation
[MoD (Fin.) ID No. 7(5)/Bud.-I/2011, dated 29th November, 2011]
Copy for information to:
VCOAS, VCNS, VCAS, Chairman OFB
SA to RM, CISC & CGDA, DG (Acq.)
Action Taken (Ministry of Home Affairs)
In this context, it is stated that the Ministry of Home Affairs makes provision of
funds under the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme and the disbursement
of pension to Freedom Fighters/spouses of deceased freedom fighters/eligible
dependents of deceased freedom fighters is made through various branches of
Nationalized Banks/Treasuries spread all over the country. This Ministry does not
make direct release of funds to the beneficiaries nor can it control incurring of
expenditure. Individual Banks get their reimbursements from RBI, Nagpur. The RBI in
turn intimates the CPAO the expenditure booked to the Government account. The
banks also send their scrolls to CPAO. Treasuries make the payments to the beneficiaries
and raise their bill to the concerned AG . All Accountants General prefer their claims
with CPAO which in turn reimburses the amount to the State  Government. CPAO
intimates the Ministry of Home Affairs the expenditure booked every month under this
scheme.
Expenditure under the Central Samman Pension Scheme is committed expenditure.
Further, pension is disbursed through various branches of the public sector banks and
the Treasuries. It is, therefore, not always possible to restrict the expenditure in relation
to budget/revised estimates. The Central Pension Accounting Office (CPAO), which is
responsible for booking/reimubursing the expenditure, is invariably informed about
the budget provision and supplementary grants if approved so that they can keep
their booking of expenditure within available funds.
Through the scope for increase in number of freedom fighters entitled for pension
over preceding years is limited, however number of fresh cases (including the claims
preferred by the eligible dependents) adding up as a result of various court's judgments
is unpredictable, hence a realistic assessment of budgetary requirement cannot be
made.
The Ministry had initiated an exercise to prepare the data base of Central Samman
Pensioner/their eligible dependents who are living and actually drawing pension as on

49
date by calling information from all the Public Sector Banks and Treasuries. Most of
the information has been received and uploaded on the MHA's website. Similarly
compilation of re-verified data of the freedom fighters/dependents drawing pension
from the State Treasuries is in the progress. The offices of C&AG and RBI have been
advised to carry out comprehensive audit of disbursal of Samman Pension by State
Treasuries and Public Sector Banks respectively.
In this background it is reiterated that it is beyond the control of this Ministry to
restrict expenditure under Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme due to the very
nature of the Scheme.
Keeping in the fact that there was no lapse on the part of this Ministry as far as
excess expenditure under the Grant is concerned; the Public Accounts Committee may
please regularize the excess expenditure.
Sd/-
(S.C. Panda)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note'  has been vetted by O/O DGACR vide their U.O.
No. RR/6-21/12/-13/742,  dated 29.1.2013)
[Ministry of Home Affairs, O.M. No. 28/1/2012-Bgt. I, dated 18.2.2013]
Action Taken (Department of Posts)
Department of Posts ensures to make realistic requirement of funds and to maintain
fiscal discipline in spending the public money in future. For this purpose the instructions
have been issued to all the subordinates units/Budget Controlling authorities to project
realistic demand for fund and to monitor the expenditure accordingly. Moreover the
proposal of the Department was re-assessed by the Ministry of Finance to reduce the
ceilling of expenditure during the Pre-budget discussions which resulted in excess
expenditure.
Sd/-
DDG (PAF)
[MoC & IT/DoP, New Delhi OM. No. 20-5/2009-BGT (PA), dated Feb., 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
The above recommendation takes into account the excess expenditure incurred by
various Central Ministries as a whole including Railways. The observation of the
Committee is noted.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 7-RA-III/2-1/11, dated 27.04.2012 have have vetted the
A TN with the remarks ‘‘Seen. Thanks.’’
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Ex. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 15.06.2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee find that out of the total excess expenditure of  ` 14581.86 crore
incurred during 2009-2010 fiscal year, the bulk of the excess was registered by the Civil

50
Sector with 63.22 per cent i.e. ` 9218.89 crore under 4 Grants. The remaining sectors—
Defence Services, Postal Services and Railways accounted for 17.93 per cent (` 2615.23
crore under 2 Grants), 5.61 per cent (` 818.13  crore under a single Grant) and 13.23 per
cent (` 1929.61 crore under 8 Grants and 4 Charged Appropriations) respectively. The
Committee's scrutiny has revealed that there was miscalssification of expenditure  in
9 Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of Railways. Out of these,
Appropriation No. 10—Operating Expenses — Fuel and Appropriation No. 16—Assets,
Acquisition, Construction and Replacement — Capital turned into savings due
to misclassification. The other cases of misclassification of expenditure were
` (-) 1,00,42,724 under Grant No. 4 — Repairs and Maintenance of Permanent ways and
works; ` (-) 2,16,02,446 under Grant No. 5 — Repairs and Maintenance of Motive
Powers; ` (-) 3,37,33,837 under Grant No. 6—Repairs and Maintenance  of Carriages
and Wagons; ` (-) 1,09,82,967 under Grant No. 8 — Operating Expenses — Rolling
Stock and Equipment; ` (+) 2,87,69,130 under Grant No. 9 — Operating Expenses —
Traffic; ` (+) 20,28,81,145 under Grant No. 12 — Miscellaneous Working Expenses;
and ` (-) 12,46,284 under Grant No. 13 — Provident Fund, Pension and other Retirement
Benefits. Taking into account the effect these 7 cases of misclassification, the actual
excess expenditure relating to Ministry of Railways works out to ` 1922,83,61,188
instead of ` 1929,61,23,832 as indicated in Indian Railways Appropriation Accounts
(2009-2010). Accordingly, the total amount of actual excess expenditure incurred during
the financial year 2009-2010 which has to be regularised by Parliament under
Article 115(1) (b) of the Constitution, is of the order of  ` 14,575.08 crore.
[Appendix II, Paragraph 2 of Fortieth Report of PAC (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (Ministry of Finance)
The Excess expenditure that required to be regularised by Parliament under
Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution as brought out in the PAC's report were as
follows:—
Sl. Name of Amount of excess
No. Appropriation expenditure
Accounts (  `)
1. Civil 9218,88,74,896
2. Defence Services 2615,22,57,850
3. Postal Services 818,12,99,000
4. Railways 1922,83,61,188
Total 14575,07,92,934
• Ministry of Railways will have to take action for regularisation of the excess
expenditure of  ` 1922,83,61,188 as recommended by the PAC.
• Ministry of Finance while taking advance action for regularisation of excess
expenditure in respect of Civil, Defence Services and Postal Services noticed
a mistake that had occurred in the Appropriation Accounts of Postal Services.
It was observed that in order to regularise the excess expenditure, actual
expenditure  should have been mentioned in the last unit of Rupees instead
of mentioning the actual expenditure in thousand of Rupees.

51
• Department of Posts vide their letter dated 14th February, 2012 (copy enclosed)
duly  vetted  by  DG  (Audit)  had  revised  the  excess  expenditure  as
` 818,12,99,976 instead of ` 818,12,99,000 in respect of Grant No. 13—of
Department of Posts. Thus the excess expenditure (excluding Railways) were
understated by ` 976.
• Ministry of Finance vide AS (Budget)'s D.O. letter dated 16th February, 2012
(copy enclosed) had requested the PAC Branch, Lok Sabha Secretariat to
take further action to enable Ministry of Finance to obtain Parliament's
approval towards regularisation of excess expenditure (excluding Railways).
• Joint Secretary, Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch) vide D.O. letter dated
7th March,  2012 (copy enclosed) has communicated that ‘the Chairman, PAC
is pleased to observe that the Ministry of Finance may go ahead with the
regularisation of excess expenditure of  ` 14575,07,93,910 (including Railways)
instead of  ` 14575,07,92,934 as mentioned in para 14 of the
40th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)’.
• As such, the revised excess expenditure that required approval of Parliament
for the year 2009-2010 were as follows:—
Sl. Name of Amount of excess
No. Appropriation expenditure
Accounts ( `)
1. Civil 9218,88,74,896
2. Defence Services 2615,22,57,850
3. Postal Services 818,12,99,976
4. Railways 1922,83,61,188
Total 14575,07,93,910
• Of the above, Ministry of Railways were to take action for  regularisation of
excess expenditure of ` 1922,83,61,188 and the remaining amount of
` 12652,24,32,722 which represents the excess expenditure for 2009-2010
excluding Railways required to be regularised by Parliament, for which Ministry
of Finance had taken necessary action in the Budget Session, 2012 of the
Parliament. Details regarding approval of Parliament has been brought out
in the ATN relating to Para 14 of the 40th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha).
This Note has been vetted by Principal Director of Audit, Economic and Services
Ministries vide their U.O. No. AMG-I/V .V/ATN/2011-2012/16-18, dated the 30th May,
2012.
Sd/-
(Dr. Rajat Bhargava)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
New Delhi-110 001, O.M. No. F.7(2)-B(SD)/2011, dated the 29 June, 2012]

NO. 20-5/2009-BGT(PA)/3924-26
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & IT
DEPARTMENT OF POSTS
BUDGET BRANCH
NEW DELHI-110 001
Dated: 14 Feb. 2012
Subject:  Revised Detailed Explanatory Notes on excess expenditure under revenue
(V oted) in Appropriation Account for the year 2009-10 in respect of Demand
No. 13 of Department of Posts—Audit vetting.
The undersigned is directed to forward 40 copies (English) and 25 copies (Hindi)
of REVISED detailed explanatory note on excess expenditure under Revenue (V oted) in
Appropriation Account 2009-10 duly approved by the Secretary (Posts) and vetted by
DG (Audit) for its regularization in the forthcoming Budget Session of the Parliament.
The above excess expenditure has also been vetted by DG (Audit) vide DGAP&T
U.O. No. Rep-civil/1(b)400/Appropriation Accounts/DoP/423, dated 3.2.2012 (copy
enclosed)
Sd/-
(R. Magadevan)
ADG (BGT)
Shri Abhijit Kumar,
Director,
Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch),
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi-1.
Copy forwarded for information and necessary action to:—
(1) Shri Shaktikanta Das, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Department
of Expenditure, North Block, New Delhi-1 w.r.t. DO letter No. 7(2)-B(SD) 2011,
dated 5th January, 2012.
(2) Shri Roopal Prakash, Deputy Director (Report), Sham Nath Marg,
Delhi-110 054 w.r.t. DGAP&T U.O. No. Rep-Civil/1(b)/400/Appropriation/Accounts/
DoP/423, dated 3.2.2012 (3) ADG(IA) Department of Posts, New Delhi-1
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF AUDIT, P&T, DELHI-110 054
Ministry may refer to their U.O. No. 20-5/09 BGT(PA)/3480-82, dated 25.01.12.
The statement of excess expenditure over grant/appropriation appeared in CAG report
no. 1 for the year 2010-11 and Appropriation Account for 2009-10 is returned vetted
with the following remarks.
52

53
‘‘Ministry may ensure that correct figures are depicted in the Accounts.’’
This issues with the approval of Director General of Audit, P&T.
Sd/-
(Roopal Prakash)
Deputy Director (Report)
Shri R. Magadevan, Assistant Director General (Bgt), DoP Dak Bhawan, New Delhi
DGAP&T. U.O. No. Rep-Civil/1(b)400/Appropriation Accounts/DoP/423, dated 3.2.2012

SHAKTIKANTA DAS, IAS PAC MATTER Hkkjr ljdkj
Additional Secretary MOST IMMEDIATE foÙk ea=ky;
vkfFkZd dk;Z foHkkx
ubZ fnYyh&110 001
Government of India
D.O.F. No. 7(2)-B(SD)/2011 Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
New Delhi-110 001
Telephone: 23092804 Fax: 23094052
E-mail: s. das@nic.in
February 16,  2012
Dear Shri Singh,
Please refer to Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch)'s OM No. 27/2/1/2011/PAC,
dated 19th December, 2011 on the subject "Action taken on the recommendations
contained in the Fortieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Public Accounts Committee
on Excess over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2009-10)’’.
2. It is stated that the Department of Posts has now intimated the excess
expenditure by showing it in last unit of Rupee under Revenue (V oted) of their Demand
No. 13—Department of Posts as ` 818,12,99,976 instead of earlier mentioned
` 818,12,99,000 (copy enclosed). Thus, the total amount of excess expenditure of
` 14575,07,92,934 mentioned in paragraph 14 of Fortieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the
Public Accounts Committee would increase by ` 976 making it as ` 14575,07,93,910
(including Railways). As excess expenditure of ` 1922,83,61,188 relates to Railways,
excess expenditure excluding Railways would be ` 12652,24,32,722 which Ministry of
Finance is taking up for regularisation by Parliament in the ensuing session of Parliament.
3. Necessary Demands for Excess Grants, 2009-10 and connected Appropriation
Bill have been prepared and are ready for seeking President's recommendation and
Parliamentary approval. A line of confirmation would be required in this regard so that
we may proceed for regularisation of Excess Expenditure to the tune of ` 12652,24,32,722
(excluding Railways).
54

55
4. I would request you to kindly give this matter your immediate and personal
attention to enable finalisation of regularisation of excess demands in the forthcoming
Budget Session of Parliament.
Regards,
Yours Sincerely,
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Shri Devender Singh
Joint Secretary,
Public Accounts Committee
Lok Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi
Encl.: As above

DEVENDER SINGH Lok Sabha Secretariat
Joint Secretary 414, Parliament House Annexe
New Delhi-110 001
Phones: 23034414/23034416
Fax: 23792726
E-mail: d. singh@sansad.nic.in
D.O.No. 27/1/5/2011/PAC
7th March, 2012
Dear Shri Das,
Kindly refer to your D.O. letter No. D.O.F. No.7(2)-B(SD)/2011 dated 16 February,
2012 regarding reported discrepancy in the figures of excess expenditure of Department
of  Posts for the year 2009-10 and the meeting convened by the Chairman, PAC on
27.2.2012 with Secretary, Deptt. of Posts and Director General Audit when you were
also present.
In view of the regret expressed over the lapse and the assurance given that in
future expenditure will be shown in the last unit of Rupees in the Appropriation
Accounts, the Chairman, PAC is pleased to observe that the M/o Finance may go
ahead with the regularization of excess expenditure of ` 14575,07,93,910 (including
Railways) instead of  ` 14575,07,92,934 as mentioned in para 14 of the 40th Report of
PAC (15th Lok Sabha).
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Shri Shaktikanta Das, IAS
Additional Secretary
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
New Delhi-110 001
56

57
Action Taken (Department of Telecommunications)
It is a fact that excess expenditure to the tune of ` 87.82 crore in respect of
Department of Telecommunications was incurred during the year 2009-10 as detailed
hereunder:—
(Fig. in Rupees)
Section Final Grants Actual Expenditure Excess
Revenue (V oted) 10765,87,00,000 10853,68,60,488 87,81,60,488
The figures of excess expenditure as noted above is vetted by the DG AP&T
vide U.O. No. Rep-Civil/I (b) 400/Appropriation Accounts/DoT/271, dated 11.11.2010.
It is also apprised that the above referred excess expenditure in respect of
Department of Telecommunications has been regularized by the Parliament and intimated
vide Ministry of Finance No. F 7(2)-B(SD)/2011, dated 29th March, 2012.
Sd/-
Deputy Director General (TPF)
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 1-20/2012-B, dated 25 April, 2012]
This has been vetted by D.G. Audit (P&T) with remarks ‘‘seen, thanks’’ vide their
No. Report-Tele-II (b) 400 Appropriation Accts./2009-10/DoT/ 141, dated 04.06.2012.
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 20)]
In this paragraph, the Committee have observed that out of the total excess
expenditure of ` 14581.86 crore incurred during the 2009-10 fiscal year, the bulk of the
excess was registered by Civil Sector with 63.22 percent i.e. ` 9218.89 crore under
4 Grants. In this context, it is mentioned that as so far as Grant no. 20-Ministry of
Defence (Civil) is concerned the excess expenditure of only ` 95.32 crore was incurred
during the FY 2009-10 which is 1.03 per cent of Excess expenditure of ` 9218.89 crore
(63.22%) under 4 Grants relating to Civil sector and only 0.65 percent over the total
excess expenditure of ` 14581.86 crore incurred during the FY 2009-10. Further, the
Committee have recommended that the amount of actual excess expenditure incurred
during the financial year 2009-10 has to be regularized by Parliament under Article 115
(1) (b) of the Constitution.
The Demand for Excess Grants for ` 95,31,73,097 (0.88% over the Total Grant)
under Demand No. 20—Ministry of Defence (Civil) relating to the financial year
2009-10 have already been passed by the Lok Sabha and the connected Appropriation
Bill (No. 2), 2012 have also been passed by the Parliament and assented to by the
President of India on March 29, 2012 and the Act has been published in the Gazette of
India (Extraordinary) dated March 29,  2012 as Act  No. 19 of  2012.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)

58
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)]
In this paragraph, the Committee have observed that out of the total excess
expenditure of ` 14581.86 crore incurred during the 2009-10 fiscal year, the bulk of the
excess was registered by Civil Sector with 63.22 percent i.e. ` 9218.89 crore under
4 Grants. In this context, it is mentioned that as far as Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions
is  concerned the excess amount of ` 8999.54 crore was incurred during the FY 2009-10
which is 97.62 per cent of Excess expenditure of ` 9218.89 crore under 4 Grants relating
to Civil sector and only 61.72 percent over the total excess expenditure of ` 14581.86
crore incurred during the FY 2009-10. Further, the Committee have recommended that
the amount of actual excess expenditure incurred during the financial year 2009-10 has
to be regularized by Parliament under Article 115(1) (b) of the Constitution.
The Demand for Excess Grants for ` 8999.54 crore under Demand No. 21—
Defence Pensions relating to the financial year 2009-10 have already been passed by
the Lok Sabha and the connected Appropriation Bill (No. 2), 2012 have also been
passed by the Parliament and assented to by the President of India on March 29, 2012
and the Act has been published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary) dated March 29,
2012 as Act No.19 of 2012.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant Nos. 22 & 23)]
In this paragraph, the Committee has recommended that the amount of actual
excess expenditure incurred during the financial year 2009-10 be regularized by the
Parliament under Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution.
The Demand for Excess Grant for ` 24641111895 (Voted) & ` 6042498 (Charged)
under Demand No.22—Defence Services—Army and for ` 1505103457 under Demand
No.23—Defence Services—Navy relating to the financial year 2009-10 has already
been passed by the Lok Sabha and the connected Appropriation Bill (No.2), 2012 has
also been passed  by the Parliament and assented to by the President of India on
March 29, 2012 and the Act has been published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary)
dated March 29, 2012 as Act No.19 of 2012.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
[Ministry of Defence (Finance) O.M. F.No.7(6)/Bud-I/2012, dated 18th June, 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Home Affairs)
The Committee found that out of the total excess expenditure of  ` 14581.86 crore
incurred during the 2009-10 fiscal year. Out of this an amount of  ` 36.21 crore excess
was under Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of MHA for the year 2009-10. There was
no misclassification of expenditure under Grant No. 54—Other expenditure of MHA
which led to excess expenditure under the Grant. Explanatory note for Excess

59
expenditure of ` 36.21 crore duly vetted by DG(Audit), Central Expenditure is enclosed
as Annexure-I.
Sd/-
(S.C. Panda)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This ‘Action Taken Note’ has been vetted by O/o DGACR vide their U.O.
No. RR/6-21/12-13/742, Dated 29.1.2013)
[Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 28/1/2012-Bgt. 1, dated 18.2.2013]

ANNEXURE 1
dk;kZy; egkfuns'kd] ys[kkijh{kk] dsUnzh; O;;] ubZ fnYyh&110 002
d`i;k vius dk;kZy;@foHkkx@vuqHkkx ds uhps fn, x, i= dk lanHkZ ysaA blls lacaf/kr vkxs dh
dk;Zokgh dk fooj.k bl izdkj gS%μ
Ministry of Home Affairs may please refer to its letter No. 28/1/2012-Bgt.-I dated
2.1.2013 and reminder of even number dated 15.1.2012 regarding A TN on para
Nos. 1,2,3,5,8 and 14 of Fortieth Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses Over
V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2009-10)".
2. The ATN has been examined and this office has no further  comments to offer.
3. Ministry may prepare the final Note considering para 2 above. The requisite
number of copies in Hindi and English, duly signed by Secretary/Joint Secretary, may
be sent to the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance for onward transmission to Public
Accounts Committee Branch, Lok Sabha Secretariat. Both versions of the final action
taken notes may also be sent to this office and office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for reference and record.
4. A copy of the note is returned herewith.
5. This issues with the approval of the Director General of Audit.
Sd/-
(B. Srikanth)
Sr. Audit Officer (RR)
Ph: 23454212
Ministry of Home Affairs, North Block, New Delhi
[(Kind Attn.: Sh. P.S. Dravaria, Under Secretary to GoI]
DGACE's U.O. No RR/6-21.12.13/742 Dated: 
Action Taken (Department of Posts)
It is fact that as far as Department of Posts is concerned, the excess expenditure
incurred during the year 2009-10 is ` 818.13 crore over the sanctioned Grant including
supplementary demands for grants. It comes to ` 8181299976 in the last unit of Rupees
and requires its regularisation from the Parliament. The details are as under:—
(Fig. in Rs.)
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Revenue (V oted) 125267000000 133448299976 8181299976
The figures of excess expenditure as noted above is vetted by the DG (Audit)
vide U.O. No. Rep-Civil/1(b)400/Appropriation Accounts/DoP/423, dated 3.2.2012.
Sd/-
DDG (PAF)
[MoC & IT/ DoP, New Delhi OM. No. 20-5/2009-BGT (PA), dated Feb., 2012.]
60

61
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
 The excess expenditure of ` 1922.84 cr. incurred by Ministry of Railways during
2009-10 has been regularized by the Parliament in its budget session, 2012.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 7-RA-III/2-1/11, dated 27.04.2012 have vetted the ATN
with the remarks "Seen. Thanks.".
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Ex. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 15.06.2012]
Observation/Recommendation
An analysis of the Appropriation Accounts and Explanatory Notes furnished by
the defaulting Ministries/Departments shows that in 5 cases the percentage of excess
expenditure over the Total Grant was exceedingly high. These are 34.61 per cent in
respect of Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions, 6.53 per cent in respect of Grant No. 13—
Postal Services; 9.82 per cent in Grant No.13 (Railways)—Provident Fund, Pension
and Other Retirement Benefits; 228.86 per cent in Appropriation No. 3—General
Superintendence and Services; and the total amount in Appropriation No. 5—Repairs
and Maintenance of Motive Powers. Obviously, such a huge excess expenditure shows
beyond any manner of doubt that the entire budgetary process has gone awry in these
defaulter Ministries/Departments and there was abysmal failure on the part of the
budget controlling authorities and Financial Advisers in budget formulation, monitoring
and in submission of revised estimates in time. The Committee therefore recommended
that the Ministry of Finance cull out and prepare the list of budget controlling authorities
and Financial Advisers of the defaulting Ministries/Departments and furnish the same
to the Committee.
[Appendix II, Paragraph 4 of Fortieth Report of PAC (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (Ministry of Finance)
The list of Budget Controlling authorities and Financial Adviser of the Ministries/
Departments, in which excess expenditure occurred in the Financial Year 2009-10 is as
follows:—
Sl. Name of the Designation of Financial Adviser of the
No. Ministries/ Budget Controlling Ministries/Departments
Departments Authority
12 3 4
1. Department of Secretary, Department Adviser (Finance) [Member (Finance)],
Telecommu- of T elecommunications, Department  of Telecommunications,
nications Sanchar Bhawan, Sanchar Bhawan,
New Delhi. New Delhi.
2. Ministry of Secretary,  Ministry of Financial Adviser  (Defence Services), Ministry
Defence Defence, South Block, of Defence, South Block, New Delhi.
New Delhi.

62
3. Other Expenditure Secretary, Ministry of Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser,
of the Ministry Home Affairs, North Ministry of Home Affairs, North Block,
  of Home Block, New Delhi. New Delhi.
  Affairs
4.  Department of Secretary, Department Joint  Secretary and Financial Adviser,
 Posts of Posts, Dak Bhawan, Department of Posts, Dak Bhawan,
New Delhi. New Delhi.
5.  Ministry of Chairman, Railway Financial Commissioner (Railways),
 Railways Board, Ministry of Railway Board, Ministry of Railways,
Railways, Rail Bhawan, Rail Bhawan, New Delhi.
New Delhi.
This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-58/11-12/979,
dated the 23rd March, 2012.
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
New Delhi-110 001 O.M.No. F.7 (2)-B(SD)/2011, dated the April 2, 2012]
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)]
In this paragraph, the Committee have observed that Appropriation Accounts
and Explanatory Notes furnished by the defaulting Ministries/Departments shows
that in 5 cases the percentage of excess expenditure over the Total Grant was exceedingly
high. These are 34.61 per cent in respect of Grant No. 21 Defence Pensions. The
Committee further observed that such a huge excess expenditure shows beyond any
manner of doubt that the entire budgetary process has gone awry in these defaulter
Ministries/Departments and there was abysmal failure on the part of the budget
controlling authorities and Financial Advisers in budget formulation, monitoring and
in submission of revised estimates in time.
The excess of 34.61 per cent excess expenditure in r/o Grant No.  21—Defence
Pensions over the total Grant was mainly due to payment of revised pension at higher
rate under VI CPC than assessed and booking of pending pension scrolls received
from banks to clear amount under suspense.
Moreover, one of the reasons for these huge excess of 34.61 per cent in r/o Grant
No.  21—Defence Pensions over the total Grant was due to non-acceptance of request
for augmentation of funds made by PCDA(P) Allahabad/CGDA to Min. of Finance.
12 3 4

63
The under mentioned table shows the amount projected by PCDA(P)/O/o CGDA and
the amount approved by Min. of Finance over the last few years.
(Rs. in crores)
Financial Projection by Approved by Actual RBI Cash
Y ear PCDA(P)/ Min. of Finance Expenditure flow
Recommended by
Defence/Finance
2008-09 21758.00 20233.00 20233.00 22947.00
2009-10 29000.00 26000.00 34999.00 35820.00
2010-11 37697.00 34000.00 37336.00 36976.00
2011-12 37547.00 34000.00 33997.83 38797.00
(Upto March (Upto March
Corr.) Corr.)
However, as a measure of control, the Government of India in the Ministry of
Defence have been issuing instructions from time to time to the budget estimating
authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare their budget proposals on realistic basis
taking into consideration all the related aspects such as commitments, trend of
expenditure and the anticipated expenditure and concrete remedial action must be
taken immediately to arrest the excess to an optimum level.
Necessary action in this  regard would need to be taken by Ministry of Finance.
Any instruction issued by Ministry of Finance in this regard would certainly be followed
by this Ministry.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken (Department of Posts)
Department of Posts ensures that the requirement of funds are made on realistic
basis and fiscal discipline is maintained in incurring expenditure in future. The suitable
necessary instructions have been issued to all the subordinate units/budget controlling
authorities to observe strict financial discipline in forming budgetary estimations and
in incurring expenditure too.
Sd/-
DDG (PAF)
[MoC & IT/DoP, New Delhi OM. No. 20-5/2009-BGT (PA), dated Feb., 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
Though the excess has been high in terms of percentage under Appropriation
Nos. 3 & 5, the amount involved is only ` 0.24 cr. and ` 0.02 cr., respectively. However,
under Grant No. 13, the excess has been high in terms of both percentage and amount.

64
The excess under this Grant has been due to the difficulty in assessing the impact of
implementation of recommendations of the 6th CPC on pension payments.
The recommendation in this para pertains to Ministry of Finance for taking the
necessary action.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 7-RA-III/2-1/11, dated 27.04.2014 have vetted the ATN
with the remarks "Seen. Thanks."
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Ex. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' Case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 15.06.2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to observe that the Ministry of Railways has
been persistently incurring huge excess expenditure during the financial year 2000-01
to 2009-10 while the Ministry of Defence  had been spending much above the authorized
expenditure  during each of the financial years 2000-01 and 2003-04 to 2009-10. To
elucidate, the Ministry of Railways incurred excess expenditure  of  ` 0.14 crore in
5 Grants/Appropriations  in 2000-01, ` 210.71 crore in  8 Grants/Appropriations in
2001-02, ` 323.65 crore in 11 Grants/Appropriations in 2002-03, ` 1136.92 crore in
9 Grants/Appropriations in 2003-04; ` 2151.99 crore in 10 Grants/Appropriations in
2004-05, ` 2322.46 crore in 11 Grants/Appropriations in 2005-06, ` 365.16 crore in 8
Grants/Appropriations in 2006-07, ` 51.22 crore in 8 Grants/Appropriations in 2007-08,
` 532.12 crore in 8 Grants/Appropriations in 2008-09, ` 1922.84 crore in 9 Grants/
Appropriations in 2009-10. The Committee also find that the Ministry of Defence
incurred an excess expenditure of ` 229.70 crore in a single Grant in 2000-01, ` 37.50
crore in a single Grant in 2003-04, ` 41.99 crore in two Grants in 2004-05, ` 44.84 crore in
two Grants in 2005-06, ` 667.17 crore  in a single Grant in 2006-07, ` 71.19 crore in a
single Grant in 2007-08, ` 742.61 crore in two Grants in 2008-09 and ` 2615.23 in two
Grants in 2009-10.
This recurring phenomenon of wide  variations between the budgetary provisions
and the actual expenditure by these important Ministries over such long periods has
led the Committee to arrive at the conclusion that the estimation of requirement of
funds is still done in a haphazardly manner devoid of sound budgetary presumptions.
Needless to say the existing budgeting mechanism  in these Ministries still suffers
from various loopholes and lacunae which are nullifying the attempts of the Government
to enhance accuracy level of their budgetary projections to achieve the desired
improvements. The persistence of such a pernicious trend is bound to further deteriorate
the fiscal discipline leading to financial ad-hocism, and mal administration. The
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministries of Railways and Defence to overhaul
their budgetary mechanism drastically, introduce IT and e-Governance in their financial
administration and fix responsibility against the budget controlling authorities in case
their estimation go awry leading to excess expenditure.
[Para No. 6 of 40th Report of PAC 2011-12, (15th Lok Sabha)]

65
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 20)]
In view  of the persistence recurrence of excess expenditure in the Ministry of
Railways and Ministry of Defence etc., the Committee have in this paragraph impressed
upon the Ministry of Railways and Defence drastically, introduce IT and e-Governance
in their financial administration and fix responsibility against the budget controlling
authorities in case  their estimation go awry leading to excess expenditure. In this
context, it is to mention that excess under Grant No. 20—Ministry of Defence (Civil)
estimate is not a recurring instance and excess under this Grant has not been registered
for earlier financial year till 2008-09.
Moreover, the observation made by PAC has been noted by the Ministry of
Defence (Civil) for future guidance and for compliance. In this regard any instructions
issued by Ministry of Finance would certainly be followed by this Ministry.
 Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)]
In view of the persistence recurrence of excess expenditure in the Ministry of
Railways and Ministry of Defence etc. The Committee have in this paragraph impressed
upon the Ministries of Railways and Defence to overhaul their budgetary mechanism
drastically, introduce IT and e-Governance in their financial administration and fix
responsibility against the budget controlling authorities in cases their estimation go
awry leading  to excess expenditure.
In this regard the Ministry of Defence, from time to time, have issued instructions
to exercise  strict control on progress of Expenditure in order to avoid any large-scale
savings or excess under any grant relating to Civil Estimate and Defence Pensions.
Moreover due to persistence recurrence of excess expenditure  in Defence
Pensions views  of the Committee, regarding overhaul of budgetary mechanism
drastically, introduce IT and e-Governance regarding Defence Pensions were sought
from the user Department [i.e. with O/o CGDA and PCDA(P) Allahabad] in the year
2011 and the user Department have informed the following Action plan for automating
classification and accounting of Pension expenditure.
• New computer application for pension sanction is being developed to create
pension date base at the time of issue of PPOs.
• In order to automate disbursement and accounting of pension payments made
by departmental PDA i.e. DPDO,  a web based online application has been
implemented in all 61 DPDOs.
• Pension disbursement agencies viz. Banks have been approached for transmission
of pension payment data electronically so as to enable PCDA(P) Allahabad to
ensure correct and timely  booking of pension expenditure by automating
classification and accounting system.

66
(a) In so far as putting in place novel ways and means to make the mechanism of
Budget  estimating more realistic and pragmatic is concerned, this Ministry
would take follow up action on the instructions of Ministry of Finance in this
regard.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant Nos. 22 and 23)]
In this paragraph the Committee  have pointed out the pernicious trend of excess
expenditure  incurred in Ministry of Defence during the years 2000-01 and 2003-04 to
2009-10 with the conclusion  that the estimation of requirement of funds is still done in
a haphazardly manner devoid of sound budgetary presumption. The Committee
therefore has desired that the Ministry should overhaul the budgetary mechanism
drastically introducing IT and e-Governance.
In this regard, it is stated here that the budgetary  projections for the Defence
Services are made on the basis of the demands projected by the concerned Services
through their Financial Planning Directorates. However, allocation provided  by the
Ministry of Finance, in general, is less than the projected requirement.
However, efforts, including use of Information Technology, are being made to
streamline the budgetary processes so that the occurrence of excess expenditure is
avoided or reduced to barest minimum.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
Addl. FA (VP) & JS
[Ministry of Defence (Finance) O.M. F. No. 7(6) Bgt.-I/2012, dated 18th June, 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
The Committee may appreciate the fact that during the period mentioned above,
the excess incurred by Ministry  of Railways was on a decreasing trend from 2005-06
till 2007-08. However, during 2008-09 and 2009-10, the Ministry has incurred excess
mainly due to difficulty in accurately assessing the impact of implementation of the
recommendations of the 6th CPC. The Ministry agrees with the Committee that the
budgetary mechanism needs to be strengthened in the light of introduction of IT and
e-Governance. The concern of the Committee is being impressed upon the Zonal
Railways to be more responsible in estimating the expenditure to avoid the incidence
of excess expenditure (copy enclosed).

67
Audit vide their U.O. No. 18-RA-III/2-1/11, dated 08.06.2012 have vetted the
A TN with the remarks "Seen. Thanks."
Sd/-
( V . Vaidehi)
Ex. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways ' case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 15.06.2012.]
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 2012-B-342 New Delhi, dated 01.04.2012
The General Managers,
All Indian Railways
Subject: Excess over V oted Grants/Charged Appropriations — 2009-10.
In 2009-10, Railways incurred an excess expenditure of Rs. 1922.84 cr. under 8
Grants/Appropriations. This 'Excess' has been viewed seriously by the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha), vide their 40th Report. The Committee has also taken
serious exception to the persistent incurrence of huge excess-expenditure during the
financial years 2000-01 to 2009-10 by Ministry of Railways and made the following
observations/recommendations:
"This recurring phenomenon of wide variations between the budgetary
provisions and the actual expenditure by the these important Ministries (Ministry of
Railways & Defence) over such long periods has led the Committee to arrive at the
conclusion that the estimation of requirements of funds is still done in a haphazardly
manner deviod of sound budgetary presumptions. Needless to say the existing
budgeting mechanism in these Ministries still suffers from various loopholes and
lacunae which are nullifying the attempts of the Government to enhance accuracy
level of their budgetary projections to achieve the desired improvements. The
persistence of such a pernicious trend is bound to further deteriorate the fiscal discipline
leading to financial ad-hocism,  and maladministration. The Committee, therefore,
impress upon the Ministries of Railways and Defence to overhaul their budgetary
mechanism drastically, introduce IT and e-Governance in their financial administration
and fix responsibility against the budget controlling authorities in case their estimation
go awry leading to excess expenditure.'
In view of the above observation, the Railways are required to take immediate
action to curb the excess expenditure.
Sd/-
(Jagmohan Gupta)
Executive Director, Finance (Budget)
Railway Board

68
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee find that the Appropriation Accounts relating to Civil, Defence
Services and Postal services for the financial year 2009-10 were laid in Parliament
on 18.03.2011. However, the Appropriation Accounts —Railways (2009-10) was laid
in the Parliament only on 05.08.2010 after a delay of 4 months and 18 days. It may be
pointed out that in the preceding years also the Appropriation Accounts —Railways
(2007-08) and the Appropriation Accounts— Railways (2006-07)  were presented to
Parliament after a delay of more than 5 months and 10 months respectively which
resulted in delay in the finalization of the Public Accounts Committee's Seventh
Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses Over Voted Grant and Charged Appropriations
(2007-08)" and Eightieth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses Over Voted Grant
and Charged Appropriation (2006-07)" . This in turn had delayed the regularizations
of excess expenditure incurred during those financial years. In paragraph 57 of the
Eightieth Report (14th Lok Sabha), the Committee had urged upon the Ministry of
Railways and the Ministry of Finance to take necessary remedial measures to ensure
timely presentation of the Appropriation Accounts expecially the Appropriation
Accounts — Railways. Further, in paragraph 52 of the Seventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha), the Committee had recommended the Ministry of Railways to take
urgent necessary and corrective action to timely present the Appropriation Accounts—
to Parliament so that all instances of excess expenditure are gone into the Committee
expeditiously before regularization. The Committee deplore the repeated failures on
the part of the Railways to lay their Appropriation Accounts in time. Taking a serious
view of the callous attitude on the part of the Ministry of Railways, the Committee only
wish to exhort the Ministry of Railways and Financial Commissioner, Railways to put
their financial administration in order or be prepared for their oral examination if
they fail to stem the rot.
[Sl. No. 7,  Appendix II, Para No. 7 of the 40th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
This sensitivity in the matter has been taken note of by Ministry of Railways and
sincere efforts would be made so that there is no delay in presentation of Appropriation
Accounts of Ministry of Railways in future. Instructions will once again be reiterated
to Railways to put in place an effective monitoring system including liaison with Audit
to ensure timely preparation, audit vetting and submission of Appropriation Accounts
so that any delay on this account is averted.
It is pertinent to state that as per procedure, Ministry of Railways submits
stipulated copies of Appropriation Accounts duly signed by Financial Commissioner,
Railways and Chairman, Railway Board, to the office of Comptroller & Auditor General
of India for signature and coordination with Ministry of Finance for presentation of
Appropriation Accounts — Railways along with C & AG's Report in Parliament.
As regards the three years viz. 2006-07, 2007-08 & 2009-10 where the delay in the
presentation of Appropriation Accounts — Railways in Parliament has been pointed

69
out, the position of date of submission, presentation to Parliament and reason for
delay is as shown below:—
Y ear Date of Signed by Date of Reasons for delay in submission
submission C&AG presentation of  Appropriation Accounts in
to the o/o to Parliament
the C&AG Parliament
2006-07 10.03.08 11.04.08 24.10.2008 Due to adjournment of
Lok Sabha on 05.05.2008
2007-08 27.03.09 29.06.09 24.07.2009 Being short term interim budget
session due to General Elections
2009-10 24.03.11 01.04.11 05.08.2011 Due to adjournment (sine die) of
Lok Sabha on 25.03.2011
Audit vide their U.O. No. 26-RA-III/2-1/11, dated 17.07.2012 have vetted the
A TN with the remarks ‘‘Seen. Thanks.’’
Sd/- 
(V. V aidehi)
Ex-Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 31.07.2012.]
Vijaya Kanth
Financial Commissioner (Railways).
D.O.No. 2012/APP/7-2 Para 7 of 40th Report New Delhi, dated 28.02.2012
Dear Shri/Smt.........
Sub.:—Action Taken Note on Fortieth Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha) on ‘‘Excesses over V oted Grants & Charged Appropriations
(2009-10)’’
The Public Accounts Committee has time and again expressed their concern
over late submission of Appropriation Accounts in the Parliament. The comments
made on Appropriation Accounts 2009-10 are reproduced below:—
"The Committee deplore the repeated failures on the part of the Railways to lay
their Appropriation Accounts in time. Taking a serious view of the callous attitude on
the part of the Ministry of Railways, the Committee only wish to exhart the Ministry
of Railways and Financial Commissioner, Railways to put their financial
administration in order or be prepared for their oral examination if they fail to stem
the rot."
In this regard attention is invited to board's letters No. 2010/APP/6-1/2009-2010
dated 19.04.2010, 28.07.2010 & 23.08.2010 emphasizing the need for strict observance

70
of the stipulated time schedule for submission of various statements of Appropriation
Accounts to Audit as well as Board's office as the non-submission/delayed submission
held up consolidation and submission thereof to the office of Dy. C&AG (Rlys.)/
Parliament. Despite these repeated instructions, there appears to be little improvement
in the matter and statements relating to Appropriation Accounts are still being received
late in the Railway Board.
I would like to request you to kindly put in place an effective monitoring system
including liaison with Audit by your officers to ensure timely preparation, audit vetting
and submission of Appropriation Accounts so that delay on this account is averted in
future.
Yours sincerly,
Sd/-
(Vijaya Kanth)
General Managers
S. Shri/Smt. S.K. Jain/CR, G.C. Agarwal/ER, Varun Bharthuar/EC, Indra Ghosh/Eco,
B.N.  Rajasekhar/NR, B.P. Khare/NC, K.B.L. Mittal/NE, Keshav Chandra/NF,
R.C. Agarwal/NW, Deepak Krishan/SR, A.K. Verma/SE, G.N. Asthana/SC, A.K. Mittal/
SW, Arunendra Kumar/SEC, Mahesh Kumar/WR, S.V. Arya/WC, Rajeev Bhargava/
RWF, Radhey Shyam/CLW , A.K. Khanna/ICF., P.B. Murty/MTP/Kol.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee observe that the Explanatory notes pertaining to the excess
registering Grants/Appropriations as highlighted in the Appropriation Accounts
(Civil), the Appropriation Accounts (Defence Services) and the Appropriation Accounts
(Postal Services) for the financial year 2009-10 were due for submission to the
Committee on or before 18th March, 2011. However, the Ministries of Home Affairs,
Defence and Communications and Information Technology (Department of Posts)
furnished their Explanatory Notes after a delay of 2 months 16 days, 2 months 20 days
and 20 days respectively. The Committee would like to impress upon all the Ministries
that delay in submission of Explanatory Notes by them impedes the Committee's
examination of excess expenditure, a direct consequence of which is delay in the
regularization of the unauthorized expenditure by the Parliament. The Committee
note that submission of the Explanatory Notes for excess expenditure should not be
delayed as they have  ample time to prepare and submit them to Parliament and in fact,
some of the Ministries submitted them well before the stipulated time. The Committee
would, also like the Ministry of Finance to put in place a centralized monitoring
network to ensure preparation and submission of Explanatory Notes by the defaulter
Ministries/Departments within the prescribed time frame. The Committee further
recommended that in future the contributory reasons for delay in submission of
Explanatory notes should invariably be appended in the relevant Explanatory notes for
their scrutiny.
[Sl. No. 8, Appendix II, Para No. 8 of the 40th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

71
Action Taken (Ministry of Finance)
The observation of the Committee has been noted. The Department, vide
OM No. 12(1) E.Coord./2012, dated 21.05.2012 (copy enclosed) issued instructions to
all Secretaries to the Government of India, to carefully monitor the submission of
Explanatory Notes and to devise and make functional a mechanism for timely preparation
and submission of Explanatory Notes. Ministries/Departments have also been advised
to ensure that, in future, the reasons contributing to delay in submission of Explanatory
Notes are invariably appended in the relevant Explanatory notes for their scrutiny.
Monitoring Cell is in the process of introduction of e-monitoring for centralized
monitoring of preparation and submission of Explanatory Notes. This system will
provide an MIS for strengthening, streamlining and speeding up the task of submission
of Explanatory notes to the Lok Sabha Secretariat. The APMS web portal
(http//:apms.nic.in), which monitors the pending CAG paras will be augmented to
include the Explanatory Notes on saving of `100 crore and above and excess
expenditure over the budget grants.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-1/12-13/165,
dated 10th July, 2012.
Sd/-
(H. Pradeep Rao)
Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure, OM No. 2/6/2010-MC/EN
dated  May, 2012]

FILE NO. 12(1) E. COORD./2012
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
New Delhi, dated 21st May, 2012
OFFICE   MEMORANDUM
Subject:Development of the centralized monitoring network to ensure timely
preparation and submission of Explanatory Notes—regarding.
The Explanatory Notes on Excess expenditure/savings of over Rs. 100 crores in
respect of each Ministry/Department in the Government of India are required to be
submitted to the Lok Sabha Secretariat as per prescribed time schedule. In view of the
persistent delays in the submission of the Explanatory Notes  on the part of some of
the Ministries/Department, PAC, in para  65 of the 1st Report of 11th Lok Sabha, had
recommended that the Monitoring Cell may be entrusted with the task of coordination,
collection and timely submission of the relevant Explanatory Notes, duly vetted by
Audit, to the Committee on excess expenditure/saving of Rs. 100 crore and above in
respect of all the Annual Appropriation Accounts of the Union Government. Secretaries
of the administrative Ministry/Department concerned were held personally responsible
for any delay in submission of the requisite Explanatory Notes.
2. The Public Accounts Committee, in Para 8 of their 40th Report of
15th Lok Sabha, again taking a serious view on the delay in submission of Explanatory
Notes  has further observed as under:—
"The Committee observe that the Explanatory Notes pertaining to the excess
registering Grants/Appropriations as highlighted in the Accounts (Civil), the
Appropriation Accounts (Defence Services) and the Appropriation Accounts
(Postal Services) for the financial year 2009-10 were due for submission to the
Committee on or before 18th March, 2011. However, the Ministries of Home
Affairs, Defence and Communications and Information Technology (Department
of Posts) furnished their Explanatory notes after a delay of 2 months 16 days,
2 months 20 days and 20 days respectively. The Committee would like to
impress upon all the Ministries that delay in submission of Explanatory Notes
by them impedes the Committee's examination of excess expenditure, a direct
consequence of which is delay in the regularization of the unauthorized
expenditure by the Parliament. The Committee note that submission of the
Explanatory Notes for excess expenditure should not be delayed as they have
ample time to prepare and submit them to Parliament and in fact, some of the
72

73
Ministries submitted them well before the stipulated time. The Committee would,
also like the Ministry of Finance to put in place a centralized monitoring
network to ensure preparation and submission of Explanatory Notes by the
defaulter Ministries/Department within the prescribed time frame. The
Committee further recommend that in future the contributory reasons for delay
in submission of Explanatory Notes  should invariably be appended in the
relevant Explanatory Notes  for the scrutiny."
3. In view of the recommendation of the Committee, an e-monitoring system is
being introduced in Monitoring Cell (D/o. Expenditure) for centralized monitoring of
preparation and submission of  explanatory notes. The system so developed will
provide an MIS for strengthening, streamlining and speeding up the task of submission
of Explanatory Notes to the Lok Sabha Secretariat. In this context, the Audit Para
Monitoring System (APMS) web portal (http//: apms.nic.in) which monitors the pending
CAG paras will be augmented to include the Explanatory Notes on Saving of Rs. 100 cr.
and above and Excess expenditure over the budget grants. A further communication in
this regard will follow.
4. As per the directions of the Committee, submission of Explanatory Notes
needs to be carefully monitored by the Secretary of the Ministry/Department
administering the respective Grants. As such, a mechanism for preparation and
submission of Explanatory Notes within the prescribed time schedule to Lok Sabha
Secretariat may be devised and made functional within your Ministry/Department.
Further as also directed by the Committee all the Ministries/Departments may ensure
that in future the reasons contributing to delay in submission of Explanatory Notes are
invariably appended in the relevant Explanatory Note for their scrutiny.
5. The report regarding timely submission of Explanatory Notes for your Grant
may be sent to the Monitoring Cell (DoE, MoF) for onward transmission to the
Lok Sabha Secretariat within the prescribed time frame. The Nodal Officer for PAC
matters may coordinate with the Monitoring Cell in this regard.
6. This issues with the approval of Secretary (Expenditure).
Sd/-
(Madhulika P. Sukul)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
Tel. No. 23093283
1. All Secretaries of GoI
2. All Financial Advisers
Copy to:
(i) Controller  General of Accounts
(ii) Monitoring Cell
Action Taken (Ministry of Defence)
In this paragraph the Committee have pointed out the delay in furnishing the
Explanatory Notes for excess registering grants in respect of Defence Services for the
Financial year 2009-10. Such delays in furnishing explanatory notes to the Committee
will be avoided in future.

74
As a matter of fact, in view of the delay in processing Explanatory Notes last
year, the Explanatory Notes for the excess registering grants in respect of Defence
Services for the year 2010-11 have already been furnished to the Lok Sabha Secretariat
through Monitoring Cell of Ministry of Finance on 2nd May,  2012 with copies to the
PAC Branch. The Appropriation Accounts (Defence Services) for the year 2010-11
were laid before the Parliament on 24.04.2012. In future, efforts will be made to submit
vetted copy of Explanatory Notes without delay along with Appropriation Accounts
(Defence Services).
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
Addl. FA (VP) & JS
[Ministry of Defence (Finance) O.M. F.No. 7(6)/Bud.-I/2012,
dated 18th June, 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Home Affairs)
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted with consideration and
will be taken care of to avoid such situations in respect of the Grant Controlled by this
Ministry. As desired by the Committee the Ministry of Home Affairs will scrupulously
follow all the instructions/directions issued in this regard.
Sd/-
(S.C. Panda)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/O DGACR vide their U.O.
No. RR/6-21/12-13/742, dated 29.1.2013)
[Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 28/1/2012-Bgt.I, dated 18.2.2013]
Action Taken (Department of Posts)
As regards 20 days delay in submission of Explanatory notes by the Department
of Posts as stated in the para, it is submitted that the explanatory notes were submitted
initially on 18.2.2012 vide this Directorate letter No. 20-5/2009-BGT(PA) which was well
before the  stipulated time. Later on, the Department was to clarify some queries raised
by the Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch) which were also complied with instantly,
by the Department. However, the Department ensures that the explanatory notes are
submitted within the stipulated time in future.
Sd/-
DDG (PAF)
[MoC & IT/DoP, New Delhi OM. No. 20/5/2009-BGT(PA), dated Feb., 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee find that the Ministry of Defence incurred an excess expenditure
of Rs. 8999.54 crore under Revenue Section (V oted) of Grant No. 21-Defence Pensions
which alone accounted for 97.62 per cent of the total excess expenditure incurred in the
Civil Sector. The Explanatory Note furnished by the Ministry of Defence inter-alia

75
states that the excess was mainly due to payment of revised pension at higher rates
under the 6th Central Pay Commission Report than assessed, booking of pending
pension scrolls received from banks etc. The Committee's examination has revealed
that this Grant had also registered an excess expenditure of Rs. 13.33  lakh during the
previous financial year 2008-09. As a mark of remedial action taken in the regard, the
Ministry of Defence stated in their Explanatory Note that necessary instructions have
been issued to all concerned to prepare their Budgetary; proposal on realistic basis.
The Committee feel that this alone will not yield the desired results as an analysis of
the causes of the excess expenditure on account of pension payments suggests that
there is lack of comprehensive networking and coordination amongst pension data
management and accounting information systems are not in order. This clearly shows
that the Ministry of Defence have not taken any concrete measures to revamp the
system so that the pension liability can be correctly forecast and factored in the
budgetary estimation. Consequently, when the recommendations of the 6th Central
Pay Commission were implemented, the flow of funds was thrown out of gear resulting
in huge excess expenditure. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should
look into all aspects for taking necessary corrective action so that the existing
deficiencies and shortcomings in the pension payment are certified and recurrence of
excess expenditure is either avoided or greatly minimized in future. The Ministry should
also adopt e-governance model and utilize the information technology services/tools
so as to establish a centralized data base of pensioners and networking of all the banks
so as to arrive at a correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular
year.
[Para No. 9 of 40th Report of PAC 2011-12 (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (Ministry of Defence)
In this paragraph, the Committee have observed that Ministry of Defence incurred
an excess expenditure of Rs. 8999.54 crore under Revenue Section (Voted) of Grant
No. 21—Defence Pensions which alone accounted for 97.62 per cent of the total
excess expenditure incurred in the Civil Sector. The Committee feels that there is lack of
comprehensive networking and coordination amongst pension data management and
accounting information systems are not in order. The Committee feel that the Ministry
of Defence have not taken any concrete measures to revamp the system so that the
pension liability can be correctly forecast and factored in the budgetary estimation.
Consequently, when the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission were
implemented, the flow of funds was thrown out of gear resulting in huge excess
expenditure. The Committee also feel that the Ministry would also adopt e-governance
model and utilize the information technology services/tools so as to establish a
centralized data base of pensioners and networking of all the banks so as to arrive at a
correct estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular year.
The excess of  ` 8999.54 crore under Revenue Section (V oted) of Grant No. 21-
Defence Pensions over the total Grant was mainly due to payment of revised pension
at higher rate under VI CPC than assessed and booking of pending pension scrolls
received from banks to clear amount under suspense.
Moreover, one of the reasons for this huge excess of 34.61 percent in r/o Grant
No. 21-Defence Pensions over the total Grant was due to non-acceptance of request
for augmentation  of funds made by PCDA(P) Allahabad/CGDA to Min. of Finance due
to shortage of funds. The undermentioned table shows the amount projected by

76
PCDA(P)/O/o CGDA and the amount approved by Min. of Finance over the last few
years.
(Rs. in crores)
Financial Projection by Approved by Actual RBI Cash
Y ear PCDA(P)/ Min. of Finance Expenditure flow
Recommended by
Defence/Finance
2008-09 21758.00 20233.00 20233.00 22947.00
2009-10 29000.00 26000.00 34999.00 35820.00
2010-11 37697.00 34000.00 37336.00 36976.00
2011-12 37547.00 34000.00 33997.83 38797.00
(Upto March (Upto March
Corr.) Corr.)
Further, in view of the fact that expenditure, for which cash flow has already
taken place in the books of RBI, was required to be brought to account, the pending
pensions scrolls amounting to ` 8999.54 crore had to be booked under the Defence
Pensions Head to clear the amount laying under RBI suspense to reflect the true
picture of cash flow from the Govt. account. It is also mentioned that the payments of
pension to the Defence Pensioners is a committed expenditure and cannot be stopped
for the want of Budget.
However, as a measure of control, the Govt. of India in the Ministry of Defence
have been advising the budget estimating authorities of Defence Pensions to prepare
their budget proposals on realistic basis taking into consideration all the related aspects
such as commitments, trend of expenditure and the anticipated expenditure and concrete
remedial action must be taken immediately to arrest the excess to an optimum level.
In this regard, this Office has issued instructions vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2009-10/721
dt. 29.06.2010 to avoid any excess expenditures over the sanctioned Grant and to
assess the requirement of funds properly. In order to have strict control, the instructions
issued by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, were also circulated
vide this Division ID No. (s) (i) MoD (Fin.) ID No. 1(9)/Fin.(MO)/2011-12/708
dated 07.06.2011 & (ii) ID No. 1(9)/Fin.(MO)/2011-2012/933 dated 21.07.2011 on the
subject—‘‘Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure Management in 2011’’ regarding taking
various steps in order to adhere to fiscal targets set out in the Budget 2011-12 and for
better expenditure management. Necessary monitoring and follow up action in this
regard would be ensured.
Moreover due to persistence recurrence of excess expenditure in Defence
Pensions views of the committee regarding overhaul of budgetary mechanism drastically,
introduce IT and e-governance regarding Defence Pensions were sought from the
user Department [i.e. with O/o CGDA and PCDA(P) Allahabad] in the year 2011 and the

77
user Department have informed the following Action Plan for automating classification
& accounting of Pension expenditure.
• New computer application for pension sanction is being developed to create
pension data base at the time of issue of PPOs.
• In order to automate disbursement and accounting of pension payments made
by departmental PDA i.e. DPDO, a web based online application has been
implemented in all 61 DPDOs.
• Pension disbursement agencies viz.  Banks have been approached for
transmission of pension payment data electronically so as to enable PCDA(P)
Allahabad to ensure correct and timely booking of pension expenditure by
automating classification & accounting system.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note with concern that huge quantum of excess expenditure to
the tune of  ` 2464.11 crore and ` 150.51 crore had been incurred both under Revenue
Section (V oted) of Grant No. 22—Defence Services—Army and Grant No. 23—
Defence Services-Navy respectively during the financial year under review. Surprisingly,
the excess expenditure under Grant No. 23 was incurred despite obtaining
Supplementary Grant of  ` 1033.32 crore. In respect of Grant No. 22, the contributory
reasons, according to the Ministry of Defence, were difference in the actual strength
of Officers/Personnel below Officer's Rank and the strength figure provided by
Management information System Organisation, reinstatement of the personnel due to
court judgement, increased expenditure due to enhancement of Dearness Allowances
and embodiment of Territorial Army for PM's, Territorial Army Day Parade, revision of
travel entitlement due to implementation of the 6th Central Pay Commission Report
and erroneous excess booking by Controller General of Defence Accounts, payments
of arrears of pay and allowances etc. As regards, the Grant No. 23, the main contributory
reasons adduced were enrolment of new officers, revision of travel entitlement due to
implementation of the 6th Central Pay Commission Report, increased expenditure due
to enhancement of Dearness Allowances, payment of the 6th Central Pay Commission
arrears, operational necessity of hiring boats for coastal security, booking of coast
guard and BSF fuel bills and additional payment for pilots training in USA due to
freshly concluded agreement not allocated in projections. The Committee do not consider
these reasons for incurring excess expenditure to be compelling as may of these could
have been anticipated well in advance and factored into at the time of finalization of
Grants through three stages of Supplementary Grants.
Further, the quantum of unauthorized excess expenditure could have been greatly
with proper care and attention to detail, which is highly expected of a Ministry dealing

78
with the Defence personnel whose spirit and character are supposed to be the epitome
of professionalism and discipline. In this context, the Committee also find that the
Ministry of Defence had incurred excess expenditure amounting to ` 95.32 crore and
` 8999.54 crore respectively under Grant No. 20-Ministry of Defence and Grant No. 21-
Defence Pensions pertaining to the Civil Sector but operated by them. Another excess
expenditure of  ` 60.42 lakh was also registered under Revenue Section (Charged) of
Grant No. 22. These altogether put the total excess expenditure by the Ministry of
Defence during 2009-10 fiscal year at ` 11,710.08 crore. This sudden spurt in the
quantum of excess expenditure proves that the Ministry have no mechanism to check
or minimize excess expenditure under the Grants operated by them. Surprisingly, as a
remedial measure, the Ministry have merely re-circulated their old instructions for
containing excess expenditure. The Committee feel that apart from routine re-circulation
of old instructions which have proved ineffective in plugging the loopholes and
rectifying the deficiencies, it is imperative for the Ministry of Defence to undergo
serious introspection and devise concrete ways and means in consultation with the
Ministry of Finance to overhaul and streamline their budgeting mechanism so that
excess expenditure is avoided altogether. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the specific corrective measures taken by the Ministry in this direction.
[Para No. 10 of 40th Report of PAC 2011-2012 (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 20)]
In view of the sudden spurt in the quantum of excess expenditure, in this
Paragraph, the Committee feel that apart from routine re-circulation of old instructions
which have proved ineffective in plugging the loopholes and rectifying the deficiencies,
it is imperative for the Ministry of Defence to undergo serious introspection and
devise concrete ways and means in consultation with the Ministry of Finance to
overhaul and streamline their budgeting mechanism so that excess expenditure is
avoided altogether. The Committee have also desired to be apprised of the specific
corrective measures taken by the Ministry in this direction.
In order to have strict control on Civil Estimates Budget and to check large scale
savings/excess, the Ministry have issued instructions from time to time to all the
budget holding authorities and asked for proper implementation of these instructions.
Such instructions were issued vide ID No. 1(8-ATN)/MO/2009-10/721 dated 28.06.2010
in r/o Civil Estimates whereby while reiterating the instructions already issued earlier,
it was instructed that in order to ensure even flow of expenditure and to avoid any
excess expenditure/savings in any Grant, concrete remedial action must be taken. The
utmost caution and accuracy should be adopted while estimating  requirement of
funds after taking into account all the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance from
time to time.
Moreover, it is submitted that the excess expenditure under Grant No. 20-Ministry
of Defence (Civil) is well below to prescribed permissible limit i.e. 5% as the variation
is upto 0.88% only over Total/Final Grants and it is also to mention that incurring of
excess expenditure under this Grant is not a recurring instance and excess under this

79
Civil Grant has not been registered for earlier financial years till 2008-09. Further, it is
submitted that this Ministry certainly take action/follow the instructions/remedial
Measures issued by Ministry of Finance to overhaul and streamline the budgeting
mechanism so that excess expenditure is avoided altogether.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)]
In view of the sudden spurt in the quantum of excess expenditure, in this
Paragraph, the Committee feel that apart from routine re-circulation of old instructions
which have proved ineffective in plugging the loopholes and rectifying the deficiencies,
it is imperative for the Ministry of Defence to undergo serious introspection and
devise concrete ways and means in consultation with the Ministry of Finance to
overhaul and streamline their budgeting mechanism so that excess expenditure is
avoided altogether. The Committee have also desired to be apprised of the specific
corrective measures taken by the Ministry in this direction.
In order to have strict control on Civil Sectors Budget and to check large scale
savings/excess, the Ministry has issued instructions from time to time to all the budget
holding authorities and asked for proper implementation of these instructions. Such
instructions were issued vide ID No. 2(6)/MO/2009-10/721, dt. 29/6/2010 in r/o Defence
Pensions whereby while reiterating the instructions already issued earlier, it was
instructed that in order to ensure even flow of expenditure and to avoid any excess
expenditures/savings in any Grant, concrete remedial action must be taken. The utmost
caution and accuracy should be adopted while estimating requirement of funds after
taking into account all the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance from time to time.
In this context, it is to mention that excess under and Defence pension is not a
recurring instance and excess under both of these Grants has not been registered for
earlier financial years till 2008-09.
Necessary action in this regard would need to be taken by Ministry of Finance.
Any instruction issued by Ministry of Finance in this regard would certainly be followed
by this Ministry.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant Nos. 22 and 23)]
In this paragraph, the Committee has pointed out huge excess expenditure under
Grant No.22-Army (`  2464.11 crore Revenue/V oted and  `  60.42 lakh Revenue/Charged)
and Grant No. 23 (`  150.51 crore Revenue/Voted) and desired that the Ministry should
undergo serious introspection and devise concrete ways and means in consultation
with Ministry of Finance to overhaul and streamline the budgetary mechanism so that
excess expenditure is avoided altogether.

80
In this connection, it is stated here that apart from issuing instructions to all
budget controlling authorities to regularly review of expenditure to contain it with in
the budgetary allocation and avoid any excess and large scale savings, the Demands
for Grants under Ministry of Defence, namely Demand No.(s) 22-Army, 23-Navy,
24-Air Force, 26-Research & Development and 27-Capital Outlay on Defence Services
have been brought, with effect from 2012-13, under the ambit of the modified exchequer
control-Cash Management system. Detailed instructions have been issued in this
regard (copy enclosed). It is expected that implementation of the cash management
system would bring in the desire financial discipline.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
 Addl. FA (VP) & JS
[Ministry of Defence (Finance) O.M. 7(6)/Bud.-I/2012, dated 18th June, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
During the financial year under review, the Department of Posts incurred an
excess expenditure of  `  818.13 crore under a single Grant operated by them i.e. Grant
No. 13-Postal Services. This excess expenditure was despite obtaining supplementary
Grant to the tune of Rs. 436.60 crore. Scrutiny of the Explanatory Note furnished by the
Department shows that the excess expenditure was mainly due to increase in the rate
of claims and hike in Dearness Allowance following the implementation of the 6th
Central Pay Commission Report, more induction training programmes to newly recruited
staff etc. The Committee have been assured that instructions have been issued to the
circles/units to keep the expenditure within the allotment and projects the demand for
fund realistically. The Committee are however, skeptical of the efficacy of the
instructions issued by the Department in checking excess expenditure without  devising
any concrete mechanism. The Committee urge upon the Department to overhaul their
prevailing expenditure review mechanism whereby a system is evolved and
enforced to provide sufficient checks and balances against any possible wanton
sanction and utilization of funds under this Grant and the requisite transparency and
accountability is maintained. The Committee, therefore desire that precise action should
be taken in this regard at the earliest.
[Sl. No. 11, Appendix II, Para No. 11 of 40th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (Department of Posts)
The excess expenditure occurred due to payment of arrears in Pay and Allowances
of regular employees and in Pension to the retirees owing to implementation of 6th Pay
Commission's Report. The effect of actual payment of arrear happened to be more
expenditure than the estimates. Due caution will be observed to avoid such instance in
future. The expenditure of the Department is being monitored by conducting Video
Conference by the Secretary (Posts) with the Head of Postal Circles each month so as
to keep the expenditure within the Grant for the year.
Sd/-
DDG(PAF)
[MoC &IT/DoP, New Delhi, OM. No. 20-5/2009-BGT (PA), dated Feb., 2012]

81
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that despite their repeated exhortations,
the Ministry of Railways have not been able to stop misclassification of expenditure in
the accounts of the Ministry of Railways. During the last 10 financial years, the
Committee have come across 50 cases of misclassification of expenditure, the details
being 1 in 2000-01, 5 in 2001-02, 3 in 2002-03, 5 in 2003-04, 9 in 2004-05, 6 in  2005-06, 5
in 2006-07,  3  in 2007-08, 6 in 2008-09 and 7 in 2009-10. This unabated trend of  persistent
misclassification of expenditure seems to have acquired endemic proportion in the
Railways. Apparently no tangible action has been taken by the  Ministry either to fix
responsibility for avoidable errors or for rectifying the terminological ambivalence
leading to misclassification. The Committee take a serious view of such callous approach
on the part of the Ministry of Railways, which if left unchecked, would derail the
budgetary exercise. The Committee recommend that the existing budgetary mechanism
in the Railways needs to be thoroughly reviewed and revamped so that necessary
corrective action, wherever warranted, could be taken to overcome systemic lacunae/
loopholes and progressive elimination of the misclassification syndrome. The persons
responsible for this malady also need to be identified, the precise reasons ascertained
for patent misclassification and responsibility fixed for the apparent lapses.
[Sl. No. 13, Appendix II, Para No. 13 of the 40th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
Recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee regarding misclassification
of expenditure is noted for strict compliance. In this regard it is submitted that detailed
instructions to the Railways exist on the internal check of accounting transactions.
Cases of misclassification if any, are required to be detected and rectified before closure
of the annual accounts of the year. However, due to voluminous transactions, some
cases of  misclassification remain undetected during the internal check and are later
pointed out by Audit.
This Ministry has already conveyed serious concern for the misclassification of
expenditure that occurred during 2009-10 to the Zonal Railways with the direction to
ensure that the measures/suggestions to prevent misclassifications/mistakes, as
circulated by the Ministry of Railways from time to time, are implemented by all
accounting units scrupulously besides taking up the concerned staff for lapses. In
response, Railways have advised that the defaulting staff have been taken up by fixing
responsibility for lapses beside issuing instructions/organizing workshops for guidance
of staff, so that such instances are avoided in future.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 26-RA-III/2-1/11, dated 17.07.2012 have vetted the
A TN with the remarks "Seen. Thanks".
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Ex. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 31.07.2012]

82
VIJAYA KANTH
Financial Commissioner (Railways)
D.O. No. 2012/APP/7-2/PAC/Para 13 New Delhi, dated 08.02.2012
Dear Shri/Smt.........
Subject: Action Taken Note on Fortieth Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2009-10)".
The Public Accounts Committee, while regularizing the "Excesses over V oted
Grants & Charged Appropriations (2009-10)" has expressed their serious concern over
the incidences of misclassification of expenditure in the accounts of Ministry of Railways
despite their repeated exhortations.
A review of items appearing in Annexure 'J' of Appropriation Accounts for the
year 2009-10 indicates that most of misclassifications/mistakes have occurred due to
misinterpretation or non-compliance of the relevant allocation rules at various levels.
In this regard attention is invited to the then Additional Member (Budget)'s D.O. No.
2009/APP/para 55/PAC, dated 14.07.2009, my predecessor's D.O. No. 2010/APP/7-2/
PAC/22nd Report (15th Lok Sabha) dated 12.01.2011 addressed to the General Manager/
CAOs of all Indian Railways and ED(A)'s D.O. No. 2011/APP/7-2/PAC/Para 20/80th
Report, dated 04.05.2011 to FA&CAOs/all Indian Railways, emphasizing urgent need
for strengthening/tightening the internal check of classification besides putting in
place an effective monitoring mechanism to watch such cases including a monthly
review at FA&CAO level. However, desired result have not yet been achieved and the
position has deteriorated further during current year also when compared to the last
year.
In view of the above, I would request you to review and set right the existing
system to ensure non-repetition of misclassifications/mistakes besides enforcing
accountability for correctness of the allocation of expenditure by taking up defaulting
staff appropriately for lapses on their part especially for serious and similar nature of
items of misclassifications being repeated year after year. The cases arising due to
varying/ambiguous interpretation of classification must also be addressed at
appropriate levels, so that an improved position is reflected in the ensuing years.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Vijaya Kanth)
82

83
General Managers,
S.Shri/Smt. S.K. Jain/CR, G.C. Agarwal/ER, Varun Bharthuar/EC, Indra Ghosh/
Eco., B.N. Rajasekhar/NR, B.P. Khare/NC, Keshav Chandra/NF, R.C. Agarwal/NW,
Deepak Krishan/SR, G.N. Asthana/SC, A.K. Mittal/SW, Mahesh Kumar/WR, S.V. Arya/
WC, Rajeev Bhargava/RWF, Radhey Shyam/CLW.
Observation/Recommendation
Subject to the observations made in the preceding paragraphs, the Committee
recommended that the expenditure referred to in paragraph 14 of Part-I this Report be
regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1) (b) of the Constitution of India.
[Appendix-II, Paragraph 14 of Fortieth Report of  PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (Ministry of Finance)
As brought out in the ATN in respect of para 2 of the 40th Report of PAC
(15th Lok Sabha), the Excess expenditure that requires to be regularised by Parliament
under Article 115(1) (b) of the Constitution is as follows:—
Sl. Name of Amount of excess
No. Appropriation expenditure
Accounts (  `)
1. Civil 9218,88,74,896
2. Defence Services 2615,22,57,850
3. Postal Services 818,12,99,976
4. Railways 1922,83,61,188
Total 14575,07,93,910
Of which Excess 12652,24,32,722
Expenditure (Excluding
Railways)
As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Demands for Excess
Grants for Expenditure of the Central Government (excluding Railways) relating
to 2009-2010 were submitted to Parliament in the Budget Session (1st Part), 2012.
The Parliament has passed the Excess Demands for Grants (excluding Railways)
for 2009-2010. Necessary Appropriation Bill for regularising the money drawn in
excess of the amounts authorised by the Parliament for the year 2009-2010, has
also been passed and the corresponding Act published in the Gazette of India
(Extraordinary) Part II, Section I, dated 29.3.2012 as Act No. 19 of 2012 after
obtaining assent of the President. In view of this, the excess amount drawn
(excluding Railways) in 2009-2010 of stands regularised. Action taken in this
regard is, therefore, completed.

84
This Note has been vetted by Principal Director of Audit, Economic and Services
Ministries vide their U.O. No. AMG-I/V .V/ATN/2011-2012/16-18, dated the 30th May,
2012.
Sd/-
(Dr. Rajat Bhargava)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
New Delhi-110 001, O.M. No. F. 7(2)-B(SD)/2011, dated the 29th June, 2012]

F. 7(2)-B(SD)/2011
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
New Delhi, the March 29, 2012
Subject: Demands for Excess Grants relating to 2009-2010.
The undersigned is directed to state that the Demands for Excess Grants relating
to 2009-2010 have been passed by the Lok Sabha. The connected Appropriation Bill
(No. 2), 2012 has also been passed by Parliament and assented to by the President of
India on March 29, 2012 and the Act has been published in the Gazette of India
(Extra-ordinary), Part II, Section I, dated March 29, 2012 as Act No. 19 of 2012.
Sd/-
(V . Prakash)
Deputy Director (Budget)
1. The Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser (Ms. Annie Moraes), Department of
Posts, Ministry of Communications & IT, Dak Bhawan, New Delhi-110 001.
2. Adviser (Finance) (Ms. Sadhana Dikshit), Department of Telecommunications,
Ministry of Communications & Information Technology, Room No. 312,
3rd Floor, Sanchar Bhawan, 20 Ashoka Road, New Delhi-110 001.
3. The Financial Adviser, Defence Services (Shri A.K. Chopra), (Demand Nos. 20—
Ministry of Defence, 21—Defence Pensions, 22—Defence Services-Army
& 23— Defence Services-Navy, Ministry of Defence (Finance), South Block,
New Delhi-110 001 (4 Copies).
4. Secretary and Financial Adviser  (Shri Suresh Chandra Panda), (Demand No. 54—Other
Expenditure of MHA) Ministry of Home Affairs, North Block, New Delhi-110 001.
5. The Finance Library (Publication Section) (10 Copies) with the request that copies
of the Gazette of India (Extraordinary), Part II, Section I dated March 29, 2012 as
Act No. 19 of 2012 be obtained from the Manager of Publication and supplied to
Comptroller & Auditor General of India, 10-Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New
Delhi- 110 002.
6. The Parliament Library, Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi (5 Copies).
7. The Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch), Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi-110 001 (5 Copies).
85

86
8 . Director General of Audit, Central Revenues (R-I), AGCR Building,
New  Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
9. Director General of Audit, Posts and Telecom, Sham Nath Marg, Civil Lines,
Delhi-54 (10 Copies).
10. The Director General of Audit, Defence Services, New Delhi-110 001 (5 Copies).
11. Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 10-Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
12. Finance Library, North Block, New Delhi (10 Copies).
13. Additional Secretary (PF-I), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance,
North Block, New Delhi.
14. Joint Secretary (PF-II), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, North
Block, New Delhi.
15. The Controller General of Accounts, Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi (10 Copies).
16. The Adviser FR/Member FR, Planning Commission, Yojana Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001 (2 Copies).
17. Finance Secretary.
18. Secretary (Expenditure).
19. Secretary (Financial Services).
20. Secretary (Economic Affairs).
21. Secretary (Disinvestment).
22. PS to AS (Budget).
23. Director (NMJ), Deputy Secretary (BN), Deputy Secretary (RP), Deputy Secretary
(PS).
24. Director (OL), DD (Hindi).
25. Manager (Budget Press).
26. ALL USs/Deputy Directors in Budget Division and all Sections in Budget Division
and PF-I & PF-II Divisions.

DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
for
EXPENDITURE OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
(Excluding Railways )
RELATING TO
2009-2010
PRESENTED TO THE LOK SABHA IN PURSUANCE OF CLAUSE (1)(B) OF
ARTICLE 115 OF THE CONSTITUTION
[The recommendation of the President, required under clause (3) of Article 113
read with clauses (1) (b) and (2) of Article 115 of the Constitution for making the
Demands has been obtained]
March, 2012
INTRODUCTORY  NOTES
 The Demands for Excess Grants contained in this V olume represent the actual
expenditure incurred during 2009-2010 under certain Demands which are in excess of
the amounts granted by the Parliament for that year.
2. Out of 100 grants and 5 Appropriations in 2009-2010, the excess expenditure
occurred in 7 Grants amounting to a total of  `12,652.24 crore under Revenue Section.
3. The reasons for excess expenditure in respective demands have been explained
in the Excess Demand Statements contained in this booklet.
4. The above excess have been scrutinised by the Public Accounts Committee,
who, vide paragraph 14 read with paragraph 14 of Part-I of their Fortieth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha), have recommended their regularisation under Article 115(1) (b) of the
Constitution of India. Further, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee observed
that taking into account the discrepancy in the excess expenditure reported by
Department of Posts, regularisation of excess expenditure (including Railways) should
be  `14575,07,93,910 instead of  `14575,07,92,934 as mentioned in paragraph 14 of the
aforesaid Fortieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha). Of this, excess expenditure (excluding
Railways) that requires regularisation under Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution of
India is  `12652,24,32,722.
87

88
Sr. No. & Title Final Actual Excess Ref.
No. of Grant Grant Expenditure Expenditure to
``` pages
EXPENDITURE MET FROM REVENUE
13. Department of Posts V oted: 12 526,70,00,000 13344,82,99,976 818,12,99,976 1
14. Department of V oted: 10 765,87,00,000 10853,68, 60,488 87,81,60,488 2
Telecommunications
20. Ministry of Defence V oted: 10 822,35,00,000 10917,66, 73,097 95,31,73,097 3
21. Defence Pensions V oted: 25 999,75,00,000 34999,29,01,305 8999,54,01,305 4
22. Defence Services—Army Charged: 20,09,00,000 20,69,42,498 60,42,498 5
V oted: 60 252,53,00,000 62716,64,11,895 2464,11,11,895 5
23. Defence Services—Navy V oted: 9435,70,00,000 9586,21,03,457 150,51,03,457 6
54. Other Expenditure of the V oted: 1361,47,00,000 1397,68,40,406 36,21,40,006 7
Ministry of Home Affairs
GRAND TOTAL 131184,46,00,000 143836,70,32,722 12652,24,32,722
Charged: 20,09,00,000 20,69,42,498 60,42,498
V oted: 131164,37,00,000 143816,00,90,224 12651,63,90,224

DEMAND NO. 13
DEPARTMENT OF  POSTS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010, in
respect of the DEPARTMENT OF POSTS under MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.
V oted: Eight hundred eighteen crore twelve lakh ninety-nine thousand nine
hundred seventy six rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
`` `
Revenue
V oted: 12526,70,00,000 13344,82,99,976 818,12,99,976
The original grant of  `12090,10,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary
grant of `436,60,00,000 obtained in March, 2010. Against the final grant of
` 12526,70,00,000 the actual expenditure was  `13344,82,99,976 resulting in an excess
expenditure of  ` 818,12,99,976 which requires regularisation. The excess expenditure
was incurred due to increase in rate of claims. Dearness Allowance hike, implementation
of Gramin Dak Sewaks Committee Report, Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme,
10 days encashment of leave for Leave Travel Concession purpose, increase in salary
and pension on implementation of Sixth Central Pay Commission recommendations
and increase in cost of equipment and machinery, etc.
89

DEMAND NO. 14
DEPARTMENT  OF  TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010, in
respect of the DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS under MINISTRY OF
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.
V oted: Eighty-seven crore eighty-one lakh sixty thousand four hundred eighty
eight rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
`` `
Revenue
V oted: 10765,87,00,000 10853,68,60,488 87,81,60,488
The original grant of  `10150,00,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary
grant of `249,24,00,000 obtained in December, 2009 and ` 366,63,00,000 obtained in
March, 2010.  Against the final grant of  `10765,87,00,000 the actual expenditure was
`10853,68,60,488 resulting in an excess expenditure of  `87,81,60,488 which requires
regularisation. The excess expenditure was incurred due to the payment on account of
implementation of Sixth Central Pay Commission recommendations.
90

DEMAND NO. 20
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010, in
respect of the MINISTRY OF DEFENCE under MINISTRY OF DEFENCE.
V oted: Ninety-five crore thirty-one lakh seventy-three thousand ninety seven
rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
`` `
Revenue
V oted: 10822,35,00,000 10917,66,73,097 95,31,73,097
The original grant of `9895,93,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary grant
of  `29,81,00,000 obtained in December, 2009 and ` 896,61,00,000 obtained in
March, 2010. Against the final grant of `10822,35,00,000 the actual expenditure was
`10917,66,73,097 resulting in an excess expenditure of  ` 95,31,73,097 which requires
regularisation. The excess expenditure was incurred mainly due to setting of Regional
Armed Forces Tribunal Benches located at various stations in India, implementation
of Sixth Central Pay Commission recommendations, hike in prices of general office
items & IT automation, additional movement of troops in the last month of financial
year and more demand & supply of stores than expected in respect of Jammu &
Kashmir Light Infantry due to their involvement in CI operations, requirement of
additional funds for maintenance and repair of office buildings, etc. and payment of
arrears on implementation of Sixth Central Pay Commission recommendations, large
number of promotions in all categories of Central Government personnel to fill up the
vacancies created due to 30 per cent increase in overall existing strength in compliance
with CCS approval, procurement of Naval store items for new ships and repair/refit of
operations unit of CGO.
The excess of  `95,31,73,097 was the net effect of total excess of  ` 166,89,35,097
less total Savings `71,57,62,000 under various Sub-Heads of the Grant.
91

DEMAND NO. 21
DEFENCE PENSIONS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010, in
respect of the DEFENCE PENSIONS under MINISTRY OF DEFENCE.
V oted: Eight thousand nine hundred ninety-nine crore fifty-four lakh one
thousand three hundred five rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
`` `
Revenue
V oted: 25999,75,00,000 34999,29,01,305 8999,54,01,305
The original grant of  `21789,75,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary
grant of  `2210,00,00,000 obtained in December, 2009 and ` 2000,00,00,000 obtained in
March, 2010.  Against the final grant of  `25999,75,00,000 the actual expenditure was
`34999,29,01,305  resulting in an excess expenditure of  `8999,54,01,305  which requires
regularisation.  The excess expenditure was incurred due to payment of revised pension
at higher rate under Sixth Central Pay Commission recommendation than assessed and
booking of pending Pension scrolls received from banks to clear the amount under
suspense.
Further, in view of the fact that expenditure, for which cash flow has already
taken place in the books of Reserve Bank of India (RBI), was required to be brought to
account, the pending pensions scrolls amounting to ` 8999,54,01,305 had to be booked
under the Defence Pensions Head to clear the amount lying under RBI Suspense to
reflect the true picture of cash flow from the Government account.
92

DEMAND NO. 22
DEFENCE  SERVICES — ARMY
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010, in
respect of the DEFENCE SERVICES — ARMY under MINISTRY OF DEFENCE.
Charged: Sixty lakh forty-two thousand four hundered ninety eight rupees.
V oted: Two thousand four hundred sixty-four crore eleven lakh eleven thousand
eight hundred ninety five rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
`` `
Revenue
Charged: 20,09,00,000 20,69,42,498 60,42,498 (a)
V oted: 60252,53,00,000 62716,64,11,895 24,64,11,11,895(b)
(a)  The original appropriation of `18,30,00,000 was augmented by a
supplementary appropriation of  `1,79,00,000 obtained in March, 2010. Against the
final appropriation of  ` 20,09,00,000 the actual expenditure was ` 20,69,42,498 resulting
in an excess expenditure of ` 60,42,498 which requires regularisation. The excess
expenditure was incurred due to finalisation of more number of court cases than
anticipated.
(b) Against the final grant of ` 60252,53,00,000 the actual expenditure was
` 62716,64,11,895 resulting in an excess expenditure of  ` 2464,11,11,895 which requires
regularisation. The excess expenditure was incurred due to difference in the actual
strength of officers/PBOR and the strength figure provided by MISO, reinstatement of
the boarded out LMC personnel on account of Court Judgement, increased expenditure
due to enhancement of DA & embodiment of TA for Prime Minister's TA Day Parade
2009-10 (Diamond Jubilee), payment of second instalment of pay arrears of Sixth Central
Pay Commission recommendation, upward revision of travel entitlements after Sixth
Central Pay Commission recommendation, payment of arrears of pay & allowances,
spill over of expenditure from previous years, proof expenditure and rollover of
procurement cycle of stores to the next financial year, etc.
93

DEMAND NO. 23
DEFENCE SERVICES—NA VY
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010, in
respect of the DEFENCE SERVICES—NAVY under MINISTRY OF DEFENCE.
V oted: One hundred fifty crore fifty-one lakh three thousand four hundred fifty
seven rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
`` `
Revenue
V oted: 9435,70,00,000 9586,21,03,457 150,51,03,457
The original grant of  ` 8402,38,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary grant
of  `1033,32,00,000 obtained in March, 2010. Against the final grant of  ` 9435,70,00,000
the actual expenditure was ` 9586,21,03,457 resulting in an excess expenditure of
` 150,51,03,457 which requires regularisation. The excess expenditure was incurred
mainly due to operational necessity to hire boats for coastal security, variation in
advance drawn by personnel for moves and amount claimed post Sixth Central Pay
Commission entitlements, payments for committed liabilities and additional payment
for pilots training in USA due to freshly concluded agreement not allocated in
projections.
94

DEMAND NO. 54
OTHER EXPENDITURE OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010, in
respect of the OTHER EXPENDITURE OF THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
under MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS.
V oted: Thirty six crore twenty one lakh forty thousand six rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
`` `
Revenue
V oted: 1361,47,00,000 1397,68,40,006 36,21,40,006
The original grant of  ` 1353,54,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary grant
of  ` 7,92,00,000 obtained in December, 2009 and ` 1,00,000 obtained in March, 2010.
Against  the final grant of  ` 1361,47,00,000 the actual expenditure was ` 1397,68,40,006
resulting in an excess expenditure of  ` 36,21,40,006  which requires regularisation. The
excess expenditure was incurred mainly due to increase in pension and dearness relief
and release of pension to freedom fighters and their dependents.
95

96
Action Taken (Department of Telecommunications)
It is apprised that the excess expenditure incurred by Department of
Telecommunications during 2009-10 has been duly regularized by the Parliament and
intimated vide Ministry of Finance No. F. 7 (2)-B(SD)/2011, dated 29th March, 2012.
Sd/-
Deputy Director General (TPF)
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of
Telecommunications, O.M. No. 1-20/2012-B, dated 25 April, 2012]
This has been vetted by D.G. Audit (P&T) with remarks "Seen, Thanks," vide
their No. DGA (P&T) Rep. Tel-II (b) 400 Appropriation Accts/2009-10/DoT/149 dated
13.06.2012.
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 20)]
The Committee have recommended that the excess expenditure referred to in the
preceding paragraphs be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1) (b) of
the Constitution of India.
As stated in Action Taken Note on Para No. 2, the Demand for Excess Grants for
Rs. 95,31,73,097 under Demand No. 20—Ministry  of Defence (Civil) relating to the
financial year 2009-10 have already been passed by the Lok Sabha and the connected
Appropriation Bill (No. 2), 2012 have also been passed by the Parliament and assented
to by the President of India on March 29, 2012 and the Act has been published in the
Gazette of India (Extraordinary) dated March 29, 2012 as Act No. 19 of 2012.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)]
The Committee have recommended that the excess expenditure referred to in the
preceding paragraphs be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1) (b) of
the Constitution of India.
As stated in Action Taken Note on Para No. 2, the Demand for Excess Grants for
Rs. 8999,54,01,305 under Demand No. 21—Defence Pensions relating to the financial
year 2009-10 have already been passed by the Lok Sabha and the connected
Appropriation Bill (No. 2), 2012 have also been passed by the Parliament and assented

97
to by the President of India on March 29, 2012 and the Act has been published in the
Gazette of India (Extraordinary) dated March 29, 2012 as Act No. 19 of 2012.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant Nos. 22 and 23)]
The Committee has recommended that the excess expenditure referred to in the
preceding paragraphs be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1) (b) of
the Constitution of India.
The Demand for Excess Grants for  ` 24641111895 (voted), ` 6042498 (charged)
under Demand No. 22-Defence Services-Army and for  ` 1505103457 under Demand
No. 23-Defence Services-Navy relating to the financial year 2009-10 has already been
passed by the Lok Sabha and the connected Appropriation Bill (No. 2), 2012 have also
been passed by the Parliament and assented to by the President of India on
March 29, 2012 and the Act has been published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary)
dated March 29, 2012 as Act No. 19 of  2012.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
Addl. FA (VP) & JS
[Ministry of Defence (Finance), O.M. F.No. 7(6)/Bud-I/2012, dated 18th
 June, 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Home Affairs)
This has already been regularised by the Parliament.
Sd/-
(S.C. Panda)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/O DGACR  vide their U.O.
No. RR/6-21/12-13/742, dated 29.1.2013)
[Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 28/1/2012-Bgt. I, dated 18.2.2013]
Action Taken (Department of Posts)
The Revised Detailed explanatory notes on excess expenditure under Revenue
(V oted) duly vetted by DG (Audit) vide DGAP&T U.O. No. Rep-Civil/1(b)400/
Appropriation Accounts/DoP/423, dated 3.2.2012 have been furnished to Lok Sabha

98
Secretariat (PAC Branch) for its regularization from the Parliament vide this Directorate's
letter No. 20-5/2009-BGT(PA)/3924-26, dated 14.2.2012.
Sd/-
DDG (PAF)
[MoC & IT/DoP, New Delhi, OM. No. 20-5/2009-BGT (PA), dated Feb., 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
The excess expenditure of  ` 1922.84 cr. incurred by Ministry of Railways during
2009-10 has been regularized by Parliament in the budget session, 2012 (copy enclosed).
Audit vide their U.O. No. 7-RA-III/2-1/11, dated 27.04.2012 have vetted the ATN
with the remarks "Seen, Thanks".
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Ex. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 15.06.2012)]

2009-10
DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
FOR EXPENDITURE OF THE
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT ON RAILWAYS
Presented to the Lok Sabha in pursuance of clause (1)(b) of Article 115 of the
Constitution
[The recommendation of the President required under clause (3) of Article 113 read
with clauses (1) (b) and (2) of Article 115 of the Constitution for making the
Demands, has been obtained]
BUDGET  SESSION,  2012
99

INTRODUCTORY
The Demand for Excess Grants relates to the expenditure incurred during
2009-10 in Excess of amount granted by Parliament and presented for regularization
under Article 115(1)(b) of the Constitution of India.
Excess expenditure aggregating to Rs. 1922.58 cr. has been incurred under 'Voted'
portion of Grant No. 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 12, 13 & 15 and Rs. 0.26 cr. under Charged Appropriation
No. 3 & 5.
The reasons for excess are:—
Voted Grants
Grant No. 4: Repairs & Maintenance of Permanent Way & Works —
(Rs. 54,49,81,635):— Mainly due to more expenditure towards staff cost
due to implementation of the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay
Commission, more direct purchases, more payment towards contractual
obligations, etc.
Grant No. 5: Repairs & Maintenance of Motive Power—(Rs. 88,71,27,842):— Mainly
due to more expenditure towards staff cost due to implementation of
the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission, more drawal
of stores from stock, more direct purchases, more payment towards
contractual obligations, etc.
Grant No. 6: Repairs & Maintenance of Carriages & Wagons—(Rs. 161,20,05,393):—
Mainly due to more expenditure towards staff cost due to implementation
of the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission, more drawal
of stores from stock, more direct purchases, more payment towards
contractual obligations, etc.
Grant No. 8: Operating Expenses-Rolling Stock & Equipment—(Rs. 35,20,77,632):—
Mainly due to more expenditure towards staff cost due to implementation
of the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission, etc.
Grant No. 9: Operating Expenses-Traffic—(Rs. 26,30,83,601):—Mainly due to more
expenditure towards staff cost due to implementation of the
recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission, more payment
towards contractual obligations for handling collection and delivery of
goods due to increase in activities etc.
Grant No. 12: Miscellaneous Working Expenses—(Rs. 39,87,35,318):—Mainly due
to more expenditure under Compensation Claims, Workmen's and Other
Compensation Claims, Catering and the head Miscellaneous Advance
Revenue (Others) etc.
Grant No. 13: Provident Fund, Pension and Other Retirement benefits—
(Rs. 1512,26,50,695):— The excess occurred mainly under
Superannuation and Retiring Pension, Commuted Pension, Death-cum-
Retirement Gratuity, mainly due to receipt of more debits from various
100

101
pension disbursing authorities because of disbursement of arrears on
account of implementation of 6th Pay Commission, finalisation of more
cases of voluntary Retirement and Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity, etc.
Grant No. 15: Dividend to General Revenues, Repayment of loans taken from General
Revenues and Amortisation of Over-Capitalisation—(Rs. 4,51,03,762):—
More payment of dividend to General Revenues mainly due to increase
in the dividend bearing capital.
Charged  Appropriation
Grant No. 3: General Superintendence & Services on Railways—(Rs. 24,21,286):—
Due to more decretal payments than anticipated.
Grant No. 5: Repairs & Maintenance of Motive Power—(Rs. 1,74,024):—  Due to
decretal payments not anticipated earlier.
The Public Accounts Committee (2011-12)—15th Lok Sabha after examining the
excess have recommended its regularization vide para 14 of Part-II of their 40th Report
on Excess over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2009-10).
The Grant-wise position of the Excess expenditure is summarised below:—
(In Rs.)
No. Grant Amount of Final Actual Excess Reference
of Grant/ Expen- to page
Grant Appropriation diture of the
Booklet
3 General Superintendence Charged 10.58,000 34,79,286 24,21,286 1
& Services on Railways
4 Repairs & Maintenance V oted 7440,75,58,000 7495,25,39,635 54,49,81,635 2
of Permanent Way &
Works
5 Repairs & Maintenance V oted 3388,32,41,000 3477,03,68,842 88,71,27,842 3
of Motive Power Charged 1,74,024 1,74,024
6. Repairs & Maintenance of V oted 7692,48,75,000 7853,68,80,393 161,20,05,393 4
Carriages & Wagons
8 Operating Expenses-Rolling V oted 5947,28,40,000 5982,49,17,632 35,20,77,632 5
Stock & Equipment
9 Operating Expenses-Traffic V oted 11819,90,61,000 11846,21,44,601 26,30,83,601 6
12 Miscellaneous Working V oted 3157,64,58,000 3197,51,93,318 39,87,35,318 7
Expenses
13 Provident Fund, Pension and V oted 15398,81,73,000 16911,08,23,695 1512,26,50,695 8
other Retirement Benefits
15 Dividend to General V oted 5538,83,00,000 5543,34,03,762 4,51,03,762 9
Revenues, Repayment of
loans taken from
General Revenues and
Amortisation
of Over-Capitalisation
Total V oted 60384,05,06,000 62306,62,71,878 1922,57,65,878
Charged 10,58,000 36,53,310 25,95,310

DEMAND NO.  3 — RAILW AYS
REVENUE
GENERAL  SUPERINTENDENCE  AND  SERVICES  ON  RAILWAYS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010 in
respect of General Superintendence and Services on Railways.
Charged: Rupees twenty four lakh, twenty one thousand, two hundred and
eighty six only.
Final Appropriation Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
10,58,000 34,79,286 24,21,286 228.86%
This Demand deals with the expenditure on General Superintendence and Services
on Railways.
The excess of  ` 24.21 lakh under 'Charged' appropriation, which works out to
228.86 per cent of the Final Appropriation of  `10.58 lakh, is due to more decretal
payments than anticipated.
102

DEMAND NO. 4 — RAILWAYS
REVENUE
REPAIRS & MAINTENANCE OF PERMANENT W AY & WORKS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010 in
respect of Repairs & Maintenance of Permanent Way & Works.
V oted : Rupees fifty four crore, forty nine lakh, eighty one thousand, six hundred
and thirty five only.
Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
7440,75,58,000 7495,25,39,635 54,49,81,635 0.73%
This Demand deals with the expenditure on Repairs & Maintenance of Permanent
Way & Works.
The excess of  `54.50 crore under 'Voted' portion, which works out to 0.73 per
cent of the Final Grant of  ` 7440.76 crore, has occurred mainly under Establishment in
Offices, Maintenance of Permanent Way, Water Supply, Sanitation and Roads (Other
than Colonies, Staff Quarters and Welfare Buildings) and Other Repairs and
maintenance, mainly due to more expenditure towards staff cost due to implementation
of the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission, more payment towards
contractual obligations, more direct purchases, etc.
103

DEMAND NO. 5 — RAILWAYS
REVENUE
REPAIRS  &  MAINTENANCE  OF  MOTIVE  POWER
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010 in
respect of Repairs & Maintenance of Motive Power.
V oted: Rupees eighty eight crore, seventy one lakh, twenty seven thousand,
eight hundred and forty two only.
Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
3388,32,41,000 3477,03,68,842 88,71,27,842 2.62%
Charged: Rupees one lakh, seventy four thousand and twenty four only.
Final Appropriation Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
,, 1,74,024 1,74,024 ∞
This Demand deals with the expenditure on Repairs & Maintenance of Motive
Power.
The excess of  ` 88.71 crore under 'Voted' portion, which works out to 2.62 per
cent of the Final Grant of  ` 3388.32 crore, has occurred mainly under Establishment in
Offices, Diesel Locomotives and Electric Locomotives, mainly due to more expenditure
towards staff cost due to implementation of the recommendations of the 6th Central
Pay Commission, more drawal of stores from stock, more direct purchases, more payment
towards contractual obligations etc.
The excess of  `1.74 lakh under 'Charged' appropriation is due to decretal
payments not anticipated earlier.
104

DEMAND NO. 6 — RAILWAYS
REVENUE
REPAIRS  &  MAINTENANCE  OF  CARRIAGES  &  W AGONS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010 in
respect of Repairs & Maintenance of Carriages & Wagons.
V oted : Rupees one hundred and sixty one crore, twenty lakh, five thousand,
three hundred and ninety three only.
Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
7692,48,75,000 7853,68,80,393 161,20,05,393 2.10%
This Demand deals with the expenditure on Repairs & Maintenance of Carriages
& Wagons.
The excess of  `161.20 crore under 'Voted' portion, which works out to 2.10 per
cent of the Final Grant of  `7692.49 crore, has occurred mainly under Establishment in
Offices, Carriages, Wagons, Electric Multiple Unit coaches and Electrical General
Services—Train lighting, Fans and Air-conditioning, mainly due to more expenditure
towards staff cost due to implementation of the recommendations of the 6th  Central
Pay Commission, more drawal of stores from stock, more direct purchases, more payment
towards contractual obligations etc.
105

DEMAND NO. 8 — RAILWAYS
REVENUE
OPERATING  EXPENSES—ROLLING  STOCK  AND  EQUIPMENT
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010 in
respect of Operating Expenses—Rolling Stock & Equipment.
V oted : Rupees thirty five crore, twenty lakh, seventy seven thousand, six hundred
and thirty two only.
Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
5947,28,40,000 5982,49,17,632 35,20,77,632 0.59%
This Demand deals with the expenditure on Operating Expenses—Rolling Stock
& Equipment.
The excess of  `35.21 crore under 'V oted' portion, which works out to 0.59 per
cent of the Final Grant of  `5947.28 crore, has occurred mainly under Diesel & Electrical
Locomotives, mainly due to more expenditure towards staff cost due to implementation
of the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission.
106

DEMAND NO. 9 — RAILWAYS
REVENUE
OPERATING  EXPENSES — TRAFFIC
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010 in
respect of Repairs & Maintenance of Plant & Equipment.
V oted: Rupees twenty six crore, thirty lakh, eighty three thousand, six hundred
and one only.
Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
11819,90,61,000 11846,21,44,601 26,30,83,601 0.22%
This Demand deals with the expenditure on Operating Expenses—Traffic.
The excess of  `26.31 crore under 'Voted' portion, which works out to 0.22 per
cent of the Final Grant of `11819.91 crore, has occurred under Station & Trains
operations, mainly due to more expenditure towards staff cost due to implementation
of the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission, more contractual obligations
for handling collection and delivery of goods due to increase in activities, etc.
107

DEMAND NO. 12 — RAILWAYS
REVENUE
MISCELLANEOUS  WORKING  EXPENSES
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010 in
respect of Miscellaneous Working Expenses.
V oted : Rupees thirty nine crore, eighty seven lakh, thirty five thousand,
three hundred and eighteen only.
Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
3157,64,58,000 3197,51,93,318 39,87,35,318 1.26%
This Demand deals with the expenditure on Miscellaneous Working Expenses.
The excess of  `39.87 crore under 'V oted' portion, which works out to 1.26 per
cent of the Final Grant of  `3157.65 crore, has occurred mainly due to more Compensation
claims, Workmen's and Other Compensation Claims, Catering payments and
Miscellaneous Advance Revenue (Others) etc.
108

DEMAND NO. 13 — RAILWAYS
REVENUE
PROVIDENT FUND,  PENSION  AND  OTHER  RETIREMENT  BENEFITS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010 in
respect of Provident Fund, Pension and other Retirement Benefits.
V oted : Rupees one thousand five hundred twelve crore, twenty six lakh,
fifty thousand, six hundred and ninety five only.
Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
15398,81,73,000 16911,08,23,695 1512,26,50,695 9.82%
This Demand deals with the expenditure on Provident Fund, Pension and other
Retirement Benefits.
The excess of  `1512.27 crore under 'V oted' portion, which works out to
9.82 per cent of the Final Grant of  `15398.82 crore, has occurred under Superannuation
and Retiring Pension, Commuted Pension, Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity mainly due
to receipt of more debits from various pension disbursing authorities because of
disbursement of arrears on account of implementation of 6th Pay Commission,
finalisation of more cases of voluntary Retirement and Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity,
etc.
109

DEMAND No. 15 — RAILW AYS
REVENUE
DIVIDEND TO GENERAL REVENUES, REPAYMENT OF LOANS
TAKEN FROM GENERAL REVENUES AND AMORTISATION OF
OVER-CAPITALISATION
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2010 in
respect of Dividend to General Revenues, Repayment of loans taken from General
Revenues and Amortisation of Over-Capitalisation.
V oted : Rupees four crore, fifty one lakh, three thousand, seven hundred and
sixty two only.
Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess Percentage of Excess
`` `
5538,83,00,000 5543,34,03,762 4,51,03,762 0.08%
This Demand deals with the expenditure on Dividend to General Revenues,
Repayment of loans taken from General Revenues and Amortisation of Over-
Capitalisation.
The excess of  `4.51 crore under 'V oted' portion, which works out to
0.08 per cent of the Final Grant of  `5538.83 crore, is mainly due to more payment of
dividend to General Revenues due to increase in the dividend bearing Capital.
110

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
111

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation
Scrutiny of the cases of excess registering Grants and Appropriations for the
financial year 2009-2010 indicates huge variations in the quantum of excess expenditure
incurred under 18 Grants/Appropriations with the bulk of the excess in the Grants
relating to Defence Services. In the Civil Sector as much as 97.62 per cent of the total
excess expenditure was incurred under Grant No. 21 (Revenue V oted)—Defence
Pensions alone while Grant No. 14—Department of Telecommunications, Grant
No. 20—Ministry of Defence and Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of the Ministry of
Home Affairs registered 0.95 per cent, 1.03 per cent and 0.39 per cent respectively, In
the Defence Sector, Grant No. 22 (Revenue Voted)—Defence Services—Army
Accounted for 94.22 per cent whereas Grant No. 23 (Revenue V oted)—Defence
Services—Navy and Grant No. 22 (Revenue Charged) Defence Services—Army
recorded 5.76 per cent and 0.02 per cent respectively. As regards the Railways, about
94.50 per cent of the total excess expenditure was incurred under 4 Grants only  i.e.
(i) Grant No. 4—Repairs and Maintenance of Permanent Way and Works; (ii) Grant
No. 5—Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Powers; (iii) Grant No. 6—Repairs and
Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons; and (iv) Grant No. 13—Provident Fund, Pension
and Other Retirement Benefits. The Committee wish to caution that expenditure over
and above the budgetary provisions sanctioned by the Parliament at different stages
of the budget does not augur well for fiscal prudence and fiscal consolidation besides
undermining the Parliamentary financial control. The unabated large excess expenditure
by these defaulter Ministries/Departments is axiomatic of the fact that they have not
taken any tangible corrective measures. Deplorably, such a trend also indicates that
Ministries/Departments have not accorded due importance to the guiding principles
of budgeting i.e. plugging of the existing loopholes and deficiencies with a view to
restricting the quantum of excess expenditure to the barest minimum so as to ensure
judicious and equitable distribution of scarce financial resources for achieving all
round growth of different sectors. The Committee urge upon the defaulting Ministries/
Departments to find innovative steps for ushering in a system of budgeting whereby
the exercise is not only made more accurate, logical and practicable but also able to
eliminate all budgetary and financial irregularities. Taking note of the persisting trend
of excess expenditure and considering the fact that the problem is not intractable with
effective application of IT and e-governance, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry of Finance make it incumbent upon the Financial Advisers and the Budget
112

113
Controlling authorities to ensure that no excess expenditure takes place in future. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the instructions issued by them in this behalf.
[Appendix-II, Paragraph 3 of Fortieth Report of PAC (Fifteenth Lok Sabha]
Action Taken (Ministry of Finance)
• Scrutiny of the Appropriation Accounts of Postal Services, Defence Services
and Civil Services reveals that there is an overall savings of V oted Grants/
Appropriation. However, excess expenditure occurred in one of the Section of
V oted Grants/Appropriations to the tune of ` 14,575.08 crore that required
regularisation of expenditure;
• Ministry of Finance issues Budget Circular every year bringing out various
Government instructions and also steps to be undertaken to formulate the Budget.
While seeking proposals for Supplementary Demands for Grants also,
instructions are issued to realistically project for the Budget, so that neither
there is an occasion for huge surrender of Budget nor there are huge excesses.
The Budget circular is followed up with meeting the Financial Advisers of various
Ministries/Departments, so that a micro review is undertaken at the apex level of
Ministry of Finance for realistic Budget requirement;
• During the pre-budget discussions held by Ministry of Finance, review of
expenditure is done Scheme-wise in respect of all Ministries/Departments, so
that realistic budget is framed and approved by the Parliament. Ministry of
Finance during the three batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants, also take
an opportunity to frame realistic assessment of the expected expenditure for the
year;
• Trend of excess Grants for the past five years reveal that the incidence of
excess expenditure has reduced considerably in respect of Ministries/
Departments other than Railways…from  ` 42,227.20 crore in FY 2003-2004
to  `14,575.08 crore in FY 2009-2010;
• Ministry of Finance has been issuing instructions in the past emphasizing the
need to control of expenditure with reference to the sanctioned Grant/
Appropriation. Recently, on 11th July, 2011, an Office Memorandum (copy
enclosed) was issued to all the Ministries/Departments emphasizing this and
suggesting the following measures:—
(a) Preparation and circulation of Monthly Financial Review Analysis to the
 Administrative Heads for monitoring the progress of expenditure, and also
to enable them to take remedial action wherever required;
(b) Convening regular internal meetings with all spending units for effecting
expenditure control;
(c) Ensuring realistic projection of Budget Estimates/Supplementary Estimates
and also ensuring that expenditure incurred is within the Budget as envisaged
in General Financial Rules, 2005 so that there is no occasion for incurring
excess expenditure;

114
(d) Putting in place/reviewing/strengthening systems for monthly monitoring
of  the flow/trends of expenditure so as to avoid recurrence of excess
expenditure.
• As brought out above, a comprehensive and detailed Budget Circulars duly
indicating the measures required to be taken by the Ministries/Departments has
been issued by the Ministry of Finance. During the recently held pre-budget
meeting this time, as an innovative measures, approved budgetary ceilings were
reviewed and corrected till as late as mid-February, 2012, keeping in view the
latest trend of expenditure. For this purpose, Ministry of Finance (Budget
Division) relief upon the booking of expenditure data available in the e-Lekha
software maintained by the Office of Controller General of Accounts, Department
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.
Given the complex nature and variety of Government spending, it is not feasible to
precisely estimate in advance all the expenditure requirements for the financial year, as
well as the requirements arising out of the unanticipated/unforeseen development
during the course of the year. However, Ministry of  Finance is taking proactive action
in precisely estimating the expenditure and will continue to do so in future also, so that
the incidence of excess is kept minimum, if not completely eliminated.
This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-58/11-12/979,
dated the 23rd March, 2012.
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
New Delhi-110 001 O.M.No. F7 (2)-B (SD)/2011, dated the 2nd April, 2012]

PAC Matter/Most Important
F.7(3)-B(SD) 2010
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
New Delhi, dated the 11th July,2011
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject:Control of expenditure against the sanctioned grant/appropriation—
Observations of the Public Accounts Committee.
The Public Accounts Committee in their 22nd Report (15th Lok Sabha) relating
to 'Excess Expenditure over the Voted Grants and Charged Appropriation (2008-2009)'
have taken a serious view of expenditure incurred in excess of the provisions authorized
by the Parliament. It has been observed there in that the percentage of excess expenditure
over the Total Grant ranged from 0.0007 per cent (Defence—Pension) to 76.96 per cent
(Railways Appropriation No. 16—Assets-Acquisition, Construction and
Replacement—Capital). In six cases, the percentage was more than 5 per cent over the
Original Grant. The Committee has expressed their displeasure over incurring such
huge amount of excess expenditure over the Total/original Grants, which is a clear
indication of poor budgeting on the part of Ministries concerned. Further, the Committee
feels that incurring excess expenditure of more than 5 per cent of the Total Grant
despite obtaining Supplementary Grant/appropriation is a pointer towards the total
failure of the Ministries concerned in anticipating the funds required for which special
efforts are needed in future to avoid recurrence of such instances. It has also been
recommended that in future the concerned Ministries should ensure that under no
circumstances the excess over Final Grants should exceed more than 5 per cent.
2. Ministry of Finance has been issuing instructions in the past emphasizing the
need of control of expenditure with reference to the sanctioned Grant/Appropriation.
Keeping in view the observations of the Public Accounts Committee and the extant
rules/instructions, it is once again emphasized that strict watch should be kept over
the flow of expenditure against the sanctioned grant by regular monitoring as provided
in Rules 54, 58, 59, 60 and 61, Chapter 3 of General Financial Rules, 2005 so that the
expenditure does not exceed the amounts authorized by the Parliament.
3. All the Ministries/Departments may consider taking necessary measures with
a view to minimize/eliminate the incidence of excess expenditure by having in place
judicious management of budgetary provisions and also ensure that expenditure is
within the original/supplementary appropriation or valid re-appropriation as the case
may be. Some of the steps suggested are:—
(a) Preparation and circulation of Monthly Financial Review Analysis to the
Administrative Heads for monitoring the progress of expenditure, and also to
enable them to take remedial action wherever required;
115

116
(b) Convening regular internal meetings with all spending units for effecting
expenditure control;
(c) Ensuring realistic projection of Budget Estimates/Supplementary Estimates
and also ensuring that expenditure incurred is within the Budget as envisaged
in General financial Rules, 2005 so that there is no occasion for incurring
excess expenditure;
(d) Putting in place/reviewing/strengthening system for monthly monitoring of
the flow/trends of expenditure so as to avoid recurrence of excess expenditure.
4. The above instructions if implemented are expected to achieve the desired
result of curtailing the incidence of excess expenditures.
5. This issues with the approval of Secretary (Expenditure).
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
To
All Financial Advisers
Ministries/Departments
(as per standard mailing list)

117
Action Taken (Department of Telecommunications)
The Department of Telecommunications strives to ensure that due care is being
taken to maintain fiscal discipline. Instructions have been issued to all the subordinates
units of the Department to ensure fiscal discipline in expenditure. All corrective measures
are being taken to ensure accurate, logical and realistic budgeting. Efforts are also
being made to ensure that expenditure is limited to the budgetary allocation.
It is also apprised that as a result of the measures taken no excess expenditure
was incurred during 2010-11.
Sd/-
Deputy Director General (TPF)
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of
Telecommunications O.M. No. 1-20/2012-B, dated 22nd February, 2013]
This has been vetted by D.G. Audit (P&T) with remarks "seen, thanks" vide their
U.O. No. Report Tele-II/Appn. A/cs/DOT/2009-10/726, dated 04.03.2013.
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 20)]
In this paragraph, the Committee have observed that in so far as Civil Ministries
are concerned, the excess expenditure incurred under Grant No. 20—Ministry of Defence
(Civil) is 1.03 per cent of total excess expenditure registered under the Civil Sector in FY
2009-10. In this context, it is submitted that the excess is under prescribed permissible
limit i.e. 5% as the variation is up to 0.88% only under Grant No. 20—Ministry of Defence
(Civil) over Total/Final Grants. Moreover, it is mentioned that incurring of excess
expenditure under Ministry of Defence (Civil)—Grant No. 20 is not a recurring instance
and excess under this Grant has not been registered for earlier financial years till 2008-09.
With a view to plugging of the existing loopholes, deficiencies and to restricting the
quantum of excess expenditure to the barest minimum, the Ministry have circulated to all
the Budget controlling authorities and IFA concerned, from time to time, the instructions
issued by Ministry of Finance, to exercise strict control on progress of Expenditure in
order to avoid any large scale savings or excess under the Grant No. 20—Ministry of
Defence (Civil). Moreover, the observation made by PAC has been noted by the Ministry
of Defence (Civil) for future guidance and for compliance.
Further, the Committee have recommend that the Ministry of Finance make it
incumbent upon the Financial Advisers and the Budget Controlling authorities to
ensure that no excess expenditure takes places in future. In this regard, Ministry of
Defence would take necessary follow up action on the instructions issued by Ministry
of  Finance.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)]
In this paragraph, the Committee have observed that in so far as civil Ministries
are concerned, the excess expenditure of  Rs. 8999.54 cr. has been incurred under

118
Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions which is 34.61 per cent of total excess expenditure
registered under in the Civil Sector in FY 2009-10. The excess under Grant No. 21—
Defence Pensions was mainly due to payment of revised pension at higher rate under
VI CPC than assessed and booking of pending pension scrolls received from banks to
clear amount under suspense.
Although the requests for augmentation of funds were made by the PCDA (P)
Allahabad/CGDA but the same could not be acceded to on account of shortage of
funds by Ministry of Finance.
Further, in view of the fact that expenditure, for which cash flow has already
taken place in the books of RBI, was required to be brought to account, the pending
pensions scrolls amounting to Rs. 8999.54 cr. had to be booked under the Defence
Pensions Head to clear the amount laying under RBI Suspense to reflect the true
picture of cash flow from the Government account.
However, as a measure of control, the Government of India in the Ministry of
Defence have been advising the budget estimating authorities of Defence Pensions to
prepare their budget proposals on realistic basis taking into consideration all the
related aspects such as commitments, trend of expenditure and the anticipated
expenditure and concrete remedial action must be taken immediately to arrest the
excess to an optimum level. In this regard, this Office has issued instructions vide
ID No. 2(6)/MO/2009-10/721, dt. 29.06.2010 avoid any excess expenditure over the
sanctioned Grant and to assess the requirement of funds properly. In order to have
strict control, the instructions issued by the Ministry of  Finance, Department of
Economic Affairs, were also circulated vide this Division ID No.(s) (i) MoD(Fin.)
ID No. 1(9)/Fin.(MO)/2011-12/708, dated 07.06.2011 & (ii) ID No. 1(9)/Fin. (MO)/2011-
2012/933 dated 21.07.2011 on the subject—"Steps for Fiscal and Expenditure
Management in 2011 regarding taking various steps in order to adhere to fiscal targets
set out in the Budget 2011-12 and for better expenditure management.
Further, Pension disbursement agencies viz. Banks have been approached for
transmission of pension payment data electronically so as to enable PCDA(P) Allahabad
to ensure correct and timely booking of pension expenditure by automating
classification and accounting system through computerized system.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA(VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant Nos. 22 and 23)]
In this paragraph, the Committee has urged upon the defaulting Ministries/
Departments to find innovative steps for ushering in a system of budgeting to eliminate
all budgetary irregularities. The Committee has also recommended that the Ministry of
Finance make it incumbent upon the Financial Advisers and the Budget Controlling
authorities to ensure that no excess expenditure takes place in future. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the instructions issued by them in this behalf.

119
This Ministry makes all efforts to ensure strict budgetary discipline among all
the budget holders to curb excess expenditure.
Further, necessary action in this regard is to be taken by Ministry of Finance.
This Ministry would certainly follow the instructions of Ministry of Finance in curbing
excess expenditure in letter and spirit.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
Addl. FA (VP) & JS
[Ministry of Defence (Finance) O.M. F.No. 7(6)/Bud-I/2012, dated 18th June, 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Home Affairs)
It may be seen from the above that, huge variations in the quantum of excess
expenditure incurred was due to requirement of additional funds to meet cost of
increase in pension and dearness relief and grant to pension to the participants of
freedom fighters and their dependents on various liberation movements. The
disbursement of pension to freedom fighters/spouses of deceased freedom fighters/
eligible dependants of deceased freedom fighters is made through treasuries and over
32,000 branches of Nationalized Banks spread all over the country. The Ministry does
not make any payment directly to the beneficiaries. Individual Banks make the payment
of pension to the beneficiaries and get their reimbursement from RBI, Nagpur. The RBI
in turn intimates the CPAO expenditure booked to the Government account. All
Accountants General prefer their claims with CPAO which in turn reimburse the amount
to State Governments.
Sd/-
(S.C. Panda)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' had been vetted by O/o DGACR vide their U.O. No.
RR/6-21/12-13/742, dated  29.1.2013)
[Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 28/1/2012-Bgt. I, dated 18/2/2013]
Action Taken (Department of Posts)
Department of Posts ensures to make realistic requirement of funds and to maintain
fiscal discipline in spending the public money in future. For this purpose the instructions
have been issued to all the subordinates units/Budget Controlling authorities to project
realistic demand for fund and to monitor the expenditure accordingly. Moreover the
proposal of the Department was re-assessed by the Ministry of Finance to reduce the
ceiling of expenditure during the Pre-budget discussions which resulted in excess
expenditure.
However, the Department of Posts, besides issuing instructions to observe
austerity measure in incurring expenditure to the fund controlling authorities reviews
the expenditure by conducting Video Conference with the Heads of Circles to monitor

120
the same in terms of Grant. This has an effective control over expenditure vis-a-vis
Grant.
Sd/-
DDG(PAF)
[MoC & IT/DoP, New Delhi O.M. No. 20-5/2009- BGT (PA), dated Feb., 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
The para brings out the Grant-wise factual position of excess expenditure incurred
by various central ministries including the Railways. Most of the excess incurred by
Ministry of Railways is attributable to steep rise in the staff cost consequent upon
implementation of the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission (6th CPC).
Bulk of the excess has been incurred in four Grants i.e. 4, 5, 6 & 13. The Committee may
appreciate the fact that despite the difficulty in accurately assessing the impact of
implementation of the recommendations of the 6th CPC, the excess under Grant Nos. 4,
5 & 6 is minor in terms of percentage to the total sanctioned amount under each grant.
However, the same under Grant No. 13 is high at 10%.
The concerns of the Committee are noted.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 7-RA-III/2-1/11 dated 27.04.2012 have vetted the ATN
with the remarks "Seen. Thanks".
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Ex. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 15.06.2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note with profound concern that out of the total 18 cases of
excess registering Grants/Appropriations, an excess expenditure of Rs. 12071.08 crore
was incurred in as many as 15 cases even after obtaining Supplementary Grants/
Appropriations to the extent of Rs. 10628.59 crore. The percentage of excess expenditure
over the Supplementary Grants in respect of these 15 Grants/Appropriations ranged
from 4.12 per cent [Grant No. 9 (Railways)—Operating Expenses—Traffic] to 456.67
per cent (Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs) and in
8 cases this percentage was more than 50 per cent. To give the sector-wise details,
Supplementary Grants to the tune of  Rs. 5760.22 crore, Rs. 1035.11 crore,
Rs. 436.60 crore and Rs. 3396.66 crore pertaining to the Civil, Defence, Postal and
Railway Sectors respectively fell short of the actual expenditure by Rs. 9218.89 crore,
Rs. 151.11 crore, Rs. 818.13 crore and Rs. 1882.95 crore in that order. In respect of six
Grants and Appropriations the quantum of excess expenditure incurred has been even
higher than the Spplementary Grants sought. The Committee deplore the tendency of

121
the defaulting Ministries/Departments in resorting to excess expenditure despite
obtaining huge sums of Supplementary Grants in a routine manner. What is more
perplexing is that these Ministries/Departments could not realistically project their
requirement of funds even after three stages of obtaining Supplementary Grants the
latest being February-March 2010 i.e. the fag end of the financial year. This is a clear
indication  of not only of bad budgeting but also of deeply pervading malaise in the
extant budgeting method/mechanism, which has failed to ensure proper assessment
and accurate projection of the fund requirement despite ample opportunities for seeking
parliamentary approval. It also exposes the hollow claim of the Ministries/Departments
that they monitor the flow of the excess expenditure. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministries/Departments concerned probe into the causes of this
chronic malaise and find effective ways and means to make the mechanism of estimating
Supplementary Grants more realistic and the budget controlling officers responsible
so that no excess expenditure is incurred and strict fiscal discipline is maintained.
[Para 5 of the Fortieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (Department of Telecommunications)
The recommendations of the Commitee have been noted. All corrective measures
are being taken to ensure framing of balanced and realistic budget estimate. Efforts are
also being made to ensure that expenditure is limited to the budgetary allocation. As a
result of the measures taken no excess expenditure was incurred during 2010-11.
Sd/-
Deputy Director General (TPF)
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of
Telecommunications O.M.No. 1-20/2012-B, dated 25 April, 2012]
This has been vetted by DG Audit (P&T) with remarks "Department of
Telecommunications may ensure projection of Fund on realistic basis to avoid any
excess/saving of Fund under various Head of Accounts", vide their No. Report -Tele-
II(b) 400 Appropriation Acts/2009-10/ DoT/141 dated 04.06.2012.
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 20)]
In this paragraph, the Committee have noted that in most of the cases, excess
registered in grants, the excess took place despite the Ministries obtaining huge sums
of Supplementary Grants. The excess registering Grant pertaining to Civil Ministries
i.e. Grant No. 20—Ministry of Defence (Civil), obtained a Supplementary Grant of
Rs. 926.42 crore. Even then, the actual expenditure exceeds the budgetary provisions
by Rs. 95.32 crore which is 10.29 per cent of total amount of Supplementary Grants
obtained under Grant No. 20. The Committee deplores the tendency of the Ministries/
Departments in resorting to excess expenditure despite obtaining huge sums of
Supplementary Grants in a routine manner. The Committee have, therefore,
recommended that the concerned Ministries/Departments concerned to probe into the
causes of this chronic malaise and find effective ways and means to make the mechanism
of estimating Supplementary Grants more realistic and the budget controlling officers

122
responsible so that no excess expenditure is incurred and strict fiscal discipline is
maintained.
In this regard the Ministry of Defence has issued instructions, from time to time,
to exercise strict control on progress of Expenditure in order to avoid any large-scale
savings or excess under any grant relating to Civil Estimate.
In so far as putting in place effective ways and means to make the mechanism of
estimating Supplementary Grants more realistic and pragmatic is concerned, this
Ministry would take follow up action in accordance with the instructions of Ministry
of Finance is this regard.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant No. 21)]
In this paragraph, the Committee have noted that in most of the excess registered
in grants, the excess took place despite the Ministries obtaining huge sums of
Supplementary Grants. The excess registering Grant pertaining to Civil Ministries i.e.
Grant No. 21—Defence Pensions obtained a Supplementary Grant of Rs. 4210 crs.
Even then the actual expenditure exceeds the budgetary provisions by Rs. 8999.54
crores. The Committee deplores the tendency of the Ministries/Departments in restoring
to excess expenditure despite obtaining huge sums of Supplementary Grants in a
routine manner. The Committee have, therefore, recommended that  the concerned
Ministries/Departments concerned to probe into the causes of this chronic malaise
and find effective ways and means to make the mechanism of estimating Supplementary
Grants more realistic and the budget controlling officers responsible so that no excess
expenditure is incurred and strict fiscal discipline is maintained.
In this regard, the Ministry of Defence have issued, from time to time, instructions
to exercise strict control on progress of Expenditure in order to avoid any large-scale
savings or excess under any grant relating to Civil Estimates.
In so far as putting in place effective ways and means to make the mechanism of
estimating Supplementary Grants more realistic and pragmatic is concerned, this
Ministry would take follow up action on the instructions of Ministry of Finance in this
regard.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
JS & Addl. FA (VP)
Action Taken [Ministry of Defence (Grant Nos. 22 and 23)]
In this paragraph, the Committee, has observed failure on the part of the defaulting
Ministries/Departments to curb excess expenditure and hence have recommended
that the Ministries/Departments concerned probe into the causes of this chronic malaise

123
and find effective ways and means to make the mechanism of estimating Supplementary
Grants more  realistic and the budget controlling officers responsible so that no excess
expenditure  is incurred and strict fiscal discipline is maintained.
Budgetary allocations provided by the Ministry of Finance are generally less
than the projected requirements. Nevertheless, all effforts are made to ensure that the
prescribed budgetary ceilings are adhered to.
Further, with effect from 2012-13 the Demands for Grants under Ministry of
Defence, namely Demand No.(s) 22-Army, 23-Navy, 24-Air Force, 26-Research &
Development and 27 Capital Outlay on Defence Services have been brought under the
ambit of modified exchequer control—Cash Management System. Detailed instructions
have been issued in this regard (copy enclosed). It is expected that implementation of
the cash management system would bring in the desired financial discipline.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
Addl. FA (VP) & JS
[Ministry of Defence (Finance) O.M. F.No. 7(6) Bud-I/2012, dated 18th June, 2012]

IMPORTANT
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE (FINANCE)
(BUDGET DIVISION)
Subject: Cash Management System in the Central Government—modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
during the last quarter of the financial year.
Vide Ministry of Finance OM No. 21(1)-B(PD)/2005 dated 2nd November, 2011
(copy enclosed), the follwing Demands for Grants under the Defence Services Estimates
have been brought under the ambit of the Modified Cash Management System—
(i) Demand No. 22—Army
(ii) Demand No. 23—Navy
(iii) Demand No. 24—Air Force
(iv) Demand No. 26—R & D
(v) Demand No. 27—Capital Outlay on Defence Services.
2. Broadly, in terms of the guidelines issued vide OM dated 27th December, 2006
(copy enclosed), this entails the following—
(i) In respect of each of the Demands, Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) shall be
worked out in the beginning of the financial year and included as an Annexure
to the Detailed Demand for Grants.
(ii) The MEP would form the basis of the Quarterly Expenditure Allocations
(QEA). The Department/Ministry may not issue cheques beyond the quarterly
limit, without prior consent of Ministry of Finance.
(iii) The MEP for the month of March may not exceed 15% of the budgeted
provision.
(iv) MEP for the months of January-March may be so fixed that the QEA for the
last quarter may not exceed 33% of the budgeted provision.
(v) Savings if any under the QEA would not be available for automatic carry
forward to the next quarter. The Departments/Ministry may however, approach
the MoF for revalidation of such savings through modification in the MEP
and thereby QEA. Spill over in respect of MEP, not inconsistent with QEA
would not require prior revalidation from MoF but may be included in the
quarterly modification.
(vi) MoF will consider the request for revalidation within 15 days of receipt of
requests, failing which the request would be deemed to have been granted.
124

125
(vii) MEP and QEA pertaining to the 4th quarter would be subsumed in the
finalization of the RE of the financial year.
3. It is therefore requested that as soon as the ceilings for BE 2012-13 are conveyed
by this Division, Monthly Expenditure Plan for the coming financial year be prepared
and conveyed to this Division as per the enclosed format. It may be ensured that the
total outgo during the year is restricted to the total allocation provided under the BE.
4. Suitable internal control be devised to ensure that no expenditure in excess of
the specified monthly limit is incurred.
5. In the event of a likelihood of expenditure exceeding the quarterly limit, a
proposal to seek waiver of the Ministry of Finance shall be initiated in time to reach
this Division by the 10th of the final month of the quarter (i.e. June, September and so
on). Reasons for such excess vis-a-vis the planned outgo shall be clearly brought out
therein. Similarly, in case of savings against the planned outgo for the quarter, a
proposal for carrying over the savings to the subsequent quarter should be sent to
this Division by the 10th of the month following the quarter end (i.e. July, October and
so on). The monthly/quarterly expenditure plan may also be modified accordingly.
6. Actual expenditure against the monthly/quarterly limit shall be intimated by
the  10th of the following month.
7. A nodal officer may be designated for coordination of this work within the
Directorate/Department. The particulars of the officer may be intimated to this Division.
The designated officer shall be the single point of contact with Budget Division, in so
far as the scheme is concerned.
8. It is requested that all concerned be briefed suitably to ensure compliance of
the above instructions.
Sd/-
(Veena Prasad)
Addl. FA & JS
DGFP,  ACNS(P&P),  ACAS(Fin. P),  ACIDS (Fin. P),
DGOF, CCR&D(R&M), DG NCC, DGQA, DGAQA,
Dte. of Standardisation, DG ATVP
MoD(Fin.) ID No. 5(7)/Bud-I/2011 dt. 18/01/2012
Copy to—
DG(Acq.), FA(Acq.), AS(B),  AS(DP), CGDA
All JSs/Addl. FAs/FMs
PS to Defence Secretary
PS to FA (DS)

NO. 21(1)-B(PD)/2005
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
BUDGET DIVISION
[CASH MANAGEMENT CELL]
Room No. 263-B, North Block,
New Delhi, dated 2nd Nov., 2011.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Cash Management System in the Central Government—modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
during the last quarter of the financial year.
The undersigned is directed to refer to this Division's O.M. of even number
dated December 27, 2006 on the subject cited above.
2. Based on the recommendations of Fourteenth Report of Second Administrative
Reforms Commission (ARC) titled. 'Strengthening Financial Management System',
accepted by the Group of Ministers (GoM), it has been decided  to extend aforesaid
system to another 23 Demands for Grants (listed in Annexure-I) from the financial year
2012-13 i.e. w.e.f. 1.4.2012. This will be in addition to the 23 Demands for Grants already
covered under the system (Annexure-II).
3. The Financial Advisor would be responsible for the implementation of the
modified expenditure management system. He/She may nominate a nodal officer for
the purpose.
4. In respect of each Demand for Grants, Monthly Expenditure Plan (separately
for Plan and Non-Plan Expenditure) (MEP) would be worked out and included as an
annex to the Detailed Demands for Grants in respect of the said Demands for Grants.
Suggested format is at Annexure-III.
5. The required information relating to actual may kindly be e-mailed to this
Ministry every month [sopd-dea@nic.in]. It may also be ensured that this information
is sent to this Ministry, in the enclosed proforma by 15th of every month.
126

127
6. The guidelines mentioned in the aforesaid O.M. dated December 27, 2006
remained unchanged (Annexure-IV).
Sd/-
Encl: As above (Brajendra Navnit)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India
Tel. No.:  011-23092744
To
1. All Financial Advisors.
2. Principal Director, O/o the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
3. Joint Controller General of Accounts.
4. All Directors/OSD/DS/US/Section Officers in Budget Division.
5. NIC, Ministry of Finance For up-loading on website.

ANNEXURE  I
Proposed list of Demands for Grants for inclusion in Modified Cash Management
System w.e.f. 2012-13 (1st April, 2012)
Sl. Demand Name of the Ministry/Department
No. No.
1. 4 Department of Atomic Energy
2. 13 Department of Posts
3. 15 Department of Information Technology
4. 22 Defence Services—Army
5. 23 Defence Services—Navy
6. 24 Defence Services—Air Force
7. 26 Defence Services—Research and Development
8. 27 Capital Outlay on Defence Services
9. 30 Ministry of Environment and Forests
10. 33 Department of Financial Services
11. 35 Transfers to State and Union Territory Governments
12. 52 Ministry of Home Affairs
13. 54 Police
14. 60 Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
15. 61 Ministry of Labour and Employment
16. 65 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
17. 67 Ministry of Minority Affairs
18. 84 Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation
19. 86 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
20. 89 Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
21. 90 Department of Space
22. 95 Ministry of Tribal Affairs
23. Ministry of Railways
128

ANNEXURE  II
List of Demands for Grants covered under Modified Cash Management System
w.e.f. 2007-08 (1st April, 2007)
Sl. Demand Name of the Ministry/Department
No. No.
1. 1 D/o Agriculture & Coop.
2. 2 D/o Agricultural Research & Education
3. 7 D/o Fertilizers
4. 11 D/o Commerce
5. 14 D/o Telecommunications
6. 17 D/o Food & Pub. Distbn.
7. 31 M/o External Affairs
8. 32 D/o Economic Affairs
9. 40 Indian, Audit & Accounts Department
10. 41 D/o Revenue
11. 42 Direct Taxes
12. 43 Indirect Taxes.
13. 46 D/o Health & Family Welfare
14. 58 D/o School Education & Literacy
15. 59 D/o Higher Education
16. 70 M/o Panchayati Raj
17. 73 M/o Petroleum and Natural Gas
18. 75 M/o Power
19. 81 D/o Road Transport and Highways
20. 82 D/o Rural Development
21. 93 M/o Textiles
22. 101 M/o Urban Development
23. 105 M/o Women & Child Development
129

130
ANNEXURE  III
CASH MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Monthly April May June QEAI July Aug. Sept. QEA II Oct. Nov. Dec. QEA III Jan. Feb. March QEA IV
Expenditure
Projection
Revenue
Salary
Other Than
Salary
TOTAL
Capital
Capital
Acquisition
Capital Other
Than
Acquisition
TOTAL

ANNEXURE  IV
F.NO.  21(1)-PD/2005
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
Room No. 168A, North Block,
New Delhi, dated December 27, 2006
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Cash management system in Central Government—modified exchequer
control based expenditure management and restrictions on expenditure
during the last quarter of the financial year.
The undersigned is directed to refer to Office Memorandum of even number
dated January 10, 2006 regarding introduction of exchequer control based expenditure
with effect from April 1, 2006.
2. Based on the working of the scheme, it has been decided to expand and
modify the Scheme as detailed below.
3. The Modified Cash Management System seeks to achieve, inter-alia, the
following objectives:—
(i) Obtain greater evenness in the budgeted expenditure within the financial
year, especially in respect of items entailing large sums of advance releases
and transfers to corpus funds.
(ii) Reduce rush of expenditure during the last quarter, especially the last month
of the financial year.
(iii) Reduce tendency of parking of funds.
(iv) Effectively monitor the expenditure pattern.
(v) Better planning of Indicative Market Borrowing Calendar of the Central
Government.
4. The Scheme shall apply in respect of 23 Demand for Grants listed in Annex.-I,
including 9 to which the Scheme is being extended with effect from financial year 2007-08.
5. Financial Advisor would be responsible for the implementation of the modified
expenditure management system. He/She may nominate a nodal officer for the purpose.
6. In respect of each Demand for Grant, Monthly Expenditure Plan (separately
for Plan and Non-Plan Expenditure) [MEP] would be worked out and included as an
131

132
annex. to the detailed Demand for Grant in respect of the said Demand for Grant.
Suggested format is a Annex.-II.
7. MEP would form the basis of Quarterly Expenditure Allocations [QEA]. The
Departments/Ministries concerned may not issue cheques beyond the Quarterly
Expenditure Allocation [which would be equal to the sum of provisions under Monthly
Expenditure Plan] without prior consent of Ministry of Finance [Cash Management
Cell, Budget Division].
8. The MEP may be finalized taking into account the following—
(a) MEP for the month of March may not exceed 15 per cent of the budgeted
provision [Budget Estimate];
(b) MEP for the months of January-March may be so fixed that the QEA for
the last quarter may not  exceed 33 per cent of the budgeted provision;
and
(c) The extant guidelines of Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure,
including D.O. No.7(3)/2006/E. Coord., dated December 21, 2006.
9. The exchequer control would apply cumulatively at the Demand for Grants
level only i.e. inter se variations between months within a quarter, between plan and
non-plan and between schemes would be permissible, subject to statutory restrictions
and extant guidelines.
10. Savings, if any, incurred under the Quarterly Expenditure Allocations would
not be available for automatic carry forward to the next quarter. The Department/
Ministry may, however, approach Ministry of Finance for revalidation of such savings
through modification in the Monthly Expenditure Plan and thereby Quarterly
Expenditure Allocation. Spill over in respect of Monthly Expenditure Plan, not
inconsistent with Quarterly Expenditure Allocation would not require prior
revalidation from Ministry of Finance but may be included in the Quarterly
modification.
11. Ministry of Finance would consider such requests for revalidation within a
period of 15 days of receipt of such request, failing which the request for revalidation
would be deemed to have been granted.
12. The Monthly Expenditure Plan and Quarterly Expenditure Allocations
pertaining to the 4th quarter of the financial year would be subsumed in the finalization
of Revised Estimate for the financial year.
13. The Monthly Expenditure Plan and Quarterly Expenditure Allocations may
be made in gross terms.
14. In addition to the above, it is advised that even in respect of Demand for
Grants not covered by the modified exchequer management system, the expenditure in
the last quarter of the financial year may not exceed 33 per cent of the Budget allocation
for the Demand for Grants. However, in the event of Revised Estimates being fixed
lower than the Budget Estimate, actual expenditure may be kept within the Revised
Estimate.

133
It is clarified that the above provision shall apply in the current financial year as
well.
15. This Office Memorandum supersedes the Office Memorandum of even number
dated January 10, 2006.
16. Receipt of this Office Memorandum may kindly be acknowledged.
Sd/-
(V .S. Chauhan)
OSD (Budget)
E. mail: chauhan@nic.in
To
1. All Financial Advisors.
2. Principal Director, O/o Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
3. Joint Controller General of Accounts.
4. All Directors/OSD/ABO/US/DD/Section Officers in Budget Division.
5. NIC, Ministry of Finance.

134
Action Taken (Ministry of Home Affairs)
The Ministry has initiated an exercise to prepare the data base of Central Samman
Pensioner/their eligible dependents who are living and actually drawing pension as on
date by calling information  from all the Public Sector Banks and Treasuries. Most of
the information has been received and uploaded on the MHA's website. Similarly
compilation of re-verified data of the freedom fighters/dependents drawing pension
from the State Treasuries is in the progress. The offices of C&AG and RBI have been
advised to carry out comprehensive audit of disbursal of Samman Pension by State
Treasuries and Public Sector Banks respectively.
Sd/-
(S.C. Panda)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/o DGACR vide their U.O.
No RR/6-21/12-13/742, dated 29.1.2013).
[Ministry of Home Affairs, O.M. No. 28/1/2012-Bgt.I, dated 18.2.2013]
Action Taken (Department of Posts)
Department of Posts ensures to make realistic requirement of funds and to maintain
fiscal discipline in spending the public money in future. For this purpose the instructions
have been issued to all the subordinates units/Budget Controlling authorities to project
realistic demand for fund and to monitor the expenditure accordingly. Moreover the
proposal of the Department was re-assessed by the Ministry of Finance to reduce the
ceiling of expenditure during the Pre-budget discussions which resulted in excess
expenditure.
However, the Department of Posts, besides issuing instructions to observe
austerity measure in incurring expenditure to the fund controlling authorities reviews
the expenditure by conducting Video Conference with the Heads of Circles to monitor
the same in terms of Grant. This has an effective control over expenditure vis-a-vis
Grant.
Sd/-
DDG (PAF)
[MoC & IT/DoP, New Delhi, OM.No. 20-5/2009-BGT (PA), Dated Feb. 2012]
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
As has already been submitted to PAC in the other Paras and in the A TNs to
22nd Report of PAC on 'Excess over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2008-09)', the excess in 2008-09 and 2009-10 has arisen mainly due to the difficulty in
assessing the impact of implementation of the recommendations of the 6th CPC. Bulk
of the excess has been incurred in four Grants i.e. 4,5,6 and 13. The Committee may
appreciate the fact that despite the difficulty in  accurately assessing the impact of
implementation of  the Recommendations of the 6th CPC, the excess under Grant No.
4,5 and 6 is minor in terms of percentage to the total sanctioned amount under each

135
grant being 0.73%, 2.62% and 2.10% respectively. However, the same under Grant
No.13 is high at 10%. The recommendation of the Committee is noted to be more
accurate in estimating the Supplementary Grants.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 7-RA-III/2-1/11, dated 27.04.2012 have vetted the ATN
with the remarks "Seen. Thanks".
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Ex. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 15.06.2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee’s examination of the Union Government Appropriation Accounts
(Railways) for the financial year 2009-10 and scrutiny of Explanatory Notes has
revealed that the  Ministry of Railways incurred a total excess expenditure of
Rs. 1922.84 crore in 10 cases of 9 excess registering Grants/Appropriation. This
amount of excess expenditure was more than double the preceding financial year's
total of Rs. 532.12 crore incurred in 9 cases of 8 excess registering Grants/
Appropriation. Out of the total excess expenditure of Rs. 1922.84 crore, the bulk of
the expenditure amounting to Rs. 1816.68 crore constitution 94.48 per cent of the
total Grant was incurred under 4 Grants only i.e. (i) Grant No. 4—Working Expenses —
Repairs and Maintenance of Permanent—Way and Work (Rs. 54-50 crore);
(ii) Grant No. 5—Working Expenses—Repair and Maintenance of Motive Powers
(Rs. 88-71 crore); (iii) Grant No. 6—Working Expenses—Repair and Maintenance
of Carriages and Wagons (Rs.161.20 crore); and (iv) Grant No. 13—Working
Expenses—Provident Fund, Pension and Other Retirement Benefits (Rs. 1512.27
crore). According to the Ministry, the reasons for excess expenditure were
implementation of the 6th Central Pay Commission Report, more expenditure on
direct purchases, stores from stock, contractual payment, increased expenditure on
Periodical Over Hauling (POH), materialisation of more contractual payments than
anticipated. The Committee observe that while anticipating and requirement of funds
by the Railways, estimations for various Sub-Heads could have been projected more
realistically by analyzing properly the total monetary effect of salary hike, prevailing
expenditure trial, upcoming demands/requirements, rising cost, etc. The Committee
cannot but conclude that the indolent Ministry of Railways have not taken any timely
corrective measures to improve their budgeting mechanism with a view to avoiding
such a huge unauthorized expenditure. Deplorably, there is no mention in the
Explanatory Notes about the specific remedial measures taken by the Ministry to
contain this persisting excess expenditure. It is apparent that the Ministry has paid
scant respect to enforcing fiscal discipline while incurring wantonly excess
expenditure, which is anything but regretable. Taking serious note of lack of concern
and sustained efforts on the part of the Ministry in observing fiscal discipline, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Railways strive earnestly for ensuring

136
realistic estimation of their budgetary requirements under various sub-heads of the
Grants/Appropriations operated by them so that their existing lapses/loopholes are
identified and concrete remedial measures taken to obviate excess expenditure.
[Sl. No. 12, Appendix-II, Para No. 12 of 40th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken (Ministry of Railways)
It is a fact that bulk of the excess (94.8%) has been incurred under only 4 Grants,
viz., 4, 5, 6 and 13. The Committee may appreciate the fact that despite the difficulty in
accurately assessing the impact of implementation of the recommendations of the
6th CPC, the excess under Grant No. 4, 5 and 6 is minor in terms of percentage to the
total sanctioned amount under each grant being 0.73%, 2.62% and 2.10% respectively.
Only under Grant No. 13, it is high at 10% and the excess under this Grant alone is
78.65% of the total excess. The excess under this Grant is also attributable to the
difficulty in accurately assessing the impact of implementation of the recommendations
of the 6th CPC on pensions.
However, concerns of the Committee have been noted.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 18-RA-III/2-1/11 dated 08.06.2012 have vetted the A TN
with the remarks "Seen. Thanks".
Sd/-
(V. V aidehi)
Ex. Director Finance (BC)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/40, dated 15.06.2012]

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)  Public Accounts Committee.
137

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 19TH MARCH, 2013
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th March, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
7. Shri Ashok Tanwar
8. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri Prakash Javadekar
11. Shri J.D. Seelam
12. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
138

139
5. Smt.  A.  Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
6. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
2. Shri Venkatesh Mohan — Director General of Audit
3. Ms. Anim Cherian — Principal Director (ST)
4. Shri Rajiv Kumar Pandey — Principal Director of Audit
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then,
apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider the following Draft Reports
of the Committee:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Fortieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Excesses
over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2009-10)’;
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
(vii) *** *** ***
(viii) *** *** ***
(ix) * * * * * * * * *
( x ) *** *** ***
3. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/suggestions
of the Members.
4. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the
*** Matter not related to this Report.

140
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to Parliament
on a convenient date.
5. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Reports.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department
12 3 4
1. 4 Finance/ The Committee deplore that despite assurances
Telecommunications/ given by  the  Ministries/Departments especially
Home Affairs/ by the Ministry of Finance that necessary remedial
Railways measures would be taken to ensure timely
submission of Action Taken Notes to the Public
Accounts Committee, the Ministries/
Departments, barring the Ministry of Defence and
the Department of Posts furnished the Action
Taken Notes on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fortieth
Report (15th Lok Sabha) after a delay ranging over
one month to 8 months. Ironically, the Ministry of
Finance, expected to act as a role model, was a
defaulter as they furnished the Action Taken Notes
after a delay of almost two months. Worse, no
extension of time was sought by the two main
defaulters i.e. the Department of Telecommuni-
cations and the Ministry of Home Affairs for
delayed submission of their Action Taken Notes.
Evidently, this smacks of sheer disregard to the
principle of the fiscal discipline and financial
propriety. The Committee express their strong
displeasure over the inordinate delay in the
submission of Action Taken Notes by the
Ministries/Departments concerned resulting in
the avoidable delay in the preparation and
presentation of the relevant Action Taken Reports
by the Committee. While deploring the callous
and indifferent approach of the defaulting
Ministries/Departments, the Committee impress
upon the Ministries/Departments concerned to
urgently initiate requisite remedial and corrective
measures so as to  ensure that Action Taken Notes
on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee are finalized and furnished invariably
within the stipulated time limit of six months.
141

142
2. 15 Finance/ The Committee are shocked to note that the
Telecommunications/ Ministries/Departments concerned have not
Home Affairs/ taken any concrete steps except giving a stock
Defence/Posts/ reply that the recommendation of the Committee
Railways has been noted and necessary instructions have
been issued to all concerned to observe fiscal
discipline and not to exceed budget allocation.
The fact that the instruction have been issued
time and again without achieving any tangible
result warrants that more robust and innovative
measures are required for strict enforcement and
compliance so as to avoid the perennial problem
of unauthorised excess expenditure over V oted
Grants and Charged Appropriations. The
Committee disapprove the tendency of the
Ministries/Departments concerned to unsuccess-
fully justify excess expenditure and violation of
Financial Rules instead of revamping their existing
mechanism with a view to achieving concrete
improvement in budget estimation exercise. The
Committee find that the Ministries/Departments
which scrupulously adhere to the General
Financial Rules and have unwavering commitment
to financial discipline and propriety contain their
expenditure within the budget allocated and
approved by Parliament. Moreover, in an age of
e-governance made feasible by computerization
and instant connectivity between field formations,
Subordinate Offices and Head quarters, there is
no valid justification for irregularities like
unauthorized excess expenditure. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate that the defaulting Ministries/
Departments should be constantly on guard and
take innovative steps so that budgeting becomes
more accurate and that there are no budgetary
and financial irregularities. Considering the fact
that the problem is not intractable with effective
application of IT and e-governance, the Committee
desire that the Ministry of Finance should devise
effective measures and make it incumbent upon
the Financial Advisers and the budget controlling
authorities to ensure that no excess expenditure
takes place in future.
12 3 4

143
3. 23 Telecommunications/ The Committee are constrained to note that none
Home Affairs/ of the Ministries/Departments have initiated any
Defence/Posts/ probe into the causes of excess expenditure
Railways despite obtaining Supplementary Grants/
Appropriations which reinforces that no specific
and concrete measures have been put in place as
yet to avoid unauthorized expenditure. Worse,
the Ministry of Railways, which had incurred
excess expenditure despite obtaining Supple-
mentary  Grants/Appropriations in as many as
eight Grants/Appropriations during 2009-10 fiscal,
have merely stated that they have noted the
recommendation of the Committee instead of
making any firm commitments to streamline their
budgetary process and overhaul the procedures
adopted for estimation of budget at the
Supplementary Grants/Appropriation stage. As
there are no cogent reasons for the inevitability
of excess expenditure when the Ministries/
Departments get opportunities to present the
Supplementary Demands for Grants during the
three sessions of Parliament in a year, the
Committee would once again like to remind the
defaulting Ministries/Departments about the
sanctity of General Financial Rules which stipulate
that no expenditure should be incurred which
might have the effect of exceeding the total Grant
or Appropriation authorized by Parliament by law
for a financial year except by way of obtaining
Supplementary Grants/Appropriations or an
advance from the Contingency Fund. The
Committee reiterate that the Ministries/
Departments concerned probe into the causes of
this chronic malaise and find effective ways and
means to make the mechanism of estimating
Supplementary Grant more realistic and fix
responsibility on the budget controlling officers
and the Financial Advisors so as to avoid
recurrence of excess expenditure even after
obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations.
4. 26 Railways The Committee are dismayed to note that the
Ministry of Railways have merely noted the
Recommendation of the Committee and sought
12 3 4

144
to justify their excess expenditure incurred during
the financial year 2009-10 on the ground that the
amounts of excess under Grant Nos. 4, 5 and 6
were very small and in respect of Grant No. 13, it
was difficult to accurately assess the impact of
implementation of the recommendation of the
VI Central Pay Commission. From the Ministry's
reply, it is apparent that the Railways, instead of
taking appropriate punitive measures to obviate
excess expenditure, have allowed things to drift
for want of strict financial control. The Committee
are of the considered view that excess expenditure
in any form, regardless of the quantum, is
unacceptable and violative of prudent budgetary
exercise and therefore urge the Ministry of
Railways to adhere to the General Financial Rules
and avoid unauthorized expenditure.
12 3 4

APPENDIX    III
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTIETH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations: 14
(ii) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted
by the Government:
Recommendation Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6-11, 13 and 14
Total: 11
Percentage: 78.57
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Recommendation Paragraph No.  Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies
of the Government have not  been accepted  by  the  Committee
and which require reiteration:
Recommendation Paragraph Nos. 3, 5 and 12
Total: 3
Percentage: 21.43
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies:
Recommendation Paragraph No. Nil
Total: Nil
Percentage: Nil
145
GMGIPMRND—6085LS—16-07-2013.