80
TATKAL  AND  ADVANCE
RESERV ATION SYSTEM  IN  INDIAN
RAILWAYS
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
EIGHTIETH  REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

EIGHTIETH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
TATKAL AND ADV ANCE RESERV A TION
SYSTEM IN INDIAN RAILWAYS
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2013
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 30.04.2013
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)

 (iii)
PAC No. 2007
Price:  ` 34.00
© 2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government
of  India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2012-2013) ................. (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12)...................... (v)
COMPOSITION   OF  THE   SUB-COMMITTEE -IV  OF   THE   PUBLIC   ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2011-12) ........................................................................ (vi)
COMPOSITION OF THE S UB-COMMITTEE-II OF THE P UBLIC ACCOUNTS C OMMITTEE
(2012-13) ........................................................................................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (ix)
REPORT
PART  I
 I. Introductory ......................................................................... 1
II. Audit Review ........................................................................ 1
III. Irregularities in booking of tickets through PRS counters...... 2
IV . Net Booking .......................................................................... 5
V. Operation of Special Trains/New Trains............................... 6
VI. Booking through Rail Traveller’s Service Agents (RTSAs).... 7
VII. Non-exhibition of Passengers’ identification ........................ 8
VIII. Issuing of Duplicate Tickets ................................................. 8
IX. Suggestions/views of the Rail Travellers Service Agents
(RTSAs)................................................................................ 9
PART  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................... 12
APPENDICES
Z  I. Minutes  of  the  First sitting  of  the Sub-Committee-IV
(Railways) at the PAC (2011-12) held on 21st February, 2012...... 1 6
II. Minutes  of  the  First sitting  of  the Sub-Committee-II
(Railway) at the PAC (2012-13) held on 24th September, 2012..... 18
III. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the PAC (2012-13)
held on 12th December, 2012 ............................................. 20
IV . Minutes of the Twenty-ninth sitting of the PAC (2012-13)
held on 29th April, 2013 ...................................................... 23

COMPOSITION OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(iii)

SECRETARIA T
1.    Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.    Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
(iv)

COMPOSITION OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr.  Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1.    Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.    Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
3. Shri  A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
(v)

COMPOSITION  OF   THE SUB-COMMITTEE-IV  (RAILW AYS) OF  THE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  (2011-12)
Shri Anant Kumar Hegde  —  Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Jagdambika Pal
Rajya Sabha
3. Dr. Prasanta Chatterjee
4. Shri J.D. Seelam
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
(vi)

COMPOSITION  OF   THE SUB-COMMITTEE-II  (RAILW AYS) OF  THE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE (2012-13)
Shri Anant Kumar Hegde  —  Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram
3. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*4. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri  Prasanta Chatterjee
(vii)
* V acancy occurred vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 28th October,
2012.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Eightieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Tatkal and
Advance Reservation System in Indian Railways” based on para 2.2 of C&AG Report
No. 34 of  2010-11 Union Government—Railways relating to the Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board).
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2010 was laid on the Table of the House on 5th August, 2011.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2011 -12) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. A Sub-Committee was constituted for the purpose. The Sub-
Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway
Board) on the subject at their sitting held on 21st February, 2012. As the subject’s
examination remained inconclusive, the Sub-Committee of Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) took further evidence of the Ministry on 24th September,
2012. Considering the importance of the subject, the matter was further examined
by the full Committee who took evidence of the representatives of the Rail Travellers
Service Agents (RTSAs) on 12th December, 2012. The Committee considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29th April, 2013. The Minutes of the
Sittings from Appendices to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and from Part-II of
the Report.
5. The Committee thank the  Sub-Committee for taking oral evidence of the
Ministry and obtaining information on the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before the Sub-
Committee and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection
with the examination of the subject. The Committee also express their thanks to the
representatives of the Rail Travellers Service Agents (RTSAs) for submission of the
memoranda and for tendering evidence before the Committee in connection with
examination of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
29 April, 2013 Chairman,
9 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

PART-I
REPORT
I. Introductory
Computer Reservation of passenger tickets was introduced in Indian Railways
on 15 November, 1985 by implementing Passenger Reservation System (PRS)
software to facilitate passengers to book their tickets in advance. To meet the
urgent/emergent travel requirement of passengers who plan their journey at short
notice and did not have confirmed reservation, Indian Railways introduced the
Tatkal reservation facility in December, 1997. This facility was provided on
payment of premium charges on 'first come first served' basis. Later on, train/
class-wise quota was fixed for reservation under this scheme in November, 2004.
Initially, a full coach was nomi nated as a T atkal coach. Presently, the Tatkal
scheme is available for all classes except 1st class in all Mail/Express trains
including Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Jan-Shatabdi trains but excluding Yuva express trains.
Effective from November, 2011, Tatkal scheme for reservation has been revised.
Tatkal and Advance Reservation tickets could be booked from any counter of
PRS between 0800 Hrs. and 2000 Hrs. Tickets could also be booked through
Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) website/agents.
II. Audit Review
2. The major audit objective of review of operation of the scheme was to
assess the extent to which genuine passengers were able to obtain reservations
through the internet and the booking counters with ease and whether the system
provided for transparency in procedures.
3. Audit scrutiny of the functioning of the 'Tatkal and Advance Reservation
System' revealed that genuine users, for whom the scheme was intended, were not
able to access the facility with ease as it was susceptible to manipulation. Audit
also revealed other lapses in delivery of services such as booking of tickets
before and after business hours; delay in announcement of special/new trains,
reservations with incomplete names of passengers, etc. The Railway Board, in
their reply, accepted certain audit recommendations and agreed to take corrective
action. The comments of the Audit are contained in the paragraph No. 2.2 of
C&AG Report No. 34 of 2010-11 for the year ended March, 2010.
4. The subject was assigned to the Sub-Committee of the PAC on Railways
for examination and report. The Sub-Committee obtained background material
and detailed written reply. They also took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on two occasions. Considering the
importance of the subject, the matter was further examined by the full Committee
who took evidence of the representatives of the Rail Travellers Service Agents
(RTSAs).

2
III. Irregularities in booking of tickets through PRS counters
5. On the day of Advance Reservation Period (ARP), booking of tickets was
scheduled to commence exactly at 0800 Hrs. onwards. Audit noticed that on the
date of Advance Reservation Period, Tatkal tickets were booked beyond business
hours (0800 Hrs. to 2000 Hrs.). On Passenger Reservation System (PRS), Delhi,
13 cases were noticed where booking against Tatkal quota was made before 0800
Hrs. on the day of ARP.
6. Replying to audit observation, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
stated that checks in the PRS system were in place to ensure that no booking was
done before 8 A.M. As regards booking beyond business hours, it was possible
in generation of new PNR in case of allotment of berths/seats from emergency
quota with a view to allot compact accommodation in the same class or in lower/
higher class. They admitted that blocking of accommodation was possible during
opening hours but not after business hours and sought specific details for further
examination.
7. As per prescribed rules, maximum six passengers could be booked through
one PNR. Audit noticed that multiple tickets were booked having 8, 10 and 12
passengers in a single PNR. It clearly showed that the system allowed manual
intervention. It was also observed that Reservation Clerks accepted multiple
reservation slips (more than two) at one time from a single person and by this
way helped unauthorized agents and touts.
8. As per the extant orders, the Enquiry and Reservation Clerk (E&RC) could
accept only one requisition form from a person at a time. However, if onward/
return journey was involved, 2 or 3 forms could be accepted from the same
passenger. Analysis of the tatkal data for the year 2009 revealed that a number of
E&RCs were able to process more than one requisition form in one minute.
9. The Sub-Committee sought the views of the Ministry of Railways on the
observations of Audit and steps taken to monitor the functioning of Reservation
Clerks so that they do not misuse the prescribed guidelines. They also wanted to
know about the action taken against erring officials for violation of the guidelines
and measures taken to curb recurrence of such irregularities. The Ministry, in their
written reply, submitted as under:—
"A number of checks have been put in place by the Railways to keep a
check on the activities of unscrupulous elements. However, still if any
loophole is brought to their notice, efforts are made to plug the same.
Ministry of Railways have accordingly examined the observations of Audit
and wherever it was found that there is a scope for improvement,
necessary action has been taken to make modifications in the software
and administrative instructions have been issued to streamline the
system."

3
10. The Ministry further submitted that Tatkal scheme for reservation has been
revised with effect from November, 2011 and following major modifications have
been made with a view to minimise the chances of misuse of Tatkal scheme:—
• Tatkal ticket are now issued only on production of self attested photocopy
of one of the 9 prescribed proofs of Identity mentioned in the scheme,
at the computerised Passenger Reservation System (PRS) counte r. While
booking e-ticket, the passenger has to indicate the number of identity
card in the system. The passenger is required to carry the same proof of
Identity during the journey.
• Advance Reservation Period of Tatkal scheme has been reduced from
two days excluding the day of journey to one day excluding the day of
journey.
• Refunds are not granted on cancellation of confirmed Tatkal tickets except
in case of special circumstances like late running of train by more than
three hours, cancellation of trains, etc.
• Duplicate Tatkal tickets are not issued under normal circumstances. In
exceptional cases Duplicate Tatkal tickets can be issued on payment of
full fare including Tatkal charges.
• Authorized agents have been denied access to Tatkal accommodation
both through internet as well as across the computerized PRS counters
during the first two hours of the opening of booking.
• A restriction of booking of a maximum of four passengers per PNR on
Tatkal ticket has been imposed.
• With effect from 10.07.2012, the timing of opening of reservation of Tatkal
tickets has been changed to 1000 Hrs. instead of 0800 hours as per
earlier provision.
• Web service agents have been permitted to book only one Tatkal ticket
per train per day on internet after 1200 Hrs.
• Modifications have been made in the Passenger Reservation System (PRS)
software so that booking in PRS should commence only if the time in the
clock in the front end machine and back end machine is more than 0800
a.m.
• As regards booking before and after the stipulated working hours, it is
clarified that the facility of booking before 0800 a.m. has been enabled
to meet the testing requirements of Railway administration.
• As regards internet transactions, checks have been introduced with effect
from April, 2009 to avoid booking of tickets before/after stipulated
business hours.
• As regards blocking of accommodation, a report has been developed to
keep a watch on the counter/location where three or more transactions

4
per minute are being done particularly during opening hours of the
reservation. Instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways to utilize
this report to identify such operators/locations and to check whether any
irregular practice is being adopted by these operators. Further, a utility
has been developed to introduce the concept of captcha in the software
so that the booking clerk cannot use function keys to book tickets fast
on the basis of pre-entered details before opening of general booking at
0800 Hrs. and Tatkal booking at 1000 Hrs.
• Computerised PRS application software does not permit booking of more
than six passengers on  one PNR as there is no space for entering details
of more than six passengers for one PNR. Moreover, Audit also could
not furnish the details of PNRs where more than six passengers were
booked on a single PNR.
• As regards acceptance of multiple reservation slips by E&RC in violation
of the prescribed procedure, instructions have been issued to all Zonal
Railways that any violation on this account should be viewed seriously
and staff found guilty should be taken up under D&A Rules.
• Instructions have also been issued to Zonal Railways to install Close
Circuit TV Cameras in PRS centres to keep an eye on the activities of
unscrupulous staff and anti-social elements indulging in malpractices in
reservation."
11. Responding to the views of the Sub-Committee regarding the system to
Tatkal bookings, the representative of the Ministry deposed as under:—
"When we investigated it we found that there is a clock at the front end
in computer system and one clock at the rear end which goes to system.
There was difference of 1/2 to 1 minute in between both the clocks. If
any booking taken place at 0759 Hrs. it was showing different time.
However, now no booking will take place until 0800 Hrs. Now, we have
taken that step to synchronize the timings. All the clocks have been
identified. So, how, same timings are shown in both the clocks, and no
booking can be permitted unless it is eight O'clock. Similarly, after 0800
Hrs. also, certain bookings are done which are called administrative
bookings. Because sometimes we have to change the PNR to generate
the seats, adjust the seats. We do it in quota and this transaction continues
even after 2000 Hrs., they are administrative transactions; they are not
commercial transactions."
12. As regards the cases pointed out in Audit, the representative submitted:—
"Whatever cases were taken by Audit, we examined it. We were taking
data from the warehouse. At the time of printing, the names were printed
twice. There were four tickets with the name of four persons. So four
became eight, six became twelve. We have clarified it. They have asked
for PNR, we checked it and replied. They have accepted all our replies

5
except that last Friday some more observations have been received. We
are examining it and we will reply to them. Third thing which they pointed
out is that some name was found in single letters like A, B, C. We
checked it and put a check in the system. Now system will not accept
any name which has less than three characters. There will be no special
character in the name and maximum 16 character name can be given. If
somebody writes A or B then no ticket will be issued. We have also
noticed another error where data was fed in the system before 0800
Hrs. This provision was there. As soon as the clock struck at 0800 Hrs.
Six or seven tickets were generated in reservation system. For that we
have introduced a 'Captcha' check in the software in July this year. What
happens in 'Captcha' is that at one stage when booking starts and name
of train/No., name of passenger, is indicated then a question is asked by
the machine. One letter appears on the screen of computer and request
for retype. So human intervention is there and from that machine, ticket
cannot be issued directly. That ensures that somebody is sitting there to
do the booking. We have put the Captcha test in place to control that."
13. When the Sub-Committee enquired about the feedbacks received from the
public to the changes made in the system, the witness during evidence stated as
under:—
"Initially there was a reaction wherein passengers felt that the system has
become very rigid. But of late when they are using the system, particularly
since we have stopped the practice of touts queuing up in the night and we
have introduced so many changes in the Software which permits only the
genuine passengers to book, we are getting positive feedback that Railways
has taken some action to control the anti-social activities as far as tourism
is concerned."
IV . Net Booking
14. According to Audit, a test check of accessibility of IRCTC server revealed
that during login of IRCTC's website exactly at 0800 Hrs. on the day of Advance
Reservation Period (ARP), the system would hang. It generally took 4-5 minutes
to login and by that time the Tatkal quota was already sold out. One plausible
explanation could be that the server capacity of IRCTC website was limited in
comparison to PRS servers and therefore insufficient to meet the growing
requirements of net users who were now a sizeable segment. On the other side
IRCTC agents were able to book/process upto 160 transactions in a minute.
15. The Sub-Committee enquired whether the Ministry intends to enhance the
capacity of IRCTC server to ensure smooth access to internet users, especially
during opening hours (0800 to 0900 Hrs.) and to restrict IRCTC Agents in
booking more than the prescribed tickets in Advance and Tatkal Reservation
System. The Ministry in their reply submitted as under:—
"With a view to ensure smooth access to internet users especially during
opening hours, following actions have been taken:—

6
(i) The internet bandwidth has been upgraded in June, 2011 from
350 mbps to 450 mbps;
(ii) The database servers have been upgraded and high capacity server
have been commissioned in September, 2011.
(iii) Agents cannot book e-ticket between 0800 Hrs. and 1200 Hrs.
(iv) Individual users are permitted to book two general tickets on the
opening day of reservation or otherwise between 0800 Hrs. and
1000 Hrs. Further between 1000 Hrs. and 1200 Hrs. two Tatkal
tickets/General tickets on the opening day of reservation or otherwise
can be booked.
(v) Quick Book Option has been removed between 0800 Hrs. and
1200 Hrs.".
16. Elaborating on this issue, the representative of the Ministry, during evidence
deposed as under:—
"The system is still hanging, but we have devised the new software. This
is not only the Tatkal system, it is the entire PRS system and the entire
e-ticketing system to put it very clearly. The software was inadequate to
cater to the rush of traffic of the e-ticketing system. Almost 49 per
cent or 50 per cent of the total bookings at present are being done on
the e-ticketing. So, we have expanded it. And we are going to roll it out
in one or two months where the system will have so much capacity that
system will not hang. The software has already been made ready and we
have to only roll it out. The last stage work is going on."
17. He further submitted as under:—
"Earlier the tatkal was opening at 8 o'clock and RTSA was also opening
at 8 o'clock. So because of rush at that time, the system was hanging.
Now the Tatkal is opening at 10 o'clock so that rush is disturbed and
system is not hanging that much. The capacity of the Server has also
been enhanced from 350 mbps to 450 mbps. Presently, approx 5 lakh
e-ticketing are being undertaken and we plan to enhance the same to
over 7 or 8 lakh."
V . Operation of Special Trains/New Trains
18. Railways introduce special trains every year on specified routes to cater to
the heavy rush of passengers during festivals like Chhat, Diwali and Christmas
and during summer vacations. Similarly, new trains announced during the Budget
were also required to be started by Railway Administration. Presently, the ARP
allowed for booking of train tickets is 120 days. Audit pointed out that the
announcement of the dates of Special/New Trains was not made sufficiently in
advance and often the time-gap between announcing the special/new trains and
actual date of appearance in the reservation system was two to four days. Delay
in announcement of special trains deprived a large part of the general public an
opportunity to plan their journeys. This also resulted in loss of revenue to
Railways due to less occupancy of such trains.

7
19. On being asked to state the measures taken by the Ministry of Railways to
ensure that general public has sufficient time to plan their journey and to ensure
better utilization of rolling stock in case of introduction of special/new trains, the
Ministry stated as follows:—
"Advance planning of special trains during all festival/rush seasons like
Holi, Summer, Pooja, Winter/X'mas etc. is done. However, it is not always
possible to plan introduction of new train services announced in Railway
Budget as well as special trains 90 days (120 days-revised) in advance as
running of these trains depends upon various factors like availability of
rakes, coaches, path, operation feasibility, traffic justification, mandatory
clearance from Commissioner of Railway Safety (in case of newly opened
and Gauge converted sections), etc. However, Summer Special trains are
planned well in advance and the time table of these special trains is also
published."
VI. Booking through Rail Traveller's Service Agents (RTSAs)
20. As a commercial policy, Railways appoint RTSAs in major cities and towns
with authorization to purchase tickets and secure reservation on behalf of the
passengers. RTSAs are appointed initially for three years and subsequently their
licenses renewed subject to satisfaction of the local Railway Administration. There
were separate counters at major stations for the agents for booking tickets. Audit
observed that RTSAs had booked tickets, even through the counters not meant
for them, in connivance with Booking Clerks, which adversely affected the interest
of general public. A check of records maintained by Delhi Division of NR revealed
that there were 13 RTSAs who did not appear in the Divisional list even though
they appeared in the Northern Railway's Time-Table.
21. About the steps taken to stop the RTSAs from booking tickets from counters
not meant for their use and to ensure that general public do not become victims
of unauthorized RTSAs malpractices, the Ministry, in their reply, submitted that
Instructions have been issued to Zonal Railways to install Close Circuit TV (CCTV)
at identified major computerised Passenger Reservation System (PRS) centres to
keep a watch on the activities at reservation counters particularly for the period
between 0800 Hrs. and 0830 Hrs. To curb the malpractices by Railway staff and
unauthorised agencies, checks are conducted by Vigilance Department in mass
contact area including booking and reservation offices.
22. In the above context, the representative of the Ministry during evidence,
stated as under:—
"We have banned the agents from accessing the system for two hours
between 8 o'clock and 10 o'clock. Now no agent can book on his ID
during that time slot. It is only the genuine passengers who can access
the system. This is the new system that we have introduced. It is only
after 10 o'clock that the agent can access the software."

8
VII. Non-exhibition of Passengers' identification
23. In order to establish the identify of a passenger as well as to avoid a
passenger travelling on a proxy ticket, it was necessary that complete and accurate
details of the passengers were captured at the time of booking. Audit scrutiny of
PRS, Delhi revealed that while reserving/booking seats, users/E&RCs entered the
name of the passenger in many cases as one character (A, B, C etc.); instances of
2 character names, were also noticed. Further analysis revealed that in respect of
5—60 cases, same names of the passengers were repeated, from 1,000—3,132
times, while booking passengers in different trains and in 1—234 cases, same
names were repeated upto 10 to 30 times, while booking passengers in each train.
24. Replying to the Audit observation, Railway Board stated (December, 2010)
that instructions have already been issued to Zonal Railways that such instances
where the booking was being made with incomplete name, should be taken up
seriously. According to Audit, remedial action taken by Railway Board was not
sufficient as necessary modifications were required to be incorporated in the
application software in the PRS to avoid such instances of abuse.
25. The Sub-Committee enquired about the measures taken to carry out suitable
modifications in the application software in the PRS to eschew such instances.
The Ministry in its reply stated that in the computerised PRS software, following
checks have been introduced regarding feeding of names of passengers:—
(i) "Name should be of minimum 3 characters.
(ii) Special characters and numerals not allowed.
(iii) Maximum 16 characters are allowed."
VIII. Issuing of Duplicate Tickets
26. As per rule, a duplicate ticket was to be issued in lieu of lost, misplaced/
torn/mutilated Reserved/RAC tickets. Duplicate tickets issued before preparation
of chart entailed a non-refundable clerkage charge of 
`20/- per passenger. No
duplicate ticket is issued for lost RAC/WL ticket after chart preparation. Audit
scrutiny revealed some irregularities in issuing of duplicate tickets in respect of
PRS, Mumbai; Kolkata; Chennai and Delhi, where tickets were issued on the same
day of booking or on the very next day. On PRS, Kolkata most of the duplicate
tickets were issued against lost Tatkal tickets on the date of booking/Journey or
the day before journey.
27. The Sub-Committee enquired about the measures taken to curb misuse of
issuing duplicate tickets. The Ministry in their written reply stated that Advance
Reservation Period of Tatkal scheme has been reduced from two days to one day.
Further, refunds shall not be granted on confirmed Tatkal tickets except in case of
special circumstances like late running of train by more than three hours,
cancellation of trains, etc. Duplicate Tatkal ticket shall not be issued under normal
circumstances. In exceptional cases Duplicate Tatkal tickets are issued on payment
of full fare including Tatkal charges.

9
IX. Suggestions/views of the Rail Travellers Service Agents (RTSAs)
28. The Committee desired to know the views of the Rail Travellers Service
Agents (RTSAs) who are authorized by the Railways to procure tickets on behalf
of passengers by charging nominal service charge which is fixed by the Ministry
of Railways. Therefore, the Committee invited the representatives of the following
RTSAs to depose before the Committee and give their suggestions/views for
improvement in the Tatkal and Advance Reservation system of Indian Railways:
(i) The association of Indian Rail Travellers Service Agents (Regd.) Delhi.
(ii) Authorised RTSAs Welfare Association of Mumbai, and
(iii) East India Travel Agents Association, Kolkata.
29. The representatives of the above RTSAs submitted memoranda containing
their suggestions/views and also deposed before the Committee. The following
were their main suggestions/views:—
(i) RTSA should be allowed to book Tatkal tickets during opening hours of
reservation (1000 to 1200 Hrs.);
(ii) Passengers themselves go to the centre to book the ticket or RTSAs
may be allowed to book Tatkal Tickets;
(iii) Earmark separate coaches for Tatkal scheme;
(iv) Tatkal charges should be refunded as an incentive to cancel the confirmed
Tatkal tickets in case of non-travelling;
(v) Increase in Advance Reservation Period (ARP) of Tatkal ticket booking;
(vi) Abolish the Tatkal Scheme as it is misused by touts and revise Tatkal
Scheme wherein confirmed Tatkal tickets are given on demand;
(vii) The passengers should be allowed to book Tatkal tickets through internet
only;
(viii) The proof of identity should not be asked for booking Tatkal tickets;
(ix) Increase the Emergency Quota;
(x) Advance Reservation Period should be one year;
(xi) Provision of computerized PRS terminals to RTSAs on lines of
'Computerized Ticket Service Provider Licencee (CTSPL) Scheme' launched
in 2002;
(xii) Increase in Service char ges of RTSAs;
(xiii) E-tickets to be booked for self and family only;
(xiv) Tatkal charges should be realized for release of Emergency Quota except
on the request form Ministers, Board Members and Government officials
going on duty;
(xv) Lack of RTSAs in the smaller towns.

10
30. The Committee sought comments of the Ministry of Railways on the above
suggestions and views of the RTSAs. The Ministry of Railways, in their comments
furnished to the Committee, have not agreed to most of the suggestions of the
RTSAs. It is understood that the Ministry has considered these suggestions and
did not find merit in most of the cases as the schemes of Tatkal and Advance
Reservation System is reviewed periodically and suitable amendments are made in
the scheme from time to time.
31. The representatives of the RTSAs in a memoranda submitted to the
Committee suggested that Government should provide separate terminals to RTSAs
on the lines of Computerised Ticket Service Provider Licencee (CTSPL) scheme
launched in 2002 in Mumbai. The Railways was earning around Rs. 22.46 lakh
from 3 CTSPL and in addition Railway was also saving huge amount (approx.
Rs. 825 lakh) on overhead expenditure in the form of salaries to staff, telephone,
electricity, infrastructure, stationery etc. However, the scheme was not
implemented in other parts of the Country. On the other hand the scheme was
scrapped after the formation of new Government in the Centre. If the scheme
would have been implemented through 3000 CTSPLs in the whole country the
income alone to the Railways would have been to the tune of approx. Rs. 8500
crore per annum and to the Finance Ministry approx. Rs. 250 crore per annum as
income/service tax.
32. The Committee desired to know the reasons for closure of such an scheme
which was beneficial to public as well as Railways. The Ministry of Railways in
a written reply submitted as under:—
"The CTSPL scheme was conceptualized in 1999 and 3 RTSAs were
provided terminals in 2002 in Mumbai on experimental basis. However,
this facility was subsequently discontinued due to opposition from
Federations/Trade Unions in the interest of ensuring positive industrial
relations. It further stated that since more than 48% of tickets are now
booked through internet, it shall not be desirable to provide PRS terminals
to RTSAs."
33. When Committee asked for suggestions which would benefit passengers,
Railways and RTSAs, a representative of the RTSAs informed the Committee as
under:—
".......Railways had introduced the same scheme in Post Offices. Imagine
the amount of money they have invested in sending a person to the Post
Office, a PRS to the Post Office and no RPF posting which has become
the 'touts adda'. In the office which deals with postal services they have
given a booking clerk. A booking clerk costs the Government a minimum
of a lakh of rupees per month. The amount of trouble they take to collect
the money from there — from Post Office a van goes and collects the
money — would not be there. The money will be paid by us in advance
to the Railways and when that money gets over, we are going to deposit
another instalment. There is no loss to Railways, only the profit. They
can tax us to the tune of Rs. 5 or Rs. 10 per ticket."

11
34. One of the representatives, in response to the alleged involvement of RTSAs
in booking tickets with other counters not meant for them in connivance with
Railways officials/staff, stated as under:—
"For RTSAs, the Government has opened separate windows. Agent of
RTSAs goes there. He cannot go to the general counter. Their forms are
different. So where are the chances of involvement of RTSAs. Our agents
have identity cards issued by Railways. They cannot do any irregular
activities. If found guilty or involved in the irregular activities the
Railways can identify them and our Licenses can be cancelled by them.
These illegal activities are performed by the unauthorized agents who
connive with police and RPF and the allegations put on us."
35. Another representative of the RTSAs also informed the Committee that in
reply to an RTI application, the Railways has intimated that except Northern
Railways where 9 cases were reported by Railway Staff, no case has been
registered by the Railways for involvement at RTSAs in the last five years.
36. When their attention was invited towards Audit findings that during physical
verification of PRS at Kolkata, representatives of RTSAs were jamming the queues
at the counter not meant for them and similar cases also reported in Delhi, one
of the representative of RTSAs informed the Committee as under:—
"I would like to bring to your kind notice what is happening in Kolkata
at the moment. This scheme was framed in 1985. Can you imagine what
I am saying, and it is a fact, that even after 27 years, 30 odd travel
agents are enjoying the injunction of the Calcutta High Court? And they
have got a counter in Kolkata, just like a travel agent, without any liability.
No secruity deposit, no guarantee, no licensing fee and nothing is paid
by them. They have just been holding a High Court order for the last
27 years. The Railways have not been able to get that order vacated till
date. Why are they not trying it? Those people are working just as
RTSAs and enjoying all the facilities and the Railways have given them a
counter. In Fairlie Place, they have been given counter No. 12 and in
Kolaghat booking office, they have been given counter No. 6. They are
working like full-fledged travel agents. They can employ any number of
people. They issue their own cards and they do not need any counter
signatures from the Railway authorities. They have been roaming in
Kolkata. This is the example of Kolkata which I have explained to the
Railway Board. Also, I have written to the authorities in Kolkata, but no
action has been taken. Moreover, all those orders are coming from single-
judge benches. They can go to Division Bench, put all these cases in
one day and it can be vanished. The question is: Why do the Railways
not do it? They know the reason better. I have been writing to them and
I have recently written one letter to them."

PART-II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee note that advance reservation system was introduced in
Indian Railways to facilitate passengers to book their tickets in advance. The
scheme of Tatkal reservation was introduced by the Railways in December, 1997
to provide reservation facility to those passengers who could not plan their journey
in advance. This facility is available on payment of premium charges on 'first-
come-first-served' basis. Advance reservation of tickets can be done from 0800
hrs. to 2000 hrs. and Tatkal booking from 1000 hrs. to 2000 hrs. through
Passenger Reservation System (PRS) and Indian Railways Catering and Tourism
Corporation (IRCTC) website/agents. Audit Scrutiny of the functioning of Tatkal
and Advance reservation system revealed that genuine users, for whom the scheme
was intended, were unable to avail the facility with ease as it was susceptible to
manipulation. Audit pointed out irregularities in booking of tickets through PRS
counters; booking of all Tatkal quota within a few minutes of opening of
reservation; irregular booking by Reservation Clerk, connivance of railway agents
and Booking Clerks; irregular booking through internet and authorized railway
agents. During examination of the subject, the Committee were informed that the
scheme of Tatkal reservation has been revised with effect from November, 2011
and major modifications have been made with a view to minimize the chances of
misuse of Tatkal scheme. These changes inter-alia include production of self
attested photo copy of proof of identity mentioned in the scheme; reduction from
two days to one day (excluding the day of journey) for booking of Tatkal tickets;
booking of only four passengers per PNR; denying access to the authorized
agents during the first two hours of the opening of booking both through internet
as well as across the computerized PRS counters. The Committee have also been
informed that with effect from 10th July, 2012 the timing of opening of reservation
of Tatkal tickets has been changed to 1000 hours instead of 0800 hours as per
earlier provision and web service agents have been permitted to book only one
Tatkal ticket per train per day on int ernet that too af ter 1200 hours. While
taking note of the measures taken by the Ministry post audit scrutiny, the
Committee would like to be apprised about the implementation of these measures
and the desired impact thereof within three months of the presentation of this
report.
2. The Committee note that Tatkal and Advance Reservation could also be
booked through IRCTC's website. The test check of accessibility of IRCTC server
revealed that during login of IRCTC's website exactly at 0800 hours on the day
of Advance Reservation Period, the system would hang seemingly due to
insufficient capacity of the server to meet the growing requirement of net users.
Admitting that the system was prone to malfunctioning, the representative of the
Ministry submitted that entire PRS system and e-ticketing has been developed
for Tatkal which will be rolled out in one/two months as the last stage work was
12

13
going on. Since the use of e-ticketing facility is catching up fast among
passengers due to its inherent ease and convenience, the Committee recommend
that the capacity of the internet bandwidth and IRCTC server should be upgraded
by installing high capacity server so that the system is able to cope up with the
surge in online bookings. The high capacity server should be installed after
conducting 'load testing' for easy access of users. Further, the Committee hope
that the new software which the Ministry proposes to roll out, would have the
latest features with fast search engine; blocking of in-active session, etc.
3. The Committee are deeply concerned that running of special trains is
announced at a notice of shorter duration during festivals/rush seasons like
Holi, Pooja, Diwali, Chhat, Eid, Christmas, summer vacations, etc. The delay
in announcement of special trains deprive general public an opportunity to
plan their journey and get a confirmed reservation. It also results in loss
of revenue to Railways due to less occupancy of such trains. According to
the Ministry, summer special trains are planned in advance and the time
table of these special trains is also published. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that information regarding running of special/new trains during
festivals/rush seasons should be announced sufficiently in advance and given
wide publicity so that the Railways earn more revenue besides fulfilling
the Citizen's Charter on Passengers Services of Indian Railways.
4. Notably, as a commercial policy, Railways appoint Rail Travellers' Service
Agents (RTSAs) and Railway Tourist Agents for booking of tickets on payment
of prescribed charges. However, no separate quotas have been assigned to these
agents and there are separate counters at major stations for agents for booking
tickets. Initially appointed for three years, the licenses of these RTSAs are
renewed subject to satisfaction of local Railway administration. What has
surprised the Committee is that though the RTSAs are appointed by the Railways,
yet there is no provision in the computerized Passenger Reservation System
(PRS) for identification of RTSA to keep the records/transactions of bookings
made by the agents. The representative of the Ministry testified before the
Committee that effective from July, 2012 authorized agents have been denied
access to Tatkal accommodation both through internet as well as across the
computerized PRS counters during the first two hours of opening of booking.
Further, web service agents are allowed to book only one Tatkal ticket on his ID
per train per day on internet after 1200 hours. The Committee are of the
considered view that the PRS need further orientation and therefore, recommend
that the Ministry should take immediate measures to deactivate multiple user
IDs of agents so that they are unable to manipulate the booking process. In order
to keep a stringent check on the activities of RTSAs and website agents, the
feasibility of issuing digitized ID needs examination to identify the tickets booked
so that the scheme is not abused. Further, inspection of transactions done by
RTSAs'/website agents' should be done at regular intervals to ensure that the
licenses of only those RTSAs are renewed who comply with the prescribed
procedure.
5. The Committee note that the computerized PRS software has been modified
to establish passenger identity so as to overcome proxy travel. While welcoming

14
the measures taken by the Railways to establish passengers' identification, the
Committee recommend that carrying a proof of identity while travelling in reserved
accommodation in trains should be made mandatory for all passengers to keep a
check on passengers travelling on transferred tickets. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that necessary instructions in this regard may be issued at the
earliest, the situation monitored regularly and the procedures updated for the
successful operation of the scheme and they be apprised within three months
from the date of presentation of this report.
6. The Committee note that Rail Travellers Service Agents (RTSAs) are the
license holder agents authorized by the Ministry of Railways to procure Rail
tickets on behalf of passengers by charging nominal service charges from
passengers fixed by the Railways from time to time. The Audit has noticed
involvement of RTSAs in various irregularities as pointed out in the Audit Report.
However, the representatives of RTSAs who appeared before the Committee denied
the Audit findings. The contention is that they have been provided separate
counters at the reservation centers and their agents carry identity cards issued
by the Ministry of Railways and can be caught and their licenses cancelled in
case they are found involved in irregular activities. Notably, in the last five years,
no case has been registered against RTSAs except in Delhi where 9 cases were
reported. The Committee feel that the RTSAs or their agents could not have
continued doing their irregular activities without active involvement/connivance
of the officials manning the PRS. The Committee, therefore, desire the Railways
to investigate all such cases where RTSAs are involved in irregularities and
take deterrent punitive action against those agents as well as against the involved
officials of the Railways.
7. The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways conceptualized
"Computerized Ticket Service Provider Licencee (CTSPL) Scheme". Under this
scheme 3 RTSAs in Mumbai given terminals on experimental basis in 2002. The
Scheme was, however, subsequently discontinued, ostensibly due to opposition
from the Federation/Trade Unions in the interest of ensuring positive industrial
relations despite the good return in terms of revenue the Scheme brought to the
Railways. The Committee note that the scheme was convenient to the public and
beneficial to the Railways as well. The CTSPL scheme was introduced around
10-12 years back when not many people were using internet/mobile for buying
tickets. Now, almost half of the Rail tickets issued are booked through the
internet. However, considering the fact that half of the Railway Tickets booked
even now are done manually or through agents and that the reach of Computer
with internet facility is largely confined to urban middle and upper classes, the
Committee recommend that the Railways reconsider re-introduction of CTSPL
scheme and provide terminals/IDs to RTSAs particularly in smaller towns where
booking facilities are lacking and the facility of internet is not available to every
family. Moreover, keeping in view the fact that almost 50% of the tickets are
presently booked through internet, the Committee see no reason for any opposition
to such a move which would be beneficial to the people and the Railways as well.

15
8. The Committee were informed that the scheme of giving licences to RTSAs
was framed in 1985. They were further informed by the representatives of the
RTSAs that there were around 30 travel agents in Kolkata who on the basis of
injunction of the Kolkata High Court given 27 years back are still enjoying full
status of RTSA and operating from there. However, they do not pay any Licence
Fee, security deposit/guarantee and without having any liability. The Railways
has reportedly given them a 'counter' also to operate. The Committee are
perturbed to know that unauthorised agents without paying any license fee,
guarantee or security deposit are operating as Railways agents only on the basis
of a stay order given almost three decades back by the Hon'ble High Court of
Calcutta. The Court's stay of operation of the Railways order does not grant the
travel agents the right to flout the terms and conditions that go with continuing
their functioning in the system. As mentioned earlier here too, the obvious flouting
of the terms and conditions by the said travel agents could not have been continued
without the connivance/negligence of the local Railway officials. The Committee,
therefore, recommend thorough inquiry and initiation of appropriate disciplinary
proceedings against the erring officials. Also the Committee would like to be
apprised about the status of the case within three months from the date of
presentation of the Report to the Parliament including the action taken for review
of the stay and expeditious disposal of the case.
9. The Committee observe that Railways have introduced a scheme wherein
certain Post Offices will be providing Railway Tickets through counters operated
by the Railway staff. This, in the considered view of the Committee, will strain
the already depleted financial resources of the Railways. It would also entail
payment of salaries, safeguarding the cash and transportation of cash, etc. The
Committee would, therefore, like the Railways to review the scheme and consider
to sale the Railway tickets by the counters operated by the staff of Postal
Department on nominal commission basis, being more sound financial proposition
and a win-win situation for both of them. Alternatively, the Railways may consider
allotting terminals to RTSAs or other agents who may issue tickets by charging
nominal fees as may be fixed by the Railways. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken within three months of the presentation of this
Report.
N
EW D ELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
29th April, 2013 Chairman,
9 V aisakha, 1935 ( Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE IV OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON
21ST FEBRUARY , 2012
The Sub-committee sat on Tuesday, the 21st February, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to
1700 hrs. in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MEMBERS
Shri Anant Kumar Hegde — Convenor
Rajya Sabha
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri J.D. Seelam
SECRETARIAT
Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India
1. Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General (Railways)
2. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Principal Director (RBA)
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways
1. Shri A.P. Mishra — Member Engineering, Railway Board
2. Ms. Vijaya Kanth — Financial Commissioner, Railways
3. Shri K.K. Srivastava — Member Traffic, Railway Board
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-committee IV of the Public Accounts
Committee, welcomed the Members of the Committee, the Audit Officers and the
representatives of the Ministry of Railways to the sitting of the Sub-committee
convened for briefing on the subjects 'Railways Finances' based on C&AG Report
No. 33 of 2010-11 and 'Tatkal and Advance Reservation System in Indian Railways',
'Construction of New Lines on socio-economic considerations', 'Excessive Delays
in Maintenance of Locomotives' and 'Functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited'. He
also drew the attention of the representatives to Direction 55(1) relating to
confidentiality of the matter till the report is presented to the House.
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Railways then briefed the Sub-
committee on various issues relating to the subject which inter alia include
measures being taken to increase traffic receipts, issues related to construction
16

17
of new lines on socio-economic considerations, functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam
Limited and working of Tatkal and Advance Reservation System. They also
responded to the various points raised by the members of the Committee.
4. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing
before the Sub-committee and furnishing the information on the subject.
The witnesses then withdrew.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Sub-committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE II OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD
ON 24TH SEPTEMBER, 2012
The Sub-committee sat on Monday, the 24th September, 2012 from 1100 hrs. to
1245 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Anant Kumar Hegde — Convener
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India
Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General (Railways)
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
1. Shri Vinay Mi ttal — Chairman, Railway Board
2. Ms. Vijaya Kanth — Financial Commissioner, Railways
3. Shri A.P. Mishra — Member Engineering, Railway Board
4. Shri Keshav Chandra — Member Mechanical, Railway Board
5. Shri K.K. Srivastava — Member Traffic, Railway Board
6. Shri Kul Bhushan — Member Electrical, Railway Board
2. At the outset, the Convener, Sub-committee II of the Public Accounts
Committee, welcomed the Audit Officers and the representatives of the Ministry
of Railways to the sitting of the Sub-committee convened to take evidence of
the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subjects
'Tatkal and Advance Reservation System in Indian Railways', 'Excessive Delays in
Maintenance of Locomotives', 'Civil Engineering Workshops in Indian Railways',
'Delay in building the new rail bridge over River Sone' and 'Signal and
Telecommunication' based on C&AG Reports No. 34 of 2010-11 and No. 32 of
2012-13 respectively. He also drew the attention of the representatives to Direction
55(1) relating to confidentiality of the matter till the report on the subject is
presented to the House. Thereafter, he raised the points on the subjects of
discussion.
18

19
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Railways explained the steps taken by
them to rectify the irregularities pointed out by Audit in regard to 'Tatkal and
Advance Reservation System'. They explained the changes latest made in the
software in PRS system and e-ticketing.
4 . *** *** ***
5 . *** *** ***
6 . *** *** ***
7 . *** *** ***
8. The Convener thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing
before the Sub-committee and furnishing the available information on the subjects.
The witnesses then withdrew.
9. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Sub-committee then adjourned.
***Not related to this Report.

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 12TH DECEMBER, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Wednesday, the 12th December, 2012
from 1500 hrs. to 1815 hrs. in Committee Room No. '62', Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Shri Prakash Javadekar
10. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
11. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India
1. Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General (Railway)
2. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General (Railway Audit)
3. Ms. Sudha Rajan — Director (PAC)
20

21
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
1. Shri Vinay Mittal — Chairman, Railway Board and Ex-officio
Pr. Secretary to GoI.
2. Ms. Vijaya Kanth — Financial Commissioner (Rlys.)
Ex-officio Secretary to GoI.
3. Shri A.P. Mishra — Member, Engineering & Ex-officio
Secretary to GoI.
4. Shri K.K. Srivastava — Member, Traffic & Ex-officio Secretary
to GoI.
5. Shri Amitabh Lal — Additional Member, Commercial
6. Shri R. Kashyap — Additional Member, Budget
7. Smt. Saroj Rajware — Advisor, Finance
Representatives of the Rail Travellers' Service Agent Associations, Delhi
1. Shri Dayashanker Bhatnagar — V ice-Chairman
2. Shri R.S. Aggarwal — Secretary
3. Shri Subhash Arora — Joint Secretary
4. Shri R.C. Gupta — Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Authorised RTSAs Association of Mumbai
1. Shri Ladharam H. Nagwani — General Secretary
2. Shri Mahendra J. Gohil — Vice President
Representatives of the Rail Travellers' Service Agent Associations
1. Shri D.N. Mehrotra — President
2. Shri K. Sethi — Secretary
2. *** *** ***
3. The Chairman, then welcomed the new Member of the Committee,
Shri Abhijit Mukherjee, MP.
4. The Committee thereafter decided to hear the views of RTSAs on 'Tatkal and
Advance Reservation System in Indian Ralways'. The representatives of the
Associations of the Rail Travellers' Service Agents (RTSAs) from Delhi and later
the representatives of RTSAs Mumbai and Kolkata were called in jointly to elicit
their views/suggestions on 'Tatkal and Advance Reservation System in Indian
Railways'. The Chairman informed them that proceedings of the sitting may be
***Not related to this Report.

22
kept confidential till the report on the subject is presented to Parliament. Some of
the important views/suggestions are as under:—
(i) Tatkal Scheme may be rechristened as Premium Rail ticket since Railways
without providing additional benefit to the passengers, has been earning
more money.
(ii) Advance reservation period should be reduced to 60 days from the
present 120 days.
(iii) R TSAs may be allowed to book tickets for needy passengers who cannot
visit reservation centres as touts are doing business in the absence of
RTSAs.
(iv) A confirmed ticket under Tatkal scheme, should have a system of refund
of the tickets cancelled. The cancellation charges may be limited to the
tatkal premium amount and not the whole amount of ticket. The cancelled
reservation may be offered to other passengers in waiting.
(v) RTSAs may be given PRS terminals so that they can serve the people
better.
(vi) R TSAs be allowed to book tatkal tickets during 1000 hrs to 1200 hrs.
The Chairman thanked them for appearing before the Committee.
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related to this Report.

APPENDIX IV
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 29TH APRIL, 2013
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th April, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
in Room No. '51' (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
9. Shri J.D. Seelam
10. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
23

Representatives of the Office of The Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General
2. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director
3. Ms. Athoorva Sinha — Director
4. Shri Likhariya — Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the last sitting of the Committee (2012-13).
Giving an overview of the performance of the Committee in the year 2012-13 as
well as in the 15th Lok Sabha, the Chairman observed that the years have been
very productive due to the hard work of the C&AG and his team, the PAC
Secretariat led by the Joint Secretary and above all the cooperation and active
participation of the Members in the deliberations. The Committee unanimously
endorsed the views of the Chairman.
3. The Chairman, then, apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider
the following Draft Reports of the Committee:—
(i) ' Tatkal and advance Reservation System in Indian Railways' based on
Para 2.2 of C&AG Report No. 34 of 2010-11, Union Government (Railways);
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
(vii) *** *** ***
4. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/
suggestions of the Members.
5. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in
the light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them
to Parliament on a convenient date.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Draft Reports. The Members also conveyed
their thanks to the Chair for his able leadership in conducting the meetings of the
Committee in a probing and educative manner.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—679LS—23-5-2012.
24