PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY OF
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
57


FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY OF
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND
FORESTS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.4.2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.4.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2012/ V aisakha, 1934 ( Saka)


PAC No. 1972
Price: Rs. 44.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012) .............. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
REPORT
PART-I
I. Introductory ............................................................................ 1
II. Afforestation ........................................................................... 1
III. Bio-diversity............................................................................ 5
IV . Pollution Control .................................................................... 14
V. Non-Achievement of Objectives of Pollution Control caused
by Leather T anneries ............................................................. 16
VI. Environmental Education ....................................................... 18
PART-II
Observations and Recommendations .................................... 22
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of  the Public Accounts Committee
(2011-12) held on 28th July, 2011. ......................................... 29
II. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2011-12) held on 5th September, 2011.................................. 32
III. Minutes of the Twenty-first Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2011-12) held on 24th  April, 2012..................... 36

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri  Abhijit Kumar — Director
*Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan was
appointed Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Fifty-Seventh Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on 'Performance of the Ministry of Environment and Forests' based
on C&AG Report No. 17 of 2010-11, Union Government (Scientific Departments)
relating to the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
2.  The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on  the
Table of the House on 26th November, 2010.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests on the subject at their sittings held on 26th July and
5th  September, 2011. The Committee considered and adopted  this Report at their
sitting held on 24th April, 2012. Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the
Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick  type in the body
of the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests  for tendering evidence before them
and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciations of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
24 April, 2012 Chairman,
4 Vaisakha, 1934 ( Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

PART I
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTORY
This report is based on the audit of the transactions and performance of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the
year 2008-09. The Ministry incurred  an expenditure of  Rs. 1711.29 crore during the
said year. The Audit findings are contained in C&AG’s Report No. 17 of 2010-11. The
objective of the Audit was to create awareness and urgency about conservation and
protection of the environment. The thrust areas of the audit were afforestation,
biodiversity, pollution control and environmental education.
The Committee, after scrutinizing the Audit Report, the written replies obtained
from the Ministry and their oral deposition,  found a number of deficiencies  and
irrregularities in various  schemes and programmes which were initiated by the
Government,  as highlighted in the succeeding paras.
II.  AFFORESTATION
2. The Planning Commission, in its Approach Paper in September 2001, had fixed the
target of increasing the forest/tree cover in India to 25 per cent of the geographical
area of the country by the end of Tenth Five Y ear Plan (2002-2007) and 33 per cent by
2012. Further, it had also been observed that availability of land and quality planting
material were major gap areas as highlighted during the discussions for the Tenth Five
Year Plan. The National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board (NAEB)  under the
Ministry of Environment and  Forests is responsible for promoting afforestation,  tree
planting, ecological  restoration and economic development in the country. Keeping
this in mind, the NAEB decided to restructure the existing Grants-in-Aid scheme which
was introduced in 1987 for providing  assistance  to voluntary agencies for tree  planting
(V A Scheme) and also to identify the constraints. The voluntary agencies could be
non-Governmental organizations,  registered societies,  non-profit organisations,
cooperatives,  charitable trusts etc. Only those  agencies which had been registered at
least for the  last five years and  had requisite experience in the field of environment
and social sector were considered for financial assistance. The re-structured scheme
renamed as  Grants-in-Aid  for “Greening India Scheme” was approved by the
Expenditure Finance  Committee  in March, 2005 at a total cost of  Rs. 49.50 crore to be
implemented during the Tenth Five Year Plan.
3. The broad objectives  of this scheme was to financially assist the V oluntary
Agencies (V As) for taking up the afforestation, tree planting and eco-developmental
activity. The Greening India Scheme further extends these objectives by including
setting up of nurseries, training, evaluation activities, etc. Funds  under these schemes
were to be given to the voluntary agencies in three  instalments to the State Forest
1

2
Departments/Forest Development Agencies in two instalments. During the period
2003—08, National Afforestation & Eco-Development Board sanctioned 647 projects
at a  cost of  Rs. 59.48 crore of which 560 projects (87%) were sanctioned to voluntary
agencies and 87 projects, (13%) to FDAs/SFDs. The total amount released during
2003-09 was Rs. 47.03 crore. The Audit findings indicated that the project completion
rate under the said scheme was very poor and there was no assurance that the funds
released to the voluntary and other agencies  had actually been utilized by them for the
purpose for which they were sanctioned. The following table highlights the findings
of the Audit Report.
Table 1
Audit findings in respect of the 647 sanctioned projects
(Amount Rs. in crore)
Released of instalments Projects T otal
One Instalment Two All Instalments Dropped
Instalment
No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount No. Amount
Projects
sanctioned
to V As 352 13.64 185 15.92 20 1.77 3 0.22 560 31.55
Projects
sanctioned to
FDAs & SFDs 47 3.59 35 3.20 NA* NA* 5 0.50 87 7.29
Total 399 17.23 220 19.12 20 1.77 8 0.72 647 38.84
•Funds under these schemes were given to the SFDs/FDAs in two instalments.
4. The Audit findings in respect of the 647 sanctioned projects are detailed in the
following paragraphs:—
(a)  Projects sanctioned to Voluntary Agencies:
• Out of 560 projects sanctioned to V As, in 352 projects (62.85 per cent) costing
Rs. 30.70 crore, only first instalment amounting to Rs. 13.64 crore was released
but remaining two instalments were not released as NAEB did not receive
necessary documents viz., UCs and progress reports from the VAs concerned
or the mid-term evaluation reports from concerned State Government/PCCF.
Thus, implementation of all  of these projects was incomplete as VAs did not
come back to NAEB for release of the second and third instalments. This
casts doubt on whether the V As  actually spent the funds released to them in the
first instalment and the possibility of misutilisation/fraud cannot be  ruled out.
• In 185 projects (33.04 per cent) involving Rs. 18.15 crore  sanctioned to VAs,
first and second instalments were released  (Rs. 15.92 crore) but final instalment
(Rs. 2.23 crore) was not released by NAEB due to non-receipt of final
evaluation  report and UCs from concerned State Government/PCCF of
necessary documents from V As. Thus,  these projects also remained
incomplete.

3
• Only in 20 projects (3.57 per cent) costing Rs. 1.79 crore sanctioned to VAs,
all the installments of grants  were released (Rs. 1.77 crore).
• Three projects (0.54  per cent) involving Rs. 22.44 lakh were dropped.
(b) Projects sanctioned to Forest Development Agencies and State Forest
Departments:—
• Out of 87 projects sanctioned to FDAs and SFDs, in 47 projects
(54.02 per cent) involving Rs. 4.91 crore sanctioned to FDAs/SFDs, only
first instalment amounting  to Rs. 3.59 crore was released but remaining
instalments were not released as NAEB was yet to receive necessary
documents/progress reports from FDAs/SFDs. Thus, project implementation
was incomplete in 54.02 per cent of the projects sanctioned to FDAs/SFDs.
• In 35 projects (40.23 per cent) involving Rs. 3.20 crore all the installments of
grants were released. However, only in 20 projects (23 per cent) final progress
report and UC were received.
• Five projects (5.75 per cent) involving Rs. 50 lakh were dropped.
5. The Committee note that only 3.57 per cent of the projects sanctioned to V As
were actually completed. In financial terms, only 5.65 per cent of the total funds were
spent on these completed projects. The possibility of misutilisation/fraud is not ruled
out as majority of the VAs neither came back to NAEB for the next instalments after
release of first instalment nor did they furnish UCs/progress reports. The NAEB had
failed  to  ensure recovery of funds from these V As and it  did not initiate any action
against the defaulting VAs.  In case of the projects sanctioned to FDAs/SFDs only
23 per cent of the sanctioned projects could be completed. More than 93 per cent of
projects did not  achieve  their  targeted objectives, thereby affecting the overall
objective of afforestation.
6. The first instalment was to be released to the V As immediately after  the sanction
of the project. After the utilization  certificates  and progress  reports for the first
instalment were  received, NAEB was required to carry out mid-term evaluation of the
project through Principal Chief Conservator of the Forest of the State concerned.
Based  on this report, NAEB was to release  the second instalment. The third instalment
was payable only after  the receipt  of utilization certificates for the second instalment
and final evaluation report by the Principal Chief Surveyor of Forest. concerned. Thus,
project completion was contingent on V As/SFDs/FDAs getting all the three instalments
and submitting utilization certificates.
7. On being asked about the number of V As that availed all the three instalments of
funds under the afforestation project, the representative of the Ministry during the
evidence informed as under:—
"In 269 cases, only one instalment was released, in 246 cases, two instalments
were released and only 54 VAs have received all the three instalments and
complied with all the relevant formalities."

4
8. The Committee wanted to know the concrete action taken against those voluntary
agencies which siphoned off  public money and vanished without trace. In reply, the
Ministry stated that:—
"Only seven such agencies have been blacklisted and FIRs have been lodged
against them,"
Asked whether any FIR had been lodged against any officer of the Ministry as
such a large scale fraud could not have been committed without the support of the
concerned officers in the Ministry, the Secretary stated:—
"The Principal Chief  Conservator of Forests was trying to trace the defaulter
NGOs and that the Ministry had filed FIRs against 07 delinquent V As. However,
FIR was filed against only one erring officer."
9. On being asked further on the matter, the Secretary stated:—
"Prior to 2005, no target was set for tree plantation activity and the scheme
was 'demand driven' and the term 'demand driven' was not recorded in the
files."
10. In response to a question about the total area of afforestation, the witness
informed the Committee that:—
"After 2005, out of a total target of 27,000 hectares to be afforested, only 7200
hectares were covered under the V A Scheme."
Audit found various inadequacies in project implementation and monitoring under
the tree planting component such as lack of correspondence with the defaulting VAs,
absence of mid-term evaluation and failure to blacklist V As as required under the
general financial rules. On being asked about the discrepancies in the implementation
of the scheme, the Secretary stated:—
"There is a need to involve civil society and also for some checks and balances
in regard to the flawed system of money flowing directly to the NGOs/V As. In
order to avoid further loss to the national exchequer, the Ministry is now
planning to route the money through the State Governments."
On being asked whether in a way the Ministry was not abdicating its responsibility,
the Witness clarified that:—
"By involving the State Governments the fiscal monitoring would be done in
a more effective manner. Further they were insisting on furnishing of Utilization
Certificates by the V As apart from photographic and videographic evidence
directly from the villages where the afforestation was targeted. The Ministry
would also monitor the progress through their six regional offices in different
parts of the country."

5
When asked whether the Ministry officials have any mechanism in place to
undertake regular visits for physically monitoring the green cover, the representative
testified that:—
"officers do visit the fields to verify the effectiveness of the afforestation".
11. On the issue of monitoring, the Secretary conceded that:—
"The Hon'ble Member is correct and that our Ministry do it at random and we
do not do thorough monitoring because we just do not have the manpower
and the capacity to do it. But we are involving the State Governments because
they should have a stake in this in terms of protection."
As per the Guidelines, financial assistance was to be given to SFDs for facilitating
production and availability of quality planting material through establishment of
high-tech nursery and satellite nursery.
However, Audit Report categorically pointed out that during the years 2005-08,
there was no achievement under setting up of satellite nurseries even though 464 such
nurseries were targeted to be set up during 2005-06 and 2006-07. In December 2009,
NAEB replied that no such proposal for satellite nurseries was received and hence
none was approved. Apparently, the targets were fixed without preliminary survey and
NAEB also did not take adequate steps to generate demand for  quality planting
material.
III. BIO-DIVERSITY
12. The Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year
acknowledges that bio-diversity is under threat world-wide and India is no exception.
Threat to species is primarily due to decline in the areas of habitation and, fragmentation
of habitats. Loss of bio-diversity may lead to unpredictable changes in the eco-system.
India is one of the 17 identified mega bio-diverse hot spots in the world. Out of 70% of
the total geographical area surveyed so far, 45500 plant species and 91000 animal
species representing about 7% of the world's flora and 6.5% of the world's fauna,
respectively, have been identified. From the bio-diversity point of view, India has
59,353 insect species, 2546 fish species, 240 amphibian species, 460 reptile species,
1232 bird species and 397 mammal species, of which 18.4% are endemic and 10.8% are
threatened. It has been estimated that at least 10% of the country's recorded wild flora,
and possibly the same percentage of its wild fauna, are on the endangered list, many of
them are on the verge of extinction.
(a) Efforts to Conserve Bio-diversity
13. To encourage protection of bio-diversity by national Governments, the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and international legally binding treaty was
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development at
Rio de Janeiro in 1992. CBD has three main objectives (i) conserving biological diversity;
(ii) using biological diversity in a sustainable manner; and (iii) sharing the benefits of
biological diversity fairly and equitably. India became a party to this treaty in 1994.

6
14. To give effect to the CBD, the Biological Diversity Act was enacted in 2002. The
Act empowered the Central Government to notify any species that were on the verge
of extinction or were likely to face extinction in the near future and take appropriate
steps to conserve them. The NBA constituted an Expert Committee in October 2005.
This Expert Committee was to develop guidelines within 90 days to identify, notify and
denotify rare, threatened, endangered and endemic species and also to recommend the
final list of regulations for conservation. The Expert Committee made its
recommendations in April, 2006 which were approved by NBA in 2007 and forwarded
to Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) in July, 2007. Ministry of Environment
and Forests directed BSI and Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) to prepare State-wise
list of critically endangered species of plants and animals along with measures to
rehabilitate and to preserve them. ZSI prepared the list in August 2008 and BSI prepared
the list and Guidelines in October 2008 to send their views/approval on the list of
threatened species and directed NBA to take follow-up action with the State Diversity
Boards and State Governments for their response within one month. The Audit found
NBA did not revisit the list of critically endangered species as requested by the Ministry
of Environment and Forests. It was also found that NBA did not have any information
on the receipt of its information from SBBs/State Governments regarding the list of
critically endangered species. As a result, list of critically endangered species could
not be notified and the measures to ensure their conservation could not be put in
place.
15. The Act listed provisions for regulated access to biological resources by bonafide
end-users for various purposes including scientific research, commerical activities
and sustainable use of non-timber forest produce. The Act was to be implemented
through the National Bio-Diversity Authority (NBA) at the national level followed by
State Diversity Boards at the State level and Bio-Diversity Management Committees at
the local community level. As provided in the Act, the Central Government established
the National Bio-Diversity Authority (NBA) in October 2003 in Chennai for
implementing the provisions of the Act. While examining the functions of NBA, the
Committee found that one of the most essential components to make any institution
workable, is to have a Chairman who will assist in providing guidance, counsel and act
as a mentor to the organization. However, the post of the Chairman, NBA had been
lying vacant for the past several years. On being asked about the credentials of the
Chairman, the NBA, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests stated:—
"The selected Chairman is a technocrat with specialization in IPR and presently
the head of the Bio-diversity wing of the United Nations Environment
Programme."
16. During the course of evidence, the Committee also found that while 21 States
had established State Diversity Boards, 7 States namely Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Bihar,
Orissa, Meghalaya, Jammu & Kashmir and Assam had not established State
Bio-diversity Boards as of April, 2009.

7
17. On being asked about the progress with regard to the formation of
State Bio-diversity Boards in respect of the States lagging, the Ministry replied that:—
"NBA has been pursuing the matter of Constitution of State Bio-diversity
Board by addressing letters to Hon'ble Chief Minister, Hon'ble Minister of
Forests, Chief Secretary, Principal Secretary (Forests), Principal
Chief Conservator of Forests of Government of Jammu & Kashmir since 2004
and most likely the SBB would be constituted in near future. In respect of
Assam, the State Bio-diversity Board has already been constituted in
September 2010."
18. In order to implement the Guidelines of National Bio-diversity Authority (NBA),
Bio-diversity Management Committees (BMCS) and Peoples Bio-diversity Registers
are required to be formed at the habitation level. The Bio-diversity Management
Committees (BMCs) are to be constituted in all local bodies for promoting conservation,
sustainable use and documentation of bio-diversity resouces. The main function of
the BMCs is the preparation of Peoples Bio-diversity Registers (PBRs) in consultation
with the local people. Peoples Bio-diversity Register (PBR) is to contain comprehensive
information on availability and knowledge of local biological resources or any other
traditional knowledge associated with them. The establishment of comprehensive
PBRs would not only help to inventorise and document the local biological and genetic
resources, but it would also help to conserve and sustainably use the biological
resources. However, Audit scrutiny revealed that these PBRs are not being maintained
by a majority of BMCs. As a result, information on bio-diversity remains undocumented.
Moreover, out of 14,000 registers, only 932 have been formed so far in eight States like
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal. In this regard, the Committee wanted to
know the reasons for such a low number of Bio-diversity Registers in various States
and the efforts made by the Ministry to achieve 100 per cent figures. Replying to this
query, the Ministry in a written note intimated as under:—
"The documentation of People's Bio-diversity Register involves collection of
primary data/information which is local/informal/unstructured/oral and in
traditional/folk form. This has to be transformed into a highly structured
scientific format. Therefore, it is a tedious and complex exercise which involves
field visits/camps in a given territorial jurisdiction of BMC. The documentation
of PBR also requires support of local NGOs, technical groups and other
Government line departments. It is pertinent to mention that completion of a
PBR for a given area requires a couple of years as it involves listing out all
organisms including micro-organisms. Sometimes, the samples need to be
sent to laboratories for identification and classification etc."
19. In reply to a question, the Ministry replied that as of October, 2011:—
"1121 PBRs have been documented in the country. It is pertinent to mention
that documentation of PBRs have also been carried out in those areas where
BMCs are yet to be formed owing to proactive steps taken by SBBs and other
agencies. One of the main reasons for slow progress is lack of availability of
taxonomists/experts in the country especially in the districts to identify flora
and fauna correctly. In addition, lack of specific financial allocations to develop
PBRs has slowed down the process."

8
20. The Ministry also furnished State-wise details on the documentation of PBRs as
given in Table 1:—
Table 1: State-wise documentation of PBRs
State Documentation of PBRs
Andhra Pradesh 1
Arunachal Pradesh —
Assam —
Bihar —
Chhattisgarh —
Goa —
Gujarat —
Haryana —
Himachal Pradesh 1
Jammu & Kashmir —
Jharkhand 3
Karnataka 212
Kerala 265
Madhya Pradesh 480
Maharashtra —
Manipur 2
Meghalaya —
Mizoram —
Nagaland —
Odisha —
Punjab —
Rajasthan —
Sikkim —
Tripura —
Tamil Nadu —
Uttarakhand 139
Uttar Pradesh 1
West Bengal 17
Total 1121

9
21. On being asked to furnish the reasons for not notifying the list of critically
endangered species in 21 States and the action plan to conserve them, the Ministry
replied as under:—
"The relevant Section in the Act dealing with threatened species in Section 38
which provides that the Central Government in consultation with the
concerned State Government to notify from time to time any species which is
on the verge of extinction or likely to become extinct in the near future as a
threatened species, and prohibit or regulate their collection and also to take
appropriate steps to  rehabilitate and preserve those species.
 Accordingly for implementation of this Section, the Ministry of Environment
and Forests requested two national survey organizations, Botanical Survey
of India (BSI) and Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) to prepare State-wise lists
of  threatened species of plants and animals which are likely to become
extinct in the near future, alongwith guidelines for rehabilitating and preserving
such species. The BSI and ZSI got these State-wise lists and guidelines
prepared inter alia through organizing a national consultation with experts.
This list was sent to all State Governments for comments. The comments
received from some of the State Governments were examined in consultation
with BSI and ZSI. Thereafter, notifications notifying threatened species have
already been issued for 14  States, of Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Uttarakhand,
Uttar Pradesh, Mizoram, Odisha, Meghalaya, Goa, West Bengal, Madhya
Pradesh, Karnataka, Bihar, Tripura and Tamil Nadu. The matter is being actively
pursued with other State Governments who have despite regular reminders
not sent their comments/approval on the list sent to them."
22. Asked to explain the absence of uniform regulation for conservation and
protection of BHS and the delay in notification of Guidelines on establishment of
Biodiversity  Heritage Sites (BHS) and formulation of the rules for management and
conservation of BHS, the Ministry replied as under:—
"The NBA has finalized and issued the model guidelines on selection and
management of BHS to all the SBBs in May 2011 for necessary follow up
action. As per Sec-37 (1) and (2) of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002, the
State Government in consultation with local bodies may notify areas of
biodiversity importance as biodiversity heritage sites. The State Government
in consultation with the Central Government may also frame rules for the
management and conservation of all the heritage sites. The State of Karnataka
has already submitted its draft rules for scrutiny and notification since it is
the only State which has notified three BHS in the country so far.”
23. According to Audit, though the NBA appointed a legal consultant in November,
2005, it did not take effective action to contest questionable IPRs but the NBA claimed
in April 2009 that they  were in the process of establishing a legal cell. When the
Committee queried further, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, stated:—
"They still do not have a full-fledged legal cell but are using advocates for the
purpose."

10
24. In addition, various biodiversity species worth thousands of millions of rupees
have been taken away by foreign scientists, botanists and businessmen from this
country causing an incalculable loss to the national exchequer. Asked whether the
lost/plundered biodiversity which originally belonged to India based on various sources
of literature, tradition or geographical appellations has been traced in the last 15 years
of the post-globalization era, the representative of the Ministry stated:—
"The Botanical Survey of India was able to identify only 46,000 floral species
and 81,000 faunal species in our country, which is no where near the total,
which is in millions."
The witness admitted that:—
".....we do not have enough taxonomists. We are not getting the right people;
people are not coming here."
Elaborating further, the representative stated:—
"In collaboration with the Department of Science and Technology, India
established Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) in 1999 and it is in
the public domain and is being used by the research bodies. However, much
needs to be done in this field."
25. In January 2008, the NBA constituted an Expert Committee for medicinal plants.
The Committee came into being after 4 years of the establishment of NBA. The job of
the Committee inter-alia was to provide a list of medicinal plants in India, suggest
ways of safeguarding traditional knowledge relating to medicinal plants, suggest a list
of endangered medicinal plants and develop guidelines for their conservation, etc.
However, Audit pointed out that the said Committee met only once in April 2008 and
until March 2009, the regulations had not been finalized. In April 2009, the NBA stated
that they proposed to reconstitute the Expert Committee. In March 2010, the Ministry
of Environment and Forests replied to an Audit query that Botanical Survey of India
was asked to prepare a State-wise list of threatened list of plants. Audit found that only
07 States notified the list.
(b) Botanical Survey of India (BSI)
26. The Botanical Survey of India (BSI) was established in the year 1890 at Kolkata.
It works as a subordinate office under the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF).
Its basic objective was to undertake surveys by exploring the plant resources of the
country and identifying flora with economic virtues. After the ratification of the
Convention on Bio-Diversity in 1994 by 150 countries including India, a larger role for
the BSI was envisaged. Some of the major objectives of the BSI remodeled in line with
the provisions of CBD are as below:—
(i) Exploration, inventorisation and documentation of phytodiversity
1 in general
and protected areas, Hotspots, Fragile ecosystems and Sacred Groves 2 in
1Phytodiversity is the enumeration of total number and variety plant species of an area.
2Sacred Groves are groups of plants or a small forest protected by humans inhabiting near or around
 them due to their religious belief.

11
particular; publication of national, State and district floras. (Article 7 of
CBD: Identification and Monitoring)
(ii) Identification of red list species3 and species rich areas needing conservation.
(Article 7 of CBD: Identification and Monitoring)
(iii) Survey and documentation of traditional knowledge (ethanobotany 4)
associated with plants.  (Article 7 of CBD: Identification and Monitoring)
(iv) Ex-situ conservation of critically threatened taxa 5 in botanical gardens,
develop and maintain botanical gardens, musea 6 and herbaria to aid
conservation.  (Article 8 of CBD: in-situ conservation and Article 9: ex-situ
conservation)
(v) Revisionary/monographic studies on selected plant groups.  (Article 12 of
CBD: Research and Training)
(vi) Environment Impact Assessment of areas assigned to BSI for
study. (Article 14 of CBD: Impact Assessment and Minimising Adverse
Impacts)
27. According to Audit, the BSI was not effective in meeting its remodeled
objectives as there are inadequate identification/documentation and monitoring
of plant species. Only a few surveys and explorations were carried out to identify
and document the Protected Areas and Fragile Ecosystems. The Red Data Book
was updated in1990 and last updated version was printed in 2003 thereby impacting
conservation efforts. Further, identification of different ethnic groups associated
with usage of plant species for different purposes was not done. The BSI did not
generate adequate data for in-situ conservation and it did not carry out ex-situ
conservation with impacted conservation of bio-diversity. As such, BSI could not
effectively fulfil its role in meeting India's commitment to CBD. A review of the
financial management and manpower of BSI for the period 2002-09 by the Audit is
contained in the table below (Table 2).
3 Red listed species are those threatened species under various categories, which are listed in the
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) list.
4 Ethnobotany is the scientific study of the relationships that exist between people and plants.
5 It is plural of "Taxon" which is a taxonomic unit from the rank of Family downwards e.g.,
Family/genus/species (and its different infra-specific categories like sub-species, variety, sub-
variety and forma) which have characters in common differentiating the unit from other such
group.
6 It is a depository for living or on non-living objects having scientific value.

12
Table 2: Funds required and sanctioned by MoEF
Funds asked for by BSI Funds released by Actual expenditure
during 2002-09 MoEF during 2002-09 during 2002-09
Y ear Plan Non T otal Plan Non T otal Plan Non T otal
Plan Plan Plan
2002-03 10.65 12.38 23.03 5.15 12.38 17.53 4.97 10.97 15.94
2003-04 11.33 12.27 23.60 6.41 12.27 18.68 5.83 10.62 16.45
2004-05 14.38 12.42 26.80 8.78 12.42 21.20 7.89 11.61 19.50
2005-06 16.97 13.10 30.07 6.50 13.10 19.60 6.73 12.43 19.16
2006-07 23.26 13.83 37.09 8.00 13.83 21.83 7.52 12.90 20.42
2007-08 8.00 13.84 21.84 8.00 13.84 21.84 7.66 13.09 20.75
2008-09 10.69 15.13 25.82 10.69 19.33 30.02 10.27 18.81 29.08
Total 95.28 92.97 188.25 53.53 97.17 150.70 50.87 90.43 141.30
28. Audit scrutiny revealed that against the projected requirement of  Rs. 95.28 crore
towards plan activity during 2002-09, the BSI got Rs. 53.53 crore which was only
56.18% of the projections made by BSI. Further, of the Rs. 53.53 crore, BSI could spend
only Rs. 50.87 crore. Table 3 shows the sanctioned strength and vacancies in the BSI.
Table 3: Details of sanctioned strength and men in position in BSI
Scientific Non-scientific
Position as Sanctioned Men-in- V acancy Sanctioned Men-in V acancy
on strength position strength position
As on 459 283 176 825 618 207
01.04.2006 (38.34) (25.09)
As on 441 275 166 822 592 230
01.04.2007 (37.64) (27.98)
As on 441 270 171 817 585 232
01.04.2008 (38.78) (28.40)
As on 441 268 173 817 587 230
01.04.2009 (39.23) (28.15)
As on 439 245 194 799 551 248
01.04.2010 (44.19) (31.04)

13
29. It was found by the Audit that only 21 national parks, 4 bio-reserves and
27 wild-life sanctuaries were fully explored and partially explored for the first time
during 2002-09. As of 2009, 64% national parks, 54% bio-sphere reserves and 94% of
the wild-life sanctuaries remained to be explored. Thus, it may be appreciated that
periodic survey exploration and identification work relating to protected areas was
grossly inadequate. The BSI also failed to conduct population studies and mapping.
Population studies are conducted to determine the total number of individuals of a
taxon (species) in the area explored while mapping is done to determine the range of
distribution of that particular species. The Audit reviewed 35 tour reports out of the
695 tour reports submitted by scientists. It was found that in none of the cases,
activities relating to population studies and mapping were conducted during survey
of the above area and tour reports did not contain adequate information for monitoring
of plant species. Similarly, in the case of Sacred Groves, Audit observed that out of
15397 Sacred Groves, only   02 Groves situated in Meghalaya were explored by BSI
as of 2002. It was further observed that one more Sacred Grove situated in Sikkim
was studied during 2002-09. However, the report of the work is yet to be published.
On being asked about the poor performance of the BSI in this regard, the Ministry
through a note has intimated as under:—
"Sacred Groves, as the name suggests, are held sacred because of religious
beliefs of people who link them to supernatural powers and therefore, such
Groves are protected in majority of cases, by such people themselves.
Therefore, from the point of view of urgency for prioritization, these Groves
assume lesser significance compared to Protected Areas, Bio-diversity
Hotspots and Fragile Ecosystems which are under tremendous anthropogenic
pressure. Accordingly, with the available resources, it is prudent on part of
the BSI to generate baseline data for these vulnerable areas for their effective
monitoring and conservation, thereby resulting in lesser thrust on the Sacred
Groves."
30. The Audit further found that the red data book which represents the present
status of rare, threatened, endangered, vulnerable, extinct species were upgraded in
1990 and the last upgraded version was printed in 2003. As no status survey has been
conducted by BSI, the same has not been updated since then. Ethno-Botanical studies
document the traditional knowledge of different ethnic groups. With the advancement
of civilization, this ethnic botanical information has been depleting at an alarming rate.
While reviewing the information of BSI in 2002, the Audit found that much needed to
be done by the BSI in this respect. On being enquired whether the Ministry had
brought out any detailed report on the initiatives taken by the botanical Survey of
India on target based specific publications on Protected Areas, Bio-diversity Hotspots,
Fragile Ecosystem etc. the Ministry explained as under:—
"No. Publication is not only a human resource intensive work but also a
revenue intensive work. BSI is accordingly bringing out publications in a
phased manner with the resources available with it. Bringing out of specific
publication on Protected Areas, Bio-diversity Hotspots, and Fragile
Ecosystems requires a lot of funds and this amount is required in addition to

14
the expenditure on other important publications like Flora of India/States,
periodicals, etc. If the funds are made available, the above publications will
be accomplished over the next three years. However, to minimize the cost of
printing and enhance the Carbon credit, bringing out e-publications of the
floristic accounts of these protected areas could also be considered".
31. When the Committee wanted to know about the targets in terms of hectares set
by the BSI for the exploration of fragile ecosystems in the country, the Ministry
submitted:—
"As per the Annual Action Plan duly ratified by the Research Monitoring and
Advisory Committee constituted for the purpose, targets for exploration of
fragile ecosystems are not set in terms of hectares but ecosystems and these
targets are fixed on an annual basis depending on the available manpower,
infrastructure and finances available and the thrust areas fixed for a particular
year. While the target for the year 2010-11 was fixed for exploration of fragile
ecosystem "Flora of cold desert of Ladakh" which is continuing during
2011-12, the target fixed for 2011-12 is for exploration of 'Wetland Flora of
Gangetic Plain of Bihar'.”
32. When the Committee wanted to know the details of the likely action plan to
implement specific projects for comprehensive study on specific protected area,
biodiversity hotspots, fragile ecosystems and sacred groves etc. the Ministry intimated
through a note as under:—
"The Action Plan for implementation of projects to study specific protected
areas, biodiversity hotspots, fragile ecosystems and sacred groves is already
in place on yearly and 5-yearly basis and these areas are targeted in a phased
manner with judicious deployment of available resources. During 11th Five
Year Plan period, 23 Protected Areas, 2 fragile ecosystems spread across all
the four Biodiversity hotspots of the country were taken up. During the
12th Five Year Plan period, 40 Protected Areas, 3 wetlands and 650 sacred
groves will be taken up."
33. The Audit during its examination found gross failure on the part of the BSI to
conduct population studies and mapping. Population study is conducted to determine
the total number of individuals of a taxon in the area explored while mapping is done to
determine the range of distribution of a particular species. These two are the essential
tools of monitoring of species. In this connection, Audit reviewed 35 tour reports out
of the 649 tour reports submitted by the scientists and found that in none of the cases,
activities relating to population studies and mapping were conducted during survey
of these areas. Further, the tour reports did not contain adequate information for
monitoring of plant species.
IV .  POLLUTION  CONTROL
34. It is through the mechanism of pollution control that the process of reduction of
elimination of pollutants into the environment is controlled. Various regulatory
authorities have been put in place to keep a check on the discharge of pollutants into

15
the atmosphere. Non-compliance to the laid down standards for pollution control
poses a risk to human health and environment.
35. The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), a statutory organization under the
Ministry of Environment and Forests had conceptualized an 'eco-city programme'. Its
overall objective was to improve the environment of selected cities and bring in visible
results in environment through implementation of identified environmental projects.
The programme in the long run was expected to create awareness and local dynamics
for decreasing environmental burden/stress, improving living conditions and help in
achieving sustainable development in the city. The CPCB initiated the eco-city
programme at a total cost of  Rs. 30 crore under the Tenth Five Year Plan for the period
2002-07. Initially, twelve towns/cities were earmarked keeping in view the historical,
cultural and tourism importance. However, the programme was initiated in only
06 towns viz. Ujjain, Puri, Thirupathy, Kottayam, Vrindavan and Thanjavur. More
towns were to be covered later on based on the results of the study on these six towns.
The eco-city programme was to be coordinated and executed by the CPCB and was to
be implemented by the municipality with local coordination and fund management by
the respective State Pollution Control Board (SPCB).
36. It was observed by the Audit that works undertaken under the programme
remained incomplete in all the six cities selected for the first phase of the programme. In
Puri, no progress was made in three projects sanctioned and entire fund released was
lying unspent with SPCB/municipality for more than seven years. In Kottayam, both
the projects identified and sanctioned remained incomplete and none of the activities
identified later were implemented. In Ujjain, the projects being implemented remained
incomplete. In Vrindavan, no project was implemented under the eco-city programme
and the entire fund sanctioned to the SPCB was lying unutilized with it for more than
seven years. In Thanjavur, no project was started under the eco-city programme and in
Thirupathy, only three out of six projects were implemented.
37. It was further revealed by the Audit that the CPCB did not take any action to
revive any of the projects after August-September 2008, leaving the works undertaken
under the programme incomplete. In addition, the second phase of the project was not
initiated at all. Thus, the objectives of the programme to improve the environment
through implementation of identified environmental improvement projects in towns
and cities of cultural/historical/heritage and tourism importance were not achieved.
38. The Audit further pointed out that the following deficiencies in the
implementation of eco-city programme:—
• Unspent balance not refunded: CPCB released Rs. 2.79 crore to SPCBs against
which SPCBs released Rs. 92 lakh to municipalities. The unspent balance of
Rs. 1.88 crore was lying with SPCBs.
• Interest accrued by the SPCBs not disclosed: As per MoUs, SPCBs were to
keep a record of the interest accrued on the budget releases by CPCB and
same was to be provided to CPCB while submitting request for release of
subsequent instalments. The interest accrued was to be adjusted while
releasing subsequent instalments to SPCBs. It was observed in audit that

16
only two SPCBs, Kottayam and Puri had disclosed the accrued interest earned
on payments released to them and that too only once in a span of seven year
duration.
• Commitment from the municipalities not taken: The CPCB did not take firm
commitment from municipalities regarding contribution of matching fund. As
a result, in the case of the cities of Puri and Vrindavan, work could not be
started till date as there was no commitment from the municipalities for the
matching fund. CPCB did not include any penalty clause in the agreement
which can be invoked in the event of default.
• Delay in implementation of the projects: On an average, the duration of the
projects sanctioned by CPCB was for six months. However, there was delay
of almost four years in implementation of these projects and they continued
to be implemented without any sanction for extension by CPCB.
39. On being asked about the poor implementation and the financial impropriety of
the eco-city project, the Secretary while deposing before the Committee submitted
that:—
"This particular scheme was conceived when the scheme of Jawaharlal Nehru
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) was not there and the funds
were allocated on the basis of certain projects. Some city corporations were
given only one week time to submit their proposals. They were asked to
hurriedly suggest some projects by stating that if they did not do so within
that time, then this money would go to some other place. So, based on that,
very quickly these projects were gathered without a proper city plan as such.
The money was not enough and that this is one of the reasons why it was not
utilized fast enough, the way it should have been done. But today because
the money under JNNURM is much more, this scheme was withdrawn."
V. NON-ACHIEVEMENT OF OBJECTIVES OF POLLUTION CONTROL CAUSED BY
LEATHER TANNERIES
40. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, in a public interest litigation case, ordered in
April, 1995 that 538 tranneries located in three clusters in Kolkata and generating
about 30 million litres per day (mld) of effluents be shifted from the city to a leather
complex and a Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) be provided to treat the
effluent generated from the proposed leather complex. Accordingly National River
Conservation Directorate (NRCD) sanctioned interest-free loan of  Rs. 67.72 crore to
Government of West Bengal for construction of a Common Effluent Treatment Plant at
Bantala, about 20 km. south-east of Kolkata. The project was originally targetted for
completion by November 1997 but could not be completed as of June 2010. The NRCD
has sanctioned only four out of seven components under the project. Delay of more
than 12 years in completion of the project adversely impacted the objective of ensuring
safe disposal of toxic industrial effluents and solid waste from tanneries, causing
immense environmental damage and health risks.

17
Delay in Implementation
41. The entire project was to be completed by March, 2010 as per the revised EFC
though the original target was November, 1997. Even after the delay of more than
12 years, the NRCD could sanction only four out of seven components under the
project and this whole project remained incomplete as of June, 2010.
Loan agreement not signed
42. As per Rule 219 of General Financial Rules, 2005 (GFRs), all sanctions to loans
should specify the terms and conditions of loan including repayment terms. However,
it was noticed that NRCD was yet to finalise the terms and conditions for repayment of
loan and sign the loan agreement. In July 2009, NRCD replied that the draft loan
agreement had not been submitted by Government of West Bengal (GWB) despite
repeated requests. As such, further funds would not be released till the loan agreement
was signed.
43. The Audit has further pointed out that as per the Government Accounting Rules
1990, provision for the release of grants-in-aid and loans to State/Union Territory
Governments under Central Plan Schemes and Centrally-sponsored Plan Schemes
should be made in the Union Budget under the major heads '3601/3602-Grants-in-aid to
State/Union Territory Governments' and '7601/7602 Loans and Advances to State/
Union Territory Governments' respectively. However, it was noticed in audit that the
NRCD did not make any budgetary provisions for sanctioning the loan under the
project. Instead, during 2001-09, the NRCD released interest free loan of  Rs. 42.24
crore to GWB from its grants-in-aid head. This was in violation of provisions of
Government Accounting Rules 1990. In July 2009, the NRCD replied that subsequent
to the signing of loan agreement, the account under the loan head would be created
and funds released so far would be adjusted as loan amount accordingly. According to
Audit, all these provisions were to be complied with before releasing the loan. On
being asked about the likely agreement between the Centre and the West Bengal
Government, the Ministry through a note stated as under:—
"The State Government has to submit a plan for repayment of the Government
of India contribution for the project as 'interest-free loan'. The Government of
West Bengal has been requested several times to submit a draft loan agreement
to be signed between the Government of India and the Government of
West Bengal. The State Government has been informed that no further funds
would be released for the project till the loan agreement is signed. A meeting
in this regard was held on August 5, 2011 under the chairmanship of Secretary,
Ministry of Environment & Forests. In response, State Government vide their
letter dated August 12, 2011 has informed that the matter regarding loan
agreement is under consideration. However, loan agreement is yet to be
received."
44. As per the NRCD's statement of November 2009, Government of West Bengal
(GWB) had signed as agreement with CLC Tanners Association in May 2005 whereby
the tanners were to return the cost of construction of the Central Effluent Treatment
Plant (CETP). It was, however, noticed that the Association was now reluctant to pay

18
back the construction cost and was requesting that the loan be converted to a grant,
raising the prospect of GWB not returning the loan to the NRCD. In Audit's opinion
such request of CLC Tanners Association should not be entertained as it will go
against the 'polluters pay principle'. On being enquired by the Committee as to whether
the Ministry had directed the NRCD to open up the loan head and adjust the amount
of interest free loan released under the said head, the Ministry replied as under:—
"As per the Hon'ble Supreme Court Order dated 7.4.1995, an effluent charge
shall be levied on the tanneries for reimbursing the amount spent on the
CETP. The repayment of loan will commence after three years from the date
CLCTA completes the process of taking over charge of all infrastructure
assets in an operational stage, and repayment will be spread over a period of
ten years in monthly installments of equal amount on pro-rata basis. In order
to discharge effectively its duties and responsibilities and to ensure
implementation of the tripartite agreement, the CLCTA will enter into an
appropriate agreement with each tannery in CLC.
Therefore, while the funds for the project were given from the existing grant-
in-aid budget head of NRCD, the repayment of the loan was to commence
after three years of completion of the CETP project. The State Government
has to submit a plan for repayment of the Government of India contribution.
The Government of West Bengal has been requested several times to submit
a draft loan agreement to be signed between the Government of India and the
Government of West Bengal which is yet to be received. After the signing of
the loan agreement for repayment of Government of India's share, matter will
be taken up with Ministry of Finance regarding the modalities of loan
repayment by the Government of West Bengal into an appropriate budget
head."
45. On the issue of polluting tanneries, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
forests testified as under:—
"Out of the 483 tanneries, 400 tanneries had been shifted to new areas and
settled.”
The witness however confessed that:—
"as per the latest inspection, all the technologies that have been applied so
far have failed to work perfectly."
VI.  ENVIRONMENTAL  EDUCATION
46. Environmental education is a process of developing skills necessary for
understanding and appreciating the inter-relationship among human beings, their culture
and their bio-physical surroundings. In India, environmental education is imparted
through methods like infusion of environmental concepts in the text books, natural
history museums, programmes like National Environmental Awareness Campaign,
National Green Crops, etc.

19
47. The National Museum of Natural History (NMNH) was set up to promote
environmental education all over the country. The objectives of the NMNH inter-alia
are to develop NMNH to achieve the highest level of quality to promote environmental
education on a national level, to develop museum based educational projects so as to
help school curriculum on environmental education, to develop resource material,
such as audio-visual aids, low-cost teaching aids, school loan kits, etc. to promote
environmental education.
48. However, Audit in its findings pointed out numerous shortcomings and came to
the conclusion that the NMNH failed to meet its objectives. The four permanent
galleries depicting various aspects of environment housed in NMNH were opened
between June 1978-1989 but they were not updated to reflect the current issues. The
exhibits it seemed were frozen in time. Current issues like climate change, global warming,
combating desertification, tsunami, depletion of ozone layer etc. were not depicted in
the galleries. Audit observed that the Advisory Committee of NMNH in December,
2006 had advised that the restoration of galleries and exhibits of NMNH be completed
by March, 2007 but it was not done. It also recorded in March 2007 that the exhibits in
some galleries were archaic and suggested that the development of galleries be
outsourced immediately and some skilled workers should be taken on contract basis,
however, this too was not done. Besides the exhibits being very old and limited in
scope, they were very amateurish and not presented in a way to encourage people to
explore and learn concepts of natural history.
49. One of the major objectives of NMNH was to undertake museollogical and
collection based research activities in consonance with the scope and resources of the
museum. Audit observed that no research was being conducted by NMNH. In the
follow-up action on the recommendations of the Advisory Committee meeting held in
November 2007, it was stated that the NMNH should collaborate with other institutions
in organizing new innovative programmes. But it was noticed in audit that the NMNH
had not undertaken any national/international cooperation/collaboration programmes/
projects during the period 2004-05 to 2008-09. NMNH has not signed any Memorandum
of Understanding (MoU) with any natural history museum/environment educational
institutions for collaborating in research on environmental issues.
50. The NMNH is housed in the FICCI building, New Delhi. When the proposal for
setting of NMNH was mooted in April 1973, it was suggested that the museum be
temporarily seated in the FICCI building until a permanent building was ready. However,
despite a proposal for acquiring land construction of the museum being included in
the Ninth and Tenth Five Year Plans, no tangible progress has been made so far. Audit
scrutiny revealed that the museum galleries were full of dust and grime. The exhibits
had no labels and some of them were damaged. During monsoon, the floors of the
galleries were flooded, the walls suffered from leakage and seepage resulting in damage
to exhibits. In case of power failures, there was no power back up system. The upkeep
of the taxidermy unit was very poor. The cell was poorly maintained. Some of the
specimens were dumped in cupboards and above the almirahs of a room. The NMNH

20
has neither conducted any physical inspection/verification of these collections nor
maintained complete lists of these items. Audit also found that the library too was in a
shabby condition. Its collection lacked relevant books on the subject of environment.
The library software installed for easy access to the library books was not working
since 2006. There was no proper sitting arrangement.
51. On being asked about the number of school children/public who visited the
NMNH, the Ministry provided the following statement:—
Table 4: Visitors to NMNH
S. No. Y ear General visitors School students T otal
1. 2006 April—2007 March 75938 32886 108824
2. 2007 April—2008 March 74280 45563 119843
3. 2008 April—2009 March 79507 45493 125000
4. 2009 April—2010 March 34901 166147 201048
5. 2010 April—2011 March 27013 87941 114954
Total (5 years) 291639 378030 669669
It was noticed that there was a downward trend in the year 2010-11 when the
number of visitors declined from 201048 in 2009-10 to 114954 in the year 2010-11.
52. The Committee wanted to know the steps being taken for the recruitment of
sufficient number of trained guides to explain the environmental concepts displayed in
the galleries to school children and general visitors. The Ministry in its written reply
responded as under:—
"At present there are four guides/educational staff working in the NMNH
headquarters. An advertisement has already been given for the recruitment
of one educational assistants through SSC for filling up of the vacancy.
NMNH has initiated a proposal for recruitment of four additional educational
assistants on contractual/out-sourcing basis."
53. On being asked about the Ministry's action plan of framing any policy for
governing acquisition of exhibits, framework to guide research activities undertaken
by the Museum, plan to guide the development of the Museum etc., the Ministry
submitted in a written reply as under:—
"The Ministry has constituted an Advisory Committee comprising of eminent
experts to guide and monitor activities of the museum including research and
also provide directions for further development of NMNH. The next meeting
of the Committee is scheduled to be held in October 2011."

21
54. When enquired by the Committee with regard to the steps taken to intensify the
research activities at NMNH with the collaboration of foreign research institutes, the
Ministry submitted as under:—
"A team of officials including Natural History Museum, London were invited
to visit the NMNH in this regard. A team from NHM, London visited India
during 4-8 March 2009 and held discussions with officials of the NMNH and
MoEF. The team suggested to have return visits by the Director of NMNH for
further discussions on future collaboration. Possible collaboration for research
in natural history and museology with Natural History Museums in Europe
and USA are being explored."

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
The Committee are anguished to note that indiscriminate exploitation of natural
resources for meeting ever increasing developmental needs coupled with the
uncontrolled growth of urbanisation, industrialisation and population explosion is
adversely impacting our environment. Dumping of industrial wastes into our rivers
and lakes, clearing forest lands for agricultural activities along with the increased
emission of harmful pollutants into the atmosphere, have all contributed to the
environmental degradation. It is in this context that Government of India put in place
institutional measures and schemes for promotion of afforestation, conservation of
bio-diversity, pollution control and environmental awareness/education. However, the
Committee note serious deficiencies and inadequacies as pointed out by the C&AG in
the implementation of environmental programmes and in the functioning of various
institutions working under the Ministry of Environment & Forests. The Committee's
examination of the subject as contained in the succeeding paragraphs further
reinforces the Audit findings and underlines the imperative need for speedy
and effective governmental intervention for conservation and protection of the
environment.
2. The Committee note that the National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board
(NAEB), solely responsible for promoting afforestation, tree planting and restoration
of ecology, directly disbursed funds to the voluntary agencies (V As) without taking
the State Governments into confidence. According to Audit, out of total 647 projects,
only 20 V As could comply with all the relevant procedures as laid down by the NAEB.
The representative of the Ministry testified before the Committee that prior to 2005,
no target was set for tree plantation and the scheme of afforestation was 'demand
driven' though the term as such 'was not recorded in the files'. The witness further
conceded that there was a need to involve civil society and application of checks and
balances against the flawed system of money flowing directly to NGOs/VAs. The
Ministry further admitted that only 54 V As received all the three instalments of the
grant whereas, in 269 cases the V As vanished after receipt of the first instalment of
the grant and in 246 cases after receipt of the second instalment of the grant. The
Committee deplore that only 7 defaulter V As were blacklisted by the Government
against whom FIRs were filed whereas FIR was filed against only one erring officer.
Apparently, grants were released to bogus V As who were content with one or two
instalments and the Ministry admitted that they vanished without a trace. The
Committee are shocked that public money was looted in the name of afforestation and
little tangible effort was made by the Government to book the defaulters. Surprisingly,
in the whole chain associated with the screening and monitoring of the grants
sanctioned to V As, only one officer was held responsible. The Committee therefore
recommend that, as in the case of Prime Minister's Gramin Sadak Yojna (PMGSY),
22

23
there should be a third party monitoring of the afforestation programme including
geo-reference based verification of the real afforestation with satellite mapping with
the assistance of the national Remote Sensing Agency. Besides, all the Ministries/
Departments of Government of India must be alerted about the said shady/bogus V As
so that they are debarred from grants from any Government Department in any form
or manner.
3. In order to track down the defaulter/spurious V As, the Committee further
recommend that the Ministry must take the assistance of all those banks through
which the money was routed to the V As and also of the State Governments to establish
the identity of the office bearers of the defaulting VAs and the beneficiaries of the
grants so that the culprits are brought to justice. The Committee should like to be
furnished within three months of the presentation of this report the list of all those
defaulter/unscrupulous V As who defrauded the public exchequer and the penal action
taken against them as also the aggregate grants to all the VAs between 2003-04 to
2008-09 and the total area afforested by them as against the total target. Taking note
of the target fixed by the Planning Commission to provide tree cover to 33 per cent
geographical area of the country by the end of  2012, the apparent failure to provide
the targeted tree cover and the serious ecological consequences of fast depleting
forest cover, desertification and the rising threat of global warming, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the latest figure of national forest cover, forest cover
State-wise and the necessary fiscal measures put in place to achieve the stipulated
target having regard to their specific climatic conditions. Besides, the national
programme of afforestation cannot be left solely for implementation by the V As/NGO
but all the departments/agencies of the Union as well as the State Governments and
Panchayati Raj Institutions need to be involved effectively to achieve the desired
target and the Committee be informed.
BIO-DIVERSITY
4. The Committee note that India has a rich and varied heritage of bio-diversity
encompassing a wide spectrum of habitats, from tropical rain forest to alpine vegetation
and from temperate forests to coastal wet lands. India is considered to be the centre of
origin of 30,000 to 50,000 varieties of rice, mangoes, turmeric, ginger, sugarcane,
etc. and it is this great bio-diversity which makes it possible for millions of species
including humans to co-exist. Further, the Committee note India is one of the
17 identified mega bio-diverse hot spots in the world. Out of 70% of the total
geographical area surveyed so far, 45,500 plant species and 91,000 animal species
representing about 7% of the world's flora and 6.5% of the world's fauna, respectively,
have been identified. From the bio-diversity point of view, India has 59,353 insect
species, 2546 fish species, 240 amphibian species, 460 reptile species, 1232 bird
species and 397 mammal species, of which 18.4% are endemic and 10.8% are
threatened. It has been estimated that at least 10% of the country's recorded wild
flora, and possibly the same percentage of its wild fauna, are on the endangered list,
many of them are on the verge of extinction. There is a growing apprehension that
thousands of varieties of plant species is being lost and the gene pool is getting eroded
by the hybrid seed. The Committee recall the hoary Indian belief "save the seeds",

24
demonstrating without an iota of doubt that since time immemorial respect for
bio-diversity was deeply ingrained in the Indian psyche. The Committee therefore
recommend that such a great bio-diversity which is typically Indian in terms of
traditions, literature or geographical appellations must be preserved/protected and
digitalized with the assistance of other premier scientific organizations of the
Government of India including the Departments of Science and Technology, Atomic
Energy and DARE. The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures instituted
in this behalf.
5. The Committee note that the Biological Diversity Act  2002 was to be implemented
through the National Bio-diversity Authority (NBA), the State level Boards and the
Bio-Diversity Management Committees (BMCs) at the Community level across the
country. The main function of the BMCs is the preparation of People's Biodiversity
Registers (PBRs) in consultation with the local people with a view to compiling
comprehensive information on availability and knowledge of local biological resources
or any traditional knowledge associated with them. The objective behind establishment
of comprehensive PBRs is to help inventorise and document the local biological and
generic resources with a view to conserve and sustainably use them. The Committee
are anguished to note that as against 14,000 PBRs required to be maintained, only
1121 registers had been documented by October, 2011 mainly by Madhya Pradesh
(480), Kerala (265), Karnataka (212) and Uttarakhand (139). The Committee observed
that though the post of Chairman, NBA has been filled after several years, seven
States namely Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Bihar, Meghalaya, J&K and Assam were yet
to constitute the State level Boards. Further the Committee are anguished to note that
precious diverse bio-diversity species have been taken away by unscrupulous foreign
scientists, botanists and businessmen causing an incalculable damage to India's
bio-diversity and irretrievable loss to the national exchequer. The Committee are
saddened to note the pathetic performance of national Bio-diversity Authority (NBA)
as even after six years of its formation, it failed to notify important regulations like
access to bio-diversity, transfer of research results and intellectual property rights,
recruit or hire adequate number of taxonomists, set up a regular legal cell etc.
Further, the Expert Committee to suggest lists of endangered medicinal plants in
India and the guidelines for their conservation was yet to be set up. Moreover, it had no
information in regard to the grant of intellectual property rights outside India on
many biological resources obtained from India. The Committee therefore recommend
that NBA should urgently set up a monitoring cell to keep track of Intellectual
Property rights granted outside India which rightfully belong to India and also set up
a regular legal cell to assist them. NBA should also develop guidelines for
documentation of local bio-diversity, bio-resources and associated traditional
knowledge and document the selected areas/fields of 'traditional knowledge' for
commercial exploitation. NBA, therefore, needs to draw a time bound action plan to
ensure that the list of endangered species in rest of the 21 States is notified
expeditiously to prevent exploitation of medicinal plants for commercial purposes and
to minimize threat to their conservation. Further, the Committee recommend that
concerted and sustained efforts be made to recruit or engage adequate number of
taxonomists/experts for identification of flora and fauna and to prepare the list of

25
endangered species which are on the verge of extinction or are threatened and
appropriate administrative and legislative framework must be put in place for their
protection and conservation. The Committe would like to be apprised about the
corrective measures taken to address the deficiencies and to meet the objectives of
the Biological Diversity Act, 2002.
6. The Committee are deeply concerned over the indiscriminate use of agricultural
pesticides and the use of a veterinary drug-Diclofenac-as cattle feed and their mortal
effect on fauna and flora. They are all the more disturbed over the vanishing population
of vultures which are almost on the verge of extinction and disappearnce of sparrows
and black blucks from many parts of the country. Also, of equal concern is of uprooting
and displacement of people from vast areas designated as wild life sanctuaries
particularly the displaced people of Kolleru Lake in the Andhra Pradesh. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government commission an empirical
study of the vanishing species of our fauna, the causes responsible for and the corrective
measures required to be taken. They also recommend that the affected/displaced
families of the national parks/wild life sanctuaries be properly rehabilitated with
provision of adequate and alternative means for their sustenance and the Committee
be apprised.
7. The Committee observe that the objectives of Botanical Survey of India (BSI)
were remodeled to meet the provisions of the Convention on Biological Diversity
(CBD). Since only a few surveys and explorations were carried out to identify and
document the protected areas and fragile eco-systems, the BSI was not effective in
meeting its remodeled objectives due to gross inadequacy in identification/
documentation and monitoring of plant species. The Committee note that the Red
Data Book was updated in 1990 and last updated version was printed in 2003. The
Committee deplore that no further identification of different ethnic groups associated
with usage of plant species for different purposes was done after 1990. Admittedly,
the BSI is also hamstrung by serious financial shortages, infrastructure and dearth
of manpower especially taxonomists. The Committee regret to note that BSI miserably
failed to fulfil its objectives and the assigned role in meeting India's commitments to
CBD due to want of necessary infrastructure and requisite manpower with the BSI
for conservation of bio-diversity. The Committee, therefore, recommend that:—
(i) Necessary resources/infrastructure be made available to the BSI for effective
and speedy conservation of India's precious bio-diversity and to meet its
commitment on the convention on Biological diversity;
(ii) The ethnobotanically important plant species be inventorised and a suitable
publication brought out periodically for sustainable utilization of
bio-resources;
(iii) The Red Data Book showing the status of threatened, rare, endangered,
enedemic, vulnerable species, extinct species be updated urgently to give
necessary spurt to conservation efforts to these threatened and vanishing
species;

26
(iv) Comprehensive survey and documentation may be done of bio-diversity hot
spots, fragile eco-systems and sacred groves for their proper conservation;
(v) The monitoring mechanism for ex-situ and  in-situ conservation be
strengthened to conserve India's great biological diversity;
(vi) The causes of environmental degradation due to developmental activities be
studied closely and suitable corrective measures taken;
(vii) The format of tour reports of the visiting scientists/researchers be suitably
devised so as to make them all encompassing and result-oriented; and
(viii) The education programme need to be revisited with specific changes in the
curricula for creating interest in the student about bio-diversity and its
importance in our life.
POLLUTION CONTROL
8. The Committee note that the Central Pollution Control Board conceptualized
an 'Eco-city Programme' with a view to bringing environmental improvement in
select cities at a total cost of Rs. 30 crore during the 10th Five Year Plan period
2002-07. Twelve cities of historical/heritage/cultural significance were selected but
the programme was initiated in six cities namely, Kottayam, Puri Thanjavur, Tirupati,
Ujjain and Vrindavan.  Audit scrutiny of the projects reveals startling irregualarities
in project approvals, release of instalments in violation of prescribed financial
procedure or without approval the Detailed Project Report (DPR), release of funds
even when there were reports of unsatisfactory implementation, non-implementation
of the Scheme where the municipality was unable to provide matching fund of 50 per
cent, non-refund of unspent balances, non-disclosure of interest by some State Pollution
Control Boards (SPCBs) failure of CPCB to take prior commitment from the SPCBs
to implement the projects, etc. The Committee therefore urge the Government to
ascertain the reasons for such a slackness on the part of CPCB and also to revisit the
'Eco-city Programme, for effective and speedy implementation and to apprise them in
due course.
9. The Committee observe delay in effective implementation of the order of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in April 1994 directing that 538 tanneries, located
in three clusters in Kolkata generating 30 mld of effluents, be shifted from the city to
a leather complex with facility of Common Efficient Treatment Planet (CETP). With
a view to implementing the order, the Government of West Bengal (GWB) submitted
a proposal to the GoI in the National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD) based
on which the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved the estimated
project cost of  Rs.  65 crore to be shared in equal measure by the GWB and NRCD.
The project was to be completed by November 1997. The Committee are anguished to
note the cavalier manner in which the project cost was worked out without providing
for Efficient Transportation System (ETS), Common Chrome Recovery System
(CCRS), Safe Solid Waste Disposal System (SSWDS) and Treated Effluent Sump and
Pumping Station (TESPS) which were integral components of the CETP. CCEA
therefore sanctioned the revised proposal at a revised cost of  Rs. 135.44 crore with

27
a share of Rs.   67.22 crore to be borne by the NRCD. The project was scheduled to be
completed by March 2010. The Committee are concerned to note the inspection
reports of the NRCD and the field functionaries of the MoEF highlighting deficiencies,
irregularities and delay in the implementation of the Project. Asked to explain, the
representative of the MoEF admitted that 400 tanneries had been shifted to areas but
as per latest  inspection, all the technologies that have been applied so far have failed
to work perfectly. As regards the loan agreement, which was required to be signed
before releasing the loan, the MoEF admitted that the loan agreement was yet to be
signed and efforts were underway to materialize the same. While deploring the
unconscionable delay in safe disposal of industrial effluents and solid waste from
tanneries causing incalculable environmental damage, the Committee recommend
that the MoEF expedite implementation of the project within a definitive time frame
through regular coordination and rigorous monitoring of the project. The Committee
should like to be apprised within four months of the presentation of this Report, the
measures taken and the physical outcome thereof a meet the stated objects of the
project, the total expenditure incurred by the GoI on the project, the status of loan
recovery as also the measures instituted to combat the environmental degradation by
tanneries elsewhere in the country, State-wise/cluster-wise.
ENVIRONMENTAL  EDUCATION
10. The Committee note that the National Museum of Natural History (NMNH)
was set up with the laudable objective to depict India's rich diversity of flora, fauna and
mineral wealth to provide an out of school facility for education of children and to
promote environmental awareness among the masses. To begin with, the NMNH was
set up on a rented building in New Delhi in 1978 with a long term vision to emerge as
a recognized institution, nationally and internationally, in the field of environmental
education and natural history museology. Later regional Museums were set up in
Mysore in 1995, in Bhopal in 1997 and in Bhubaneswar in 2004. The fourth Museum
was to be set up in Sawai Madhopur in Rajasthan by 2009. The Committee are startled
to note the Audit findings relating to the functioning of NMNH vis-a-vis its objectives.
NMNH did not have any consultation with the NCERT for the development of
curriculum for standardizing environment education, no audio-visual aids were
developed for environmental education during 2004-2009; no school loan kits were
developed after 1986; the exhibits remained the same for decades without depicting
current environmental concerns like global warming, natural disasters, afforestation,
pollution control, sustainable development, utilization of solar energy, rain water
harvesting, depletion of Ozone layer, climate change, etc. The Committee are, therefore,
of the considered view that the whole concept of NMNH needs a revisit.
11. The Committe are saddened to note that the Museum is utterly in defunct and
dilapidated conditions and it would be nothing short of mockery to call it a national
Museum worthy of National and International acclaim. The visitors' comments truly
reflect the abject state of neglect of the Museum, some of which read, "very, very ill
maintained, a very bad and dirty place"; "this Museum does not make sense being
named National Museum"; "should be closed immediately"; "there is nothing to be
seen except filthy building and non-working models", etc. Asked to explain the

28
shortcomings and deficiencies pointed in Audit, the MoEF had no cogent replies
especially with regard to the inordinate delay in setting up a permanent Museum.
Mindful of the conceptual objective and conscious of the need for heightening
environmental education and showcasing our great diversity of fauna and flora and
mineral wealth, the Committee recommend that the Government set up a Committee
of eminent museologists, environmentalists and educationists drawing clue from the
National Science Museum and the Parliament Museum equipped with interactive
story-telling museum with sound-light-video animation and set up a permanent state-
of-the-art first rate National Museum of natural history to fulfil the vision of the
former Prime Minister late Smt. Indira Gandhi behind setting up the museum and to
meet the ever growing need of setting up a national museum of natural history.
12. Further, the Committee recommend that in order to build a sustained and
momentous national drive for protection and conservation of environment, the students
be involved actively in surveying the fauna and flora in their vicinity and in afforestation
and for disseminating evnironmental awareness and  heightening environmental
concerns across the country. Suitable summer vacation programmes for heightening
environmental awareness be drawn up and the students incentivised to partake in the
programmes in a big way apart from revisiting the school curricula as recommended
elsewhere in this Report. The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures
initiated in this behalf as also the mechanism put in place to monitor periodically the
outcome of such measures.
N
EW DELHI; DR.  MURLI MANOHAR  JOSHI
24  April, 2012 Chairman,
4 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 28TH JULY , 2011
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 28th July, 2011 from 1100 hrs.
to 1320 hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Adhi Sankar
11. Shri K. Sudhakaran
12. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Naresh Gujral
15. Shri Prakash Javadekar
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
29

30
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director of Audit (Report
 Central)
2. Ms. Geetali Taare — Principal Director of Audit
 (Scientific Department)
3. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General of Audit (Report
Central)
4. Ms. Nameetha Prasad — Director General of Audit
(Scientific Department)
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. Tishyarakshit Chatterjee — Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Bansal — Addl. Director General (FC)
3. Smt. Meera Mehrishi — Addl. Secretary
4. Smt. Gauri Kumar — Addl. Secretary
5. Shri Rajiv Gauba — Joint Secretary
6. Shri Rajneesh Dube — Joint Secretary
7. Shri A.R. Chadha — Inspector General of Forest
8. Dr. B. Venugopal — Director, NMNH
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then apprised the
Members that the sitting was convened with a view to take oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the subject  'Performance
of the Ministry of Environment and Forest'. Considering the wider significance of the
subject, the Chairman observed that the Secretary may in the first instance brief on the
various points raised by the C&AG. The Committee would then again call the
representatives of the Ministry for detailed oral evidence. The Members concurred
with the suggestion of the Chairman.
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests were then called
in and the Chairman welcomed them to the sitting. The representatives of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests then briefed the Committee on the Audit Paras. Members
raised concerns over the serious deficiencies and irregularities pointed out in Audit.
Members also pointed out that various aspects of environmental governance such as
climate change, global warming  etc. need to be addressed urgently. On being asked,
the Secretary  assured to furnish within  a week the complete list of defaulter  Voluntary
Agencies, State-wise and the amounts involved. The representative also  assured to
consider the suggestion of the Committee to involve some Central  Universities with a
view to create a basket of courses on environmental studies  and  main streaming of
environmental education.

31
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry for briefing the
Committee and furnishing the available   information that the Committee desired in
connection with the examination of the subject. The Chairman also thanked the officers
of the C&AG of India for providing assistance  to the Committee in the examination of
the subject and asked them that the Committee would resume further evidence on the
subject  in due course.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings  of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12) HELD ON 5TH SEPTEMBER, 2011
The  Public Accounts Committee sat on Monday, the 5th September, 2011 from
1500 hrs. to 1725 hrs. in Committee  Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri  Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Kunwar  Rewati Raman Singh
10. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Prasanta  Chatterjee
13. Shri Prakash Javadekar
14. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
32

33
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Deputy C&AG
2. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director of Audit
 (Report Central)
3. Ms. Geetali Taare — Principal Director of Audit
 (Scientific Department)
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. Tishyarakshit Chatterjee — Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Bansal — Addl. Director General (FC)
3. Smt. Gauri Kumar — Addl. Secretary
4. Smt. Meera  Mehrishi — Addl. Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office  of C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then apprised the
Members that the sitting was convened to take further oral evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests  on the subject 'Performance
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests'.
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests were called in
and the Chairman welcomed them to the sitting.The Members expressed their concern
over the fact that a number of NGOs which were associated   with the afforestation
schemes  had disappeared after availing the first instalment of the grant and the
outstanding amount continued to be  unaccounted. A large number of NGOs  were also
untraceable. The Committee  asked the Ministry to take the assistance  of the  banks
through which the money was routed to establish the identity of the office bearers of
the NGOs. Such defaulting  NGOs  should also be blacklisted  and an alert  may be sent
to all the Ministries  about such NGOs. The Committee gave three  months of time to
the Ministry for tracing all the NGOs which vanished after taking  the grants. The
representative of the Ministry assured that conclusive action would be taken  to trace
the defaulter NGOs with the help of the Banks and State Governments.
4. The Committee thereafter took up  the issue  of bio-diversity. The Committee was
informed that  the Bio-Diversity Act,   2002 exhaustively deals with bio-diversity
including bio-diversity hertiage sites. It was stated that all relevant information has
been digitalized.  The Committee was apprised by the Secretary, Ministry of Environment
and Forests that on the directions of the Committee, Department of Higher Education,
Ministry of Human    Resource  Development  has been approached to introduce  a
programme of study on Taxonomy which will be funded  by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests. A suggestion was also made that the taxonomic  studies   could be funded
by the Government by way of suitable  scholarships.

34
5. The Committee urged the Ministry to take immediate and effective steps to save
vulture  population which is on the verge of extinction due to adverse effects of
veterinary  drug called Diclofenace  being used in cattle feed. Taking note of the plea
that the drug  cannot   be banned, the Chairman observed that the Council of Scientific
and  Industrial  Research (CSIR)/Indian Council for Agriculture  Research (ICAR) may
be requested to find a suitable substitute for Diclofenace. The Committee also expressed
their concern over the dwindling number of sparrows in the country  and underlined
the need for their protection.
6. The Committee pointed out the flawed land acquisition   policy of the Ministry for
national parks and sanctuaries  without actually initiating  any work on  them as in the
case of Kolleru  lake in Andhra Pradesh.The Committee emphasized  that school children
may be sensitized  and involved to protect the flora and fauna during vacations by way
of holding  workshops and field visits. The Committee also brought to the  notice  of
the Ministry the decline of the Black  Buck population near Allahabad  and the need
for immediate reversal  of the trend.
7. The Committee, thereafter, took up the issue  of functioning  of CPCB and pointed
out that  Fluorosis  and Chromium,  the carcinogenic substances found in alarming
proportions in the tanneries and the pollution being caused to water bodies including
rivers, lake and underground water.
The Chairman thanked  the representatives of the Ministry for deposing before the
Committee.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
8. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the  Memorandum No. 2
regarding selection of additional  subjects for examination during the year 2011-12.
After  some discussion, the Committee selected the following additional subjects for
examination and report during the year 2011-12.
(i) Report No. 6 of 2011-12 —Union Government (Civil) Performance
Audit—XIX Commonwealth Games, 2010.
(ii) Report  No. 7 of 2011-12—Union  Government (Defence Services) Coast  Guard
Performance Audit Role and Functioning of Indian Coast Guard.
(iii)  Union Government (Civil) Performance Audit—Fertiliser Subsidy.
(iv) Union Government (Defence Services)—Adarsh Co-operative Housing
Society, Mumbai.
(v) Union Government (Civil)—Autonomous Bodies.
(vi) Report No. 34 of 2010-2011 Union Government (Railways)—Para Nos. 2.2, 3.1,
4.1 and 7.2.
(vii) Report  No. 38 of 2010-11 on Autonomous Bodies—Para Nos. 5.1, 8.4, 8.5 and
8.8.

35
9. The Chairman then thanked  the Officers  of the C&AG of India for providing
assistance to the Committee in the examination and selection of subjects.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST  SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 24TH  APRIL, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday,  the 24th April, 2012 from 1500 hrs.
to 1600 hrs. in Room No. '51' (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri  Anandrao Vithoba  Adsul
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri  Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt.  A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
Representative of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Pr. Director, Audit
2. Ms. Geetali Tare — P r. Director, Audit
3. Ms. Sudha Rajan — Director
2. At the outset the Chairman  welcomed the Members  and the representatives of
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor  General  of India to the sitting of the
Committee. Apprising the  Members that the meeting had been convened to consider
and adopt four Original Draft Reports of the Committee, the Chairman desired  that the
said Reports be taken up one by one for consideration for appropriate incorporation of
the views, if any, of the Members therein.
36

37
3.  Accordingly, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for consideration
and adopted the same:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) 'Performance  of the Ministry of  Environment and Forests' based on the
C&AG Report Nos. 17 of 2010-11 (Para No. 63) and 15 of 2010-11 (Chapter II);
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
4. The Committee, then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Draft Reports in light
of the factual  verifications, if any, received from Audit and present the Reports to the
House on a date convenient to him.
5. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active participation
in the discussions. He also thanked the representatives of the Office of  the C&AG  for
their  valuable  inputs and  assistance to the Committee in the examination of the
subjects. The Committee also appreciated the hard work put in by the Secretariat  in
drafting and finalising 25 Reports  during the current term of the Committee.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Not related to this Report.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
V asavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006.
(A.P)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramma,
Muzaffarpur-842002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P.B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service, C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P .B. No. 2621,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp.
2nd Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building, Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110 002.