25
UNFRUITFUL
EXPENDITURE OF
INVESTORS MONEY — SEBI
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

TWENTY FIFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
UNFRUITFUL EXPENDITURE OF
INVESTORS MONEY—SEBI
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.2.2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.2.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)

P.A.C. NO. 1932
Price:  ` 28/-
     2011  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.
©

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
COMPOSITION  OF  SUB-COMMITTEE  I  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2010-11)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (vii)
REPORT
PART  I Narrative Portion
I. Introductory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
II. Pendency of Audit Paragraphs in the Ministry of Finance–
Department of Economic Affairs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
III. Unfruitful Expenditure of Investors Money  . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
(A) Awarding of a Database Preparation Work in favour
of NSDL by SEBI without competitive bidding  . . . . 5
(B) Constraints Faced in Implementation of MAPIN
Project  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
(C) Suspension  of   MAPIN  Project  and  subsequent
substitution with PAN  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
(D) Unique Identification Number—‘Aadhar’ Scheme  . . 10
(E) Safeguarding Data and Return of Money  . . . . . . . . 11
PART  II Observations/Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
APPENDICES
I. Minutes   of  the  sitting  of   Sub-Committee  I  held  on
22nd September 2010  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
II. Minutes of the sitting of the PAC held on 3rd February 2011. . . 18

(iii)
COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri  Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
*16. V acant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
* V acancy occurred vice  Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
19th January, 2011.

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE I OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11)
* Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convener
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal — Alternate Convener
3. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao — Member
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Kalraj Mishra — Member
* Appointed as the Convener of the Sub-Committee I w.e.f.  28th January, 2011 in place of
Shri Ashwani Kumar vice his appointment as Minister of State w.e.f. 19th January, 2011.
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee as authorised by the Committee,
do present this Twenty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Unfruitful Expenditure
of Investors Money (SEBI)” based on Para 8.2 of Report No. CA-15 of 2008-09 of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, Union Government — (Civil)—
Autonomous Bodies.
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year
ended March, 2009, Union Government—(Civil)—Autonomous Bodies No. CA-15
of 2008, was laid on the Table of the House on 24th July, 2009.
3. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time frame, the Public Accounts
Committee (2010-11) took up the subject for detailed examination and report. A Sub-
Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation with the
Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of the Department of
Economic Affairs with a special reference to the SEBI.
4. In the process of the scrutiny of the Audit Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports
pending with the Department of Economic Affairs, the Sub-Committee came across
certain pending Paragraphs/Remedial/Corrective ATNs on very important issues
and considered it prudent to examine and report the same alongwith the Non-
Compliance issue. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee took up the above-mentioned
Para of Audit Report for in-depth examination.
5. The Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on the subject at their sitting held on
22nd September, 2010. The Committee considered and finalised this Report at their
sitting held on 3rd February, 2011. Minutes of the sittings form Appendices to the
Report.
6 . For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report.
7. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for their efforts in examining the
subject in detail and finalizing and placing the Report before the main Committee.
8. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) for tendering evidence
before the Sub-Committee and furnishing information that the Committee desired in
connection with the examination of the subject.
(vii)

9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
21 February, 2011 Chairman,
2 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(viii)

REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory
The Reports of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India, after being laid in
Parliament in accordance with Article 151 of the Constitution of India, stand referred to
the Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. As it becomes practically impossible
for the Public Accounts Committee to examine each and every paragraph contained in
the Audit Reports, the Committee adopt a selective approach and take up a few relatively
more important paragraphs for indepth examination at the beginning of the term every
year. As regards the paragraphs which are not formally selected for examination by the
Committee, these are dealt with by means of a procedure whereby the Ministry/
Department is required to furnish the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to the
Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of  Expenditure).
2. Since there was inordinate delay on the part of the Ministries/Departments in
furnishing the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee in their
105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that with effect from 31st March,
1996 the Action Taken Notes on all the paragraphs of the Reports of the C&AG, which
are not formally taken up by the PAC for examination and Reports presented thereon,
should be furnished to the Committee within four months of the laying of the Audit
Reports.
3. During 2000-01, vide their 9th Report, the Committee decided that the remedial/
corrective Action Taken Notes furnished by the respective Ministries/Departments
should be categorized by the Audit under three broad heads namely 'Accepted', 'Partially
Accepted' and 'Not Accepted'. In subsequent developments, the Committee also
decided that a brief on those Action Taken Notes which are categorized as 'Not
Accepted' should be furnished by the Office of C&AG, clearly indicating the reasons
for such categorization as well as the points of difference between Audit and the
Ministry/Department concerned. The Remedial Action Taken Notes and briefs on
''non-Accepted'' paras are then circulated to the Members of the PAC for their perusal
and then the Remedial Action Taken Notes reach the stage of finality.
4. Even after devising an elaborate system, the Committee note that various
Ministries/Departments have been unable to furnish the remedial/corrective Action
Taken Notes to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) within the prescribed time limit of four months. For example as on
25th June, 2010 remedial/corrective Action Take Notes on a total number of 4191
Chapters/Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/Departments.
5. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject of Non-compliance by
the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs of
the C&AG on Para 8.2 of Report No. CA - 15 of 2008-09 relating to 'Unfruitful Expenditure
of Investors Money' for detailed examination during the year 2010-11.  A Sub-Committee
1

2
was constituted to go deep into the matter, prepare separate Reports on each Ministry/
Department concerned with the subject and place the same before the Main Committee
for their consideration. In the process, the Sub-Committee obtained Background Notes/
Preliminary Materials and Written Replies from the Ministries/Departments concerned.
The Sub-Committee also took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) alongwith the representatives of SEBI on 22.09.2010.
II. Pendency of Audit Paragraphs in the Ministry of Finance—Department of
Economic Affairs
6. The Ministry of Finance—Department of Expenditure intimated to the Committee
that a total number of 4191 Action Taken Notes are pending with various Ministries/
Departments as on 25th June, 2010. As stated by Audit a total of 2418 paras were
pending with different Departments of the Ministry of Finance. Out of these, according
to Department of Expenditure a total of 10 paras were  pending with the Department of
Economic Affairs for which Action Taken Notes were not furnished. This Report pertains
to the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on the Audit Paragraphs pending with
the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs.
7. After the commencement of the examination of the subject, the Sub-Committee
were informed by Audit that as on 31st May, 2010 a total of 3462 paragraphs were
pending  with all the Ministries on which remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes
(ATNs) were due. With regard to Para 8.2 of CA - 15 of 2008-09, Audit revealed that
revised Action Taken Notes on same was pending with the Ministry.
8. In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the exact number of
Audit Paragraphs received by the Ministry of Finance particularly Department of
Expenditure in the last two years. The Ministry in their written reply stated that
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) had received a total of 30 Audit Paras. The
exact number of Audit Paras received by the entire Ministry of Finance including
Departments of Expenditure/Revenue—Direct Taxes/Indirect Taxes/Financial Services/
Disinvestment was not available and had been sought from Department of Expenditure/
Controller General of Accounts.
9. When asked to indicate the exact number of paras pending with the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Economic Affairs), the Ministry informed the Committee that
out of 30 Audit Paras received by Department of Economic Affairs, 14 paras were
pending as on date, on which the final ATNs had not been furnished to audit.
10. The Committee note that particular para i.e. Para No. 8.2 of Audit Report No.
CA-15 of 2008-09 on 'Unfruitful Expenditure of Rs. 11.54 crore and undue benefit  to
NDSL', was first received as a draft para from the Audit on 01.10.2009, the review of
which was done by the Ministry on 08.03.2010. Subsequently, the Ministry sent their
reply conveying disagreement with audit observations on 10.02.2010 after about
4 months of receiving draft para for the first time.
11. The Sub-Committee during the course of examination of the subject learnt that
the revised ATNs were sent to Audit finally on 17th September, 2010 apparently after
the Sub-Committee took up this subject for examination. Then the Sub-Committee
sought specific reasons for delay in sending the revised Action Taken Notes to  Audit

3
on 17th September, 2010 despite being fully aware of the fact that A TNs were to be
furnished within 4 months from the date of laying of Audit Report on the Table of
House. The Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs in his deposition before the
Committee stated:
‘‘Our apologies, Sir. But it was sent on the 17th of September, 2010.’’
12. Further, in their written reply it was added as under:
''......It may be observed that major delay has occurred as a result of disagreement
of the Ministry with the Audit Observations, as also disagreement of the Audit
with the views of the Ministry during the process of vetting of the A TN. The
Final ATN was sent after recording the vetted comments of the Audit in a separate
Column VI(B) in the ATN with replies of the Ministry/SEBI thereto.....''
13. Asked whether any responsibility was ever fixed for not furnishing revised
Action Taken Notes on the pending audit paragraphs within the stipulated time, the
Department of Economic Affairs in their written note submitted thus:
''There has been no case of not furnishing revised ATNs in the DEA and as such
no action has arisen for fixing of any responsibility there for.''
14. The Committee then desired to know the mechanism devised or proposed in this
regard by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) to ensure timely
submission of Action Taken Notes within the stipulated time-frame of four months and
whether any constraints and difficulties were encountered/anticipated in this regard.
The Ministry, in a written note explained as under:
''The Department of Expenditure lays down the overall guidelines/mechanism
for ensuring timely submission of ATN within stipulated time for all Ministries/
Departments of GoI. The Department of Economic Affairs complies with these
guidelines. The submission of ATNs by the concerned Divisions in regularly
monitored in DEA by the Financial Advisor. A quarterly Report on the status of
Audit Paras is furnished to Department of Expenditure. A Standing Audit
Committee under the Chairpersonship of Finance Secretary has been constituted
in August, 2010 to monitor and review the submission of ATNs on a monthly
basis. The major constraint that is faced in adhering to the stipulated time schedule
for replying to Audit Paras relates to obtaining the required  information sought
from various other entities/Departments etc. in time.''
III. Unfruitful Expenditure of Investors Money*
15. One of the important paragraphs* is Paragraph No. 8.2 of the Report of the
C&AG of India No.CA-15 of 2008-09 — relating to 'Unfruitful Expenditure of Investors
Money'. Out of the pending Audit Paragraphs with the Department of Economic Affairs,
the Sub-Committee decided to examine this para in regard to the compliance of the
Ministry to the Audit observations/suggestions contained therein as well as the overall
status of the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to be furnished by the Ministry.
Since at the time of commencement of the examination of this subject, the above Audit
*Para No. 8.2 of Audit Report No. CA-15 of 2008-09.

4
Para did not reach the stage of finality, the Sub-Committee decided to inquire in detail
the above-mentioned paragraph. However, during the course of the examination of the
subject, the Sub-Committee learnt that this particular Audit Para was finally sent to the
Audit on 17.09.2010, five days prior to holding of the oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Finance and the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).
16. The Audit paragraph brings out a case of  award of a data base preparation work
by SEBI without competitive bidding and before conducting elaborate and exhaustive
due-diligence such as seeking comments of all the stake-holders like individual
investors, approved intermediaries, Bankers to an issue, collective investment schemes,
credit rating agencies, custodians of securities, debenture trustees, depositories,
depository participants, investor associations, merchant bankers, mutual funds,
portfolio managers, registrars and share transfer agents, stock exchanges, underwriters
and venture capital funds.
17. The Sub-Committee learnt that this ‘Central Database of Securities Market
Participants' and Investors Identification Number (MAPIN) was notified by SEBI on
20.11.2003 under the SEBI (Central Database of Market Participants) Regulations,
2003. It involved collection and maintenance of data in respect of the participants such
as demographic details, biometric impressions and digital photographs.
18. Further the Sub-Committee were informed that SEBI prepared a comprehensive
discussion paper regarding creation of the database after studying the practices and
systems prevalent in other countries. It awarded the work of MAPIN to the National
Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL) in May, 2003 through a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU), without any competitive bidding. As per the MoU, market
participants were required to deposit registration fees of Rs. 300 each with SEBI, which
was to be passed on to NSDL at periodic intervals based on the number of cards
issued by it. The exact basis on which the rate of Rs. 300 was fixed was not available in
the records of SEBI.
19. Audit scrutiny has revealed that SEBI placed the discussion paper on the website
and asked the participants to send them their feedback by September 20, 2003 i.e. four
months after awarding the work to NSDL, SEBI stated therein that the comments from
the market participants and the public would help it to impart a final shape to the idea
of creation of a central database of market participants. Several representations were
received from intermediaries, market participants, companies etc. expressing
apprehensions about the database. The database was launched in November, 2003
and till June 2005 only abot three lakh MAPIN Unique Identification Number had been
issued compared to over 70 lakh demat accounts. The amount collected by issuing of
3 lakh MAPIN UINs, as stated by Audit stood at Rs. 11.54 crore (at the rate of Rs. 300
per investor)
However, during the course of oral evidence, it was intimated by the representatives
of SEBI that the actual registrations were more than 3 lakh. To be precise, the
representatives is stated that the total registration was 3.84,000. The total natural
persons were 3,12,000 and as such SEBI registered intermediaries as 8.600 and other
corporate bodies as 63,000.

5
20. Audit also pointed out the SEBI had set up in March, 2005 a committee to
re-examine issues relating to MAPIN which concluded that the present system should
not be continued due to investors' concerns relating to fingerprints, multiple IDs, the
high cost of obtaining the UINs and the inadequate reach of the system.
In the light of these recommendations, SEBI suspended in July, 2005 all fresh
registrations and the requirement of UIN under the MAPIN regulations and made a
total payment of Rs. 11.54 crore collected from the participants to NSDL. From
April, 2007 onwards, PAN numbers were mandated as the sole identification number
for all participants in the securities market. The database was lying idle with NSDL as
of date.
21. In response to the Audit Observation, the Ministry had stated in
December, 2008 that MAPIN was undertaken on a pilot basis and it was operationalised
initially for a small set of participants and its coverage was gradually extended. They
further stated that the work was awarded to NSDL after assessing its suitability.
22. Not agreeing with the Ministry's stand, the Audit had brought out that this reply
was an afterthought as these facts were not available in the records made available to
audit and the MoU entered into between M/s. NSDL and SEBI did not indicate the fact
that MAPIN was undertaken initially on pilot basis. Further, the reply was also silent
about the basis of fixation of rate of Rs. 300 per participant which was finalized neither
on competitive basis nor through negotiation. The Ministry also did not agree with the
Audit conclusions stating that the feedback/comments received on the discussion
paper were very general in nature and did not express any apprehension about the
feasibility of the data itself.
(a) Awarding of a database preparation work in favour of NSDL by SEBI without
Competitive Bidding
23. The Sub-Committee wanted to know about the criteria adopted by SEBI for
selection of National Securities Depositories Ltd. (NSDL) as the service provider for
creation of Central Database of Securities Market Participants and Investors
Identification Number (MAPIN) and also the reasons why the procedure of competitive
bidding was not adopted before awarding the work to NSDL. The Chairman, SEBI
while deposing before the Sub-Committee stated:
".....What SEBI needed at that time was an entity which could be entrusted with
the management of a large database because at that time the project was envisaged
to have something like 75 to 80 lakh account details, names, fingerprints and so
on and there were not too many entities in the market who could handle such
large data bases. The other requirement was that the database was of a confidential
nature. So we could not just give it to anybody in the market. Obviously, SEBI
was far more comfortable giving it to a regulated entity so that SEBI has the
ability to take any action in case something went wrong. So, SEBI came to the
conclusion that NSDL and CDSL, the two depositories seem to be the entities
that needed to be examined in this aspect. SEBI came to the conclusion that
NSDL was handling a far larger database. The matter was considered by a

6
Committee of Executive Directors in SEBI and then it was later put up to the
Board."
He further submitted:
"Accordingly, a MoU was signed with the National Security Depositories Limited
(NSDL) after SEBI came to the conclusion that NSDL would be the correct entity
to handle this..............."
24. Subsequently, the Sub-Committee in this regard were informed by the Ministry
in a written note as under:
"(a) Following were the evaluation criteria followed by the Committee of Executive
Directors (CoED) for selection of NSDL as the service provider. The same was
also placed before the SEBI Board after which the MoU was signed with NSDL.
(i) Credibility of the institution.
(ii) Promoters of the institution.
(iii) Relative experience in establishing, upgrading and operating huge
databases.
(iv) Ability to maintain confidentiality.
(v) Quality of key personnel and operating staff.
(vi) Compliance standards with regulatory requirements.
At the time of allotting the work to NSDL, NSDL was largely owned (to the extent
of 82%) by public sector financial institutions and UTI. And that time it already
had experience in handling large databases of similar nature.
(b)The other agency that was considered was Central Depository Services Ltd.
(CDSL).
(c) Competitive bidding was not resorted to as this type of job was being done
in our country for the first time and no organization had actual execution
experience. SEBI chose NSDL as it was the organization which, in the combined
wisdom of Executive Directors at SEBI, was most suited based on the criteria
enumerated in (a) above."
25. The Sub-Committee desired to know from the Department of Economic Affairs
about the justification of SEBI entering into a contract with NSDL without seeking
public comments on the issue. The Ministry, in this regard intimated to the
Sub-Committee through a written note as under:
"At that point of time when the exercise was undertaken first of its kind in our
country and there was no precedence to be followed as a guide. Some preparatory
time for setting up the infrastructure, acquiring software and hardware for the
said registrations were required by NSDL. Further, it was planned by SEBI that
the infrastructure for registration should be in place at the time of notification of
the regulations to save time and early implementation of MAPIN."

7
26. On a clarification whether the implementation of the MAPIN Project was on a
pilot basis or a policy decision, the representatives of the SEBI during evidence stated:
"......... The first question that was raised was with regard to whether this was a
pilot project or not. I think, what SEBI had done was that it had decided this
project would be implemented in phases."
In a related context, the Ministry also stated in their Background Note that it was a
policy decision and not the project which required feasibility study. They also informed
that this policy decision was taken in the backdrop of JPC recommendation and after
extensive study of international practices and consultation with the regulator and
public.
27. The Sub-Committee's examination of the subject revealed that MAPIN was
introduced/executed on a recommendation of Joint Parliamentary Committee (JPC) on
'Stock Markets Scam and matters relating thereto' which was presented to Parliament
on 19.12.2002.
(b) Constraints faced in implementation of  MAPIN Project
28. The Committee were given to understand that due to various issues which arose
during the implementation including resistance by the market participants to the use of
biometric identification, cost of obtaining UIN, coverage of investor categories etc. a
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri Jagdish Capoor, former Dy. Governor, RBI
Jagdish Capoor Committee set up on 07.03.2005. The Committee submitted its report
on 23.06.2005. The report was put up on website for public comments for the period
28.06.2005 - 15.07.2005. Pending a view on this report, the issue of fresh MAPIN was
suspended from July 1, 2005.
Based on the recommendations and public comments, amendment to MAPIN
regulations was put up to SEBI Board in its meeting on December 30, 2005. The Board
while approving the same said that those agencies capable of providing such facilities
in a cost effective manner will be assigned the responsibility of maintaining the database
(PR dated 30.12.2005). Consequently, an 'Implementation Committee' on MAPIN was
formed under the chairmanship of Prof. Sadgopan on 27.12.2006 to examine the need
for a biometric based MAPIN and to identify a new Designated Service Provider
through a tendering process.
29. Asked about the type of resistance noticed by the market participants to the use
of biometric identification, cost of obtaining Unique Identification Number (UIN),
coverage of investors categories etc., the Ministry informed the Committee through a
written reply as under:
"The concerns of the market participants with regard to the various issues
related to MAPIN registrations are as under:
Finger printing: Finger printing was perceived, by and large, as an invasion of
privacy and often associated with identification of criminals and thus a humiliating
experience. It also militates free market spirit. There was also concerns about the
security of finger prints data.

8
Multiple IDs: Investors questioned the need of yet another capital market ID
besides DP Client ID and Unique Client Codes. This is in addition to the several
IDs that a person has-PAN, Passport Number, Bank Account Number/s, Voter
Identity and Driving License.
Cost: The cost of obtaining UIN of Rs. 300 was considered high by the market
participants when seen in conjunction with further indirect costs like DD charge,
travel/conveyance (multiple visits) etc.
Reach: The infrastructure and reach of Point of Service (PoS) was considered
inadequate, leading to hardships and indirect costs to the investors. Moreover,
the biometric system required presence of the persons, for taking IDs. This made
it difficult for a section of the investing class like senior citizens, physically
challenged persons etc.".
(c) Suspension of MAPIN Project and subsequent substitution with PAN
30. The Sub-Committee was informed by the Ministry that while the 'Implementation
Committee' was found to identify a new Service Provider and assess the need for a
biometric based MAPIN, the Budget Speech announcement 2007-08 made PAN the
sole identification number which was mandatory for all participants for transactions in
the securities market. The Sadgopan Committee then deliberated on the issue of making
PAN the sole identification number and recommended that the responsibility may be
cast on the concerned intermediary to verify the details of PAN with IT website and
authenticate the same.
31. When the Sub-Committee enquired about the reasons for suspending MAPIN
which led to a wasteful expenditure of Rs. 11.54 incurred by the SEBI, the Chairman,
SEBI explaining the position, stated in Oral evidence as under:
".........the project never reached the stage where it was actually made applicable
to retail investors. So, no retail investor was required by SEBI to register under
MAPIN. Before that only all these events took over and ultimately MAPIN was
suspended."
He further elaborated as under:
"The question raised also is whether the fingerprint was the only reason why
people resisted. I think that was the major concern that people had. There were
other issues that were raised by people which were more practical in nature. For
example, when SEBI asked that intermediary employees should register, there
was also a requirement that the immediate relatives also need to register because
people do not trade in their own name. They typically trade in the name of either
the wife or the son and so on. So what should be the extent of this coverage,
those kinds of issues were also raised. But the main issue that resulted in a lot of
resistance to this scheme was fingerprints."
32. Asked to state specifically whether any action had been initiated against those
responsible for the loss of public money and how would the Ministry make amends for
the loss of amounting to Rs. 11.54 crore caused due to suspension of MAPIN system

9
in July, 2005, the Ministry informed that this exercise was undertaken for the first time
in our country and there was no benchmark applicable/available that could be followed.
They also informed that there were no malafides in the decision. Further, the implementing
agency—NSDL had done its job by providing registration as required therefore it had
done its part. However, as the project was abandoned midway the registrations were of
no use. There was no loss to SEBI or Government of India. The amount of Rs. 300 per
registration was collected from around 3.84 lac investors and given to NSDL which
was registering, servicing and maintaining the database."
33. The Committee, then, desired to be apprised of the effective steps being taken
by SEBI to prevent irregularities, scams, frauds etc., such as tracking multiple
membership and others in the absence of MAPIN. In reply the Chairman, SEBI deposed
in evidence:—
".........The other thing we have done is that we have instructed the depositories
to carry out an analysis when they find that the same PAN number occurs in
different accounts on more than, say, two or three occasions. It may be that a
person has opened two or three accounts and if you find that PAN number
occurs in 30 accounts then something needs to be investigated. Then the
intermediaries are asked to do the Know  Your  Client (KYC) all over again for
that account. We also examine these accounts for PAN number being different
but the address being the same. Again a family staying in one place can have a
common address and PAN numbers will be different. But that will be five or ten.
But if you find that 100 people have the same address and different PAN numbers
then you need to look into it. So, we have put in various mechanisms to see that
the purpose that JPC had in mind should still be fulfilled and our process of
protecting the investors should not get affected just because MAPIN has gone
out of the way. Nothing is 100 per cent foolproof, but we are reducing the
possibility of somebody doing this."
34. In response to a query on putting in place a system of proper checks and
balances and internal control mechanism to track multiple memberships and safe
guarding the interests of the investors, the Ministry in a written note elucidated as
under:—
(i) PAN is mandatory to be furnished at the time of opening of demat account.
(ii) All fresh and existing demat account to furnish PAN number.
(iii) All PAN non-complaint accounts have been frozen.
(iv) In-person verification to establish the identity of the applicant is mandatory.
(v) Copy of the PAN card provided by the applicant is validated with the original
card and also checked with Income Tax Department website.
(vi) The system of the depositories is built in such a manner that it identifies
multiple accounts with identical PAN.

10
(vii) No cred its or debits other than automatic corporate action are allowed in a
PAN non-complaint demat account. Now even corporate action credits are
not allowed in PAN non-complaints account.
(viii) The Unique Client Code (UCC) allotted by the broker to the client is mapped
with the PAN number of the client.
(ix) It is mandatory to mention PAN number for applying in Public issues. The
applications without PAN number are rejected.
(x) The PAN number provided in the application is checked with the depository
database. The application is liable for rejection if the same does not match.
35. In regard to the internal control mechanism to effectively control and regulate
the securities market, the Ministry in a Post-Evidence Reply have informed the Sub-
Committee that the steps taken by SEBI inter-alia includes Rules, Regulation, Guidelines
registration and Supervision of intermediaries, Strengthened Surveillance mechanism
by setting IMSS in SEBI, Closed coordination and regular interaction with stock
exchanges in the matters of surveillance, Regular oversight of stock exchanges and
intermediaries and Investigation. They also stated that the measures taken by SEBI to
effectively control and regulate securities market are continuously evaluated and vary
with the need of the market.
36. When asked to state categorically how could the SEBI protect the interest of the
investors in the absence of MAPIN specially keeping in view of the fact that this
system was put in place consequent to the recommendation of Joint Parliamentary
Committee (JPC) on stock market scam and matters relating thereto and also this was
very sophisticated system like Central Registration Depository System of US-NASD-R
(now FINRA). In reply, the Chairman, SEBI elaborated in evidence as under:—
"JPC had not suggested any specific system of identify. SEBI had planned to
introduce MAPIN as the identification system based on its study of identification
systems in developed market. However as explained in answers to other
questions due to issues associated with MAPIN as also with the announcement
that PAN should be used as identity MAPIN was discontinued. And PAN was
made sole identification number despite the fact that there are challenges with
regard to having PAN which is a non-biometric based ID as the sole identification
number due to exemptions granted to a section of population i.e. residents of
Sikkim and few entities having multiple PAN cards, PAN was still made the sole
identification number........ ."
(d) Unique Identification Number—'Aadhar' Scheme
37. During the course of examination of the subject, the Sub-Committee observed
that PAN was not a fool-proof system in safeguarding the interests of the investors
and other stake-holders. They were also informed that SEBI will consider alternative
Unique Identification Number to effectively control and regulate securities market.

11
The Ministry in this connection informed the Sub-Committee through a written note as
under:—
"SEBI will consider adopting the Unique Identification (UID) Number, an initiative
(Aadhar) recently undertaken by Government of India which is also biometric
and is issued with the purpose of establishing the identity of the citizen. However,
an alternate for such unique number needs to be deliberated with regard to
corporate, NRIs etc."
38. In another context, the Ministry  in a written note intimated as follows:—
"As observed by Jagdish Capoor Committee, one of the reasons for which
MAPIN met with resistance was the lack of investor education about the system.
More than 5 years after discontinuation of MAPIN, now GoI has taken up the
initiative 'Aadhar' to put in place a Unique Identification  Number which is similar
to MAPIN of capturing biometric impression. When 'Aadhar' is fully implemented
it can be explored to move from the current system of PAN card after following a
consultative process with all the stakeholders in the securities market. As per
the present proposal of GoI, 'Aadhar' is meant only for citizens where in case of
financial market transactions identity needs to be established for corporates as
well."
(e) Safeguarding data and return of money
39. The Sub-Committee observed that it was the onerous duty of SEBI to look into
the aspects of checking the misuse of the data of 3.84 lakhs persons whose identity
was still in possession of NSDL in the form of biometric identification. When asked
whether SEBI was keeping the data secured so as to avoid its misuse, the Chairman,
SEBI, stated as under:—
"The data is still with NSDL. Frankly speaking, we do not see much use for that
data except for the intermediaries' data. We are looking at whether the
intermediaries' data can be put to some use."
40. In response to a query on feasibility of returning the collected money of back to
the investors, the Chairman, SEBI stated during evidence:—
"The money has already been paid to NSDL."
Further, the Chairman, SEBI also stated:
"NSDL made capital expenditure. It wrote the software which is of no use today.
It cannot use it."
41. Not satisfied with the reasoning adduced by the Department in the evidence,
the Sub-Committee enquired whether it would be appropriate for SEBI to refund the
collected amount of Rs. 300 each to the investors since the project was abandoned. In
reply, the Chairman, SEBI while tendering the evidence stated as under:—
"To return the money we will have to recover it from NSDL when they will ask
and say: 'Look. I had set up the infrastructure for your project. Y ou decided to
abandon it halfway. How am I responsible for this?'..."

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS
1. The Public Accounts Committee pursuant to the recommendations made in
their 105th Report (10th Lok Sabha) devised a procedure whereby the Ministries/
Departments were required to furnish Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes to
the Committee on the Audit Paragraphs which were not formally selected and taken
up for detailed examination by the Committee. From March, 1996 furnishing of such
Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were made time-bound and were to be
furnished within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports in Parliament. To
regulate and implement this system of checks and balances Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) was entrusted to be the Nodal Agency for furnishing
these notes to the Public Accounts Committee for their perusal. The Notes once
received by the PAC Secretariat from Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell),
are then forwarded to Audit for categorizing them into three parts viz., 'Accepted',
'Not Accepted' and 'Partially Accepted'. Once categorized, these Notes are then
circulated to the Chairman and Members of the PAC for their perusal. If no concerns
are raised by the Members, the Audit Paragraphs then reach the stage of finality.
2. The Public Accounts Committee (2009-10) of the 15th Lok Sabha took a serious
view on the large number of pending Audit Paragraphs on which Remedial/Corrective
ATNs were not furnished by Ministries/Departments. They constituted a
Sub-Committee especially on this subject which examined several Ministries/
Departments and a total of Eight Reports were presented to Parliament on the subject.
The Committee are perturbed to note that even after the intervention through the
examination of this subject during 2009-10, the overall picture in regard to the
pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes remains dismal. As per information
furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) 4191 Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes were pending as on 25th June, 2010. The Audit also
supplied a figure in this regard which stated that a total of 3462 Paragraphs were
pending with all the Ministries as of 31st May, 2010. Out of these, the Committee
note that 2418 paras were pending with different Departments of the Ministry of
Finance. The Committee also note that as stated by Department of Expenditure, a total
of 10 paras were pending with the Department of Economic Affairs. However, the
number of pending paras of this Department (Economic Affairs) as intimated to the
Committee during the course of examination of the subject stood at 14. The Committee,
therefore, would like to be apprised of correct figures in regard to the number of
pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes as supplied by the Department of
Expenditure and Audit. Also taking serious note of the delay/negligence on the part of
the Department of Economic Affairs, the Committee would like to be intimated about
the specific reasons of delay for each of these pending paragraphs. The Committee
further recommend that the issue of pendency of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
Notes be reviewed on a quarterly basis by the departmental Secretary and the result
of such review brought  to the notice of the Minister in charge invariably under
intimation to the Committee.
12

13
3. Against the backdrop of  huge pendency of the Remedial/Corrective Action
Taken Notes with different Ministries/Departments, the Public Accounts Committee
(2010-11) again took up this subject for examination. The Committee were informed
of the elaborate mechanism which is in place in the Department of Economic Affairs
to ensure timely submission of ATNs within the stipulated time frame of 4 months.
Nevertheless, the Committee are constrained to note that the number of pending
paras within the Ministry of Finance stands at 2418 on 25th June, 2010 and the
Department of Economic Affairs could not furnish the ATNs within the stipulated
time  frame of 4 months. In his own statement the Secretary, Department of Economic
Affairs has intimated to the Committee  that Department of Expenditure has laid down
guidelines for ensuring timely submission of  ATNs. Such submission is regularly
monitored in the DEA by the Financial Adviser and a Quarterly Report on the status
of the pending paras is furnished to the Department of Expenditure. In this regard,
the Committee have also been informed that a Standing Audit Committee under the
Chairmanship of Finance Secretary has been constituted in August, 2010 to monitor
and review the submission of ATNs on a monthly basis. The Committee have also been
informed that the major constraints faced by the DEA in adhering to the  stipulated
time frame for replying to the Audit Paras is in obtaining the required information
from other entities/departments in time. In this regard, the Committee would
recommend that Ministry should remove this bottleneck by devising a mechanism for
timely procuring of the information  from entities/departments in order to enable
them to adhere to the time-line of four months for furnishing Remedial/Corrective
Action Taken Notes.
4. What is baffling to the Committee is the fact that even after monthly appraisals
of the status of pending ATNs by high Government functionaries such a large number
of Audit paras are found to be pending within the Ministry of Finance itself and also in
the DEA. As the situation stands now, the Committee, recommend that all the 14
pending Audit paragraphs within the Department of Economic Affairs be settled within
one month of the presentation of this Report  to the Parliament under intimation to
the Committee and due care should be taken in future to obviate such instances of
delay in finalising the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes.
5. In view of the pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee
thought it prudent to examine at least one case out of the Audit paragraphs pending
with Department of Economic Affairs. Accordingly, the Committee selected Paragraph
No. 8.2 of the Report of the C&AG of India No. CA 15 of  2008-09 relating to 'Unfruitful
Expenditure of Investors Money (SEBI)'.
6. Audit Report No. CA 15 of 2008-09 in which Para No. 8.2 on SEBI figures, was
presented to Parliament on 24th July, 2009. The DEA have stated that this para was
first received as a draft  para from  the Audit on 01.10.2009 and the review of the same
was done by the Ministry on 08.03.2010. The Ministry then sent their reply conveying
this disagreement with Audit observations  on 10.02.2010 and the revised ATNs were
finally sent to Audit on 17.09.2010. The Committee do not understand that the Report
which was presented to Parliament on 24th July, 2009 first  reached Ministry on
01.10.2009 after a delay of little over two months. The Ministry sent their reply to
Audit on 10.02.2010 after a delay of almost four months of receiving of the draft para

14
for the first time. The Committee note that this exercise of sending the documents
back and forthwith Audit continued and this para was finally sent to Audit on 17.09.2010
noticeably after a delay of almost 14 months, whereas the time-line prescribes a
period of four months for settlement of the para. It is apparent  that progress in the
settling of the para was made only after the Committee took up the subject for
examination. Such an indifferent attitude on the part of the Ministry of Finance,
which is the watch-dog Ministry as far as audit objections are  concerned is cause for
concern. In this regard, the Committee recommend that DEA should take up the
matter with the Audit urgently so as to obtain copies of the Audit Reports immediately
after their presentation to Parliament and gear up their internal  mechanism to settle
Audit paras within prescribed time frame.
7. The Committee observe that the Central Database of Securities Market
Participants'  and Investors Identification Numbers (MAPIN) was put in place by
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) consequent to a recommendation of
Joint Parliamentary Committee (JPC) on 'Stock Markets Scam and matters relating
thereto' which was presented to Parliament on 19th December, 2002. The system at
the time  was state-of-the-art in nature as  it was based on advanced data base systems
in other countries and in particular the US on Central Registrations Depository
System of US-NASD-R (now FINRA). This system was concerned to check
irregularities and shortcomings in the stock market operations and was meant to
cover 75 to 80 lakh account details. In its outreach the system intended to cover
approved intermediaries, Bankers to an issue, collective investment schemes, credit
rating agencies, custodians of securities, debenture trustees, depositories, depository
participants, investor associations, merchant bankers, mutual funds, portfolio
managers, registrars and share transfer agents, stock exchanges, underwriters and
venture capital funds etc. in nutshell, the system covered all stake-holders concerning
stock market transactions.
8. The Committee further note that the work in regard to this system was awarded
to National Securities Depository Ltd. (NDSL) through a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) without any competitive bidding. They also note that MAPIN
was notified by SEBI on 20.11.2003 under the SEBI (Central Database of Market
Participants) Regulations, 2003.
9. However, the before entering into a contract with NDSL, no suggestions were
invited from the stake-holders on the MAPIN system especially when it involved
collection and maintenance of data in respect of the participants such as  their
demographic details, biometric impressions and digital photographs. Although there
is no doubt that SEBI's decision was actuated and motivated by a desirable objective
and was taken bonafide, larger consultations with stake-holders would have been
beneficial. The Committee, however, deplore the manner in which this contract was
awarded to NSDL in haste. Had SEBI exercised due dilligence by inviting
the suggestions from all the stake-holders prior to awarding  the contract, they
could have obviated such a situation which led to infructuous expenditure of
Rs. 11.54 crore.
10. It is brought out in the inquiry that there was another player in the field namely
Central Depository Services Ltd.  (CDSL). The view presented by DEA/SEBI that the

15
type of job in  question was being undertaken for the first time in the country  and that
no organization had actual execution experience should have been on ground for
extra care in deciding the issue of award of contract. DEA/SEBI could not satisfy the
Committee as regards the basis for recovery of  Rs. 300 per registration from the
stakeholders. However, considering that the exercise appear to be bonafide and actuated
by consultations for ensuring transparency in stock market transactions and that
NSDL a public sector institution of credibility was awarded the contract, the Committee
is content with observing that for the future credible, purposive and transparent
mechanism for awarding contract should be devised which would ensure the best
quality of service at a competitive and market driven price.
11. The Committee note that the eventual suspension of MAPIN let to a wasteful
expenditure  of Rs. 11.54 crore collected from 3.84 lakh investors. During the course
of examination of the subject, the Committee have been given to understand by DEA/
SEBI/ that SEBI did not lose any money. Even if this be so, the fact remains that the
various stake-holders were meant to part with registration fee for a specific purpose,
the benefit  of which did not accrue either to SEBI or to the stake-holders.
12. The Committee note  with concern that the infrastructure (both hardware and
software) and the data inventory collected by NSDL is still idling with the company
which is no more a service provider for MAPIN as this project has already been
suspended and there are no assurances given either by the DEA or the SEBI regarding
its recommencement. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the infrastructure
and the DATA inventory should be secured by SEBI without any further delay and put
in safe custody so that it is not misused in any dellinquent manner.
13. The Committee have been given to understand that SEBI will be exploring an
alternative scheme akin to MAPIN for further safeguarding the interests of the
investors and other stake-holders. The Committee recommend that after the
abandonment of the MAPIN scheme for reasons brought out above. SEBI should
formulate a concrete proposal and perhaps suitably adapt the Unique Identification
Number (UID) — 'Aadhar' Scheme to their optimum benefit. All technicalities such
as identity needs to be established for corporate entities in addition to individual
entities should be worked out well in advance including seeking public opinion through
newspapers/websites etc. by SEBI so that maximum benefit of this scheme can be
obtained when it reaches the implementation stage. The Committee would like this to
become one of the priorities for SEBI as it would not only safeguard the interests of
the market participants but accord credibility to SEBI as well. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the initiatives taken in this regard.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
21 February, 2011 Chairman,
2 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11) ON "NON-COMPLIANCE BY THE
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION
TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED PARAGRAPHS OF THE
C&AG OF INDIA HELD ON 22ND SEPTEMBER, 2010
The Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Wednesday, the
22nd September, 2010 from 1445 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'B', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Kalraj Mishra
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit
2. Shri Kulwant Singh — Director (Audit)
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
1. Shri Ashok Chawla — Secretary
2. Shri Bimal Julka — Director General (Currency) &
Additional Secretary
3. Shri Thomas Mathew — Joint Secretary
4. Shri C.S. Mohapatra — Director (RE)
Officers from Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
1. Shri C.B. Bhave — Chairman, SEBI
2. Shri J.N. Gupta — Executive Director
3. Shri S.V . Murli Dhar Rao — Chief General Manager
16

17
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor, Sub-Committee I of the Public Accounts
Committee welcomed the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India to the
sitting of the Sub-Committee. The Convenor then informed the Members that the
sitting has been convened for taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) on the subject relating to "Non-compliance
by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the
Non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India". The Convenor also informed the
Members that the meeting will proceed with a discussion on para 8.2 on 'Unfruitful
Expenditure of Investor's money' of Audit Report No. CA 15 of 2008-09.
3. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on
the various issues concerning the subject on "Non-compliance by the Ministries/
Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected
Paragraphs of the C&AG of India".
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) and the Officers from Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) were
called in and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-committee. The
Chairman, SEBI then briefly explained their viewpoint on the audit Para and later
replied to various queries of the Members. As some queries required detailed and
statistical information, the Convenor, directed the Chairman SEBI to furnish written
replies thereon. The Secretary, Ministry of Finance Department of Economic Affairs,
too briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiative taken by their Ministry in timely
submission of Audit paragraph to the C&AG of India.
5. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs) and officers from SEBI for appearing before the
Sub-Committee and for furnishing information in connection with the examination of
the subject. The Convenor also thanked Officers of the C&AG of India for providing
assistance to the Sub-Committee in the examination of the subject.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD ON 3RD FEBRUARY , 2011
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3rd February, 2011 from 1130 hrs. to
1250 hrs. in Room No. '62', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Ramen Deka
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Yashwant Sinha
7. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
8. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri K. Sudhakaran
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri N. Balaganga
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Kalraj Mishra
15. Shri N.K. Singh
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
18

19
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri R.S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit
(Central Expenditure)
2. Shri C.M. Sane — Pr. Director of Audit (Air Force & Navy)
3. Ms. Ahladini — Director, (Central Expenditure)
4. Shri Bhawani Shankar — Director, (Economic Service & Ministries)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised
that the meeting was convened to consider six Draft Reports of the Committee.
Accordingly, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
( i ) ** ** ** ** ** **
(ii) Draft Report on "Unfruitful Expenditure of Investors Money—SEBI"
(Ministry of Finance—Department of Economic Affairs) based on Para
No. 8.2 of C&AG Report No. CA15 of 2008-09;
(iii) ** ** ** ** ** **
(iv) ** ** ** ** ** **
(v) ** ** ** ** ** **
(vi) ** ** ** ** ** **
3. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports mentioned at
Sl. Nos. (i) to (v) with some modifications/amendments. While considering the Draft
Reports mentioned at Sl. Nos. (iv) and (v), the Committee desired that the C&AG
should conduct thorough audit of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes by devising a
suitable mechanism in consultation with the Ministry of Finance so as to assure that
the funds released by the Union to the States are spent in the prescribed manner to
meet the intended objectives. The Committee also underlined the need for another
audit of the Mid Day Meal Scheme in the six defaulting States namely Kerala, Jharkhand,
Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Nagaland and Bihar. The Chairman requested the
Members to give their respective suggestions to the Audit in this regard.
4. ** ** ** ** ** **
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the five Reports adopted by
them, in light of their suggestions and the factual verifications received from the Audit
and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
** Matter does not pertain to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—9LS—09-05-2011.