i 
 
     73 
NEGLIGENT SCRUTINY OF CLAIMS LEADING 
TO EXCESS PAYMENT  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-first Report (15th Lok Sabha)] 
  
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2012-13) 
 
 
SEVENTY-THIRD  REPORT 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  


ii 
 
PAC NO. 2000 
 
SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT 
     
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2012-13) 
     
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
  
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-first Report (15th Lok Sabha)] 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 21.03.2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 21.03.2013 
 
 
 
L O K    S A B H A    S E C R E T A R I A T 
N E W  D E L H I  
 
March, 2013/    Phalguna 1934 (Saka) 
NEGLIGENT SCRUTINY OF CLAIMS LEADING 
TO EXCESS PAYMENT  
 

iii 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  
COMMITTEE (2012-13)      
(iii) 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………............…………………….. 
  
(v) 
CHAPTER I              
  
Report ……………………………………………… 1 
*CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government …………… 
 
6 
 
*CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
replies received from Government  ………… 
 
 
12 
 
*CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration ………………………………………….. 
 
 
13 
 
 
*CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which the Government have furnished interim 
replies………………………………………………… 
 
 
14 
 
APPENDICES 
 
*I 
 
Minutes of the Twenty -seventh sitting of Public 
Accounts Committee (2012 -13) held on  19 th March, 
2013 
 
 
*II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on 
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee contained in their Forty-first 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) 
 
 
   
 
 
* Not appended to the cyclostyled copy of the Report 
 

iv 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 
(2012-13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
* Elected w.e.f  6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on 28th 
October, 2012. 
† Elected w.e.f  6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on  
28th October, 2012. 
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  - Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul 
  3. Dr. Baliram 
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit 
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai  
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan  
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde 
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab 
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam 
10 Shri Shripad Yesso Naik 
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar 
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy 
14. Dr. Girija Vyas 
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav 
 RAJYA SABHA 
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee 
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra  
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy 
20. Shri J.D. Seelam 
21. Shri N.K. Singh 
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar  - Director 
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi - Deputy Secretary 

v 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012 -13), having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present this Seventy -third Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty -first Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Negligent scrutiny of claims leading to excess payment' 
relating to the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. 
2. The Forty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
19th December, 2011. Replies of the Government to the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 5 th November, 2012. 
The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted this Report at their 
sitting held on 19th March, 2013. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix- I.  
3. For facility of reference and convenience, t he Observations and 
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body 
of the Report. 
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance 
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Audito r 
General of India. 
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in the Forty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is 
given at Appendix-II. 
 
NEW DELHI;                                       DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI 
 19 March, 2013                                                                                                   Chairman, 
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)                                            Public Accounts Committee. 
 

CHAPTER - I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Forty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ' Negligent scrutiny of claims leading 
to excess payment' based on Paragraph No. 7.1, Chapter VII of Audit Report No. CA 2 
of 2008 relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
 
The Forty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha), which  was presented to Lok Sabha 
on 19 th December, 2011, containe d 6 Observations and Recommendations. Action 
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and Recommendations have been 
received from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and are broadly categorized 
as under: 
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: 
 
Para Nos.1-5 
Total: 5 
Chapter - II 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies received from the Government:   
 
-NIL- 
Total: Nil 
Chapter - III 
 
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration: 
 
-NIL- 
 
                                   Total: Nil 
Chapter - IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect o f which Government have furnished 
interim replies: 
 
Para No. 6 
Total: 1 

-2- 
 
 
 
Chapter - V 
2. Taking cognizance of the huge pendency, the Public Accounts Committee 
constituted a Sub -Committee during 2010 -11 to examine the Ministries/Departments 
who defaulted in furnishing the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes within the 
prescribed timeframe.  The Committee thereafter decided to examine the position in 
respect of Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. 
 
3. In the course of examination of pendency, the Committee found that in addition 
to pendency regarding submission of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes, there 
was discrepancy with respect to pendency figures.  Alongwith examination of this issue, 
the Committee had also taken up Para No. 7.1 of Chapter VII of Audit Report No. CA 2 
of 2008 for detailed examination during the year 2010 -11.  Urging the Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Expenditure to reconcile the figures in consultation with the 
Audit and Ministry of Information & Broadcasting to ensure nil pend ency, the Committee 
had made their observations on the detailed examination of Audit Para and had given 
their recommendations thereon, in the Forty-first Report (15th Lok Sabha).  
 
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in their Forty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant 
Chapters of this Report.  In the ensuing paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the 
Action Taken by the Government on their Observations and Recommendations made in 
the Original Report which merit comments.   The Committee desire that Government 
should furnish final/conclusive action take n replies to the recommendation  for 
which interim reply has been furnished.  
 
A.    Recovery of excess money paid to BCCI  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
5. Audit Para No. 7.1 of Chapter-VII of Audit Report No. CA 2 of 2008, relating to 
the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting had highlighted  a case of loss of revenue to 
the tune of ` 3.39 crore due to an erroneous agreement signed between Prasar Bharati 

-3- 
 
 
 
and Board of Control for Cricket  in India (BCCI) on 30.11.2005 for the telecast of 12 
One Day International (ODI) Matches during October -November, 2005. According to 
clause 11 of the Agreement, the Prasar Bharati was to pay ` 7.50 crore to BCCI for 
each of the Match played. The Agreement also contained a rider wherein it was 
provided that in case a Match was not played for full duration , which according to Audit 
and based on the Sport Section Schedule provided by the Prasar Bharati was 'seven 
hours', on any day the amount of money to be paid was to be calculated in term s of the 
number of hours played . Clause 11 of the Agreement also stated that 'in case of lesser 
number of matches being played for any reason whatsoever, the consideration shall be 
reduced on a pro rata basis'. According to the Agreement, 'in case a game is not played 
for the full duration on any day for any reason whatsoever, the consideration for that day 
shall be calculated in proportion to the number of hours played'. In the event of a match 
being cancelled altogether, 'no consideration shall be payable'. The Committee had 
noted that ,on the contrary, the Agreement also provided that in terms of the stipulations 
of the International Cricket Council (ICC), a ball being bowled in a Match shall be 
deemed to be a Match having been played. Based on this analogy, the Committee had 
found that Prasar Bharati had not reduce d the payment f or five Matches which were 
held for less than the full duration of seven hours except for one cancelled Match and 
one match played at Mohali. The Committee were perturbed to note that such a patently 
erroneous Agreement was described by the Secretary, Mini stry of I&B simply as 'an 
unhappily drafted agreement'. The Committee had deplored that the Agreement, which 
caused pecuniary loss of ` 3.39 crore to the public exchequer, was not even vetted by 
legal authorities  which was, in fact, a reproduction of an earlier Agreement signed in 
2004 for a five -day Match series. The Committee had thus demanded explanation for 
such patently erroneous drafting  of agreement, recovery of the intentional loss caused 
to the public exchequer and stringent pe nal action against the officers involved with the 
finalization of the Agreement. The Committee had recommended that the process be 
commenced for the recovery of the amount overpaid to BCCI for the Matches which 
were played for less than seven hours duratio n as similar deduction was made for the 
Mohali Match. Further, the Ministry was exhorted to take foolproof measures to ensure 

-4- 
 
 
 
that agreements were drafted with utmost care and foresight and duly vetted legally to 
avoid any fiduciary loss to the Government. 
 
6. In this regard, the Ministry submitted the action taken as under: 
"Prasar Bharati has informed that the matter for recovery of excess amount has 
since been taken up by Prasar Bharati with the BCCI for refund. The BCCI has 
been asked to refund the excess amount of ` 3.39 crore paid earlier. The officers 
who signed and approved the draft agreement have since retired. Utmost care is 
now being taken to ensure that all the agreements signed with third parties are 
duly vetted by our standing Legal counsel with particular reference to the need to 
ensure that ambiguity of the kind which arose in the instant case does not recur". 
7. Pursuant to their recommendation, the Committee find that the Ministry has 
asked BCCI to refund the excess amount that has been paid by P rasar Bharati for 
the ODI Matches that were played during October-November 2005 and which were 
played for less than seven hours.  From the Action Taken Notes it is seen that the 
BCCI has been asked to refund but the outcome of this request has not been 
made available to the Committee.  The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the response of the BCCI in this regard and the payments made, if 
any.  The plea of the Ministry that 'officers who signed and approved 
the draft agreement have since retired ', is no t acceptable and 
therefore, the Committee reiterate that the officers responsible for 
fiduciary loss to the Government must be made accountable.   
B. Establishment of state-of-the-art filing and retrieval system 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
8. Prasar Bharati made a net gain of ` 26,81,47,402.00 for the said 11 Matches, yet 
the Ministry had failed to explain to the Committee as to what was the basis for fixing 
the rate of  `  7.5 crore paid to BCCI for each ODI Match. The Committee were shocked 
to learn  that 'no records were traceable in Prasar Bharati which could give details of 
fixation of this rate'. The Committee had decried such an outrageous plea of missing 
records and recommend ed that responsibility be fixed for the 'missing records' and all 

-5- 
 
 
 
out efforts be made to reconstruct the records. The Committee had also recommended 
that state-of-the-art filing and retrieval system be put in place within the Ministry as well 
as Prasar Bharati so that instances of this nature would not recur and transparency was 
brought in their functioning. 
 
9. Elaborating on the Action Taken in this regard, the Ministry has stated as under: 
 
"Prasar Bharati has informed that special efforts have been made to trace the 
relevant records.  It has been noted that the Prasar Bharati  Board approved a 
recommendation made by the Empowered Committee on Sports Rights (ECSR) 
in its meeting held on 21 st October 2005 to submit a bid to the BCCI for acquiring 
telecasting and broadcasting rights.  The decision was based on a detailed 
revenue e valuation exercise.  Subsequently, the ECSR approved fixation of a 
consideration amount of rights fee of ` 7.5 crores per ODI in respect of the 
Cricket Series in question.  Observations made by the Committee are noted for 
future guidance and inconvenience caused is regretted". 
 
10. Deploring the instance of 'missing/untraceable records' related to fixing the 
rate of ` 7.5 crore paid to BCCI for each ODI Match , t he Committee  had 
recommended for a state-of-the-art filing and retrieval system in the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and  Prasar Bharati  which would aid in 'good 
governance'.  Though the Ministry has taken cognizance of their 
observations for future guidance the  Committee desire that they be 
intimated of concrete remedial measures initiated by  the Ministry to 
prevent recurrence of such instances of missing/untraceable 
documents. The Committee further desire that responsibility be fixed 
for the failure to recover/retrace the relevant records.  
 
New Delhi                                                                           Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
19 March, 2013                            Chairman,  
28 Phalguna 1934(Saka)                         Public Accounts Committee 
 