  69
ACCELERATED RURAL WATER  SUPPLY
PROGRAMME (ARWSP)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-fifth
Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY  OF  DRINKING  WATER & SANITATION
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2012-2013
SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SIXTY-NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ACCELERATED RURAL WA TER  SUPPLY
PROGRAMME (ARWSP)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of  the
Committee contained in their Thirty-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY  OF  DRINKING WATER & SANITATION
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on: 16 January, 2013
Presented to Lok Sabha on ..............................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ..............................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
January, 2013/Pausa, 1934 (Saka)

PAC No. 1996
Price:  ` 45.00
© 2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.
SERVER4\E\REPORT 2013\4681LS\4681PRE

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)........................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ...................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  of  the  Committee  which
have been accepted by the Government ................................. 10
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government............................................................................. 29
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ................................................... 30
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which  the
Government have furnished interim replies ............................. 31
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 28th December, 2012....................... 34
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Thirty-fifth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) ................................................................................... 36
SERVER4\E\REPORT 2013\4681LS\4681PRE

COMPOSITION OF THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
  3. Dr. Baliram
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10 Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012  vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected w.e.f.  6th December, 2012 vice  Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th  October, 2012.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Sixty-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Thirty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘ Accelerated Rural
Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)’ relating to the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation.
2. The Thirty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
11th August, 2011. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 9th February, 2012. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 28th December,
2012. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
28 December, 2012 Chairman,
7 Pausa, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Thirty-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on the Report
of the C&AG of India for the year ended March 2007, No. 12 of 2008 (Performance
Audit), Union Government (Civil) relating to ‘Accelerated Rural Water Supply
Programme’.
2. The Thirty-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 11th August, 2011. It contained 16 Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the observations/
recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation and these have been categorized as under :—
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government :
Paragraph Nos. 1, 3-5, 7, 8, 9-12 and 14-16
Total : 13
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government :
                                              -NIL-
Total : NIL
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph No. 2
Total: 1
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies :
Paragraph Nos. 6 and 13
Total : 2
Chapter V

2
3. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the non-selective Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports, the Public Accounts Committee (2010-11) took up the
subject for detailed examination and Report.  In due consultation with the Audit, the
Committee decided to examine the position in respect of the Ministry of Drinking
Water and Sanitation.
While observing that certain Paragraphs/Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
Notes on very important issues were pending with the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation, the Committee considered it prudent to examine and report the same
alongwith the non-compliance issue. Accordingly, the Committee took up the C&AG
Report No. PA-12 of 2008 (Entire Report) relating to ‘Accelerated Rural Water Supply
Programme’ for detailed examination during the year 2010-11.
4. During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee had found
several deficiencies in the implementation of Accelerated Rural Water Supply
Programme (ARWSP) which included non conduct of National Habitation Survey
2003 by some States, anomalies with regard to Annual Action Plans (AAPs) of
several States not having been based on detailed and comprehensive habitation-
wise analysis, instances of deficient financial controls besides cases of inadmissible
expenditure and diversion of funds, slip-back of fully covered habitations and re-
emergence of problem habitations etc. Cases had also surfaced depicting
inadequate infrastructure for testing and monitoring water quality and periodic
testing requirements, poor distribution and utilization of field testing kits at the
Gram Panchayat/Village Water and Sanitation Committee level, lacunae in taking
measures for ensuring sustainability of water resources etc. The Committee had
accordingly given their Observations/ Recommendations in the Thirty-fifth Report
(15th Lok Sabha).
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation to each of the Observations/ Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Thirty-fifth Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this
Report.  In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the action taken
by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations.
6. The Committee desire that Government should furnish final/conclusive
action taken replies to the recommendations for which interim replies have been
furnished.
A. Pendency of Audit Paras in the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
(Recommendation Para No. 2)
7. Having found discrepancies in figures pertaining to pendency of remedial/
corrective action taken notes, between the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) and Audit, the Committee had desired that the figures be reconciled and
they be apprised of the same.

3
8. Apprising the Committee of the pendency of remedial/corrective action taken
notes with the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation as on date, the Ministry in its
Action Taken Notes to the above-said recommendation, stated as follows:—
“As per records, the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has 2
Reports with it:
(a) The CAG Report No. III of 2002
(b) the Performance Audit Report PA 12 of 2008.
For the first report, the ATNs were submitted to audit, and vetting comments
received from them. Final replies on the vetting comments have also been
submitted. Audit finally vetted the A TNs and gave their final recommendations,
in which they asked for some additional information to be submitted.
Submission of this information is being done.
For PA 12 of 2008 report, the ATNs have been submitted to the Principal
Director of Audit. The vetting Comments on the ATNs have been received
from Audit. Final reply to the vetting comments where the comments were
‘NIL’ have been completed and submitted to the Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance and to Lok Sabha Sectt. The comments which were not
‘NIL’, were forwarded to the States. Comments have been obtained on the
vetted comments from the States except J&K and Kerala and are being
submitted to Audit.”
9. From the information furnished by the Ministry regarding submission of
remedial/corrective action taken notes on the Audit observations pertaining to the
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, the Committee are perturbed to note that
ATNs in respect of Audit Observations, contained in Report No. 3 of 2002, which was
presented to the Parliament on 19.03.2002,  were  being processed even after a lapse
of ten years.  While deploring such unconscionable delay on the part of the Ministry
of Drinking Water & Sanitation, the Committee  direct   the   Ministry to furnish
final Action Taken Notes, incorporating Audit vetting comments thereon, to the
Committee through the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance within next three months
along with the reasons for delay.
(Recommendation Para No. 4)
10. While observing that the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation had
failed to furnish ATNs on the ARWSP Report, the Committee had recommended that
the issue of pendency of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes be reviewed on a
Monthly basis by the Secretary. The Committee had also desired that if any delay was
anticipated in submitting the ATNs, the Secretary ought to bring the matter to the
notice of Cabinet Secretary and Minister-in-Charge and apprise them of constraints
and impediments in complying with the time period and accordingly approach the
Audit for seeking any genuine extension of time under intimation to the Committee.
11.The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in its ATNs has stated as
under:—
“The Ministry has set up an Audit Committee under the Chairmanship of the

4
Secretary Drinking Water & Sanitation, with Additional Secretary and Financial
Advisor and the concerned Joint Secretary as members, to regularly monitor
the pendency of the ATNs.
States are requested through letters, phone calls and video conferences to
submit replies to the pending Audit paras of the Committee and a report of the
progress achieved in submission of the ATNs shall be submitted by the end of
January, 2012."
12.  The Committee note that in pursuance of their earlier recommendation,
the Ministry has set up an Audit Committee to regularly monitor the pendency of the
Action Taken Notes. The Ministry’s reply is however, silent regarding the date of
setting up of this Audit Committee, number of sittings held so far and outcome thereof,
findings of the Committee and action taken thereon by the Ministry and the
improvements brought about. The Committee would like to be apprised of the factual
position within three months of the presentation of this report.
Budgetary Allocation and Control
(Recommendation Para No. 8)
13. In their Thirty-fifth Report, the Committee had noted that the cases of
diversion of funds to the tune of  `404 crore had taken place in 12 States. The Committee
had also noted that the latest position on the recovery of funds by the two existing
States i.e., Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra had not been intimated to the Committee.
The Committee had, therefore, recommended that the latest position be intimated to
the Committee and diverted funds be recouped within six months of the presentation
of the Report to the Parliament.  They had also desired to be apprised of erring States
who had to undergo the percentage cuts on accounts of late submission of proposals,
recorded excessive opening balances and slow utilization of funds. Further, expressing
concern about the delay in receiving proposals from the States, the Committee had
recommended that the Ministry should devise a strong Monitoring Mechanism in
consultation with the Chief Secretaries of the States so that proposals are invariably
received in time. For pollution of drinking water sources, the Committee had urged the
Ministry to take up the matter with the concerned Ministries/ Departments/Authorities/
Boards to make pollution of drinking water sources an offence and to bring in punitive
legislation. They had also desired that the Ministry put in efforts to get draft legislation
prepared on the same within the next 6 months.
14.  The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in its A TNs has stated as under:—
“(a) The matter of recovery of Centage charged by the Government of UP in rural
supply schemes has been taken up with the State.
The matter is being pursued with the State Government for final settlement.
(b) Regarding Maharashtra, audit had raised objection to the State Government
procedure of calculating gross cost by calculating cumulative costs of
sub-works and then adding 17.5% ETP charges on the gross cost. They said
that ETP charges were to be levied on net cost of work.

5
(c) A total of  ` 323.00 cr. was cut from the releases under NRDWP in 2010-11 to
12 States. The list of States on which cuts were imposed and the reasons for
such cuts are placed at Annexure I.
(d) The Monitoring mechanism to monitor expenditure incurred by States from
NRDWP funds, to ensure timely submission of proposal for release of 2nd
instalment, is already in place, through the Integrated Management Information
System (IMIS). States are eligible to claim the 2nd instalment on utilization of
60% of available funds. This is constantly monitored and communications
kept open with States to ensure that documentation is complete to enable the
release of the instalment. Letters have been addressed by the Hon. Minister of
Rural Development and Drinking Water and Sanitation to the Hon. Chief
Ministers of States  and by the Secretary, MDWS to the Chief Secretaries of
the States to utilize the available funds expeditiously and send proposals in
time with required documents for release of 2nd instalment.
(e) The Ministry of Environment & Forests is mandated for control of pollution of all
water sources, which inter alia include drinking water sources. Water (Prevention
& Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Environment (Protection) Act, 1981 are
already enacted by the Government of India to prevent/control water pollution.
Restrictions on discharge of trade effluents/untreated water/sewage/pollutants
into water bodies is covered under Sections 24, 25 and 26 of the Water Act, 1974
and the penal provisions have been mentioned clearly under Chapter VII of the
said Act. However, the recommendation of the Committee has been sent to
Ministry of Environment & Forests for necessary action.”
15.The Audit in their vetting comments on the above-said ATNs stated that the
Ministry has requested the Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra Governments on 16.01.2012
to refund the Centage charges.
16.  The Committee are surprised that even after a lapse of one year, the issue
of recovery of charges levied by Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra Governments has
not been settled. Audit in their comments have informed that the Ministry requested
both the Governments on 16.1.2012 to refund the Centage charges. This clearly
shows that the matter has not been addressed seriously by the Ministry, though the
matter has been pending with the Ministry from 10.12.2009 when the Audit Report
was laid in Parliament. Apparently, the assurance of the Ministry about the Monitoring
mechanism being in place does not appear to be efficacious enough to address the
problem. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the
reference made to the Ministry of Environment & Forests regarding the issue of
making pollution of drinking water sources an offence and to bring in punitive
legislation for the same.
Slip-back & Re-emergence of Problem Habitations
(Recommendation Para No. 9)
17.Having noticed the problem of slip-back of habitations from fully covered to
partly covered/non-covered and re-emergence of problem habitations, the Committee

6
had recommended the Ministry to evolve a mechanism within a time-frame whereby
precise data with regard to the ‘slip-back’ habitations could be obtained. The Committee
had also recommended that the Ministry should impress upon the States that they
must ensure that habitation does not slip-back further and a quarterly report of the
progress in this regard should be sent to the Department of Drinking Water and
Sanitation.
18.The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in its ATNs has stated as
under :—
“(a) Slip-back is a dynamic process when a water supply system stops
functioning to any reason. Often these reasons include non-payment of power
charges, lack of trained operators; minor mechanical/electrical faults requiring
repair; availability of spares; drying up of source etc.
States have been addressed letters urging them to ensure that  slip-back should
be absolutely maintained by preventive mechanisms and in case where slip-
back still occurs, the turnaround time should be minimum. They have also
been urged to update the functionality status of scheme on a quarterly basis.
Slip-back can be reduced if the PRIs, i.e., the Gram Panchayats or the Village
Water and Sanitation Committees are empowered with the responsibility of
operation and managing the drinking water scheme. To ensure this, the NRDWP
guidelines have in 2011 been amended to provide 10% weightage in the
allocation criteria of NRDWP funds to ‘rural population managing drinking
water schemes weighted by a Management Development Index (MDI). The
MDI measures the extents of devolution of Funds, Functions and Functionaries
to PRIs by the State Governments. The idea behind this amendment is to
encourage States to devolve more and more authority and responsibility in
rural water supply to PRIs. This will create an ownership of the schemes amongst
the PRIs and ensure that slip-back are less frequent, along with faster
turnaround time.
(b) Provision has been created on the IMIS to capture the number of non-
functional water supply schemes at any given time. However, data entry by
States is incomplete. States have been requested to enter the updated
information on non-functional schemes. Information available on 20.1.2012 is
at Annexure II.”
19. The Committee note that as a follow-up of their recommendation, the Ministry
has addressed letters to the States that slip-back should be absolutely minimized by
preventive mechanisms. A number of steps have also been taken by the Ministry
including amendment of NRDWP guidelines during 2011 in order to ensure that
slip-backs are less frequent. The Committee, however, find that the reply of the
Ministry is silent about the impact of these instructions on the frequency of slip-
backs. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to assure that the
instructions issued by them are scrupulously adhered to and that there are not any
further slip-backs. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the outcome of all
the steps that have been taken in this regard.

7
20. It is a matter of serious concern that as many as 2291 schemes of rural
water supply were non-functional as on 19.01.2012. Further, from the figures of non-
functional schemes in the States, the Committee are inclined to conclude that either
the schemes were ill-conceived or there was lack of sustained and vigorous monitoring
by the Ministry. Worse, the Ministry released financial assistance without ensuring
whether the schemes were functional or not. The Committee also note with regret
that the Ministry has failed to apprise them of the vital data such as  year of setting up
of the schemes, targets set for completion of the schemes, funds provided by the
Government, since when such schemes are non-functional, action taken by the State
Government/Ministry either to make them functional or abolish them, etc. The
Committee would like to be apprised of these details at the earliest. Considering the
importance of the schemes, the Committee desire that the Ministry look into this
vital area and take necessary corrective steps for ensuring that all schemes for
drinking water programme in every State are completed in time and any deviations be
viewed seriously. The monitoring mechanism also be tightened so as to keep effective
watch over the implementation of all the schemes. The Ministry may also consider
withholding of financial assistance to the defaulter States pending completion of such
schemes.
Water Quality Testing
(Recommendation Para No. 11)
21.The Committee while observing that in the absence of periodic test check it
was extremely difficult to locate the areas affected with bacteriological or chemical
contamination, had recommended that the Ministry should lay more emphasis on
water testing aspect by increasing the frequency of monitoring the quality of water
and also instructing the States to test all drinking water sources at least twice a year
and for chemical contamination at least four times in a year i.e. every quarterly. They
had also recommended that the information so obtained should be put on the public
domain.
22. The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in its A TNs has stated as
under:—
“On an average, a well equipped and staff district water quality testing
laboratory can test/analyze about 3,000-3,500 samples in a year. With more
than 45 lakh reported drinking water sources in the country in the rural areas,
it may not be currently possible for the laboratories to test 100% sources.
Therefore, the programme of decentralized water quality testing was introduced
to screen positively tested samples only and send them for confirmation. With
the current manpower and infrastructure available, it may not be practically
possible for the laboratories to test water sources twice from chemical
contamination and twice a year for bacteriological contamination as per existing
guidelines. However, with more sub-district water testing laboratories getting
established, this recommendation could be considered for action in the next

8
phase, say during the XIIIth Five Year Plan. As stated earlier, the Cabinet has
recently approved increasing the allocation for NRDWP Support component
from 5% to 8% with 3% earmarked for WQM&S.”
23.  In response to the Committee’s recommendation to increase the frequency
of monitoring the quality of water, the Ministry has stated that with more sub-district
water testing laboratories getting established, the action on the Committee’s
recommendation could be considered during XIII Five Year Plan.  For this, the Cabinet
has approved the increase in the allocation for National Rural Drinking Water
Programme (NRDWP) support component from 5% to 8% with 3% earmarked for
Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQM&S).  However, Committee deplore
that instead of addressing the problem of water contamination and setting up of water
testing laboratories on priority, Government propose to take up the programme during
XIIIth Plan Period.  In their considered view, a serious problem like water pollution
responsible for water borne diseases cannot brook delay and therefore it is imperative
and incumbent upon the Government to initiate effective and immediate action to
address the problem and keep the Committee apprised.
Non-completion of  Works
(Recommendation Para No. 15 & 16)
24. Expressing their concern over the slow rate of completion of projects for
achieving better water quality in nearly fourteen States, the Committee had desired to
be apprised of the exact status and progress in this regard, including details such as
the number of projects which had been completed, the cost/time overrun involved and
target dates for completion of projects. The Committee had also directed that it being
a funding agency it was incumbent upon the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
to monitor completion of projects without any time overrun.
25. In its  Action Taken Notes, the Ministry has submitted as follows:—
“(a) Information on incomplete schemes available with the Ministry as submitted
by the States through the IMIS is at Annexure III.
(b) The Ministry is using the IMIS to closely monitor the schemes being
implemented by the States. During the AAP discussions, completion of
incomplete schemes is given priority. States are urged to ensure completion of
incomplete schemes before taking up new schemes.”
Further the Ministry has added that:
“The Ministry has engaged an independent professional agency to carry out
a nationwide verification of data with respect to rural water supply entered
into the IMIS by the States. The Evaluation report is expected to be received
by the end of the financial year 2012-13.”
26.In order to check the delay in completion of projects, the Committee had
also recommended the cost overrun, if any, be borne by the respective State
Governments.

9
27.  In response to this, the Ministry in its Action Taken Notes has stated
that this matter would be taken up with the States during AAP discussions for
2012-13.
28.  The Committee do not accept the stock reply tendered by the Ministry. They
are concerned to note that no time frame has been provided to ensure timely completion
of schemes as more than one to four thousand schemes are pending finalization in
15 States.   The Committee have been informed that 56162 schemes are targeted to be
completed by March 2012, 9885 schemes by March 2013, and 3298 schemes after
March 2013. The Committee would like to be apprised of the present status of
56162 schemes which were stated to be completed by March 2012. Reiterating that
the Ministry keep a constant watch over the progress of remaining 9885 schemes
which are slated for completion by/after March 2013, the Committee urge the Ministry
to streamline and improve the implementation of ARWSP so that the schemes are
completed on time and submit Status Report to the Committee within three months.
The Committee also recommend that the independent professional agency engaged to
carry out a nationwide verification of data of schemes completes its verification within
stipulated time frame and the Committee apprised the earliest.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
Failure on the part of the Ministries/Departments in giving timely submission of
replies to the audit paragraphs of C&AG is an issue of serious concern to the Public
Accounts Committee. It is a reflection on the working of the Government of India. The
act of Secretaries, who are also the chief accounting authority of the respective Ministries/
Departments, by not making timely response, tantamount to diluting authority of
Parliament. This trend is definitely fraught with danger. The Public Accounts Committee
(2009-10) of the 15th Lok Sabha were perturbed in view of the large number of pending
audit paragraphs on which Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes (ATNs) were not
furnished by the Ministries/Departments. This has resulted in constituting a Sub-
Committee to examine the issue. The Committee took oral evidence of selective Ministries/
Departments and total of 8 reports were presented to Parliament on the subject. The
Committee are agitated to note that even after their intervention the overall picture in
regard to the pending Remedial/Corrective ATNs remains rather dismal.
[Sl. No. 1 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
No Comments.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H. 11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
While examining the subject "Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme" the
Committee note with distress that the Ministry had failed in furnishing A TNs despite
a lapse of 19 months from the presentation of the ARWSP Report to Parliament  i.e. on
19th December, 2008 and issuance of eight reminders by Audit on different dates
between April, 2009 and March, 2010. The final ATNs were sent to Audit in two lots on
24.09.2010 and 15.10.2010 including ATNs from J&K and Uttarakhand. The Committee
deplore the stand taken by the Ministry that delay in furnishing final Remedial/Corrective
Action Taken Notes occurred because the Office of C&AG had sent the Audit Report
10

11
to a wrong address and thereafter kept on sending reminders, which were according to
the Ministry never received in the Department. According to them as soon as the
matter came to their notice they initiated quick action to collect the information from all
the States for submitting ATNs. Such a stand taken by the Ministry is totally
unacceptable to the Committee as all the Reports presented by the Audit to the House
are invariably uploaded on their website. It is a given fact that all the Ministries are in
constant touch with the field officers of the Audit when the Audit Reports are being
finalized in consonance with respective Ministries/Departments. In the opinion of the
Committee, the Ministry ought to have kept track of the developments and not relied
solely on the formal communication to be received from the Audit. Moreover, the
Report once placed on the Table of the House becomes a public document of which
Ministry should have taken immediate cognizance. The Committee hope no Department
of Government would ever take such an imprudent and lame excuse of non-receipt of
Audit Report.
[Sl. No. 3 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry had submitted reasons for the delay in submission of A TNs of
PA 12 Performance Audit Report in 2009-10. The ATNs for this report were submitted
on 24.9.2010 and 15.10.2010.
However, the Ministry has taken note of the comments of the Committee and
shall strive to ensure that delays in submitting ATNs do not recur in future.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H. 11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee also recommend that the issue of pendency of Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes be reviewed by the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) on a monthly basis by the Secretary to
ensure that ATNs are collected from the States and are submitted with in the stipulated
time-frame of four months. The Committee have also been given to understand that the
Ministry has established an Audit Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary
with other members from the Finance and other wings to deal with the cases of pendency
and obviate delay in submitting ATNs. In light of this initiative, the Committee
recommend that the composition, procedure to be adopted for obtaining ATNs from
States and progress of the Committee be intimated to Public Accounts Committee. The
Committee further desire that if delay is anticipated in submitting the Action Taken
Notes, the Secretary of the Ministry/Department ought to bring the matter to the
notice of Cabinet Secretary and Minister-in-Charge and apprise them of constrains

12
and impediments in complying with the time period and accordingly approach the
Audit for seeking any genuine extension of time under intimation to the Committee.
[Sl. No. 4 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry has set up an Audit Committee under the chairmanship of the
Secretary, Drinking Water and Sanitation, with Additional Secretary and Financial
Advisor and the concerned Joint Secretary as members, to regularly monitor the
pendency of the ATNs.
Further Secretary, DWS, in the weekly meetings with officials of the Ministry,
regularly reviews the status of the ATNs.
States are requested through letters, phone calls and video conferences to submit
replies to pending Audit paras of the Committee and a report of the progress achieved
in submission of the A TNs shall be submitted by the end of January, 2012.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H. 11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to note that several deficiencies have been found
in the implementation of Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP). These
pertain to the conduct of 2003 National Habitation Survey in the States, anomalies in
regard to Annual Action Plans (AAPs) of several States not having been based on
detailed and comprehensive habitation-wise analysis, instances of deficient financial
controls besides instances of inadmissible expenditure and diversion of funds. Also,
slip back of fully covered habitations and re-emergency of problem habitations
continued to be a recurring major problem. Further, the Committee note that cases have
also surfaced of inadequate infrastructure for testing and monitoring water quality and
periodic testing requirements, poor distribution and utilization of field testing kits at
the Gram Panchayat/Village Water and Sanitation Committee (VWSC) level; and lacunae
have been noticed in taking measures for ensuring sustainability of water resources
especially ground water and depletion of ground water which is evidently a major
cause of vexation. These deficiencies have been discussed in detail in the succeeding
paragraphs for their urgent redressal.
[Sl. No. 5 of  the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

13
Action Taken
Comments on the issues pointed out in the report are in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H. 11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The preparation of the Annual Action Plan (AAP) is also of great concern to the
Committee. It has been revealed that Annual Action Plan which is the mainstay in
making any project successful or otherwise has been neglected thoroughly by the
various State Governments. The Committee note with concern that two States; Jammu
& Kashmir and Jharkhand have not prepared the AAPs during the period 2002-03 to
2007-08, while 7 States had not submitted their AAPs to the Department of Drinking
Water Supplies, Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India, though the
same had been prepared. In 15 States, the AAPs lacked habitation-wise details. Similarly,
in 9 States, AAPs did not indicate activities to be taken under submission of water
quality and sustainability. The ARWSP guidelines require that States/UTs should
earmark and utilize at least 25% and 10% of ARWSP funds for drinking water supply to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes respectively. However, the Committee note
with deep anguish that a number of States are not following the said guidelines in letter
and spirit. The Committee, therefore, desire that details of coverage of  SC, ST population
should be a part of the AAPs. The States Governments came out with a number of
excuses for not preparing their AAPs. The Committee are of the view that success rate
of the implementation of ARWSP is very much dependent upon preparing of  the
AAPs and the Committee stress that each State should invariably prepare their AAPs.
The Ministry has informed the Committee that it has taken up the work of preparing
AAPs of the States with a lot of seriousness and States have also been asked to
prepare detailed district-wise AAPs for which formats have been provided. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should issue the instructions to
the States to prepare and submit the AAP habitation-wise within three months. The
Committee recommend to the Ministry that such instructions should not be merely on
paper but bring tangible results. If need be, the Ministry should make suitable
amendments in the ARWSP guidelines to make submission of AAPs in a time bound
manner so that the benefits of the schemes percolate to the grassroots.
[Sl. No. 7 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
 (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
•  All States are preparing the AAPs. The Ministry is now holding annual
State-wise meetings to discuss the State AAPs. States are not released funds
till the AAP is finalised.

14
• The Ministry would like to inform that significant progress has been made in
regard to the AAPs. Since the revision of the rural water supply programme,
focus has been placed on the preparation of the AAPs by the States. These
AAPs are prepared at the district level, where NRDWP guidelines envisages
the preparation of district water security plans. These district plans are combined
at the State level to give State level AAPs. The AAPs are prepared habitation-
wise for coverage of the targeted habitations.
• AAPs prepared by the States every year are discussed with the Ministry.
Habitations targeted under the AAPs are marked on the IMIS. Priority is given
to water quality affected habitations and partially covered habitations.
• From the year 2010-11, it has been decided that there shall be earmarked
allocation of 22%  of  NRDWP funds for the Scheduled Castes Sub-Plan (SCSP)
and 10% for the Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP). This ensures that funds are spent on SC
and ST concentrated habitations populations in a dedicated manner. The
coverage of SC/ST concentrated habitations is a part of the AAPs. Data is also
available about the coverage of such habitations with regard to rural water
supply.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H. 11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are distressed to note that the cases of diversion of funds to the
tune of Rs. 404 crore have taken place in 12 States viz. Assam, Himachal Pradesh,
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya,
Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal. In this regard, the Committee
have been informed that a majority of this is by way of Centage Charges which the
States have charged out of Rs. 400 crore. The Committee have also learnt that if any
case of inadmissible expenditure or diversion of funds is pointed out, the same is
deducted from second instalment due for such States. As per the existing system
proposals for release of second instalment has to reach the Department by
31st December of the year. A cut of 10, 20 & 30 per cent respectively is imposed, if the
proposal is received late i.e. in January, February or March.
The Committee are appalled to find that the problem of diversion of funds has
not been addressed in the right earnest by the Ministry. The Committee understand
that the Centage Charges have completely been stopped from 1.4.2009. What can be
more disturbing than the fact that eight months have elapsed since the Committee took
oral evidence on the subject and the latest position on the recovery of funds by the
two erring States i.e. Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra have not been intimated to the

15
Committee. They, therefore demand that the latest position be intimated to the Committee
forthwith and diverted funds be recouped within six months of the presentation of the
Report to Parliament. They would also like to have the details of those erring States
who had to undergo the percentage cuts on accounts of late submission of proposals,
recorded excessive opening balances and slow utilization of funds. The Committee
also recommend that the Ministry devise a strong Monitoring Mechanism in
consultation with Chief Secretaries of States so that proposals are invariably received
in time. Timely receiving of the proposal would in turn result into timely execution of
the Scheme which is very vital for providing safe drinking water in the rural habitat of
India. Towards this end, the Committee would urge the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) to take up the matter with all concerned
Ministries/Departments/Authorities/Boards to make pollution of drinking water sources
an offence and to bring punitive legislation. The Committee also desire the Ministry to
make all out efforts to get draft legislation prepared on the same within the next
6 months.
[Sl. No. 8 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(a) The matter of recovery of Centage Charged by the Government of U.P. in rural
water supply schemes has been taken up with the State.
The matter is being pursued with the State Government for final settlement.
(b) Regarding Maharashtra, audit had raised objection to the State Government
procedure of calculating gross cost by calculating cumulative costs of sub-
works and then adding 17.5% ETP charges on the gross cost. They said that
ETP charges were to be levied on net cost of work.
The State Government has submitted its reply explaining the background to
the decision. The Audit vetted this reply by the State Government and did not
give any further comments.
(c) A total of Rs. 323.00 crore was cut from the releases under NRDWP in 2010-11
to 12 States. The list of States on which cuts were imposed and the reasons for
such cuts are placed at Annexure 1.
(d) The Monitoring mechanism to monitor expenditure incurred by States from
NRDWP funds, to ensure timely submission of proposal for release of 2nd
instalment, is already in place, through the IMIS. States are eligible to claim the
2nd instalment on utilisation of 60% of available funds. This is constantly
monitored and communications kept open with States to ensure that
documentation is complete to enable the release of  the instalment. Letters
have been addressed by the Hon. Minister of  Rural Development and Drinking
Water and Sanitation to the Hon. Chief Ministers of States and by the Secretary,
MDWS to the Chief Secretaries of the States to utilise the available funds
expeditiously and send proposals in time with required documents for release
of  2nd instalment.

16
(e) The Ministry of Environment & Forests is mandated for control of pollution of
all water sources, which inter alia  include drinking water sources. Water
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Environment (Protection)
Act, 1981 are already enacted by the Government of India to prevent/control
water pollution. Restrictions on discharge of trade effluents/untreated water/
sewage/pollutants into water bodies is covered under Sections 24, 25 and 26 of
the Water Act, 1974 and the penal provisions have been mentioned clearly
under Chapter-VII of the said Act. However, the recommendation of the
Committee has been sent to Ministry of Environment & Forests for necessary
action.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H. 11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
Slip-backs and re-emergence of problem habitations is another issue which drew
the attention of the Committee. The reasons tendered by various State Governments for
this phenomenon were excessive drawal of ground water, inadequate and non-maintenance
of tube-wells, lack of sustainability of water resources and increase in population. The
Ministry's stand that it had not been able to follow-up the matter with the States does not
help since it is foremost duty of the State to make available adequate drinking water to
the people while conserving precious water resources. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry evolve a mechanism within a
time- frame whereby precise data with regard to the slip-backs habitation could be obtained.
The Committee should be intimated about the new mechanism evolved. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should impress upon the States that they must
ensure that habitation does not slip-back further and a quarterly report of the progress in
this regard should be sent to the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation.
[Sl. No. 9 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(a) Slip-back is a dynamic process when a water supply system stops functioning
due to any reason. Often these reasons include non-payment of power charges,
lack of trained operators; minor mechanical/electrical faults requiring repair;
availability of spares; drying up of source etc.
States have been addressed letters urging them to ensure that slip-backs
should be absolutely minimised by preventive mechanisms, and in case
where slip-back still occurs, the turnaround time should be minimum. They
have also been urged to update the functionality status of schemes on a

17
quarterly basis. Slip-backs can be reduced if the PRIs, i.e. the Gram
Panchayats or the Village Water and Sanitation Committees are empowered
with the responsibility of operation and managing the drinking water
scheme. To ensure this, the NRDWP guidelines have in 2011 been amended
to provide 10% weightage in the allocation criteria of NRDWP funds to
rural population managing drinking water schemes weighted by a
Management Devolution Index (MDI). The MDI measures the extent of
devolution of Funds, Functions and Functionaries to PRIs by the State
Governments. The idea behind this amendment is to encourage States to
devolve more and more authority and responsibility in rural water supply
to PRIs. This will create an ownership of the schemes amongst the PRIs
and ensure that slip-backs are less frequent, along with faster turnaround
time.
(b) Provision has been created on the IMIS to capture the number of
non- functional water supply schemes at any given time. However, data entry
by States is incomplete. States have been requested to enter the updated
information on non-functional schemes. Information available as on 20.1.2012
is at Annexure II.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H. 11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
Success of the ARWSP depends on the quality of water being supplied to
the beneficiaries. The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed that
establishing of water quality laboratories hitherto was not a mandatory component
of the ARWSP . Audit has suggested that water quality laboratories may be
implemented at three levels, consisting of a nodal unit at the top level, intermediary
level units like district laboratories and grass-root level units. They also stated
that State and region-specific Information Education and Communication (IEC)
activities were to be taken up. In the Scheme of things, 100 per cent funding was to
be provided to the States for strengthening water quality monitoring facilities with
a view to networking the nodal unit (premier technical institution) with the State
headquarters Public Health Engineering Department (PHED). In the Scheme of
things, it is apparent to the Committee that the Ministry may provide funding to
this effect if sought by the States. The Committee are distressed to observe that
10 States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Karnataka, Kerala, Meghalaya, Orissa, and Uttar Pradesh had not assigned the
task of checking water quality at the State level to premier institutes. States did not
take up region-specific IEC activities involving Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs)
cooperatives, women groups, self help groups etc. In States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh, no

18
qualified staff was appointed in the laboratories. In Bihar, 2 out of 9 test checked
districts did not have a laboratory. In Gujarat, 25 districts did not have laboratories.
In Jammu & Kashmir, out of a total of 14 districts, only four districts had laboratories,
of which one was not functional. In Manipur, there were no laboratories in the
Districts. In Nagaland, only one out of 11 District laboratories were functional. In
Orissa, out of 30 districts level laboratories only 15 were made operational in
2006-07. The Committee note with deep concern the Ministry's view that the exact
information regarding staff strength at specific laboratories is available only with
the States. While the issue of manpower at the State level laboratories is
comparatively better, the issue of technical manpower remains a matter of concern.
According to the Ministry, the States have been urged to ensure that adequate
trained manpower is available at these laboratories. Taking a serious view of these
lapses in so many States, the Committee strongly recommend that the component
of water quality testing through laboratories should be made a mandatory provision
in the ARWSP guidelines.The also desire that all States should assess the technical
staff requirements and Ministry should impress upon the States to fulfil the
vacancies so that the Scheme could be implemented in an effective manner and
Quality Water is available to the users. The Ministry should also periodically
monitor the augmentation of water testing in States through field visits of otherwise
and ensure that these laboratories are functional at all times.
[Sl. No. 10 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry has constituted an Expert Team chaired by the Director, National
Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur for formulation of uniform
drinking water quality monitoring protocol so that laboratories and testing at the
State/district/sub-district are standardized. It is a fact that trained manpower is not
available in many district water testing laboratories. During various meetings, the
State Government officials have been requested to recruit/hire trained manpower
urgently in the laboratories so that water quality testing is done regularly. In order
to provide additional support to the States, the Cabinet has approved the revision
of existing NRDWP guidelines to provide a dedicated 3% NRDWP-Support fund
on 100% Central assistance basis to States for water quality monitoring and
surveillance, which inter alia  includes setting up of new/upgradation of district/
sub-district water quality testing laboratories, providing chemicals and
consumables to labs, hiring of trained manpower for the laboratories, providing
field test kits/refills to GPs etc.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H.11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]

19
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee find that ARWSP Guidelines stipulate testing of 10 per cent of all
samples tested, including all positive tested samples by the district water quality
testing laboratories, at the State level. Further, District laboratories/Public Health
Engineering Department (PHED) were to test at least  30 per cent of water samples
tested by Gram Panchayats (GPs), and all cases where possibility of contamination
was reported by the community. All water sources were required to be tested at least
once a year initially. Examination of data revealed that the State Governments were not
at all serious with the issue of testing the quality of water. The Committee feel that in
the absence of periodic test check, it is extremely difficult to locate the areas affected
with bacteriological or chemical contamination. The Ministry has informed the Committee
that it has been repeatedly requesting the States to arrange testing of all drinking water
sources at least once in a year for chemical contamination and twice a year for
bacteriological contamination in rural drinking water sources. The Committee note that
for the first time in the Annual Action Plan 2010-11 States have been given targets for
testing of samples. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should pay more
emphasis on water testing aspect and should increase the frequency of monitoring the
quality of water. To begin with, the Ministry should instruct the States to test all
drinking water sources at least twice a year and for chemical contamination at least
four times in a year i.e. every quarterly. They also desire that the information so
obtained should be put on the public domain at District, Block and Village level through
print and visual media so that no individual is affected due to contamination in drinking
water. The Committee are happy to learn that Ministry is planning to enhance financial
support to States from meager 5 per cent 9-10 per cent for establishment of laboratories
to conduct test of drinking water sources. In this regard, the Committee feel that
paucity of budget should not stand as a barrier in test-checks for quality water and
they expect the Ministry to pursue this aspect vigorously so that the same is approved
expeditiously by the Government of India. The Committee would like to be intimated of
the final decision taken in this regard within six months.
[Sl.No. 11 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
On an average, a well-equipped and staffed district water quality testing laboratory
can test/anlayze about 3,000-3,500 samples in a year. With more than 45 lakh reported
drinking water sources in the country in the rural areas, it may not be currently possible
for the laboratories to test 100% sources. Therefore, the programme of decentralized
water quality testing was introduced to screen positively tested samples only and
send them for confirmation. With the current manpower and infrastructure available, it
may not be practically possible for the laboratories to test water sources twice for
chemical contamination and 4 times for bacteriological contamination. The Ministry
would endeavour to first ensure that States test and report on all sources once a year
for chemical contamination and twice a year for bacteriological contamination as per
existing guidelines However, with more sub-district water testing laboratories getting
established, this recommendation could be considered for action in the next phase,

20
say during the 13th. Five Year Plan. As stated earlier, the Cabinet has recently approved
increasing the allocation for NRDWP Support component from 5% to 8% with 3%
earmarked for WQM&S.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H.11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
With a view to encourage drinking of safe water, the ARWSP envisages building
capacity of Panchayats to own the Field Test Kits (FTKs) and take up full Operation &
Maintenance (O&M) responsibility for water quality monitoring of all drinking water
sources in their respective Panchayati Raj Institution (PRI) area. The Committee also
understand that 100 per cent testing of all sources at the village level was to be done
by grass root level workers from Gram Panchayat (GP)/Village Water and Sanitation
Committee (VWSC). However, in reality a dark picture emerges. In certain States, FTKs
were not received, whereas in some States only a handful of Districts received the
FTKs. The Committee recommend promoting household based & community based
terracotta filters for takling iron and bacteriological contamination.
The FTKs serve as powerful tool to supplement water quality treatment facilities.
The Committee are astonished to note the admission of the Ministry that although the
FTKs had been given by the States yet they were not passed on to the Gram Panchayats.
Five individuals who were supposed to be trained like teachers for others were not
themselves properly trained. The Committee have been intimated that the State
Secretaries have been directed to identify the individuals in a particular Gram Panchayat
who possess such kits. However, in its post-evidence reply the Ministry has informed
that under Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Programme, provisions have
been made for States to provide one field test kit to each Gram Panchayat. Further, in
the Annual Action Plan 2010-11 States have indicated targets for provisions of FTKs
and for training of grass root workers. As reported by States, so far against the
cumulative target to train 12 lakh grass root level workers at the GP level, only 8.55 lakh
have been trained. Against the target to provide field test kits to 2.45 lakh GPs,
2.47 lakh chemical FTKs and 424.33 lakh bacteriological kits are reported to be procured/
distributed.
However, the figures supplied by the Ministry to the Committee in regard to
supply of FTKs, Training etc. are in stark contradiction with the findings of the Audit.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should once again supply to
the Committee the genuine and verifiable data pertaining to the procurement and
distribution of FTKs. Such data should clearly bring out the achievements against the
target as well. The Ministry should also fix future targets for procurement and
distribution of FTKs and apprise the Committee of the time line by which all Gram
Panchayats will be equipped with FTKs. The Committee recommend that workers at

21
the grass root level at GPs be adequately trained by experts in the shortest possible
period so as to achieve the sole objective of providing safe potable water in each rural
habitat.
[Sl.No. 12 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry has written to State Governments to consider adopting terracotta
filter technology.
In order to verify the authenticity of the data regarding supply of FTKs, training,
etc. and assess the impact of the Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance Programme,
a third party independent evaluation is being taken up by the Ministry and the Committee
would be appraised of the findings subsequently.
In the Annual Action Plans (AAP), finalized after discussion with States, targets
are fixed for supply of field test kits and number of persons to be imparted training and
refresher training on use of these kits.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H.11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
As per ARWSP Guidelines both the Government of India as well as State
Governments would take up monitoring studies of representative water sample from
time to time. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that the officials of
the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation do not carry out field inspection of
the projects/schemes. The officials of Ministry only visit the States to participate in
the meetings of the States Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee (SLSSC) workshops,
training etc. The evaluation and monitoring studies are assigned to the officers of
the State Governments for rural water supply. The Committee note with concern that
the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has 7-8 officers and each of them
have been allocated 10-12 States to do the field inspections. The Committee can well
comprehend the quantum of work these handful of officers can handle. Shortage of
staff is a matter of concern for the Committee. These handful of officers have not
only to undertake field visits but also participate in SLSSC workshop. It also goes to
show that how much importance the Ministry gives to monitoring and evaluation
studies. The Committee, therefore, recommended that staff strength be augmented
adequately to ensure effective monitoring and evaluation of water samples from time
to time.
[Sl.No. 14 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

22
Action Taken
The Ministry has created National Resource Centre and engaged experienced
persons as Consultants including in the field of Monitoring & Evaluation to assist the
Ministry in better monitoring of NRDWP and TSC. Further, States, under the advice of
the Ministry, have at the State level, set up the 'Water and Sanitation Support
Organization (WSSO)s' to effectively implement and monitor NRDWP and TSC
programmes. Provision has been made to engage 6-7 Consultants in WSSO for support
to the line divisions. This includes implementing IEC, HRD and hydro-geological
based activities and monitoring of drinking water quality with the help of professionals.
The District Water and Sanitation Missions have also been strengthened by making
provision for engaging expert consultants with NRDWP-Support Funds.
In order to bridge the gap between the VWSC/GP and the district administration,
provision for creating Block Resource Centres with 1-4 trained persons has also been
made so that overall monitoring of water and sanitation programmes becomes more
effective. The BRC coordinators shall handhold the GPs in their efforts to manage
water supply schemes sustainably. However, it is true that the Department of Drinking
Water and Sanitation which has been upgraded to a Ministry in 2011-12, is insufficiently
staffed at the Central level. There is a need for augmenting both the administrative and
technical wings of the Ministry. The Ministry is making efforts to obtain sanction for
additional staff posts.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H.11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
Slow rate of completion of projects for achieving better water quality is
another matter of serious concern for the Committee. In nearly 14 States, relevant
projects/schemes were found to be incomplete. The Committee have been informed
by the Ministry in this regard that States have been impressed upon to ensure that
pending projects are completed on priority basis and take up new schemes only
after completing the ongoing schemes. Consequently in the next one to two years,
the number of pending incomplete schemes will gradually come down. The Ministry
further informed that it has developed 12-13 formates to identify incomplete
schemes. However, the Committee desire to be apprised of the exact status and
progress in this regard, including details such as how many projects have been
completed/what are the cost/time overrun/target dates of incomplete projects etc.
mainly after the introduction of the said formats within six months of the
presentation of this Report. The Committee, therefore, recommend that being a
funding agency, it is incumbent upon the Ministry of Rural Development

23
(Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) to monitor and ensure timely
completion of projects without time overrun as the delayed completion of project
would jeopardize the very objective of the programme.
[Sl.No. 15 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(a) Information on incomplete schemes available with the Ministry as submitted
by the States through the IMIS is at Annexure III.
(b) The Ministry is using the IMIS to closely monitor the schemes being
implemented by the States. During the AAP discussions, completion of
incomplete schemes is given priority. States are urged to ensure completion of
incomplete schemes before taking up new schemes.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H.11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Ministry has informed the Committee that in order to check inordinate
delay in ongoing works provision has been made in the NRDWP Guidelines, whereby
amount released cannot be utilized/adjusted against any cost escalation of the
schemes or excess expenditure over and above the approved cost of the schemes in
the previous years. Taking note of the provision made, the Committee recommend
that in case of delay in completion of a project beyond the approved time limit, the
cost overrun, if any, be borne by the respective State Governments. The Ministry
needs to ensure the focus of every measure taken by it remains to serve the rural
population/masses which had hitherto been deprived of their basic right of safe
drinking water.
[Sl.No. 16 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Matter shall be taken up with the States during AAP discussions for 2012-13.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H.11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated 9th February, 2012]

24
ANNEXURE I
STA TUS OF CUT IMPOSED IN NRDWP DURING 2010-11
S.No. Name of the State Amount of cut imposed On account of
(Rs. in lakh)
1. Arunachal Pradesh 226.35 Excess expenditure under O & M during 2009-10.
2. Bihar 16219.35 Less expenditure reported against first instalment.
3. Goa 507.30 No expenditure reported.
4. Himachal Pradesh 161.98 Excess expenditure under O & M during 2009-10.
5. J & K 209.71 Excess OB as on 1.4.2010.
6. Jharkhand 5168.37 Excess OB of Rs. 3831.29 lakh and less State share of Rs. 1337.08 lakh.
7. Kerala 30.55 Excess expenditure under O & M during 2009-10.
8. Madhya Pradesh 73.92 Excess expenditure under O & M during 2009-10.
9. Manipur 47.17 Excess expenditure under O & M during 2009-10.
10. Sikkim 238.93 Excess expenditure under O & M during 2009-10.
11. Uttarakhand 6621.03 Less expenditure reported against first instalment.
12. Uttar Pradesh 2795.81 Less State share during 2009-10.
Total 32300.47

25
ANNEXURE II
RURAL WATER SUPPLY—NON-FUNCTIONAL  SCHEMES (AS REPORTED BY STATES AS ON 19.01.2012 ON THE IMIS)
No. of Schemes
S.No. State Total Functional Non-functional
1 2 345
1. Andhra Pradesh 355900 355900 0
2. Bihar 108202 108202 0
3. Chhattisgarh 162994 162993 1
4. Goa 251 251 0
5. Gujarat 60098 60097 1
6. Haryana 8113 8113 0
7. Himachal Pradesh 16289 16289 0
8. Jammu and Kashmir 3770 3770 0
9. Jharkhand 220940 220914 26
10. Karnataka 145647 145625 22
11. Kerala 3124 3124 0
12. Madhya Pradesh 447875 447875 0
13. Maharashtra 96659 96659 0
14. Orissa 238222 238222 0

26
15. Punjab 10787 10787 0
16. Rajasthan 72828 72727 101
17. Tamil Nadu 326439 324333 2106
18. Uttar Pradesh 1700901 1700901 0
19. Uttarakhand 6488 6488 0
20. West Bengal 99816 99816 0
21. Arunachal Pradesh 7819 7786 33
22. Assam 72445 72445 0
23. Manipur 3195 3195 0
24. Meghalaya 10420 10419 1
25. Mizoram 729 729 0
26. Nagaland 1468 1468 0
27. Sikkim 1182 1182 0
28. Tripura 10010 10010 0
29. A & N Islands 19 19 0
30. Puducherry 232 232 0
Total 4192862 4190571 2291
12 3 4 5

27
ANNEXURE III
RURAL WATER SUPPLY-INCOMPLETE  PIPE WATER SUPPLY SCHEMES (ONGOING SINCE 3 YEARS)
S.No. State Name Total Incomplete T otal Original T otal Revised Target Date of Completion
Schemes Schemes Cost (in Lakhs) Cost (in Lakhs) Mar .-2012 Mar.-2013 After Mar. 2013
1 2 3 4 5 678 9
1. Andhra Pradesh 43585 3207 114741.@60 114741.60 3207 0 0
2. Bihar 1075 23 14394.81 14394.81 16 7 0
3. Chhattisgarh 8977 4686 68092.81 69964.96 4039 567 80
4 . G o a 1 2 7 0 0 0000
5 Gujarat 51121 662 113959. 84 113765.36 585 45 32
6. Haryana 8204 1192 102 590.42 105299.78 1030 152 10
7. Himachal Pradesh 16279 1065 141 178.98 142614.44 582 283 200
8. Jammu and Kashmir 2756 614 86845.45 87544.74 257 337 20
9. Jharkhand 7520 6005 119 054.23 120013.75 5690 309 6
10. Karnataka 81249 23802 306390.85 310955.44 22537 1120 145
11. Kerala 3693 83 52425.21 52425.21 64 15 4
12. Madhya Pradesh 6008 1222 29515.14 29649.66 1140 81 1
13. Maharashtra 50818 8874 403 991.08 405628.05 4883 3946 45
14. Orissa 10903 2428 107 067.55 107198.21 2056 307 65

28
15. Punjab 9595 1079 51831.22 51919.13 987 91 1
16. Rajasthan 15117 3160 725 162.85 725384.02 2940 170 50
17. Tamil Nadu 76919 3716 39962179.62 39962179.62 1675 281 1760
18. Uttar Pradesh 5861 182 46554.55 46554.56 114 67 1
19. Uttarakhand 6101 589 25190.35 25420.86 375 214 0
20. West Bengal 1409 142 115 843.66 115843.66 17 55 70
21. Arunachal Pradesh 7611 962 23454.59 23454.59 504 458 0
22. Assam 5844 1277 80465.50 80465.50 1069 189 19
23. Manipur 3171 364 8533.78 8533.78 205 111 48
24. Meghalaya 6763 2082 104 038.63 104321.46 1295 672 115
25. Mizoram 625 114 7925.64 7925.64 114 0 0
26. Nagaland 1570 196 9037.64 9037.64 196 0 0
27. Sikkim 973 222 5741.96 5741.96 178 44 0
28. Tripura 3008 1397 22846.73 22846.73 407 364 626
29. A & N Islands NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
30. Puducherry 179 0 0 0000
Total 437074 69345 42849054.79 42863825.27 56162 9885 3298
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
-NIL-
29

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation
As per information furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) 4191 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were pending as of
25th June, 2010. The audit also supplied a figure in this regard which stated that a total
of 3462 Paragraphs were pending with all the Ministries as of 31st May, 2010. Having
observed the discrepancies of figures pertaining to pendency of cases, between the
Ministry and Audit, the Committee would therefore, like the two to reconcile the figures
and apprise the Committee of correct figures as on date.
[Sl. No. 2 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15 the Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per records, the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation has Two Reports
with it:—
(a) The CAG Report No. III of 2002
(b)The Performance Audit Report PA 12 of 2008
For the first report, the ATNs were submitted to audit, and vetting comments
received from them. Final replies on the vetting comments have also been submitted.
Audit finally vetted the A TNs and gave their final recommendations, in which they
asked for some additional information to be submitted. Submission of this information
is being done.
For PA 12 of 2008 report, the ATNs have been submitted to the Principal Director
of Audit. The vetting Comments on the ATNs have been received from Audit. Final
reply to the vetting comments where the comments were 'NIL' have been completed
and submitted to the Deptt. of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance and to Lok Sabha
Sectt. The comments which were not 'NIL', were forwarded to the States. Comments
have been obtained on the Vetted comments from the States except J&K and Kerala
and are being submitted to Audit.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H. 11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated the 9th February, 2012]
30

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation
Taking the issue subject-wise, the Public Accounts Committee take a serious
view upon the way the National Habitation Survey, 2003 was conducted. Inconsistencies
and discrepancies were noticed in the conduct of the Survey in Manipur and Haryana.
In Manipur, the Survey was conducted through an NGO and a report submitted to the
Government of India in December 2003. However, due to inconsistencies in the Survey
Report, the State Government of Manipur was considering conducting another survey.
In Haryana, the Survey was conducted in 2005 but the Survey results could not be
finalized due to discrepancies between the figures with the State Government and
Government of India. In Chhattisgarh (partly), Jharkhand and Orissa authenticity of
the Survey could not be verified due to lack of documentation. Detailed maps were not
prepared in 130 out of 154 test-checked districts in 22 States. When the Secretary,
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation was asked to explain about lack of
reliable data which is essential for proper planning for Rural Water Supply Scheme, the
Secretary stated that National Habitation Survey has become redundant as a result of
the Census 2011 since the Census 2011 will afresh determine the number of villages
which will come within its ambit. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the
Ministry and would emphasize that Ministry cannot absolve itself of its original
responsibility of monitoring and surveillance of the Survey. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that they be apprised of the methodology to be adopted for new census
and progress made till date within three months of the presentation of this Report to
the Parliament. The Committee also recommend that such census should be completed
in a time bound manner so that ARWSP is implemented effectively.
[Sl. No. 6 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The National Habitation Survey, 2003 was carried out with the intention of
ascertaining the status of water supply in rural habitations. This was the first time such
a survey was carried out, involving all the State Governments. As has been replied
earlier, the survey did suffer from procedural faults and lacunae in some States, which
was also pointed out by Audit.
In continuation to the replies submitted to PAC and Audit earlier, it is submitted
that to strengthen the database of rural water supply across the country, from 1.4.2009,
a national pan-India, web-based database of the status of rural water supply, the
Integrated Management Information System (IMIS), was set up by the Department/
31

32
Ministry. Developed with technical support of the National Informatic Centre (NIC) of
the Government of India, the database was launched with data available with the
Centre and States as on 1.4.2009 entered as base information. It has since then been
progressively updated by State Governments with regular validations. Updation of
information regarding existing habitations and feeding of information on new habitations
and of new water supply schemes are carried out annually. Entry of data on the water
quality is done on a continuous basis.
In the last 36 months the IMIS has become increasingly robust. Information
regarding rural water supply, is available down to the habitation level which is Two
steps deeper than the Panchayat level and one step deeper than the village level. As
on 1.4.2011, Habitation level information for over 16.64 lakh habitations of the country,
covering every Panchayat, in terms of coverage, service levels and water quality is
now available on the IMIS. The physical and financial information is being used by the
States for planning their rural water supply schemes/programmes. The habitations
targeted for coverage under the Annual action plan of NRDWP are also marked online
by the States. The IMIS is also the main source of information for monitoring the
status of RWSS, the coverage of habitations and the implementation of the NRDWP
by the States.
The Census 2011, results of which are expected soon, shall also provide the
most authentic data on the status of rural water supply in all rural habitations, which
shall be a significant input for validating and updating the IMIS.
Further, the NSSO has decided to take up survey of the rural water supply in its
69th round. This shall also enable us to create another benchmark in the sector.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation O.M. No. H.11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated the 9th February, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that plans are in place for engaging experts for monitoring
and evaluating the quality of drinking water in rural areas. During examination, the
Committee were given to understand that such technical manpower would be in place
by the end of the financial year 2010-11. In this regard, the Committee would like to
have details of the developments which took place at the time of oral evidence of the
subject i.e. 16.8.2010 till the date of presentation of this Report. It is also disconcerting
to note that the financial year which was mentioned by the Ministry is already over but
no intimation has been given to the Committee whether the experts have already been
engaged or not along with reasons for delay, if any. They accordingly, recommend that
complete details in this regard may be furnished to the Committee.
[Sl. No. 13 of the 35th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(5th Lok Sabha)]

33
Action Taken
Under NRDWP guidelines, State Governments have been given the power to
engage experts under the provisions of "State Technical Agency". NRDWP-Support
funds provided to them could be utilized to hire their services for all technical matters
relating to rural drinking water and sanitation. Initially, the Ministry identified certain
experts who were engaged/working closely on technical issues and shared this list
with the States. However, in order to bring in more transparency, an expression of
interest with brief  terms of reference has been prepared and is being processed for
issuing advertisement inviting technical experts to apply. Draft guidelines on engaging
National level Experts are also under consideration of the Ministry. The Committee will
be updated about the progress.
Sd/-
(T.M. Vijay Bhaskar)
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, O.M. No. H. 11011/2/2011-Water-II
dated the 9th February, 2012]
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 December, 2012 Chairman,
7 Pausa, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 28TH DECEMBER, 2012
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28th December, 2012 from 1500 hrs to 1610 hrs
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
10. Shri J.D. Seelam
11. Shri N.K. Singh
12. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri P. Sesh Kumar — Director General (C)
2. Shri Nand Keyolar S. — Director General
34

35
3. Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General
4. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General
5. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director (RC)
6. Ms. Geetali Tare — Principal Director
7. Shri Maneesh Kumar — Principal Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the  Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the sitting of the
Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised that the meeting was convened to consider
and adopt the six Draft Reports circulated to them by the Secretariat.
3. The Committee then took-up the following Draft Reports one by one for
consideration.
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** ***
(vi) Draft Report on Action Taken on the 35th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on the
subject "Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)".
4 . *** *** *** ***
5. During the further course of consideration, some Members suggested minor
modifications in the draft Original Reports. After some discussions and deliberations,
the Committee adopted all the Draft Reports and authorized the Chairman to finalise
these Reports in light of the factual verifications received from the Audit, if any, and
present the same to the Hon'ble Speaker on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
Draft Reports and active participation in the consideration and adoption of the Reports.
The Committee, then adjourned.
***Not related to this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations 16
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee Total 13
which  have been accepted by the Government: Percentage-81.25%
Para Nos. 1, 3-5, 7, 8, 9-12 and 14-16
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee Total: 0
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received Percentage-0%
from the Government:
-NIL-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Total: 1
replies of the Government have not been accepted Percentage-6.25%
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para No. 2
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Total: 2
Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage-12.5%
Para Nos. 6 and 13
36
GMGIPMRND—4681LS—11.3.2013.