INJUDICIOUS  RELEASE  OF  GRANTS
[ACTION TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERV ATIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR
SIXTY-NINTH REPORT  (14TH LOK SABHA)]
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT (DEPARTMENT
OF HIGHER EDUCATION)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2009-10
SIXTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
6

SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
INJUDICIOUS RELEASE OF GRANTS
[Action Taken  by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-ninth Report  (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2009
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2009/Agrahayana, 1931(Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1901
Price Rs.: 50.00
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of  India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
Page
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2009-10).......................................................................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by Government .................................................... 8
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from Government................................................................ 20
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration............................. 21
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies ........................ 42
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2009-10)  held on 02.12.2009............................. 43
II. Analysis of the Action  taken by the  Government  on  the
Observations/Recommendations of  the  Public  Accounts
Committee contained in their Sixty-ninth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha).......................................................................... 45
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
Shri Jaswant Singh     — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Gopinath Munde
9. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati  Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri  Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2009-10), having  been authorised
by the Committee, do present on their behalf  this Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on action taken  by Government  on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Injudicious Release of Grants”.
2. The Sixty-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28th April, 2008.
Replies  of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report were received on 26th May, 2009. The Public  Accounts  Committee  considered
and adopted the Sixth Report at their sitting held on 2nd December, 2009. Minutes of
the sitting are given at Appendix I.
3. For facility of reference  and convenience, the Observations and Recommen-
dations of the Committee have been printed  in thick  type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor  General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken   by the Government  on the  Observations/
Recommendations contained  in the Sixty-ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix II.
N
EW DELHI;  JASWANT SINGH
8 December, 2009 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
I. Introductory
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Sixty-ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Para 6.8 of  the Report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India for the year ended March, 2006, No. 3 of 2007, Union
Government (Civil-Autonomous Bodies) relating to "Injudicious Release of Grants''.
2. The Sixty-ninth Report of the Public Accounts Committee, which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 28th April 2008, contained 9 Observations/Recommendations. The
Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received
from the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education)
and are broadly categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Paragraph Nos. 25, 26, 27, 29, 32 and 33
[Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,5,8, and 9]
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
-NIL-
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 28, 30 and 31
[Sl. Nos. 4, 6 and 7]
Chapter--IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
Chapter--V
II.  Gist of the  Committee's findings in their Original Report
3. The University Grants Commission (UGC) started the Development Assistance
Programme with the objective of improving infrastructure and basic facilities in
universities and colleges so as to achieve at least the threshold level of infrastructure.

2
Keeping in view the disparities between Urban/Semi-Urban and Backward Areas, the
UGC formulated two new schemes during the X Plan Period (2002-2007) entitled.
'Special Development Grant to Young Universities' (SDGYU) and 'Special Development
Grant to Universities in Backward Areas' (SDGUBA). SDGYU aimed to create basic
and bare minimum infrastructure and to improve/expand the existing infrastructure of
Young Universities so as to enable them to attract more students and teachers and to
help introduce new courses. The objective of SDGUBA is to focus attention on
universities located in backward areas and to improve infrastructure, to achieve
optimum teaching equity and access at least to the threshold level.
4. The universities included under Section 2(f) of the UGC Act of 1956 and
declared eligible for central assistance under Section 12(B) of the Act from the
VIII Plan onwards were considered eligible to receive grants from the UGC under the
scheme SDGYU and all eligible universities under Section 2(f) and 12 (B) of the UGC
Act and physically located in backward areas were considered for Grants under the
scheme SDGUBA. Eligible and desirous universities were required to submit their
proposals in the prescribed format to the UGC. Thereafter, selected universities were
to be invited to give presentation before an Expert Committee, based on whose
recommendations admissible grants were approved.
5. The Committee during their examination had observed that the University
Grants Commission (UGC) prematurely released advance grant amounting to Rs. 5.48
crore  to 24 Universities by the University Grants Commission (UGC) in March 2004
subject to condition that the grant may be used only after receiving item-wise approval
of the UGC. Subsequently, the UGC conveyed its approval for incurring the expenditure
from the said grant after a lapse of time ranging between 8 and 24 months. This
resulted in blocking of funds amounting to Rs. 5.48 crore for a period ranging between
8 and 24 months and consequent loss of interest of Rs. 59.02 lakh for the period from
April 2004 to March 2006. After examining the Audit findings, explanations of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development and other relevant aspects, the Committee
had, inter-alia recommended as under:
(i) UGC should review their system of approval and release of grants to
universities under different schemes so that funds are released judiciously
based on the soundness of proposals without needlessly blocking the
funds released pre-maturely on half-baked proposals.
(ii) UGC needs to be more vigilant and prompt in attending to and rectifying
matters, which have large financial implications.
(iii) The Ministry of HRD should devise a mechanism making it mandatory for
the UGC and the heads of the universities to hold monthly review meetings
to monitor the expenditure and so far as practicable, ensure even flow of
expenditure throughout the year.
(iv) Delays in the submission of Utilisation Certificates of the earlier released
grants should be enquired and responsibility fixed for such laxity and UGC
should now galvanise their machinery and take up this issue strongly with
the State Governments/Universities.

3
(v) UGC should avoid releasing grants in excess of the capacity of grantee
universities and its releases should be modulated in such a manner that
unnecessary parking of funds with the grantee institutions is avoided.
(vi) UGC should conduct a thorough review of its functioning with particular
emphasis on the release and utilization of grants to universities.
6. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the
succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the action taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the Original
Report, which need reiteration or merit comments.
III.  Review of System of Approval and Release of Grants
[Paragraph 28 of the 69th Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
7. In their 69th Report, the Committee had noted that UGC conveyed its approval
for incurring expenditure out of the sanctioned Grants to the universities after a lapse
of considerable time ranging between 8 and 24 months and such approvals to three
universities under SDGYU and one university under SDGUBA were conveyed well
beyond this period. The pre-mature release of grant by the UGC pending presentations
from the universities and subsequent delay in conveying the final approvals resulted
in blocking of funds amounting to Rs. 5.48 crore for a period ranging between 8 and
24 months and consequent loss of interest of Rs. 59.02 lakh for the period from
April 2004 to March 2006. The Committee had observed that no time limit was prescribed
by the UGC for ensuring that presentation of the projects by the Universities within
a definite time schedule. While on one hand, the UGC had shown hurry in releasing
grants to the universities in the month of March, on the other they restricted them to
use the grants until receiving item-wise final approval of the UGC. The Committee had
pointed out that this process itself was responsible for blocking of funds with the
grantee universities. While deprecating that there was no proper system in UGC to
ensure early utilization of funds by the universities, the Committee had recommended
the UGC to review their system of approval and release of grants to universities under
different schemes for streamlining the procedures for approval and release of funds
so that funds are released judiciously based on the soundness of proposals without
needlessly blocking the funds released pre-maturely on half-baked proposals.
8. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:
"Keeping in view of the disparities between Urban, Semi Urban and Backward
Area. UGC introduced two schemes namely (1) Special Development Grant
to Young Universities (2) Special Development Grant to Universities under
Backward Areas. UGC identified 13 Universities (Y oung), 11 Universities
(Backward) for the purpose.
The Committee Constituted by the UGC approved in principle the proposals
in question and asked Universities identified to submit their detailed proposals
in this regard. UGC also released Rs. 5.48 Crore to all 24 Universities (Young
and Backward) identified 'on account' grant with the approval of competent
authority.

4
The Universities were asked to send their proposals, which were to be vetted
by an Internal Expert Committee of UGC, and after Committee's approval
universities were to be invited for presentation before this Expert Committee.
Since the universities took very long time in presenting and preparing
documents for presentation. It was decided by the UGC to release Rs. 21.00
lakhs to each of 13 Young Universities and Rs. 25.00 lakhs to each of
11 universities under Backward Area Scheme as First instalment. This was
specifically keeping in view that the grant being released was 'on account'
grant under these schemes to be implemented during X plan period i.e.
2002-2007. The updated position of grants released/utilized during the
X plan period 2002-2007 to the above 13+11(24) Universities under the Special
Development grant to Young and Backward Universities are enclosed as
Annexure-I & II.
As per the policy of the UGC 2nd and subsequent instalments of grant is
released on receipt of Utilisation Certificate/statement/progress report of
expenditure against earlier grant as per prescribed norms of the scheme.
Now the UGC has constituted a Committee to review the cases of the X Plan
period and meeting of the Committee has been fixed on 8th June, 2009."
9. In their original Report, the Committee had commented upon the malady of
hastily releasing grants by the University Grants Commission (UGC) to the
Universities in the month of March alongwith the stipulation that the released Grants
should be utilized only after receiving item-wise final approval from the UGC. This
process was considered responsible for blocking of funds with the grantee
universities. Accordingly, the Committee had recommended to the UGC to review
their system of approval and release of grants to Universities under different schemes
for streamlining the procedures for approval and release of funds so that same could
be released judiciously based on the soundness of proposals without needlessly
blocking the funds released pre-maturely on half-baked proposals. The Committee
are, however, constrained to note that the UGC has merely constituted a Committee,
that too after 13 months from the presentation of the Report, to review the cases
pertaining to the X Plan period under 'Special Development Grant to Y oung
Universities' (SDGYU) and 'Special Development Grant to Universities in Backward
Areas' (SDGUBA). This reveals that the UGC has yet to act on the core issue of
putting in place a reliable procedure for ensuring smooth preparation and approval
of detailed proposals, prompt release of funds as well as timely and proper utilization
of Grants by the Universities under different schemes which are essential for
achieving their intended objectives of enhancing the search and coverage of University
education in backward areas. The Committee feel that their recommendation has
not been given the seriousness it deserved. They strongly feel that there should be a
definite proper procedure for management of the grants. The Committee, therefore,
cannot but overemphasize the need for streamlining the procedure for approval and
release of funds by the UGC.

5
IV. Prevention of Rush of Expenditure at the end of Financial Year
[Paragraph 30 of the 69th Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
10. The Committee had observed in their Original Report that the UGC released
grants under both SDGYU and SDGUBA to the universities in the month of March in
contravention of the provisions of General Financial Rules according to which rush
of expenditure particularly in the closing month of the financial year would be regarded
as a breach of financial propriety. Moreover, such grants were released in a mechanical
manner before according UGC's approval to the proposals. Since the universities
could not, as per provisions, incur any expenditure without receiving item-wise final
approval from the UGC, the urgency shown by the Commission in releasing the
advance grant of Rs. 5.48 crore to the universities proved to be pointless and rather
infructuous. Terming that such large-scale rush of expenditure in the closing month
of the financial year clearly indicates lack of financial discipline and accountability,
the Committee had rcommended that the Ministry of Human Resource Development
should devise a mechanism making it mandatory for the UGC and the heads of the
universities to hold monthly review meetings to monitor the expenditure and so far as
practicable, ensure even flow of expenditure throughout the year.
11. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Human Resource Development,
states as under:
"The UGC has noted the suggestions of PAC and adopted a procedure to
convene meetings with the Vice-Chancellors, Registrars and Finance Officers
of the Universities from time to time to discuss the issues i.e. grants released
submission of Utilisation certificate, problems faced by the Universities etc.
This has resulted that the Universities have turned more vigilant to UGC
grants".
12. Emphasizing that the tendency of releasing  grants by the University Grants
Commission (UGC) under both 'Special Development Grant to Young Universities '(SDGYU)
and 'Special Development Grant to Universities in Backward Areas' (SDGUBA)
Schemes to the universities in the month of March is in contravention of the
provisions of General Financial Rules and a breach of financial propriety, the
Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that the Ministry of Human
Resource Development should devise a mechanism making it mandatory for the
UGC and the heads of the universities to hold monthly review meetings to monitor
the expenditure and so far as practicable, ensure even flow of expenditure throughout
the year. The Committee, however, note that the UGC has simply adopted a procedure
to convene meetings with Vice Chancellors, Registrars of Universities and Finance
Officers of the Universities from time to time to discuss general financial issues
regarding release of grants, submission of Utilization Certificates etc. This,
according to the Committee, may not fully address the issue of devising a proper
mechanism to ensure an even flow of expenditure throughout the year, or at least to
prevent the detrimental rush of expenditure in the closing month of the financial
year. The Committee believe that the newly formulated arrangement of convening
meetings with the Vice Chancellors, the Registrars and the Finance Officers from
time to time is no substitute for the recommended regular or monthly meetings

6
under proper monitoring mechanism. While drawing once again the attention of the
Ministry to the obstacles created by the March rush of expenditure in achieving the
objectives of the UGC Schemes, the Committee reiterate that the Ministry of Human
Resource Development should devise a suitable mechanism mandating the UGC and
the heads of the universities to hold monthly review meetings to monitor the
expenditure flow and the extent of the implementation of the assigned task with a
view to ensuring even flow of expenditure throughout the financial year.
V . Stringent Measures for Non-submission of Utilisation Certificates
[Paragraph 31 of the 69th Report (14th
 Lok Sabha)]
13. In their Original Report, the Committee had noticed that Utilisation Certificates
(UCs) amounting to Rs. 618.29 lakh under the 'Special Development Grant to Young
Universities' (SDGYU) and Rs. 663.69 lakh under the 'Special Development Grant to
Universities in Backward Areas' (SDGUBA) were still outstanding. This is
approximately 50 percent of the total grants released to the universities under those
schemes. Having taken a serious view of the inordinate delay on the part of the
universities concerned in furnishing the Utilisation Certificates (UCs) of such a huge
amount, which thwart the very process of releasing further grants to the universities,
the Committee had called for enquiring into the matter and fix responsibility for such
laxity. Further, with a purpose of eliminating the delay in submission of these utilization
certificates to the UGC, the Committee had recommended that UGC should galvanise
their machinery and take up the issue of non-submission of Utilisation Certificates
strongly with the State Governments/Universities so that stringent measures are
initiated for prolonged delay or failure on the part of the universities to furnish the
Utilisation Certificates as per schedule.
14. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Human Resource Development,
stated as under:
"The UGC has constituted a Project Oversight Committee to review the
progress of work done by all universities under the Scheme (i) Young
Universities and (ii) Backward Universities during X plan. The date of meeting
of the Committee has been fixed for 8th June 2009. Letters are being sent to
Registrars/Finance Officer of these Universities for a Meeting in UGC office.
They will be requested to come with Progress Report/Utilisation Certificate/
Statement of expenditure and completion certificate of building duly signed
by the concerned authorities for the grants released during the X plan under
the scheme (i) Young Universities and (ii) Backward Universities. UGC will
also inform them that failure to do so may invite stringent measures by UGC.
UGC will be constrained to stop future grants. A copy of the D.O. No. F63-1/
2003 (SU-I) date 1/5/2009 for monitoring the utilized of funds issued to the
Vice-Chancellor's and Registrars of the concerned Universities are enclosed
for your ready reference."
15. From the Action Taken Note of the Ministry, the Committee note that steps
have not been taken to ascertain the reasons for inordinate delay in submission of
Utilisation Certificates by the Universities for utilization of Rs. 618.29 lakh under
SDGYU Scheme and Rs. 663.69 lakh under SDGUBA Scheme so far. Non-submission

7
of Utilisation Certificates in these cases blur the legitimacy of utilizing huge sums
of money, which constitute about 50 per cent of the total grants paid under the two
Schemes besides thwarting further releases. The Committee feel that this lapse,
which harbours scope for misuse and embezzlement of public money, is quite a
serious lapse to be ignored lest the degree of fiscal indiscipline will only get
worsened. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the UGC should enquire into the
matter and fix responsibility for such a serious laxity.
The Committee further observe that remedial steps taken by the UGC for
expeditious submission of Utilisation Certificates by the Universities more or less
pertain to re-circulation of routine instructions and old circulars issued by the
UGC, which is not going to substantially contribute in ensuring timely submission
of Utilisation Certificates. Further, the belatedly constituted Project Oversight
Committee of the UGC is yet to start functioning and it is not clear as to how this
Committee is slated to monitor utilisation of funds by the Universities and subsequent
submission of Utilisation Certificates thereof. Nothing has also been specified
precisely for taking the proposed stringent measures against the defaulting
Universities. Such casual approach cannot ameliorate the correlated financial crisis
caused by non or delayed submission of Utilisation Certificates. The Committee,
therefore, would like to re-emphasize that the UGC should galvanize its machinery
and take up the problem of delayed/non-submission of Utilisation Certificates with
the respective Universities so that stringent deterrent measures could be initiated.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 25
The University Grants Commission started the Development Assistance
Programme with the objective of improving infrastructure and basic facilities in
universities and colleges so as to achieve at least the threshold level of infrastructure.
Keeping in view the disparities between  Urban/Semi-Urban and Backward Areas, the
UGC formulated two new schemes during the X Plan period (2002-2007) entitled,
'Special Development Grant to Young Universities' (SDGYU) and  'Special Development
Grant to Universities in Backward Areas' (SDGUBA) with the objective of creating
basic/minimum infrastructure and also to improve/expand the  existing infrastructure
of universities to achieve optimum teaching equity. The Universities included under
Section 2(f) of the UGC Act of 1956 and declared eligible for central assistance under
Section 12 (B) of the Act from VIII Plan onwards were considered eligible to receive
grants from the UGC under the scheme SDGYU and all eligible Universities under
Section 2(f)  and 12(B) of the UGC Act and physically located in backward areas were
considered for Grants under the scheme SDGUBA. Eligible and desirous Universities
were required to submit their proposals in the perscribed format to the UGC. Thereafter,
selected Universities were to be invited to give presentation before an Expert
Committee, based on whose recommendations admissible grants were approved.
[Observation/Recommendation  Sl.No.  1, Appendix Para 25 of 69th Report of
PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Factual position no comments.
Observation/Recommendation No. 26
The Committee understand that the UGC take decisions for release of grants to
universities under any scheme/programme based on the advice of the Expert Committee.
Generally, in a plan period, the allocation is decided by the Expert Committee and the
grant is released in installments on receipt of 'Utilisation Certificate' of the earlier
sanctioned grant. The Expert Committee meets once in a year to consider the proposals
and after approval, the grants are released. According to the UGC, this procedure for
release of grants is reviewed in the beginning of each Five Year Plan and necessary
improvements are incorporated.
[Observation/Recommendation  Sl.No. 2,  Appendix Para 26 of 69th Report of
PAC (Lok Sabha)]
8

9
Action Taken by the Government
Factual position no comments.
Observation/Recommendation No. 27
The Committee's examination of the subject showed that an Expert Committee of
officials of the UGC met in March 2004 to assess the proposals received from different
universities and recommended 13 universities under 'Special Development Grant to
Young Universities' (SDGYU) 11 under 'Special Development Grant to Universities in
Backward Areas' (SDGUBA) for release of advance grant at the rate of  Rs. 21.00 lakh
and Rs. 25.00 lakh respectively subject to condition that the grant may be used only
after receiving item-wise final approval of the UGC and  the eligible universities be
called for presentation of their projects. Accordingly, the UGC released (March 2004)
Rs. 5.48 crore as advance grant to these 24 universities.
[Observation/Recommendation  Sl.No.  3, Appendix Para 27 of 69th Report of
PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Factual position no comments.
Observation/Recommendation No.  29
With regard to prescribing a time limit on order to ensure that presentation of
their projects by the universities should be made within the prescribed time schedule,
the Committee have been informed during the course of examination of the subject
that the UGC is streamlining the procedures and a calendar of events i.e., inviting
proposals, scrutiny, interface meetings, approval and release of grants is being
introduced in XI plan. It is only after taking up the matter by the Committee, the UGC
has now initiated certain measures for approval and release of grants. Had these
steps been initiated earlier, the situation of blocking of funds amounting to Rs. 5.48
crore and consequent loss of interest of Rs. 59.02 lakh in respect of two development
schemes could well have been avoided. The Committee would now expect the UGC to
be more vigilant and prompt in attending to and rectifying matters which have large
financial implications.
[Observation/Recommendation Sl. No. 5,  Appendix Para 29 of 69th
Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
 The UGC is inviting proposals during XI plan from all eligible Universities which
are covered under the scheme (i) Young Universities, and (ii) Backward Universities.
The last date for inviting proposals is 20th May 2009. It may please be noted that it
has been decided to constitute one Committee only which will look after not only the
review of X plan Projects but also give recommendations for the proposals received

10
during XI plan period. This meeting has been fixed for 9th June 2009 for
considering the proposals of XI plan fresh Universities [copy of the office order
No. F.80-3/2008 (SU-I) dated 2-4-2009 and No. F.80-3/2005 (SU-I) dated 29th April 2009
are enclosed for your ready reference]
Observation/Recommendation of Public Accounts
Committee No.  32
The Committee note that it was specifically mentioned to the universities by the
UGC that interest accruing on the funds allocated to them would be treated as
additional grant. The grantee institutions are also required to incorporate such amount
of interest in the Utilisation Certificate to be submitted to the UGC. In this context, the
Committee would expect the UGC to avoid releasing grants in excess of the capacity
of grantee universities. The present practice of release of grants without correctly
estimating the observing capacity of the universities should be discontinued forthwith.
Further, the UGC should modulate its releases in such a manner that unnecessary
parking of funds with the grantee institutions is also avoided.
[Observation/Recommendation Sl.No. 7, Appendix Para 32 of 69th
Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Keeping in view the suggestions of the PAC the UGC has reviewed its policy for
releasing grants and it has been decided that grants to Universities will be considered
on their genuine requirements to develop infrastructure facilities particularly for
academic purposes. Copy of the revised guidelines are enclosed for your ready
reference. (Annexure 'A').

11
Annexure'A'
Special Development grant for Universities in Backward/Rural/Remote/
Border Areas
Objective
It is observed that there is a visible disparity between the universities situated in
metropolitan cities and urban and semi-urban areas, and the universities located in
backward/rural/remote/border areas. This disparity is a major weakness of our higher
education system and requires immediate attention. One of the priorities of the
XI Plan is to identify such weaknesses and strengths of the higher education institutions
and then extend focused funding to remove weaknesses and fortify strengths. In order
to partially overcome disparities and to improve the higher education scenario presently
prevailing in the backward areas of the country, the Commission has initiated a scheme
entitled "Special Development Grant for Universities in Backward Areas" Beneficiary
universities under this scheme will be able to  strengthen their available infrastructure
and create essentially required additional basic infrastructure.
The objective of the scheme is to focus attention on universities located in
backward/rural/remote/border areas and to improve infrastructure to achieve optimum
teaching, equity and access at least to the threshold level. This will help the universities
to evolve to a level where  they are able to introduce innovations in academics and
meet the challenges of globalization. By doing so the students of these areas will
come up to the level of other urban and semi-urban areas of the country. This will also
stem the migration from backward/rural/remote/border areas to Metropolitan and
Urban Areas. Additional Job opportunities will also emerge in the particular areas by
opening up opportunities for self employment in these areas.
Eligibility/Target
All eligible universities under sections 2(f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act of 1956 and
physically located in backward/rural/remote/border areas will be considered under
this scheme. A university which has received grant under the scheme in the X Plan
and is also eligible in the XI Plan  will also be considered for funding under the
scheme. All Central and Deemed to be Universities, getting 100% non-plan grant are
excluded from the purview of this scheme.
Norms for identifying the university as one located in Backward/Rural/Remote/
Border areas:
(a) Backward
All the universities physically located in the districts with GER less than the
national average and with no. of colleges less than 5 per lac of population
would be considered as those  located in backward area district.
(b) Rural
Any university located in an area where village panchayat exists would be a
rural university.
(c) Remote Area
Any university which is not connected by a metalled road upto 5 km. will be
considered as one located in a remote area. This may be certified by the
District Magistrate.

12
(d) Border Area
The districts whose boundary touches the border of a neighbouring country
will be treated as border area districts. Any university located in these districts
would be eligible under this scheme. This may be certified by the District
Magistrate.
Nature of Assistance
Eligible universities under this scheme will be provided up to Rs.100.00 Lakh
(One Hundred Lakh) as one time grant during the XI Plan if it falls under one of the
above categories. The grant would be Rs.1.25 crore if it falls under two of the above
categories and Rs.1.50 crore if it falls under more than two categories. This grant can
be utilized exclusively for creating/upgrading/augmenting infrastructural projects of
capital nature, such as central facilities like library, staff quarters, classrooms,
laboratories, hostels, conference hall, etc.
Proforma for submitting the proposal is at Annexure-X.
Procedure for Monitoring
The scheme will be monitored by obtaining an annual progress report and the
submission of a statement of account, audited utilisation certificate and completion
documents (infrastructure projects) from the university concerned. However, the
Commission reserves its right of sending an expert committee for an on-the-spot-
monitoring, if deemed necessary.
Special Development Grant for Y oung Universities and Rejuvenation Grant for
Old Universities
Objective
At present the biggest challenge before the nation is to meet the diametrically
opposite demands of quality education and an increasing number of students aspiring
for higher education. The need for both quality and quantity in higher education
demands better academic and physical infrastructure, greater financial resources and
an increasing number of educational institutions. To match this increased demand
new universities are being established every year. These new universities need to
develop their infrastructure, which requires substantial funding since they are new
and are normally devoid of such  infrastructure at the time of their establishment.
Similarly, the universities which are more than 100 years old require refurbishing of
infrastructure to maintain the quality. Therefore, one of the thrust areas identified by
the UGC during the XI Plan is to strengthen these newly created universities and old
universities by providing them additional grant.
Eligibility/Target
The universities which have been included under Section 2 (f) and declared
eligible for Central assistance under Section 12 (B) of the UGC Act, 1956 and are not
above ten years of age as on 1st April, 2007 are eligible to receive grant from UGC
under this scheme of Special Development Grants for Young Universities. A university
which has received grants under the scheme in the X Plan and is also eligible in the
XI Plan will also be considered for funding under the scheme. Rejuvenation Grant for
old universities will be given to those which have already completed more than 100
years of their establishment.

13
Nature of Assistance
The eligible universities will get assistance as a one time grant during the XI Plan
maximum limit for the same being:
(i) Young Universities - Rs. 1.00 crore
(ii) Rejuvenation grant - Rs. 1.00 crore
for old universities
Under this component, the University can make use of grant available for
augmenting/improving/extending their physical infrastructure.
This grant can be utilised exclusively for creating infrastructure facilities of a
capital nature such as libraries, hostels, staff quarters, class rooms, laboratories,
canteens, auditoria, guest houses, play grounds, repairs and renovation of buildings/
infrastructure, etc.
Monitoring and Evaluation
Every year the University must send to the UGC, the Expenditure Statement and
the Progress Report for Physical performance in the prescribed proforma enclosed as
Annexure. Proforma for submitting the proposal is at Annexure-XI.
Instrumentation Maintenance Facility (IMF)
Objectives
(i) The primary objective of the IMF is to provide effective and economical
services in the repair and maintenance of scientific instruments and
electronic hardware.
(ii) The IMF shall strive to satisfy the users of instruments and electronic
hardware regarding the quality of the service.
(iii) The IMF shall provide facilities for staff development through training and
opportunities to exchange experience with other IMFs and centres
providing similar services around the country.
Eligibility
Central/State Universities, and Deemed to be Universities, which are under sections
2 (f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act, 1956, are eligible to receive financial support to
establish IMF in their institutions for PG Science Departments under this scheme. A
University/Deemed University having USIC Programme will  not be eligible for IMF
Unit. All Universities which have been approved by the UGC for implementing this
scheme during Xth Plan period will also not be eligible for IMF during the XIth Plan.
Observation/Recommendation of Public Accounts
Committee No.  33
To sum up, the facts narrated in the foregoing paragraphs reveal several
shortcomings in the existing system of the UGC for allocation of grants to the universities.
Considering the fact that the 'Special Development Grant to Young Universities' and
'Special Development Grant to Universities in Backward Areas' schemes were meant to
create basic and minimum infrastructure and to achieve optimum teaching equity, it is
unfortunate that no mechanism was evolved by the Ministry/UGC to assess the actual
requirement of funds by the universities, their capabilities and allocate them funds
accordingly for proper implementation of these schemes. Another disquieting aspect

14
observed by the Committee is the absence of a proper monitoring mechanism in the
UGC to monitor whether the budget allocations made to the universities have been
utilized by them as per the prescribed norms or not. Monitoring of progress of the
universities is presently being done by the UGC merely on the basis of the Utilisation
Certificate, statement of expenditure and progress report received from the universities.
Considering the fact that a large number of Utilisation Certificate involving huge sums
of money are pending for submission by the concerned universities, the Committee
urge upon the UGC to make their regulatory mechanism more effective to enable
purposeful utilization of grants. The Committee recommend in this regard that the UGC
should conduct a thorough review of its functioning with particular emphasis on the
release and utilization of grants to universities. The Committee would like to be informed
of the conclusive action taken in the matter.
[Observation/Recommendation Sl.No.  9, Appendix Para  33 of 69th
Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The UGC has noted the recommendations of the PAC and will be more vigilant in
future in the matters relating to release of grants to State Universities under various
schemes. Proper monitoring of progress of the Utilisation of funds is being adopted.
Meetings of Vice-Chancellor, Registrars and finance officers are called in the UGC
office from time to time to discuss the requirements of the Universities, and also to
make proper Utilisation of funds etc. The recommendations of the PAC is being
followed while releasing funds to the Universities.
The steps taken by thye UGC to review the present position is as under:—
1. The UGC has constituted a Project oversight Committee to review the
progress of work done by all universities under the Scheme (i) Young
Universities and (ii) Backward Universities during X plan. The date of
meeting of the Committee has been fixed for 8th June 2009. Letters are
being sent to Registrars/Finance Officer of these Universities for a Meeting
in UGC office. They will be requested to come with Progress Report/
Utilisation Certificate/statement of expenditure and completion certificate
of building duly signed by the concerned authorities for the grants released
during the X plan under the scheme (i) Young Universities and (ii) Backward
Universities. UGC will also inform them that failure to do so may invite
stringent measures by UGC. UGC will be constrained to stop future grants.
2. The UGC is inviting proposals during XI plan from all eligible Universities
which are covered under the scheme (i) Young Universities and (ii) Backward
Universities. The last date for inviting proposals is 20th May 2009. It may
please be noted that it has been decided to constitute one Committee only
which will look after not only the review of X plan Projects but also give
recommendations for the proposals received during XI plan period. This
meeting has been fixed for 9th June 2009 for considering the proposals of
XI plan fresh Universities.
3. The statement (uptodate) showing the position of the grant allocated/
released/Utilisation Certificate received from the concerned Universities
under the scheme (i) Young Universities and (ii) Backward Universities as
Annexure-II.

ANNEXURE I
Young Universities Scheme
Statement showing the position of the grant allocated/released and UC received
from the eligible State universities under the scheme special Development
Grant to Young Universities during X Plan period
(Rs. in lakh)
S.No. Name of the Universitie/ Allocation Grant Utilisation Remarks
State released Certificate
1 2 3 4 5 6
Orissa
1. Fakir Mohan University 100.00 90.00 50.00 Completion awaited
2. North Orissa University 100.00 90.00 40.00 -do-
Madhya Pradesh
3.* Mahatma Gandhi Chitrakoot 100.00 90.00 56.41 Completion awaited
Gramodaya Vishwavidyalaya
4. National Law Instt. 100.00 90.00 50.00 Completion awaited
University
Kerala
5 . Sree Sankaracharya 100.00 100.00 100.00 Accounts settled
University of Sanskrit
6. Kannur University 100.00 90.00 90.00 Completion
documents awaited
Gujarat
7.* North Gujarat University 100.00 100.00 100.00 Accounts settled
Bihar
8 . B.N. Mandal University 100.00 50.00 — Completion
documents awaited
9 . Veer Kanwar Singh University 96.73 88.00 50.00 -do-
Rajasthan
10. M.D.S. University 100.00 50.00 — -do-
Ranchi
11.* V inoba Bhave University 100.00 90.00 25.47 -do-
Karnataka
12.* Kannada University 90.99 90.99 90.99 Completed
13.* Kuvempu University 100.00 100.00 100.00 Building completed
14. National Law School of India 100.00 50.00 — Progress report of
University expdt. awaited
15

16
Haryana
15.* Guru Jambheshwar University 100.00 90.00 50.00 Completion
of Science & Technology documents awaited
Maharashtra
16.* S.R.T.M. University, Nanded 100.00 50.00 16.88 Progress Report/
Utilization Certi-
ficate awaited
17.* North Maharashtra 100.00 50.00 27.71 Completion
University, Jalgaon Documents/Progress
Report awaited
Delhi
18.* Guru Gobind Singh 100.00 21.00 — Refund received &
University, Delhi Accounts finalized
Uttar Pradesh
19.* Dr. R.M.L. Awadh University, 100.00 50.00 — Progress Report/
Faizabad Utilization
Certificate awaited
20. Bundelkhand University, Jhansi 100.00 90.00 50.00 Completion
Documents/
Utilization
Certificate awaited
21.* V .B.S. Purvanchal University, 100.00 50.00 — Progress Report
Jaunpur awaited
22.* J.R.H. University, Chitrakoot 100.00 21.00 21.00 -do-
Dham
23. M.J.P. Rohilkhand University, 154.04 — — Regretted as
Bareilly construction work
not started upto
31-03-2007
West Bengal
24. Bengal Engg. & Sc. University, 100.00 90.00 90.00 Completion
Shibpur Documents awaited
Andhra Pradesh
25. National Academy of Legal 100.00 50.00 50.00 Documents called
Studies and Research for awaited
University, Hyderabad
Chhattisgarh
26. H.N. Law University, Raipur 100.00 90.00 90.00 Completion
Documents awaited
Tamil Nadu
27.* M.S. University, Thirunelveli 100.00 90.00 100.00 Account finalized
28. Periyar University, Salem 100.00 90.00 100.00 Completion
Documents
called for
1 2 3 4 5 6

17
Arunachal Pradesh
29. Rajiv Gandhi University, 96.11 48.05 96.11 Completion
Itanagar Documents awaited
Note: The UGC is approach ing these Universities from time to time for submission of statement
of expenditure and completion documents in respect of buildings approved by the UGC.
* Advance grant was given to these Universities.
1 2 3 4 5 6

ANNEXURE II
Backward Area Scheme
Statement showing the position of the grant allocated/released and UC received
from eligible State universities under the scheme special Development Grant
to universities located in Backward Areas during X plan period
(Rs. in lakh)
S.No. Name of the Universities/ Allocation Grant Utilisation Remarks
State released Certificate
1 2 3 4 5 6
Orissa
1. North Orissa University 70.00 63.00 35.00 Statement of
expenditure/
Utilisation
Certificate awaited
Madhya Pradesh
2.* Awadhesh Pratap Singh 68.91 68.91 68.91 Accounts settled
University
3. Mahatma Gandhi Chitrakoot 70.00 63.00 39.07 Completion
Gramodaya Vishwavidyalaya documents awaited
Gujarat
4.* Saurashtra University 70.00 70.00 70.00 Accounts settled
5.* North Gujarat University 70.00 70.00 70.00 Accounts settled
Bihar
6. Patna University 66.64 33.00 — Statement of
expenditure/
Utilisation
Certificate awaited
7. T.M. Bhagalpur University 70.00 63.00 35.00 Statement of
expenditure/
Utilisation
Certificate awaited
8 . K.S.D. Sanskrit University 70.00 35.00 — -do-
9 . B.N. Mandal University 70.00 35.00 — -do-
18

19
10. L.N. Mithila University 70.00 63.00 35.00 Statement of
expenditure/
Utilization Certificate
awaited
11. Veer Kanwar Singh University 64.52 57.00 32.00 Statement of
expenditure/
Utilization
Certificate
awaited
Rajasthan
12.* J.N. V yas University 70.00 35.00 24.63 -do-
13. M.L. Sukhadia University 70.00 69.99 69.99 Accounts settled
14. M.D.S. University 70.00 35.00 22.83 Stt. of exp./
Utilization
Certificate
awaited
Jharkhand
15.* V inoba Bhave University 70.00 63.00 35.00 -do-
Karnataka
16.* Gulbarga University 70.00 63.00 63.93 Completion
documents awaited
17. University of Mysore 70.00 59.00 67.50 -do-
J&K
18. Kashmir University, Srinagar 68.68 61.81 34.34 Completion
Documents awaited
Uttar Pradesh
19.* D.D.U. Gorakhpur University, 70.00 25.00 24.65 Revised Utilization
Gorakhpur Certificate called
20. Dr. R.M.L. Avadh University, 70.00 35.00 35.00 -do-
Faizabad
21.* V .B.S. Purvanchal, Jaunpur 70.00 35.00 — Progress Report/
Utilization
Certificate awaited
Andhra Pradesh
22. Andhra University, 70.00 35.00 — Information/
Visakhapatnam Progress
Report/Utilisation
Certificate awaited
23.* Kakatiya University, Warangal 70.00 63.00 35.00 Completion
Documents received.
Information called
for
24.* Sri Krishnadevaraya 70.00 63.00 55.00 Completion
University, Anantapur Documents awaited
25.* Acharya Nagarjuna 70.00 63.00 26.57 Completion
University, Guntur Documents awaited
1 2 3 4 5 6

20
Chhattisgarh
26. Guru Ghasidas University, 59.00 29.50 — Progress Report/
Bilaspur Utilisation Certificate
awaited
Note: The UGC is approaching these Universities from time to time for submission of statement
of expenditure and completion documents in respect of buildings approved by the UGC.
* Advance grant was given to these Universities.
1 2 3 4 5 6

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE GOVERNMENT DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
— NIL —
21

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation No. 28
The Commitee find that UGC conveyed its approval to the universities for incurring
the expenditure on the said schemes after a lapse of considerable time ranging between
8 and 23 months and approvals to three universities under SDGYU and one university
under SDGUBA scheme were conveyed well beyond this period. Thus pre-mature
release of grant by the UGC pending presentations from the universities and
subsequent delay in conveying the final approvals resulted in blocking of funds
amounting to Rs. 5.48 crore for a period ranging between 8 and 24 months and
consequent loss of interest of Rs. 59.02 lakh for the period from April 2004 to
March 2006. While admitting the delay in conveying the approval for incurring the
expenditure on the said schemes, the UGC attributed this to the long time taken in
presenting and preparing documents for presentation by the universities. The
Committee find the reply of the UGC hardly convincing. Holding the universities
responsible for the delay cannot absolve the UGC of their responsibility to expedite
the approvals. The fact of the matter remains that no time limit was prescribed by the
UGC for ensuring that presentation of their projects by the universities be made
within a prescribed time schedule. On the one hand, the UGC had shown hurry in
releasing grants to the universities in the month of March, while on the other they
restricted them to use the grants with the condition that these may be used only after
receiving item-wise final approval of the UGC. The Committee find that this process
iteself was responsible for blocking of funds with the grantee universities. Evidently,
there was no proper system in UGC to ensure early utilization of funds by the
universities. The UGC have also conceded in their deposition that the process followed
by them led to delay in commencement of works which consequently resulted in slow
utilization of the funds by the universities. The Committee deplore the fact that till
now no procedure has been evolved by the UGC nor prescribed by the Ministry for
management of grants. The Committee feel that absence of sound procedures in the
UGC for release of grants to the universities is not a desirable situation for an
organization responsible for the promotion and regulation of university education.
Since the universities were dependent on the availability of funds for proper
implementation of the schemes, the need for streamlining the procedures for approval
and release of funds warrants urgent attention of the UGC. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the UGC should review their system of approval and release of
grants to universities under different schemes so that funds are released judiciously
based on the soundness of proposals without needlessly blocking the funds released
pre-naturedly on half-baked proposals.
[Observations/Recommendations Sl.No.  4 Appendix  Para 28 of 69th Report of
PAC (Lok Sabha)]
22

23
Action Taken by the Government
Keeping in view of the disparities between Urban, Semi Urban and Backward
Area, UGC introduced two schemes namely (1) Special Development Grant to Young
Universities (2) Special Development Grant to Universities under Backward Area.
UGC identified 13 Universities (Young), 11 Universities (Backward) for the purpose.
The Committee constituted by the UGC approved in principle the proposals in
question and asked Universities identified to submit their detailed proposals in this
regard. UGC also released Rs. 5.48 crore to all 24 Universities (Young and Backward)
identified 'on account' grant with the approval of competent authority.
The Universities were asked to send their proposal which were to be vetted by an
Internal Expert Committee of UGC and after Committee's approval Universities were to
be invited for presentation before this Expert Committee. Since the Universities took
very long time in presenting and preparing documents for presentation. It was decided
by the UGC to release Rs. 21.00 lakhs to each of 13 Young Universities and Rs. 25.00
lakhs to each of 11 Universities under Backward Area Scheme as First instalment.
This was specifically keeping in view that the grant being released was 'on account'
grant under these schemes to be implemented during X Plan period i.e. 2002—2007.
The updated position of grants released/utilized during the X Plan period 2002—2007
to the above 13+11(24) Universities under the Special Development Grant to Young
and Backward Universities are enclosed as Annexure-I & II.
As per the policy of the UGC 2nd and subseqent instalments of grant is released
on receipt of Utilisation Certificate/statement/progress report of expenditure against
earlier grant as per prescribed norms of the scheme.
Now the UGC has constituted a Committee to review the cases of the X Plan
period and meeting of the Committee has been fixed on 8th June, 2009.
Comments of the Committee.
Please See Para No. 9 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation No. 30
The Committee's examination also revealed that the UGC released grants under
both the schemes to the Universities in the month of March in contravention of the
provisions of General Financial Rules according to which rush of expenditure
particularly in the closing month of the financial year would be regarded as a breach
of financial propriety. Considering the fact that Universities could not incur any
expenditure out of the advance grant of Rs. 5.48 crore without receiving item-wise
final approval from the UGC, the urgency shown by UGC in releasing the grants to
Universities in mechanical manner before according approval to the proposals proved
to be pointless and rather infructuous. Further, such large scale rush of expenditure in
the closing month of the financial year clearly indicates lack of financial discipline
and accountability. The Committee, therefore, consider it necessary that the Ministry
of HRD devise a mechanism making it mandatory of the UGC and the heads of the

24
Universities to hold monthly review meetings to monitor the expenditure and so far as
practicable, ensure even flow of expenditure throughout the year.
[Observations/Recommendations  Sl.No.  6 Appendix  Para 30 of 69th Report of
PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The UGC has noted the suggestions of PAC adopted a procedure to convene
meetings with the Vice-Chancellorss, Registrars and finance officers of the Universities
from time to time to disenss the issues i.e. grants released submission of Utilisation
certificate, problems faced by the Universities etc. This has resulted that the Universities
have turned more vigilant to UGC grants.
Comments of the Committee
Please See Para No. 12 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation No. 31
The Committee note that in order to ensure that grants are properly utilized by
the Universities for the purpose for which they were sanctioned, the certificate of
utilization of grants are required to be submitted by the Universities to the UGC. The
Committee's scrutiny has revealed that Utilization Certificate (U.C.) amounting to
Rs. 618.29 lakh under the scheme of  'Special Development Grant to Young Universities'
(SDGYU) and Rs. 663.69 lakh under the scheme of 'Special Development Grant to
Universities in Backward Areas' (SDGUBA) were still outstanding, which is
approximately 50 percent of the total grants paid to the Universities under those
schemes. The Committee take a serious view of the inordinate delay on the part of the
Universities concerned in furnishing the Utilisation Certificate (UC) of such a huge
amount. The Committee, would like the UGC to enquire into the matter and fix
responsibility for such laxity. Needless to say, such delays in the submission of
Utilisation Certificate of the earlier released grants thwart the very process of releasing
further grants to the Universities. The UGC should now galvanise their machinery
and take up this issue strongly with the State Governments/Universities. Prolonged
delay or failure on the part of the Universities to furnish the Utilisation Certificate
should immediately invite stringent measures by the UGC that would go a long way in
eliminating the delay in submission of these Utilisation Certificate to the UGC. The
Committee trust that necessary steps would be taken in this direction.
[Observations/Recommendations  Sl.No.  7,  Appendix  Para 31 of 69th Report  of
PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
1. The UGC has constituted a Project Oversight Committee to review the progress
of work done by all universities under the Scheme (i) Young Universities; and
(ii) Backward Universities during X Plan. The date of meeting of the Committee has
been fixed for 8th June, 2009. Letters are being sent to Registrars/Finance Officers of these

25
Universities for a meeting in UGC officer. They will be requested to come with Progress
Report/Utilisation Certificate/statement of expenditure and completion certificate of
building duly signed by the concerned authorities for the grants released during the
X Plan under the scheme (i) Young Universities and (ii) Backward Universities.
UGC will also inform them that failure to do so may invite stringent measures by
UGC. UGC will be constrained to stop future grants. A copy of the D.O. No. F.63-1/
2003 (SU-I) dated 1-5/2009 for monitoring the utilization of funds issued to the Vice-
Chancellors and Registrars of the concerned Universities are enclosed for your ready
reference.
Comments of the Committee
Please See Para No. 15 of Chapter I.
No. F. 80-3/2008(SU I)
The undersigned, Sh. H.B. Sharma US(SU) and Mrs. Kulvinder Kaur SO(SUI)
had a meeting on 23.03.2009 with Sh. Uma Shankar IAS, Director (UGC), Ministry of
Human Resource Development regarding reply to be sent to Ministry of Human
Resource Development in connection with PAC paras of grant related to Young and
Backward Universities during the X Plan period.
During the discussion, Sh. Uma Shankar suggested the following:—
1. Statement of grant released to all Backward and Young Universities alongwith
their expenditure and UCs.
2. A Committee may be constituted to review the progress of funds. For this, all
VCs./Registrars/FO of above universities may be called with completion report,
UCs, statement of expenditure. They may also be informed that as per directions
of PAC in the event of failure to do so the Universities will face stringent
measures by the UGC.
3.  A schedule may be prepared with the following:—
(a) Proposals may be invited from all Backward and Young Universities as per
XI Plan guidelines.
(b) In terms of clause 20(i) of UGC Act, 1956 a Project Oversight Committee
may be constituted to look into the proposals of the above Universities.
Sh. Uma Shankar has also informed that the above information may be
furnished to him on or before 7.04.2009 so that the final reply can be prepared
well in time.
As regards Sl. Nos. 2 and 3, the UGC has given an assurance in its earlier reply
that University Grants Commission will  streamline the procedures and a calendar of
events i.e. inviting proposals, scrutiny, interface meetings, approval and release of
grants will be introduced in XI Plan.
Keeping in view the above discussions, the following suggestions are made:
1. We may constitute a Committee to review the progress of grants released to
all Universities during the X Plan. The meeting may be fixed in 1st week of
May, 2009 (2 days). The Chairman may please like to constitute the Review
Committee.

26
2. All VCs/Registrars/FO of above Universities may be called with progress
report, UCs, statement of expenditure and Completion Certificate of Buildings
duly signed by the concerned authorities for the grant released during X Plan
period under the scheme of Young and Backward Universities as per norms of
UGC. We may also inform them as per directions of PAC (Public Accounts
Committee) prolonged delay or failure on the part of the Universities to furnish
the utilization certificates should immediately invite stringent measures by
the UGC that would go a long way in eliminating the delay in submission of
these utilization certificates to the UGC. In view of this we may inform strongly
that UGC will be constrained to stop future grants in all respect.
3. In the XI Plan guidelines nothing has been mentioned  about the inviting of
proposals. Since UGC had given an assurance we may invite the proposals by
taking an administrative decision and their proposals may be placed before
the Project Oversight Committee for Y oung and Backward Universities. The
proposals may be considered by the Committee keeping in view of the
recommendations of the Visiting Committee.
4. A project Oversight Committee may be constituted. The date and time of
meeting will be fixed at UGC headquarter accordingly. As such, the Members
may be nominated by the Chairman.
5. The schedule of the above will be as under:—
Last date for inviting the proposal — 25.05.2009
Date of Meeting — 8-9.06.2009
In view of the above and since the reply is to be sent on or before 7.04.2009 the
proposal is submitted for approval please.
No. F. 80-3/2008(SU-I)
The following Committee is constituted:—
Prof. M. Anandakrishnan : Chairman
Former Vice-Chancellor,
Madras University, 79
Second Main Road
Gandhi Nagar, Adyar,
Chennai-20
Dr. M.S. Valiathan : Member
Former Vice-Chancellor,
MAHE, Manipal-576 119
Prof. M. Madiah : Member
Former Vice-Chancellor
Mysore University, Mysore-570 005
Secretary (on tour)

27
No. F 80-3/2008/(SUI)
S.No. 81FM P115-116/C
Placed below the O.M. No. 32/3/1/2007/PAC dated 8th April, 09 received from
Shri Sanjeev Sharma, D.S. Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi regarding action taken
notes on the recommendations contained in the 69th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on paragraph 6—8 of the Report of C&AG of India for
the year ended 31st March, 2006. No. 3 of 2007, Union Govt. (Civil Autonomous
Bodies) stating to 'Injudicious release of Grant'.
In this connection it is stated that the response of UGC does not comply with the
format sent earlier by the Secretariat as an attachment with OM dated 28th April, 2008
(Copy enclosed at P 116/Cor). Now it has been requested UGC to send the action
taken report in the format enclosed at P 116/Cor. by 30th April, 2009.
In view of the above position, a draft reply is placed below in the prescribed
proforma as desired by the Lok Sabha Secretariat.
Sd/-
Submitted for approval please:—
— Univ. have requested to lend the documents in a separate file and Letters
of Members to be sent are also: also  put up in the file.
— We may send action taken report to the Lok Sabha Sectt. and copies to
M/H RD as proposed above.
Sd/-

fo'ofo|ky; vuqnku vk;ksx
cgknqj'kkg t+Qj ekxZ
ubZ fnYyh&110002
University Grants Commission
 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg
 New Delhi-110002
April 2009
D.O. No. F 80-3/2005 (SUI)
Dear Dr. Valiathan
I am pleased to inform you that the Chairman, UGC has constituted a Project
Oversight Committee consisting of the following members to review the progress of
grants released to all Universities during the X Plan under the scheme Special
Development Grant to Young Universities and special development grant to
Universities located in backward areas and also to assess the proposals of the
XI Plan under the said scheme. The date of the meeting has been fixed on 8th & 9th
June, 2009 at UGC, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi.
1. Prof. M. Anandakrishnan, — Chairman
Former Vice-Chancellor,
Madras University,
79, Second Main Road,
Gandhi Nagar, Adyar,
Chennai-20.
2. Dr. M.S. Valiathan, Member
Former Vice-Chancellor,
MAHE,
Manipal-576 119
3. Prof. M. Madiah, Member
Former Vice-Chancellor,
University of Mysore,
Crawford Hall,
Mysore-570 005
I shall be grateful if you kindly accept the membership of the above Committee.
A line in conformation will be highly appreciated.
With kind regards
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Rajesh Anand)
Prof. M. Anandakrishnan, Dr. M.S. Valiathan,
Former Vice-Chancellor, Former Vice-Chancellor,
Madras University, MAHE,
79, Second Main Road, Manipal-576 119
Gandhi Nagar, Adyar,
Chennai-20.
28

29
Prof. M. Madiah,
Former Vice-Chancellor,
University of Mysore,
Crawford Hall,
Mysore-570 005
Copy to:Sh. Uma Shankar, Director (UGC), Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Deptt. of Secondary & Higher Education, Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001
for information.

fo'ofo|ky; vuqnku vk;ksx
cgknqj'kkg t+Qj ekxZ
ubZ fnYyh&110002
University Grants Commission
 Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg
 New Delhi-110002
F. No. 63-3/2009 (SUI) April 2009
The Registrar,
As per list attached
Subject: Submission of proposal under the scheme (i) Special Development grant
to Young Universities and rejuvenation Grant for old Universities
(ii) Special Development Grant to Universities located in Backward Areas/
Rural/Remote Area/Border Area during XI Plan period—reg.
Sir,
As you are aware that the UGC is providing financial assistance for (i) Special
Development Grant for Young Universities and rejuvenation grant for old Universities
(ii) Special Development Grant for Universities accordance with the XI Plan guidelines
the above schemes. Now these above schemes merged with General Development
Assistance Scheme.
As such, you are requested to submit the detailed proposal in respect of the
above schemes in the prescribed proforma and strictly as per XI Plan guidelines as
per (Annexure-I & II). However, the guidelines of the schemes are also available on
UGC website www.ugc.ac.in. The UGC has already constituted Project Oversight
Committee to assess these proposals. The last date of receiving the proposals is
20th May, 2009 and beyond that the proposals received after last date will not be
entertained. The meeting of the Committee has been fixed on 9th June, 2009.
It may please be noted that the Universities which have already received the
grants under the scheme in X Plan are also eligible in XI Plan will also be considered
for funding under the scheme.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(H.B. Sharma)
UNDER SECRETARY
Copy to S.O. (SUII)
30

SU BUREAU
Name of the State Universities receiving grants under Section 12(B) of UGC
Act 1956 as on 31.3.2009
S.No. Name
1. Alagappa University
Karaikudi-630 003 (Tamil Nadu)
2. Amravati University
Amravati-444 602.
3. Andhra University
Waltair
Visakhapatnam-530 003.
4. Anna University
Chennai-600 025.
5. Annamalai University
Annemalainagar-608 002.
6. Awadesh Pratap Singh University
Rewa (M.P.)
7. Bangalore University
Bangalore-560 056.
8. Barkatullah Vishwavidyalaya
Bhopal-462 026 (M.P.)
9. Bharathiar University
Coimbatore-641 046.
10. Bharathidasan University
Tiruchirappalli-640 046.
11. Bhavnagar University
Gaurishanker Lake Road,
Bhavnagar-364 002.
12. Calicut University
Calicut-673 635.
13. Cochin University of Science & Technology
Cochin-682 022.
14. Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya
R.N. Tagore Marg
Indore-452 001 (M.P.)
31

32
15. Dr. B.A. Marathwada University
Aurangabad-431 004.
16. Dr. H.S. Gour Vishwavidyalaya
Sagar-470 005 (M.P.)
17. Goa University
Sub Post Office Goa University
Taleigao Plateau
Goa-403 206.
18. Gujarat University
P.B. Number 4010, Navrangpura
Ahmedabad-380 009.
19. Gulbarga University
Jnana Ganga,
Gulbarga-585 106.
20. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University
Hyderabad-500 072.
21. Jiwaji University
Gwalior-474 011 (M.P.)
22. Kakatiya University
Warangal-505 009.
23. Kannada University
Hampi, Vidyaranya,
Hospet Taluk-583 276.
24. Karnatak University
Dharward-580 003.
25. Kerala University
Thiruvananthapuram-695 034.
26. Kuvempu University
Gnana Sahyadri,
Shankarghatta-577 451. Shimoga Distt.
27. M.S. University of Baroda
Fatehganj
Vadodara-390 002.
28. Madurai Kamaraj University
Madurai-625 021.
29. Mahatma Gandhi Gramoday Vishwavidyalay
Chitrakoot-485 331.
30. Mahatma Gandhi University
Kottayam-685 560.
31. Mangalore University
Mangalagangothri-574 199.
S.No. Name

33
32. The Tamil Nadu Dr. Ambedkar Law University
Chennai (T.N.)
33. Manonmaniam Sundaranar University
Tirunelveli-627 912.
34. Mother Teresa Women's University
Kodaikanal-624102 (Tamil Nadu)
35. Mysore University
Mysore-570 005.
36. Nagarjuna University
Nagarjuna Nagar-522 510.
37. Nagpur University
Nagpur-440 001.
38. National Law School of India University
Bangalore-560 072.
39. North Gujarat University
Patan-384 265 (Guj.)
40. North Maharashtra University
Jalgaon-425 001.
41. Osmania University
Hyderabad-500 007.
42. P.S. Telugu University
Public Gardens
Hyderabad-500 004 (A.P.)
43. Rani Durgawati Vishwavidyalaya
Jabalpur-482 001 (M.P.)
44. S.N.D.T. Women's University
Mumbai-400 020.
45. Sardar Patel University
Vallabh-Vidyanagar-388 120.
46. Saurashtra University
University Road
Rajkot-360 005.
47. Shivaji University
Kolhapur-416 004.
48. South Gujarat University
University Campus
Surat-395 007.
S.No. Name

34
49. Sri Krishnadevarya University
Anantapur-515 003.
50. Sri Padmavathi Mahila Vishvavidyalayam
Tirupati-517 502 (A.P.)
51. Sri V enkateswara University
Tirupati-517 502.
52. Swami Ramanand Teerth Marathwada University
Nanded-431 606.
53. Tamil University
Thanjavur-612 005. (Tamil Nadu)
54. University of Madras
Chennai-600 005.
55. University of Mumbai
Mumbai-400 032.
56. University of Pune
Pune-411 007.
57. Vikram University
Ujjain-456 010 (M.P .)
58. Kannur University
Mangattuparamba
Kannur-670 567.
59. Gauhati University
Gopinath Bardoloi Nagar,
Guwahati-781 014.
60. Dibrugarh University
Dibrugarh-786 004.
61. Patna University
Patna-800 004.
62. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar University
Muzaffarnagar-842 001.
63. Tika Manjhi Bhagalpur University
Bhagalpur-812 007.
64. Kameshwara Singh Darbhangha Sanskrit University
Kameshwar Nagar,
Darbhangha-846 008.
65. Magadh University
Bodhgaya-824 234.
S.No. Name

35
66. Lalit Narayan Mithila University
Kameshwarnagar,
Darbhangha-846 004.
67. Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha Univversity
Old Delhi College of Engg. Campus, Kashmere Gate
Delhi-110 006.
68. Maharshi Dayanand University
Rohtak-124 001.
69. Kurukshetra University
Kurukshetra-132 119.
70. Guru Jambheshwar University
Hissar-132 119.
71. Himachal Pradesh University
Summer Hills
Shimla-171 085.
72. Kashmir University
Hazratbal,
Srinagar-190 008.
73. Jammu University
Babasaheb Ambedkar Road, New Campus,
Jammu Tawi-180 004.
74. Ranchi University
Ranchi-834 008.
75. Periyar University
Salem-636 011.
76. Utkal University
V ani Vihar,
Bhubaneswar-751 004.
77. Berahmpur University
Bhanja Bihar
Berahmpur-760 007.
78. Sambalpur University
Jyoti Vihar, Burla Distt.
Sambalpur-768 019.
79. Shri Jagannath Sanskrit University
Puri-752002.
80. Punjab University
Chandigarh-160 014.
S.No. Name

36
81. Panjabi University
Patiala-147 002.
82. Guru Nanak Dev University
Amritsar-143 005.
83. Rajasthan University
Jaipur 302 004.
84. Jai Narain V yas University
`Jodhpur 342 001.
85. Mohan Lal Sukhadia University
Udaipur-313 001.
86. Maharishi Dayanand Saraswati University
Pushkar Bye Pass
Ajmer-313 001.
87. Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit,
Kalady-683 574. District, Ernakulam
88. Bundelkhand University
Kanpur Road
Jhansi-284 001.
89. Ch. Charan Singh University
Meerut 250 005.
90. Dr. Bhim Rao Ambedkar University
Agra-282 004.
91. Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Avadh University,
Faizabad-224 001.
92. Deendayal Upadhyay Gorakhpur University
Gorakhpur-273 009.
93. Lucknow University
Lucknow-226 007.
94. M.G. Kashi Vidyapeeth
Varanasi-221 002.
95. VBS Purvanchal University
Jaunpur-222 001.
96. Mahatma Jyotiba Phule Rohilkhand University
Doli Lal Agarwal Marg,
Bareilly-243 001.
97. Sampurnanand Sanskrit University
Varanasi 221 002.
98. Ch. Shahu Ji Maharaj Kanpur University
Kalyanpur, Kanpur-208024
S.No. Name

37
99. Hemwati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University
Srinagar-246 174 (Distt. Garhwal)
100. Kumaun University
Nainital-263 001.
101. Calcutta University
College Street,
Kolkata-700 073.
102. Jadavpur University
188 Raja S.C. Mallik Road,
Kolkata-700 032.
103. Burdwan University
Rajbati, Burdwan
Burdwan-713 104.
104. University of Kalyani
Kalyani-741 235.
105. University of North Bengal
P.O. North Bengal University
Raja Rammohunpur-734 430, Distt. Darjeeling
106. Rabindra Bharati University
56-A Barrackpore Trunk Road,
Kolkata-700 050.
107. V idyasagar University
West Midnapore-721 102.
108. Pt. Ravishankar Shukla University
Raipur-492 010.
109. Guru Ghasidas University
Bilaspur-495 009.
110. Indira Kala Sangit Vishwavidyalaya
Khairagarh-491 881.
111. Jagadguru Rambhadracharya Handicapped University
Chitrakootdham-210 204.  (U.P.)
112. V inoba Bhave University
P.B. No. 31,
Hazaribag-825 301.
113. National Academy of Legal Studies and Research University
3-4-761, Barkatpura
Hyderabad-500 027.
114. National Law Institute University
Bhopal-462 003.
S.No. Name

38
115. B.N. Mandal University
Laloo Nagar,
Madhepura-852  113.
116. Bengal Engineering and Science University
Shibpur,
Howrah-711 103.
117. Hidayatulla National Law University
Raipur-492 001.
118. Karnataka State Women's University
Bijapur-586 101, Karnataka
119. Jai Prakash University,
Chhapra-8410 301.
120. V eer Kunwar Singh University
Arrah-802 301.
121. Fakir Mohan University
Vyasa Vihar,
Balasore-756 019.
122. Dravidian University,
Kuppam-517 425.
123. North Orissa University,
Baripada,
Mayurbhanj-757 003.
124. Ravenshaw University
Cuttack
125. The Sido Kanhu Murmu University
Dumka- 814 101 Bihar
126. Bhagat Phool Singh University
Sonepat,
127. Dr. Babasabeb Ambedkar Technological University Lonere,
Raigad (Maharashtra)
128. W est Bengal University of Technology,
Kolkata,
129. Deenbandhu Chhotu Ram University of Science &
Technology
Murthal,
130. Chaudhary Devi Lal University
Sirsa,
131. Rajiv Gandhi Prodyogiki Vishwavidyalay
Bhopal.
S.No. Name

fo'ofo|ky; vuqnku vk;ksx
cgknqj'kkg tQj ekxZ
ubZ fnYyh&110 002
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
BAHADURSHAH ZAFAR MARG
NEW DELHI-110 002
F. No. 80-3/2005 (SU-I)
The Vice-Chancellor,
As per list attached 1 May, 2009
Subject: Special Development Grant to Young and Backward Universities during
X plan period — reg.
Sir,
As per the directions of Public Accounts Committee (PAC), the Chairman, UGC
has constituted the Project Oversight Committee to review the above proposals, due
to prolonged delay and failure on the part of the Universities to furnish the statement
of expenditure/Utilisation Certificate and completion certificates of the buildings.
You are requested to send the above documents by the end of 20-5-2009 without
further delay, so as to enable us to place the same before the Project Oversight
Committee meeting which is scheduled on 8th & 9th June, 2009 in the office of the
UGC failing which universities will face stringent measures to be taken by the UGC.
This may kindly be treated as Most Urgent.
Yours faithfully,
-Sd/-
(H.B. Sharma)
UNDER SECRETARY
Copy to:—
The Registrar,
As per list attached
39

40
S. No. Name of the Universities
1. Fakir Mohan University, Orissa
2. North Orissa University, Orissa
3. Mahatma Gandhi Chitrakoot Gramodaya Vishwavidyalaya, Chitrakoot
4. National Law Instt. University, Bhopal
5. Awadhesh Pratap Singh University, Rewa
6. Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit, Kalady, Ernakulam
7. Kannur University, Kannur
8. North Gujarat University, Patan
9. Saurashtra University, Rajkot
10. B.N. Mandal University, Madhepura, Bihar
11. V eer Kanwar Singh University, Ara
12. Patna University, Patna
13. Tilak Manjhi Bhagalpur University, Bhagalpur
14. Kameshwara Singh Darbhanga Sanskrit University, Darbhanga
15. Lalit Narayan Mithila University, Darbhanga
16. M.D.S. University , Ajmer
17. Jai Narain V yas University, Jodhpur
18. Mohanlal Sukhadia University, Udaipur
19. Vinoba Bhave University, Hazaribagh
20. Kannada University, Hampi
21. Kuvempu University, Sankarghatta
22. National Law School of India University, Bangalore
23. Gulbarga University, Gulbarga
24. University of Mysore, Mysore
25. Guru Jambheshwar University of Science & Technology, Hissar
26. Kashmir University, Srinagar
27. S.R.T.M. University, Nanded
28. North Maharashtra University, Jalgaon
29. Hidyatullah University National Law, Raipur
30. Dr. R.M.L. Awadh University, Faizabad

41
31. Bundelkhand University, Jhansi
32. V .B.S. Purvanchal University, Jaunpur
33. J.R.H. University, Chitrakoot Dham
34. M.J.P. Rohilkhand University, Bareilly
35. D.D.U. Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur
36. Bengal Engg. & Sc. University, Shibpur
37. NALSAR University of Law, Hyderabad
38. Andhra University, Visakhapatnam
39. Kakatiya University, Warangal
40. Sri Krishnadevaraya University, Anantapur
41. Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur
42. M.S. University, Thirunelveli
43. Periyar University, Salem
44. Rajiv Gandhi University, Itanagar
45. Guru Ghasidas University, Bilaspur
S. No. Name of the Universities

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
— NIL —
NEW DELHI; SHRI JASWANT SINGH
8 December, 2009 Chairman,
17 Agrahayana, 1931 (Saka) Public Account Committee.
42

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 2nd DECEMBER, 2009
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 2nd December, 2009 from 1500 hrs. to
1600 hrs. in Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Jaswant Singh — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
4. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
5. Shri Khagen Das
6. Shri Naveen Jindal
7. Shri Satpal Maharaj
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
10. Shri Ashwani Kumar
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller & Auditor General of India
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG Report Central (RC)
3. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
43

44
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar — Defence Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Singh — Secretary (Defence Production)
3. Smt. Indu Liberhan — Secretary (Defence Finance)
4. Vice Adml. D.K. Dewan — VCNS
5. Shri S.K. Sharma — DG (Acquisition)
6. Shri Ajoy Acharya — Additional Secretary (DP)
7. Shri S. Chandrasekaran — FA (Acquisition)
8. Smt. Preeti Sudan — JS & AM (MS)
9. Shri Gyanesh Kumar — JS (SY)
2. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
The withnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
5. The Committee then, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:—
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on "Injudicious Release of Grants".
6. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above-mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee  then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Draft Reports
in the light of the factual verifications received from the Office of the C&AG and
present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
**** Matters not related to this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE  GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY-NINTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH
LOK SABHA
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 09
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government Sl. No./Paragraph Nos:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 & 9
Total : 6
Percentages: 66.7
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Sl. No. Nil
Total : Nil
Percentage : Nil
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 4, 6 & 7
Total : 3
Percentage : 33.3
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
Sl. No. Nil
Total : Nil
 Percentage : Nil
45
GMGIPMRND—13LS—18.03.2010.