ACTIVITIES OF ATOMIC ENERGY
REGULATORY BOARD
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2013-2014
NINETIETH REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
90

NINETIETH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ACTIVITIES OF ATOMIC ENERGY
REGULATORY BOARD
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 09 December, 2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 09 December, 2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)

PAC No. 2017
Price: ` 70.00
     2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.
©

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION  OF THE P UBLIC ACCOUNTS C OMMITTEE (2013-14) ............. (iii)
COMPOSITION  OF THE P UBLIC ACCOUNTS C OMMITTEE (2012-13) ............. (v)
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................... (vii)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory ............................................................................. 1
 II. Regulatory Framework for Nuclear and Radiation Facilities..... 4
III. Development of Safety Policy, Standards, Codes and Guides.... 14
IV. Consents .................................................................................. 18
 V . Compliance and Enforcement of Regulatory Requirements ..... 27
VI. Radiation Protection ................................................................. 30
  VII. Emergency Preparedness for Nuclear and Radiation Facilities.... 38
 VIII. Decommissioning of Nuclear and Radiation Facilities ............. 39
   IX. Maintaining  Liasions  with  International  Bodies Dealing with
Nuclear Regulatory Issues ....................................................... 43
PART II
Observations/Recommendations ............................................. 47
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Eighteenth sitting of the PAC (2012-13) held
on 26th October, 2012 ............................................................ 59
II. Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the PAC (2013-14) held
on 17th October, 2013 ............................................................... 61

(iii)
COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambidurai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
†18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
††20. Dr. V . Maitreyan
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Smt. Ambika Soni
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri  Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
4. Shri Deepankar Kamble — Committee Officer
* Elected w.e.f.  14th August, 2013 vice  Dr. Girija Vya s appointed as Minister of Housing,
Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his retirement as a
Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
$ Elected  w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. EM. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister of
State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
 3. Dr. Baliram
 4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
 5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
 6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
 7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
 8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
  10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
  *11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
  12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
**13. Shri T akam Sanjoy
  14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
   16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
   17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
   18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
   19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
   20. Shri J.D. Seelam
   21. Shri N.K. Singh
   22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
 1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
 2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
 3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
 4. Shri Deepankar Kamble — Committee Officer
* Elected  w.e.f.  6th December, 2012  vic e Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
** Elected  w.e.f.  6th December, 2012  vice  Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Ninetieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Activities of
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board" based on C&AG Report No. 9 of 2012-13 relating to
Department of Atomic Energy.
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 22nd August, 2012.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2012-13) took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Atomic Energy and Atomic Energy Regulatory Board on the subject at
their sitting held on 26th October, 2012. The subject was subsequently carried forward
by the successor Committee (2013-14) for examination. The Committee considered and
adopted this Draft Report at their sitting held on 17th October, 2013. The Minutes of
the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommen-
dations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part-II of the Report.
5. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee for taking oral evidence of
the Department of Atomic Energy and Atomic Energy Regulatory Board and obtaining
information on the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Department of Atomic Energy and Atomic Energy Regulatory Board for
tendering evidence before the Committee and furnishing the requisite information
to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI,
04 November, 2013 Chairman,
13 Kartika, 1935 ( Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(vii)

REPORT
PART I
I. INTRODUCTORY
Radiation and radioactive substances which have immense beneficial
applications in the arena of power generation, medicine, industry and agriculture
simultaneously carry the risk of radiation to the persons engaged in the aforesaid
fields as well as to the environment.
2. As the activities of Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) and use of radiation
sources in  the country were increasing, it was considered essential to establish a
separate body to carry out regulatory and safety functions effectively. This resulted in
the creation of an Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) with powers to lay down
safety standards and assist DAE in framing rules and regulations for enforcing the
regulatory and safety requirements envisaged under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962
(AE Act).
3. The national and international regulatory scenario and the criticality of the
issue of radiation risks and safety prompted C&AG to undertake a study of the structure
and status of AERB as well as effectiveness of its role as the nuclear regulator of India.
4. The C&AG carried out a Performance Audit reviewing the legal and regulatory
framework of AERB and examined the prevailing management controls and
administrative procedures connected with licensing, inspection and enforcement
activities for the period 2005-06 to 2011-12. The performance audit commenced with a
presentation at an entry conference held with the representatives of AERB, DAE and
other stake holders to explain the audit objectives and approach. Audit reviewed the
functioning of the emergency preparedness in three selected NPPs of Tarapur Atomic
Power  Station (TAPS) — 1 & 2, Kaiga Generating Station — 1 & 2 and Madras Atomic
Power Station and  the districts of Boisar, Karwar and Kancheepuram. Audit criteria of
the evaluation of performance were derived from the various Acts/Rules/Manuals on
the subject viz. The Atomic Energy Act, 1962; Rules framed under the Atomic Energy
Act, 1962; AERB Constitution Order dated 15 November 1983; IAEA Handbook, Safety
Guide, Standards, Conventions, Manuals etc. and AERB Safety Codes, Standards,
Guides, Manuals, etc. and also from scrutinizing the records relating to issue of
consents, authorizations, licenses and regulatory inspections, minutes of the various
committee meeting; utility correspondences file, project reports etc. during the period
September to November 2010 and September to October 2011 at the offices of AERB,
DAE, the Safety Research Institute, Kalpakkam and the Directorate and Radiation
Safety, Thrissur. In addition, Audit attempted a comparative study of the systems
prevailing in AERB with the best practices available in other countries. The Audit

2
Report was finalised based on the responses received from AERB in February, 2012
and the discussions held during the exit conference on 22.03.2012. The Audit Report
was laid in Parliament on 22.08.2012.
5. The main findings of the Audit Report were as under:—
(i) Regulatory framework for nuclear and radiation facilities
• The legal status of AERB continues to be that of an authority subordinate
to the Central Government, with powers delegated to it by the latter despite
availability of international commitments, good practices and internal expert
committees’ recommendations.
• AERB does not have the authority for framing or revising the rules relating
to nuclear and radiation safety.
• The maximum amounts of fines are too low to serve as deterrents against
offences/contraventions related to nuclear and radiation facilities which
involve substantial risks. Further, AERB neither has any role in deciding the
quantum of penalties nor any powers with regard to imposition of the same.
(ii) Development of safety policy, standards, codes and guides
• AERB failed to prepare a nuclear and radiation safety policy for the country
in spite of a specific mandate in its Constitution Order of 1983. The absence
of such a policy at a macro-level can hamper micro-level planning of radiation
safety in the country.
• AERB had not developed 27 safety documents despite recommendations
of the Meckoni Committee in 1987 and the Raja Ramanna Committee in 1997
to expedite development of safety documents. There were significant delays
in development of the safety documents test - checked in audit.
(iii) Consents
• The consenting process and system for monitoring and renewal were found
to be weak in respect of radiation facilities. This led to a substantial number
of units of radiation facilities operating without valid licences. Non-
availability of basic licence documents in files also indicated deficiencies in
the maintenance of important consent files.
• Around 91 per cent of the medical X-ray facilities in the country had not
been registered with AERB and, as such, were out of its regulatory control.
• The Supreme Court had directed (2001) the setting up of a Directorate of
Radiation Safety (DRS) in each State for regulating the use of medical
diagnostic X-rays. However, as on date (July 2012), out of 28 States and
seven Union territories, DRS had been set up only in Kerala and Mizoram.
• AERB had not framed any rules to prescribe and fix the fees for recovery of
the cost of services rendered for the regulatory and consenting process, as
a result of which, it had to bear the cost of the consenting process.

3
(iv) Compliance and enforcement of regulatory requirements
• Frequencies of regulatory inspections had not been prescribed for radiation
facilities. In the absence of any benchmarks laid down by AERB, the
performance of AERB in carrying out such inspections of radiation facilities
was compared with the periodicity (lowest frequency from range) suggested
by IAEA-TECDOC (IAEA-Technical Documents) and observed that AERB
had not conducted 85 per cent regulatory inspections for both industrial
radiography and radiotherapy units, even though these were identified as
having a high radiation hazard potential; and there was a shortfall of over
97 per cent in the inspection in the case of diagnostic radiology facilities
every year which showed that AERB was not exercising effective regulatory
oversight over units related to the health of the public.
• AERB had failed to enforce safety provisions and compliance with its own
stipulations even when its attention was specifically drawn to deficiencies
in the case of units in Kerala.
(v) Radiation Protection
• The functions of monitoring of radiological exposure as well as the
responsibility of radiological surveillance of Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs)
lay with the operators of NPPs. Consequently, AERB had no direct role in
conducting independent assessments and monitoring to ensure radiological
protection of workers despite being the nuclear regulator of India.
• AERB did not have a detailed inventory of all radiation sources to ensure
effective compliance of regulations for safe disposal of disused sources.
There were no proper mechanisms in place to ensure/verify that radioactive
waste had actually been disposed off safely after utilization; the sources for
which consents for transport of radioactive material for safe disposal had
been given, had really been disposed off or not; and the radioactive sources
did not get out of regulatory control. The regulatory response mechanism
to trace and discover lost and/or orphan radioactive sources in the country
was not effective.
(vi) Emergency preparedness for nuclear and radiation facilities
• On-site emergency preparedness plans were being put in place by the Plant
Managements of NPPs and nuclear fuel cycle facilities were being tested by
them. Though actual periodic exercises prescribed, based on various types
of emergencies were conducted by them, AERB only reviewed the reports
of these exercises and did not directly associate itself in these exercises,
even as observers.
• Off-site emergency exercises carried out highlighted inadequate emergency
preparedness. Further, AERB was not empowered to secure compliance of
corrective measures suggested by it.
• No specific codes on emergency preparedness plans for radiation facilities
such as industrial radiography, radiotherapy and gamma chambers etc. had
been brought out although the hazard potential of these were rated as high.

4
(vii) Decommissioning of nuclear and radiation facilities
• There was no legislative framework in India for decommissioning of
nuclear power plants and AERB did not have any mandate except prescribing
of codes, guides and safety manuals on decommissioning.
• Even after the lapse of 13 years from the issue of the Safety Manual relating
to decommissioning by AERB, none of the NPPs in the country, including
those operating for 30 years and those which had been shut down, had a
decommissioning plan.
• Neither the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 nor the Rules framed thereunder had
any provision for creation of decommissioning reserves by the utilities.
Besides, AERB had no role to play in ensuring availability of adequate
funds.
(viii) Maintaining liaisons with international bodies dealing with nuclear regulatory
issues
• Although AERB maintained liaisons with international nuclear organisations,
it was slow in adopting international benchmarks and good practices in the
areas of nuclear and radiation operation.
• AERB had not yet availed of the opportunity of the peer review and appraisal
services of IAEA to get its regulatory framework and its effectiveness
reviewed by them.
6. Examination by the PAC: Against the above backdrop, the Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) selected the subject for detailed examination and report. The
Committee obtained Background material and detailed Advance Information from the
Department of Atomic Energy and took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Atomic Energy and Atomic Energy Regulatory Board on 26th October,
2012. Post Evidence Replies were also obtained from them. Considering the importance
of the subject, the successor PAC (2013-14) reselected the subject for examination.
Based on the written and oral depositions, the Committee examined the subject in
detail. The issues are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
II. REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR NUCLEAR AND RADIATION
FACILITIES
(i) Delay in conferring statutory status with enhanced legal powers to AERB
7. Audit scrutiny revealed that although international commitments, good
practices and internal expert committees' recommendations are available, the legal
status of AERB continues to be that of an authority subordinate to the Central
Government, with powers delegated to it by the latter.
8. The characteristic features of an independent regulator are that it should be
created in law, rather than by a decree, or an executive order, which in turn should
provide clarity on the jurisdiction, powers, duties and responsibilities of the regulator
as also the authority to make final decisions on matters within its statutory domain;

5
ability to set standards and make rules for the sector for which it has been provided
legal authority; to enforce its decisions, standards, codes and rules and for this; to
take recourse to a range of remedies, including penalties, appropriate to the severity of
violations; to compel production and provision of information as may be necessary
and monitor the performance of the regulated entities.
9. The need for an independent legal status of regulatory bodies has been
recognized and the number of Countries which have conferred legal status to them
through laws enacted by their legislatures includes Australia, Canada, France, Pakistan
and United States. Audit findings also pointed out that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has recognized the paramount need for independence for regulating
bodies and enumerated the existing independent Regulating Authorities in other
Countries which were all established under an Act viz. (i) The Australian Radiation
Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency; (ii) Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission;
(iii) The Nuclear Safety Authority of France; (iv) Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory  Authority;
and (v) Nuclear Regulatory Commission of USA.
10. In India, the AE Act and the rules framed under it provide the main legislative
and regulatory framework pertaining to atomic energy and radiation facilities in the
country. The AERB has been constituted under Section 27 of the AE Act, 1962, which
provides for exercise of powers by a subordinate office. This Section currently does
not provide for constitution of any authority or Board and merely provides for
delegation of powers to a subordinate authority. A subordinate office cannot be 'fully
autonomous'. For a regulator to be independent it should be able to frame rules, verify
compliance to rules and impose penalties as appropriate. It was notable that under the
AE Act, 1962 the powers conferred for imposition of penalty vest with the Central
Government viz. DAE and not the AERB.
11. The Meckoni Committee report, submitted way back in 1981, titled
'Reorganisation of Regulatory and Safety Functions', recommended the creation of an
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board, with powers to lay down safety standards and
assist DAE in framing rules and regulations for enforcing the regulatory and safety
requirements envisaged under the AE Act. The Committee also recommended that
AERB should be a statutory body under the Act to give AERB a legal basis. However,
even after a lapse of more than three decades, the fact remains that the AE Act, 1962 is
yet to be amended.
12. Audit findings traces out the chronology of events since the Meckoni
Committee Report from 1981 till the introduction of the NSRA Bill, 2011, bringing out
the protracted delay, DAE stated that the process of improving the existing legal
framework for introducing greater clarity in respect of separation of legal responsibilities
concerning promotional and regulatory functions, had already been taken up and the
Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill had been tabled in Parliament to give enhanced
legal status to the existing AERB. DAE further stated (February 2012) that the Nuclear
Safety Regulatory Authority (NSRA) Bill, 2011 introduced in the Lok Sabha envisages
consequential amendments to the AE Act, 1962 insofar as radiation safety is concerned,
the provisions of which are related to Sections 16, 17, 23, 26 and 30 and that the Atomic
Energy (Amendment) Bill, 2011 have since been drafted and circulated with the approval

6
of the Prime Minister as Minister-in-charge, for the comments of the concerned
Ministries. A proposal for introduction of the Atomic Energy (Amendment) Bill, 2011 in
the Parliament will be submitted shortly for approval of the Cabinet. DAE also stated
that delay in bringing out the Atomic Energy (Amendment) Bill, 2011 has occurred due
to unforeseen developments and the intent is that such a Bill will be as comprehensive
as possible.
13. In his oral testimony, the Secretary, DAE and Chairman, AEC deposed:—
"All our nuclear power plants are completely Government owned. It is a public
sector undertaking. We also decided that we will not have constitution of an
independent regulatory body under the Atomic Energy Act. It has to be a different
Act altogether. That is the Bill which has now been put on the Table of Parliament".
14. On a pointed query of the Committee as to whether the lacunae pointed out
by Audit have been addressed in the proposed Bill, the representative of DAE explained
as under:—
"Let me say how exactly this Bill was evolved. The starting point was Dr. Raja
Ramanna's Report in 1997. We started working on amendment to Atomic Energy
Act to incorporate those recommendations and set up an independent regulatory
authority. Several rounds of discussions took place. The Cabinet Note went for
some approval, but at the last moment, some changes were proposed. But by the
time we could address them, there was a change in the Central Government and
we were advised to go through a second round of consultations. That change
took place in 2004. We went through the second round of consultation and
again made some formulations taking into consideration what has transpired
globally in various other countries. We came up with a new Bill. That was around
2007-08. At the same time, since various other developments were taking place,
we had to wait for some time. Then, it was around 2010 after Mayapuri incident
happened, around that time, the idea came that separate out these two Bills
altogether so that Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority is totally independent.
The amendment to the Atomic Energy Act which we had pursued till now, it was
split in two different Bills and the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill was
formulated. This has already been introduced in the Parliament. It has been scrutinized
by the Departmentally-Related Standing Committee. Their recommendations we
have seen and now we are trying to take into consideration the changes which have
been suggested by the Parliamentary Committee. That job is almost complete and a
revised Cabinet Note etc.— that process will be completed soon. This is with regard
to the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011".
15. On being asked as to why the AERB does not have the authority for framing
or revising the rules relating to nuclear and radiation safety, the AERB in their written
reply stated that as per section 30 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, powers to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act are given to the Central Government.
However, AERB was always involved in consultative process while framing rules/
amending rules in so far as it relates to issues connected with nuclear and radiation
safety. AERB in exercise of its regulatory powers has, from time to time, framed Codes
and Guidelines for regulation of nuclear safety and radiation safety.

7
16. The Committee sought to know whether AERB feels that they have the
necessary legal status, authority, independence and adequate mandate to fulfil the
responsibilities expected of a nuclear regulator. The representatives of AERB thereon
stated that AERB does have the necessary legal status, authority, independence and
adequate mandate to fulfil the responsibilities of the nuclear safety regulator. AERB
was established in exercise of the powers conferred in the Central Government, under
section 27 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962. Further, AERB is mandated to discharge
the regulatory functions envisaged under sections 16, 17 and 23 of the Atomic Energy
Act, 1962. The sections 16, 17 and 23 of the Act deal with control over radioactive
substances (including prohibition and consent), special provisions as to safety (imposing
safety requirements, entry and inspection and enforcement of penalties) and
administration of Factories Act, 1948 (in relation to facilities of the Central
Government, any authority or corporation established by it or a Government Company
and engaged in carrying out the purposes of the Act), respectively. AERB also have the
powers of the competent authority to enforce the rules and regulations framed under
the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, for radiation safety in the country, viz. Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004; Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal of Radioactive
Wastes) Rules, 1987; Atomic Energy (Factories) Rules, 1996; and Atomic Energy
(Working of Mines, Minerals and Handling of Prescribed Substances) Rules, 1984. It
was further submitted that the Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004,
have adequate provisions for all the regulatory functions, including regulatory
consenting, safety review and assessment, inspections, enforcement, penalties,
prescribing dose limits, issuance of safety codes and standards, provisions with respect
to emergency preparedness, etc. It was further stated that in its functioning, AERB has
been fully autonomous with regard to its regulatory decision making. AERB has never
found its status as to being a body constituted by the Central Government under the
Atomic Energy Act, 1962, to be an impediment in the discharge of the assigned
responsibilities in an autonomous, professional and effective manner. This is evident
from the numerous examples of regulatory enforcement actions taken by AERB with
respect to the units of DAE. including nuclear power plants as well non-DAE radiation
installations. In extreme situations, AERB has even ordered shutdown of plants or
suspension of activities, as demonstrated in the earlier submissions.
17. The Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environmental and Forests in their 221st Report on the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011 had observed that the current Bill by and large seems
to meet three out of the four core values  viz. competence, independence, stringency
and transparency, but it still lacks somewhat on the count of independence. The
Committee found that there are certain Clauses in the Bill viz. Clause 14(1) (Removal
of Chairperson and Members of the Authority), Clause 42 (Directions by the Central
Government to the Authority) and Clause 48 (power of Central Government to
supersede the Authority), which may impinge on functional autonomy of the Authority.
The Committee was, therefore, of the view that the Department should explore the
possibilities of making the Regulatory Authority more independent and autonomous
not only to carry out its functions effectively but also to enjoy credibility among the
public and the trust of the people. [Clause 14(1), Clause 42, Clause 48]. It may be
pertinent to bring out that on the issue of independence and autonomy, the dissenting

8
minutes submitted by one of the member of the Committee it was pointed out that
unless Clause 14, 42 and 48 of the Bill are fully deleted or drastically amended, the
NSRA will have no meaningful autonomy.
18. On the action taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the
Parliamentary Standing Committee Report, the representative (AERB) submitted
during oral evidence that they were in the process of formulating amendments to
accommodate the recommendations of the Standing Committee and were in touch
with the Ministry of Law and Justice, as explained under:—
"Sir, with regard to the features of Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill,
first, let me say about the status. The status is that the Standing Committee has
finished its job. They have given the report. Now, we are in the process of
formulating amendments to accommodate the recommendations of the Standing
Committee. We are in touch with the Ministry of Law and Justice".
19. On the aspect of independence of AERB, the Secretary, DAE and Chairman
AEC himself pointed out during oral evidence before the Committee that the kind of
autonomy contemplated did not exist earlier. He submitted that:—
"Further on, way back in 1997-98, there was a Raja Ramanna Committee. That
Committee reviewed in the light of further growth of the programme with more
number of facilities and what needs to be done. The Committee gave very
important recommendations in enhancing within the Atomic Energy Act; the
statutory part of the AERB itself although even at that time it was not conceived
to be completely independent because there was a Committee in which Chairman,
AEC as well as Chairman, AERB were supposed to be the members. So that kind
of freedom, as it is now being thought by us, did not exist at that time".
(ii) Regulatory independence and clarity of AERB's role
20. Article 8 of the Convention on Nuclear Safety of the IAEA, ratified by the
Government of India on March 31, 2005, stipulates that each contracting party should
take appropriate steps to ensure an effective separation between the functions of the
regulatory body and those of any other body or organization concerned with the
promotion or utilization of nuclear energy. A regulatory body must be able to exercise
its key regulatory functions (standard-setting, authorisation, inspection and
enforcement) without pressure or constraint. Audit compared the criteria as laid down
by IAEA for and the present positions in India to assess the status of AERB and made
point-wise observations as tabulated below:—
Criteria laid down by IAEA Present status in India Audit Observations
12 3
Institutional separation of DAE is responsible for non- The fact that the Chaiman,
regulatory and non-regulatory regulatory activities of power AEC and the Secretary, DAE
functions. generation whereas AERB are one and the same
is responsible for regulatory negates the very essence
functions of DAE activities. of institutional separation

9
In the present set-up, AERB of regulatory and non-
as well as DAE are responsible regulatory  functions.
to the Atomic Energy
Commission (AEC).
Fixed  terms  for regulatory The  Chairman  is  to  be appointed Internationally
officials   and   constraints for a period of three years or until benchmarked practices
on   removal of  regulatory further orders, whichever  is earlier, have not been adopted.
officials on political grounds. implying that he can be removed
before completion of his term of three
years. Currently, however there is no
fixed term of office of  the Chairman,
AERB and extensions are granted on
a case to case basis. Three Chairmen
worked for periods of three years
each during 1990-1993, 1993-1996
and 1996-1999, two for a period of
five years each during 2000-2005 and
2005-2010 and one for a period of
seven years during  1983 to 1990.
Separate budgetary and As per the Constitution  Order  of As against the best practice
employment authority for AERB issued in November 1983, of the financing mechanism
the regulatory body. DAE   provides    administrative of the re gulatory being
support  with  regard  to AERB’s defined in the legal
budget,  parliamentary  work  and framework,  AERB is
matters relating to establishment dependent on DAE for
and accounts. AERB prepares bud getary and administrative
and  submits  its  budgetary support.
requirement to DAE. DAE
allocates   the   budget   under
separate account heads of
AERB.
Reporting to an official As per the AERB Constitution Chairman AERB reports  to
or the organization Order   1983,   the   Chairman; Chairman AEC. Chairman
without conflicting AERB reports to the Chairman, AEC is also the Secretary,
responsibilities. AEC. DAE which is one of
the bodies regulated by
AERB, resulting in conflict
of responsibilities and
interests.
12 3

10
Audit, thus, concluded that AERB has no effective independence as per the
criteria laid down by IAEA. The Expert Committee headed by Shri Raja Ramanna in
1997 had recommended that the financial powers of Chairman, AERB should be
enhanced fully to that of a Secretary of a Department in the Government of India and
he should be given full powers to exercise control on the funds allocated under his
budget head. However, the Chairman AERB continues to remain subordinate to
Secretary DAE in this respect.
21. Audit scrutiny revealed that AERB's independence was circumscribed by the
following aspects: (i) there is no institutional separation of regulatory and non-regulatory
functions; (ii) the tenure of the AERB Chairman was not fixed and he works in a
capacity similar to any head of department in DAE; (iii) there was no separate budgetary
authority; and (iv) AERB reports to an official/organization whose activities were
supposed to be regulated by it i.e. AEC.
22. The Committee sought to know as to what was the status on the adoption of
the recommendations of the Raja Ramanna Committee for effective independence of
the AERB as per the criteria laid down by IAEA. AERB thereupon stated in their
written reply that the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board was effectively separated from
the organisations it regulates and was independent in its regulatory decision making
and in the case of AERB, the de-facto independence was evident from the safety
performance of the nuclear power plant and fuel cycle facilities which were on par with
the international benchmarks. The International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group
(INSAG), the most eminent Advisory Group to the IAEA on issues related to Nuclear
Safety had recognised that a regulatory body cannot be absolutely independent in all
respects of the rest of Government: it must function within a national system of laws
and under budget constraints, just as other governmental organisations do. However,
the issue of de-facto independence of the regulatory body was important from the
consideration of the capability of the regulator in ensuring safety. Recognising this
aspect, the Convention on Nuclear Safety calls for 'effective separation' of the regulatory
body from the organisations involved in promotional aspects. In order to strengthen
the existing legal framework governing nuclear regulation, and to further enhance the
institutional separation between promotional and regulatory functions under such a
legal framework, Government of India has introduced the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority (NSRA) Bill, in 2011, in the Parliament.
23. The Committee when pointed out that apparently the tenure of Chairman,
AERB was not fixed which seemed to indicate that it was not in congruence with
internationally benchmarked practices, the AERB submitted that as per 'the present
practice, appointments to the post of Chairman, AERB were made for a period of three
years, in the first instance by the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet. In case the
term of a sitting Chairman was considered for extension, the same was considered for
a further term of up to three years. Introduction of fixed terms for appointment of
Chairman and Members of the regulatory authority was one of the aspects included in
the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011, which was presently under
consideration of the Parliament'.

11
24. The Committee sought to know whether the AERB was dependent on DAE
for budgetary and administrative support, in reply there to, the AERB categorically
stated that they are not dependent on DAE for its budget and stated that their budget
was presented to the Atomic Energy Commission directly for approval and not to
DAE. DAE extends only administrative/service support to AERB, which had not
compromised the functional independence of the nuclear regulator.
25. During oral evidence, the Committee sought to know whether the Department
Related Standing Committee on Science and Technology had proposed any safeguards
with regard to the autonomy of AERB, the representative stated as under:—
"With regard to what exactly are the features of this Bill, it is to constitute a
Council of Nuclear Safety to oversee and review policies relating to radiation
and nuclear safety, and to establish statutory regulatory bodies for radiation
nuclear safety. Here, I am saying 'bodies' because it is not that we are setting up
Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority, it also provides for setting up of regulatory
body for the strategic programme of the country separately. One very good
aspect which has been included in the long title of the Bill is 'To establish an
authority, etc., based on a scientific approach, operating experience and best
practices followed by nuclear industry and to ensure...'. The point that you
raised, Sir, as to how the international practices will come in, this is included right
in the long title and later on also. The long title, again, I will repeat, '...based on
scientific approach, operating experience and best practices followed by nuclear
industry'. The long title itself takes care of the point which you are suggesting.
I have my full presentation ready which I have made earlier to the other Standing
Committee. First, there will be a Council which will be headed by the
Prime Minister of India; and several Union Ministers, Cabinet Secretary and
eminent experts to be nominated will be members of that Council. The Council
shall oversee and review the policies with regard to radiation safety, nuclear
safety and it will constitute such committees for the selection of Chairperson
and members of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority. It will also constitute
appellate authority. This NSRA shall consist of a Chairperson, two whole-time
members and not exceeding four part-time members. The Chairman and members
will be appointed on the recommendation of the Search Committee. They will
hold office for a period of five years."
26. The Committee also sought to know the operational processes and the working
of the proposed Council to be headed by the PM and whether the Chairman and
Members of NSRA will be reporting to the Council The representative of DAE replied
thereon that:—
"No. It will be reporting on the overall policy with regard to nuclear and radiation
safety. Overall broad guidelines will be provided by the Council. But all details
are left... The report will come only to Parliament.''
27. On a pointed query as to whether the report of the NSRA will not be vetted by
the Council, the representative replied in the affirmative as under:—
"Yes, Sir. V etting was not provided for. Since it was going to be an independent
authority being set up by an Act of Parliament, the report will be coming to
Parliament only."

12
28. On a further specific query as to whether the Department of Atomic Energy is
satisfied that all the three basic functions of a Regulatory Body are fully reflected in
the proposed Bill, the representative testified:—
"..........  Section 20 (2) (of the Bill), lists what this authority shall do. The very first
provision is, devise and implement policies and programmes for radiation safety
and nuclear safety; to ensure that use of atomic energy or radiation in all its
application is safe for the health of radiation workers, members of the public and
environment. This is within the purview of the regulatory authority. The name is
Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority. The current AERB will translate into that."
29. The Committee asked whether the proposed authority would be an
independent regulatory Authority like the SEBI, the representative responded:—
"It is independent. It will not report to the Departments; it will be serviced by the
DAE."
30. On a pointed query as to whether the report goes to the President of India
and through him to the Parliament, the representative submitted during evidence that:—
 "Yes, Sir. I think it directly comes to the Parliament."
31. The Committee sought to know as to who would chair the proposed Authority
and who would be answering the Parliament on behalf of the proposed Authority. The
representative thereupon submitted during evidence that:—
"There is a provision again in the Bill which says that the Chairperson, Members,
Secretary, officers and other employees shall be public servant within the meaning
of the Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. So, they are independent but they are
public servants. That is very clearly specified. I am reading from Clause 43 of the
Bill. Secondly, with regard to reporting, it very clearly says in Clause 39 that
authority shall prepare once every year an Annual Report which shall be
forwarded to the Central Government and the copy of this report as received by
the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as it is received, before the Houses
of Parliament. This is specified again in this Bill."
32. Asked whether the proposed Authority will work under the Department of
Atomic Energy, the representative of DAE testified that the Authority will not be
working under but would rather be serviced by the Department of Atomic Energy. He
also submitted that the final authority would be the Chairman of the Authority.
(iii) Absence of powers to make rules and enforcement thereof
33. Audit scrutiny pointed out that AERB does not have the authority for framing
or revising  Rules relating to nuclear and radiation safety. The existing Rules regulating
various activities in the field of nuclear and radiation safety viz. Atomic Energy (Working
of the Mines, Minerals and Handling of Prescribed Substances) Rules, 1984; Atomic
Energy (Safe Disposal of Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987; Atomic Energy (Control of
Irradiation of Food) Rules, 1996; Atomic Energy (Factories) Rules, 1996; and Atomic
Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 were all framed by DAE and not by AERB.
DAE stated (February 2012) that as per Section 30 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962,

13
powers to make Rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act were given to the
Central Government i.e. DAE. AERB was only involved in the consultative process
and framing/amending rules insofar as they related to issues connected with nuclear
and radiation safety. Thus, confirming that AERB had no authority to make Rules.
34. Audit findings pointed out that DAE has not been prompt in delegation of
powers of the competent authority to AERB. AERB functions as a 'competent authority'
in respect of the Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004. It was noticed that
while AERB was constituted in 1983 as the safety regulator, it was notified as a 'competent
authority' only in December 1987. When the Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection)
Rules were replaced in 2004, the Chairman, AERB was notified as the 'competent
authority' in October 2006. As a consequence of the delay, accountability could not
have been fixed in the event of any disaster due to absence of such legal authority
during the intervening periods.
35. A regulatory authority should be able to enforce its decisions, standards,
codes and rules. Audit noticed instances where the rules were ambiguous. Audit
pointed out that Clause 30 of the Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004
(RPR 2004) empowers 'any person', duly authorized under Sub-section (4) of Section
17 of the AE Act to inspect premises, radiation installations and conveyances. While
accepting this observation, DAE assured that a new set of rules would be promulgated
on enactment of the NSRA Act, replacing the RPR 2004.
36. Section 30(3) of the AE Act, 1962 provides that Rules made under this Act
may provide that a contravention of the rules shall, save as otherwise expressly provided
in this Act, be punishable with fine, which may extend to five hundred rupees. Audit
pointed out that the penalty provisions are administered by DAE and AERB has no
role in deciding the quantum or imposition of penalties. Moreover, the maximum amounts
of fines are too low to serve as deterrents against offences/contraventions related to
nuclear and radiation facilities which involve substantial risks.
37. On being asked as to how such low amount of fines would act as deterrent
against offences related to nuclear and radiation facilities involving substantial risks,
the representative submitted before the Committee during evidence that:—
"In fact, talking about the entire gamut of violation and not only of X-rays,
I would say that there are cases of non-compliances. When we find a case of
non-compliance, first thing we do is that we ask them to correct it and usually it
gets corrected. We have a series of graded kind of approach particularly in
nuclear power plants. Many times we ask for some augmented systems, we ask
for additional things to be put in and in very serious cases we even suspend the
operations or activities. In fact, there is a long list of enforcement actions that we
take and our Annual Report brings out the enforcement actions that we have
taken. I must say that if we curtail the operation of facility even for one week, the
economic penalty is huge. The fine amount is insignificant compared to the
curtailment of operation resulting in economic penalty."

14
38. When the Committee further questioned the representatives of AERB
whether they impose the fine as well as curtailment of operations simultaneously,
the reply of the representatives of AERB was that provision of 'fine' was never used.
39. It was notable in the 50 years of operation of DAE and 29 years of operation
of the AERB, the opportunity to invoke the penal provisions under Section 24 or
Section 30 (3) of Atomic Energy Act, 1962, never presented itself. In this context, the
Committee sought to know whether it was a pointer to the lack of effectiveness of the
regulator and whether there was any proposal to amend the existing provisions. The
AERB in their written reply stated that AERB has been using enforcement actions,
including suspension/withdrawal of consents as the preferred tool for ensuring
compliance to the requirements and these enforcement actions were commensurate
with the seriousness of the non-compliances, which range from written warnings to
withdrawal/suspension of the consent. It may be noted that withdrawal of consent by
itself was a very severe economic penalty and has the potential of seriously affecting
the financial health of the stakeholder. Moreover these enforcement actions can be
taken promptly, for ensuring quick and effective compliance to the specified
requirements. It was further submitted that the existing Act and Rules have adequate
penal provisions. Similar penal provisions are also included in the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011.
III. DEVELOPMENT  OF  SAFETY  POLICY ,  STANDARDS,  CODES  AND  GUIDES
40.  Audit scrutiny pointed out that AERB failed to prepare a nuclear and radiation
safety policy for the country in spite of a specific mandate in its Constitution Order of
1983. The absence of such a policy at a macro-level can hamper micro-level planning of
radiation safety in the country.
41. Subsequent to the Audit findings and suggestion, AERB had agreed that it
will be useful to consolidate the policy level statements contained in the various
regulatory documents of AERB into a separate document. The work on consolidating
the policies was stated to be in progress and the draft document was expected to be
available soon.
42. Audit pointed out that it was after a lapse of 18 years of its existence that
AERB brought out a Safety Guide only in 2001, specifying a provisional list of safety
documents which comprised codes, standards and guides to be prepared by it. AERB
identified 148 codes, standards, and guides for development under various thematic
areas. On a subsequent re-assessment, it deleted 25 safety documents and added
another 45 safety documents in the provisional list, for development. AERB developed
141 of the 168 safety documents that it was expected to develop while 27 safety
documents relating to safety codes, standards and guides remained to be developed
by AERB. The Meckoni Committee in 1987 and the Raja Ramanna Committee in 1997
had stressed upon the need for hastening the process of development of codes and
guides.
43. DAE stated that most of the documents that were being developed in AERB
dealt repeatedly with complex, high-end and evolving technology areas as well as
related management and regulatory processes. AERB ensured that the views of the

15
relevant stakeholders, experts and the regulators were appropriately considered during
the development of regulatory documents. There had been some instances where
resolution of contradictory views from the experts and stakeholders on critical issues
had taken substantial time, requiring extensive consultations, analytical work and
procedural changes in the relevant management and regulatory areas.
44. Audit further pointed out that while the average period of publication of
safety was prescribed to be three to four years, only six out of the 25 cases were
developed within that timeframe and in three cases it took as long as 8 to 12 years to
develop. AERB stated that the delays were due to various factors such as non-
availability of expertise, need for consensus among stakeholders, multiple technical
support organizations involved, limited operating experience, feedback from experts,
national and international developments, etc.
45. In their written submissions to the Committee, DAE stated that all the aspects
of safety regulation by AERB are guided by several high level documents which
enshrine elements of nuclear and radiation safety policies and principles/policy
objectives in the areas of the codes on siting, design, operation of nuclear power
plants, etc. DAE also claimed that AERB has been able to deliver an adequate regulatory
regime for nuclear and radiological safety.
46. Asked to about the lessons drawn from the Fukushima nuclear disaster, the
AERB submitted that the Post Fukushima review conducted by AERB-appointed high
level committee has acknowledged the inherent strengths in Indian regulatory and
safety review system. In fact, there has been a strong tradition of robust safety reviews
right from early days of nuclear power programme. This was in contrast to the aspects
brought out in the Japanese Independent Commission which investigated the
Fukushima nuclear accident. Further, the Atomic Energy Commission appointed a high
level expert committee for review of institutional aspects in India and to draw lessons
from the Japanese experience as well as the report of the Independent Investigation
Commission. The report of this high level expert committee was presently being finalised.
The report would be forwarded after it was issued by the Committee.
47. On being asked about the action taken following the recommendation of high
level Committee constituted after the Fukushima Nuclear Disaster, the Chairman AERB
deposed:—
"After Fukushima incident, AERB set up a high level committee and the utilities
also set up their own committees for investigations. As a culmination of various
reviews done by the utilities and by the regulator, a list of recommendations has
emanated. The first finding was that we have several strengths through which
we can withstand the kind of situations that Fukushima had created. To add
further to the safety, additional measures have been recommended — probably
I need not go into the technical details of those — basically to be able to
withstand an extended period of power failure, extended period of renewed
availability of cooling water and so on. The recommendations that have come
from that have been categorised into immediate ones, intermediate ones and
long term ones. In fact, we are one of the few countries in the world where

16
some implementation measures have already taken place on ground. In fact,
recently there was a kind of peer review of all the countries on the Fukushima
related work that we have done. It was evident that we are among the earlier
ones who have already started implementation. Many countries are still in the
review process and coming to decisions of what should be done and so
on. Things like emergency provision of water supplies, emergency connection
of mobile power pacts into the power plant and all that — those things are
already placed in our plants. Implementation-wise, it is being followed up. In
fact, we have a long history and tradition of safety upgrades in our nuclear
power plants because any lessons we learnt — there was Chernobyl and so
many small things happening — from operating experience feed back. From
those, the intensive reviews that took place in AERB need to be seen by outsiders
to be believed. The recommendations come from there. Their implementation
is followed up on a very regular basis. We have a system of periodic safety
review of our nuclear power plants apart from the day-to-day safety reviews.
In fact, we give license to our nuclear power plants for five years at a time. At
the end of those five years for renewal of licence, the entire operating
performance history has to be seen, what are the pending items, have they been
implemented, what are their status, that has to be seen. Every tenth year we
have to review the plant against the current safety standards; not the original
standards based on which it was made; against today's standards; and what are
the non-performances and how they can be taken care of. I think the system for
nuclear power plants is extremely satisfactory."
48. The Committee sought to know whether AERB's failed to prepare a
comprehensive nuclear and radiation safety policy document, the AERB submitted as
under:—
"One of the mandates given to AERB as per its Constitution has been to Develop
Safety Codes, Guides and Standards for siting, design, construction,
commissioning, operation and decommissioning of the different types of plants,
keeping in view the international recommendations and local requirements and
develop safety policies in both radiation and industrial safety areas. Towards
fulfilment of this mandate that AERB has been involved in formulation and
issuance of the Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 (earlier there
was the Radiation Protection Rules, 1971), Atomic Energy (Factories) Rules,
1996; and the 141 safety and regulatory documents of AERB, which include
20 codes and 14 standards, which deal with the mandatory safety and regulatory
requirements. During the course of the CAG Audit and in the subsequent
submissions/responses, AERB has taken pains to explain that AERB has
developed adequate policies with respect to radiation safety, industrial safety
and nuclear safety and their regulation. These policies are in line with the
requirements of IAEA and the Factories Act, 1948 (with respect to Industrial
Safety). These policies and the relevant statements can be seen in the above
Rules, Codes and Standards issued by AERB. The regulatory activities of AERB
and the specific safety requirements stipulated in the rules and the regulatory
documents of AERB are in line with these policies. In the regulatory activities,

17
AERB has also been careful with respect to optimal and effective use of its
resources and manpower. As the organisation has been growing in its capacity,
AERB has been expanding the regulatory control activities to enhance the
coverage in the areas having lower hazard potential."
49. It was further assured that:—
"While it should not be construed that AERB has not developed the safety
policies as it was mandated, AERB has however agreed to the suggestion of
the CAG that it would be useful to consolidate the policy level statements
contained in the various regulatory documents of AERB into a separate policy
document, as it would be useful from the point view of openness and in reducing
the communication gaps while interacting with the outside agencies. The work
on consolidating the policies is currently in progress and the draft document
is expected to be available soon."
50. The AERB further submitted that they have developed adequate policies
and in the absence of appropriate safety policies, AERB could not have been
instrumental in regulating and achieving the safety record on par with the international
standards, in the facilities and activities it was regulating. In the area of implementation
and enforcement of those policies, AERB had been following a graded approach, so
as not to be overtly restrictive in areas/activities that have lower radiation hazards
and larger societal benefits such as the diagnostic X-ray facilities.
51. Noting that even after 15 years of the recommendations of the Raja Ramanna
Committee, AERB has not been able to identify external agencies for development
of codes and guides, the Committee sought the comments of the DAE in the matter.
The AERB reiterated their earlier submission as under:—
"The process of document preparation, review and incorporation/disposition of
stakeholder views are done through a multi-tier system of expert committees.
This system has the Advisory Committee on Nuclear Safety (ACNS) at the apex
level with area-specific committees such as ACCGORN (Regulatory Policies),
ACRDS (Siting), ACS (Security), ACRS (Radiological Safety), ACCGD (Design
of NPPs), ACCGASSO (NPP-Operation), ACCGQA (Quality Assurance),
ACRDCSE (Civil & Structural Engineering Safety), ACIFS (Industrial & Fire
Safety), ACSDRW (Radioactive Waste Management), and numerous working groups
of experts under them for preparation of the drafts. The experts serving in all of
these committees are drawn from the National R&D Centres, Industries, Academic
Institutes and Government Organisations, apart from retired specialists having
experience in the related fields, available in the public domain. Most of the AERB
documents deal with very specialized and advanced technology areas. There are
experts in the related areas, available across external agencies in the country, whose
services are utilized by AERB, but the number of such experts is limited."
52. When the Committee sought to know about the process of consolidating the
documents pertaining to the AERB's mission objectives and principles brought out in
various policy status, codes and guides as a separate policy document, AERB reiterated
that it has adequate policies for radiation safety, nuclear safety and industrial safety
and their regulation, in  the facilities / installations coming under its jurisdiction and

18
these policies form part of the already existing high level documents of AERB, namely
the codes, standards.
IV . CONSENTS
53. Audit findings pointed out that the consenting process and system for
monitoring and renewal are weak in respect of radiation facilities. This has led to a
substantial number of units of radiation facilities operating without valid licences.
Non-availability of basic licence documents in files also indicated deficiencies in
the maintenance of important consent files.
54. The Code for 'Regulation of Nuclear and Radiation Facilities' of AERB
defines 'consent' as a written permission issued to an applicant by the regulatory
body to perform specified activities related to nuclear and radiation facilities. The
objective of regulatory consent was to secure an effective assurance that the safety
of the workers employed and the public at large, of the environment and of plant and
equipment was not at risk and that all activities were being carried out in accordance
with the prescribed processes and systems, ensuring safety of all. As per Rule 3 (3)
of the RPR, 2004, the facilities deploying radiation and/or radioactive sources need
consents in the form of licences, authorizations and registrations from the competent
authority. While licences are applicable to sources with the highest radiation potential
such as Nuclear Power Plants, particle accelerators, radiotherapy, industrial
radiography; authorisation are required for medium hazard potential such as gamma
chambers, nuclear medicine facilities, production facilities of nucleonic gauges;
and registration are required for low hazard potential such as Medical X-ray units,
research institutes, etc.
55. The regulator has the responsibility of bringing not only all persons,
organisations, equipment or facilities concerned with the atomic energy sector under
its regulatory ambit by appropriate consent but also of ensuring that all processes
and systems prescribed for securing safety are being followed by the consentees on
a continuous and regular basis by adequate and effective regulatory supervision and
monitoring. AERB, being the competent authority, was mandated to grant regulatory
consents under RPR, 2004.
56. As per RPR, 2004, consents are necessary for radiation activities viz, siting,
designing, constructing, commissioning and decommissioning of a radiation
installation; Procurement of sealed sources, radiation generating equipment and
equipment containing radioactive sources, for the purposes of manufacture and supply;
Package designing for transport of radioactive material; Shipment approval for
radioactive consignments; and Procurement of such other source or adoption of
such practice as may be notified by the competent authority, from time to time.
57. The Nuclear Projects Safety Division (NPSD) of AERB processes applications
for consents for siting, constructing and commissioning of nuclear projects and carries
out required safety reviews and assessments as per the established process for issuance
of consents. NPSD had issued 87 consents for siting, designing, constructing and
commissioning of nuclear power plants and research reactors. Audit findings pointed
out that the Radiation Safety Division (RSD) had issued 23,440 consents for various

19
facilities under its purview during the period 2005-06 to 2011-12. DAE stated that
siting reviews involved several complex issues and required investigation of many
site-specific issues.
(i) Licences
58. Licences are permissions granted by AERB which are related to the
operations of nuclear fuel cycle facilities and certain categories of radiation facilities.
RPR, 2004 stipulates that no person shall establish or decommission a radiation-
generating installation without a licence. The audit observed that there were no major
deviations from the laid down procedure, except that some units did not submit their
applications to AERB within the prescribed time limit of at least 90 days before the
expiry of the existing licence.
59. Audit pointed out that it was evident that the licencing process for radiation
facilities was adequate only in respect of Gamma irradiators and medical cyclotrons.
In all other types of units, the licensing and renewal process was unsatisfactory,
including units relating to research accelerators, industrial radiography and radiotherapy,
all of which were categorized as having 'high’ radiation potential hazards. Further, the
non- availability of basic licence documents in files and the failure of AERB to monitor
the renewal of licences indicates deficiencies in the maintenance of important files
relating to licences. As a result, a substantial number of units of radiation installations
with high radiation hazard potential, were operating without valid licences. The
RPR, 2004 envisaged that AERB would issue licences/authorizations to users of radiation
sources. Audit highlighted that AERB was, however, slow in bringing all the radiation
users in the country under its regulatory control for the last eight years. This indicates
lack of sufficient manpower and laxity on the part of AERB in institutionalizing the
processes and enforcing regulatory control on radiation users.
60. With respect to radiation facilities like research accelerators and industrial
radiography units, in the past, prior to the promulgation of the Atomic Energy (Radiation
Protection) Rules, 2004, the granting of formal "Licenses" was not in practice. After the
Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 came into being, AERB had started
the process of issuing formal Licenses duly signed by the Competent Authority, to
these radiation facilities from 2006 onwards. Audit scrutiny pointed out that while
AERB had been able to issue formal licenses to all facilities that came after 2006,
difficulties were faced with the older ones. DAE stated that it began the process of
issue of formal licences only in 2006. It further stated that although formal documents
are not being issued as licences, various regulatory clearances in a graded approach
were being issued to the user institutions at various stages and it ensured that user
institutions had all prerequisites prior to commencement of commissioning of the
facilities. It added that with the significant increase in its manpower, it was expected to
complete the backlog of issue of licences by February, 2012.
61. The Committee sought to know specifically whether it was mandatory to
bring to kind of licensing regime. The Chairman, AERB during oral evidence submitted
that:—
"The regulations require that you cannot operate a machine without registration.
If it happens, they are violating the law. What I am saying is that we are trying to

20
bring them to conform (to) that requirement. We have to have some infrastructure
which we are trying to bring in. One is this Directorate at the State level and
second is the system of registration whereby they get a kind of motivation to get
registered with the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board. On both counts, we have
been working."
62. The Committee was informed that even though formal licenses were not
available for some of the facilities, all these facilities were subjected to safety reviews
and regulatory supervision, including regulatory inspections by AERB. In principle,
the license to operate the units with high radiation potential after expiry of the license
period stands cancelled. However, this situation does not normally arise as the renewals
of licenses were obtained within the time frame by such institutes, AERB follow-up
with reminders and directives. With respect to the industrial radiography units, AERB
has now made a stringent provision by issuing circulars to the source suppliers for not
providing fresh sources to the facilities not having valid license. AERB has not specified
penal action proposed to be taken against such units. Even though AERB had issued
circulars to Industrial radiotherapy units, applications were still awaited. In view of
this AERB was now planning to take stronger enforcement measures. Circulars had
already been issued to them to the effect that beyond a cut-off period, permission for
replenishment of sources will only be issued after they obtain formal licenses as per
current norms. This reinforces the weakness of AERB as a regulator to effectively
ensure compliance against breach of basic regulatory requirements  viz,  operating
without license.
63. The Committee was further informed that AERB had not taken any penal
action against the research accelerators, which were being operated by educational
institutions and Central Government institution which have not renewed the licenses
even after considerable expired time. AERB was now issuing show cause notices to
these institutions. With respect to the Industrial Radiography Units, it may be noted
that these were considered to be of high radiation hazard potential, some of them are
not possessing formal licenses, all facilities were under safety review and regulatory
coverage of AERB as claimed. AERB has statedly initiated stronger enforcement
measures to prevent them from obtaining fresh sources without having a valid license.
64. According to Section 30 of the AE Act, the Central Government has been
empowered to make rules to levy fees for issue of licences. The Ministry of Finance
had issued instructions to levy or revise the fees towards the recovery of cost of
services rendered for the consenting process. AERB, in the capacity of being the
competent authority under RPR, 2004 has been authorized to prescribe fees.
65. On a specific query of the Committee on the current status of the delays in the
cases of citing consents of three Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs), namely PFBR, RAPP-6
and RAPP-5 where delay has been attributed to the issuance of siting consents, the AERB
stated that the siting consent for PFBR was issued on 9th October, 2000 and for RAPP-
5&6 on 26th November, 2005. The NPPs at RAPP-5&6 became operational in 2010,
and PFBR was currently in an advanced stage of construction. AERB also mentioned that
there had been no delays attributable to regulatory review of these NPPs towards issue
of siting consents. considering the mandate of AERB with regard

21
to NPP safety. The review processes, including requirements of review were well
established in AERB. If the submittals from the applicant for review did not conform to
the review requirements, additional data/information/investigation had to be submitted
so that the safety review was conducted appropriately prior to the issue of consent.  If the
submittals conformed to all requirements of content, quality and time schedule specified
in the AERB regulatory documents for review process, then the specified minimum lead
time for review could be achieved. Any interactions during review process due to lack of
data/information from the applicant added to the time taken for review.
66. What action could AERB take if units did not submit their applications
within the prescribed time limit of 90 days before the expiry of the existing license,
AERB submitted that in such cases, they would issue necessary directive to the plant
to stop its operation and maintain a safe configuration. In the case of NPPs and Fuel
cycle facilities, AERB would continue with its process of safety supervision and
inspections, for ensuring that the facility was complying with the necessary safety
measures. In case of radiation facilities the license to operate after expiry of the
license period stood cancelled. In cases where the renewals were not obtained within
the time frame by such institutes, AERB followed-up with reminders and directives.
67. The AERB also replied that it was taking a number of steps to strengthen
the systems for monitoring and renewal of consents to the radiation facilities as
well as the related regulatory activities. These included development of an e-licensing
system for filing of applications and issue/renewal of consents, increased inspection
coverage for radiation facilities, conduct of awareness programmes and establishment
of Regional Regulatory Centres (RRC).
68. On the issue of renewal of licenses, AERB replied that till date (19th June,
2013), all radiation units bearing higher hazard potential (such as Category 1&2 sources,
accelerators) had renewed their licences. As regards the penal provisions, it was
submitted that the AERB had the powers to take enforcement measures with these
facilities, which ranged from issuing written directives to comply with the requirements,
directives to discontinue operation, and suspension/withdrawal of the license/
authorisation. Further, AERB also stated that section 24 and section 26 of Atomic
Energy Act, 1962 had provisions for imposing penalties. The enforcement measures
against the diagnostic x-ray facilities are commensurate with the degree of non-
compliance and its impact on safety.
(ii) Authorization
69. Authorization is a type of consent granted by AERB for activities relating to
the use of radioactive material and radiation-generating equipment. As per RPR, 2004,
an authorization is necessary for sources and practices associated with the medium
radiation-generating facilities. Audit scrutiny revealed that the authorization documents
in respect of 12 units were not available in the relevant files, while the remaining
18 units did not renew their authorizations, indicating that there was no system in place
for monitoring the expiry of authorizations and their renewals. The renewals of these
18 units were due for periods ranging from 1988 to 2009. The problem of protracted
delays in renewal of authorizations, for periods as long as 24 years, needed to be

22
urgently addressed. However even after issue of the circular by AERB in August 2010,
there was only a slight improvement in the issue of authorizations and alarmingly
70 out of 135 gamma chamber units, continued to function without valid authorizations.
A regulatory body has the responsibility of verifying compliance with safety regulations.
70. Audit scrutiny revealed that DAE started the process of issuing formal
authorizations for operation of gamma chambers only from 2006, i.e. after the Atomic
Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 came into being and although formal
authorization exists only for some of them, some Gamma chambers have been allowed
to operate without formal authorization in spite of provisions in this regard in the
RPR, 2004. AERB had not taken enforcement action against these units.
71. Queried about the number of gamma chamber operating without valid
authorizations, the Chairman, AERB deposed:—
"What I am saying is that we have brought them in our data base but the formal
licensing applications in respect of some of them have not yet come. Today,
there are 131 gamma chambers in the country. Out of those, 43 have formal
authorization from AERB, 28 have formally applied to us for decommissioning.
That means, they are no longer in use. Some of them have obtained the
permission to decommission; some of them have applied and we are in the
process of giving them the permission and so on. The gamma chamber situation
is like this. While, all of them still do not have formal authorization and they
are all under our radar. Some are formally authorised and others are in the
process of getting authorization. As I said, we are working on that."
72. On being asked to explain as to how gamma chambers have been allowed to
operate without formal authorizations, AERB stated that presently all the gamma
chambers were under regulatory coverage including formal authorizations. It was
further submitted that the design and construction of gamma chambers incorporate
certain built-in-design features that give them a high level of inherent safety as the
source was inaccessible. This feature in addition to standard operating procedures,
offers a high level of safety, as long as the equipment was not manhandled. Thus, the
safety concerns associated with this equipment were very small. However the
Mayapuri incident has been an eye opener and AERB had subsequently taken many
steps to ensure that the operational gamma chambers were under close regulatory
monitoring and the non-operational ones are safely disposed of within a reasonable
timeframe.
73. On the aspect of laxity on the part of AERB to issue licenses/authorizations
as envisaged in RPR 2004, the Committee sought to know what steps were being taken
up by AERB to institutionalize the process and enforce regulatory control on radiation
users, AERB in their written reply stated that it had an institutionalized process for
issuance of licenses/authorizations for use of radiation sources. The issues that were
faced with respect to the renewals were users not submitting the applications for renewal
of the licenses/authorizations. Further, AERB stated that it had taken additional efforts
to induce a very high level of compliance with respect to issuance of licenses/
authorizations to the facilities having higher radiation potential such as issuance of
circulars and advertisements to ask all utilities to obtain the requisite licenses,

23
accreditation of laboratories; liaison with DGFT, steel ministry, ministries of coal and
power awareness programmes; Use of enforcement measures like non-issue of NOC
to the users not having valid license/authorizations for procuring sources and instructing
the source suppliers for not issuing sources to the users not processing valid license/
authorizations; increased inspection coverage, etc.; establishment of ELORA
(E-Licensing of Radiation Application) system with capabilities of securing tighter
compliance with regulations; increased coverage of inspections as per the frequency
specified in the Draft AERB Manual on Regulatory Inspection of Radiation Facilities;
and Updated inventory of radiation sources.
74. The AERB further submitted that with the above measures the current level
of issuance of licenses/authorizations was as under:—
• Gamma Irradiators: Number of Gamma Radiation Processing Facilities: 17
and Licence issued to all facilities.
• Industrial Radiography: No. of Industrial Radiography institutions haying
valid Licence as on 08.05.2013: 463 out of 472; No licence has been issued
by AERB for 6 Nos. of industrial radiography institutions of Defence &
BARC. DAE since they are not under the regulatory ambit of AERB: and
remaining 3 No. of industrial radiography institutions are under review and
necessary action.
• Radiotherapy: Total number of radiotherapy facilities —337, out of which
licenses have already been issued to 327 facilities; and license has not been
issued to 10 radiotherapy facilities as they are non-functional and are in the
process of decommissioning.
• Gamma Chambers: No. of institutions for gamma chambers: 112; no. of
Authorizations issued for operation till date: 72; 29 institutions possessing
disused gamma chambers would not be issued authorizations. AERB is
taking steps to expedite safe disposal of these disused gamma chambers,
with the owners and suppliers of gamma chambers; and remaining
11 institutions are under review and necessary actions.
(iii) Registrations
75. AERB grants registrations for equipments related to research and medical
facilities, whose radiation hazard potential was low. As per RPR 2004, a registration is
necessary for sources and practices associated with the operation of the low radiation
generating facilities. Recognising the challenges in regulation of medical x-ray units in
the country, AERB set up a specialist committee in 1985, to prepare a comprehensive
report on the implementation of radiological safety requirements in respect of medical
x-ray equipment and installations. Based on the report of this committee, AERB decided
that certain regulatory controls were necessary to ensure safety in the design,
manufacture, installation and use of medical x-ray equipment. AERB released codes
intended to govern radiation safety in design, installation and operation of x-ray
generating equipment for medical diagnostic purposes, which were revised in 2001.
The Supreme Court had directed in 2001, the setting up of a Directorate of Radiation

24
Safety (DRS) in each State for regulating the use of medical diagnostic x-rays. Audit,
however, observed that DRS had been set up only in Kerala and Mizoram and 52,173
medical x-ray units, 171 nucleonic gauge units, 231 radio-immunoassay (RIA) units
and 180 research institutions were functioning without valid registrations.
76. Audit examination of the efficiency of registration of medical x-ray units in
the country by AERB and the related directions of the Supreme Court revealed that
there were 57,443 medical x-ray facilities operating in the country and of these, only
5,270 units had been registered and were under the regulatory control of AERB. AERB
had faced difficulties in regulatory control of these, on account of the large number of
units spread across the country. The balance 52,173 units, constituting 90.82 per cent
of the total units were functioning without AERB registrations and were, therefore, out
of their regulatory control.
77. When the Committee pointed out that apparently the regulatory mechanism
concerning x-ray units was a total failure, Chairman AERB submitted in the affirmative
during oral evidence and stated that:—
"With regard to x-ray facilities, I will agree with you, we have failed so far. As
I mentioned, central agency with 300 engineers and scientists cannot control
50 odd thousand x-ray machines. We admit that and we have tried various
measures. One was, as I mentioned earlier, the Directorate of Radiation Safety
(DRS) and State level and then further things. Now, we have taken new initiatives
and the new initiatives, which we hope will succeed, are web-based registration
system of x-ray facilities which will kind of induce and motivate x-ray units to
come forward. Once they start coming forward, then we intend to publicise the
need for registering and educating the public that it is in their own interest and
they should go to only registered facilities. We cannot start some proceeding
against 50,000 violators, but if a smaller number is there then we can start
proceeding against. Then, there is one more point. As I said, the real safety in x-
ray machines is design. Operation does not make that much difference and the
design-related control is already quite well established through the regulation of
manufacturing facilities in the country."
78. On the aspect of monitoring of x-ray units, the representative of DAE exuded
the Department's helplessness during oral evidence by stating that:—
"How do we know that there are 50,000 x-ray units? We do not really know. We
do not have counts. If we have counted we would have known where they exist.
The basic difficulty with them is with the x-ray units and with the small nucleonic
gadgets. With other big units, there is no problem because they have isotopes
which decay over a period of time; they have to change them periodically; for
changing, they have to get new isotopes; for that, they have to come to them.
So, these are all very well known. So, there is no problem. The research facilities,
etc. are all under the umbrella. It requires authorization and licensing; this requires
a particular protocol to be followed. It is not that they are not already doing the
consenting part. But the licensing part requires them to abide by certain rules
which will be coming as a part of the 2004 Radiation Protection; they are

25
assessed according to that and then, they are given licenses. They are already
in the umbrella. The most difficult part, which has been repeatedly asked by all
the Members and we have not been able to give a completely convincing answer
is the overwhelming number of smaller units like x-rays, etc."
79. On regulation of x-ray units, the Secretary DAE further submitted during
oral evidence as under:—
"With regard to lower level of hazard potential because of x-ray machines in
very large numbers, AERB with its centralised work force of 300 odd people,
it is simply not possible to individually regulate them. I was talking to some of
our colleagues from AERB who are here, they have said that they have tried to
find out some years ago through the sale of the films which go to these x-ray
units. But, what we have been doing with the resources available is to focus on
the design of these facilities. It is because the number of manufacturers is
limited and we can access them more easily. Major hazards from x-ray, whatever
hazard is there, can be controlled from the design, that is, if it is well-shielded
and it has all the interlocks and so on. That we control by doing type approval
or design approval. Only type approval machines are allowed to come into the
market."
80. The Chairman AERB while briefing the Committee about the registration
process of the x-ray machines stated that:—
"Basically, the main thing is to get them to register and when they are registered,
they have to prove to us that they have all the paraphernalia, radiation monitoring
system and all that. Once they have that system and they apply, only then they
get the registration. We are taking some additional initiatives apart from this. We
have taken the initiative that we are developing a system of web page registration —
a computerised webpage system — so that, once they meet our requirements,
they can log in and get registered. We are simplifying and rationalising the
regulations also so that more people may come in. Once we have that system in
place, we intend to publicise the need for registration and tell the public that you
please go only to register facilities for your own health. Through that, we believe
that majority of them will come forward voluntarily to get registered and when
minority of them remains unregistered, we can be stringent with them. Today we
cannot be stringent with 50000 of those people. So, to bring them on board we
have this roadmap apart from the Directorate of Radiation Safety."
81. The Secretary DAE sought to down play the hazardous potential of x-rays by
stating that:—
"The next lower level is not including any radiation from an isotope but it is a
source which is coming from x-ray. Here, it is an electrical machine which is
producing x-ray, once you turn it off it is safe as anything else but if you turn it
on, radiation is caused. Radiation is supposed to be moved in a particular direction
because of the design of the machine. On other directions, one has to provide
lead shielding. So, the design can very easily be confirmed that it is meeting the
requirement because it should not allow people in the corridor or outside to get

26
irradiated instead of the patient. That is the one important difference between
the rests of it. There are no particles that are required to prevent spread of
radiation to the neighbourhood or to the people who are sitting outside. It is the
machine design which takes care of that. In terms of hazards, this is the least as
compared to what is reactor. AERB has followed a graded policy."
82. The Committee sought to know as to why AERB was soft on regulating x-ray
units, AERB stated that their approach was primarily to ensure safety built into the
design of the equipment over operational safety. The regulatory control was exercised
on the suppliers/manufacturers to ensure maintenance of quality assurance during
manufacturing/sale of such units to give satisfactory performance during use at the
place of end users which was in line with the approach followed across the world.
83. Audit Report pointed out that Kerala had established a DRS in 1998, the
set-up of which was delegated with powers to register all radiation installations and
equipment in the State. However, this power was withdrawn and the duties of the DRS
were restricted to carrying out inspections of medical diagnostic x-ray installations in
the State.
84. When the Committee enquired about the non-starting of DRS' in States other
than Kerala and Mizoram, the Secretary DAE stated as under:—
"We have got Inspectors at the State level so that we can curb the malpractice
and punish the wrong doers. That is the way it has to be implemented and that
is the intention of the Directorate of Radiation Safety at the State level. But, till
now only two States have shown their interest in this type of regulation. It is
really sad to note that we have not really got that kind of a support so far from
most of the State Governments. That mechanism has to be put in place. However,
in recent past, about half a dozen States have at least signed MoU with us in this
regard."
85. However, in a written reply the Committee was informed that as on May 31,
2013 AERB has signed MoU's with the Government of Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Punjab, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra and Odisha. Follow up
meetings with other States are in progress.
86. On being asked as to whether, in the absence of DRS in states, there was any
coordination with Ministry of Health on issues relating to public health, AERB replied
in the negative and stated that presently there was no structured mechanism for
coordination between AERB and the Ministry of Health on issues related to public
health.
87. The Committee also sought to know as to what was being done to bring 91%
of the medical x-ray facilities into its regulatory control. AERB thereupon stated that it
has already prepared a roadmap and initiated several actions, to bring the medical x-ray
facilities under its regulatory control. The actions in hand in this respect included viz.
steps to enhance awareness levels regarding the regulatory requirements related to
diagnostic x-ray facilities, through advertisements in the newspapers, awareness
programmes and information provided in AERB website; simplification of regulatory

27
requirements for the end-users of diagnostic x-ray facilities; regulatory control on
manufacturers/suppliers, through type approval of the equipment and arrangements
for sharing information on the purchasers/users of x-ray equipment; development of
an easy and approachable interface for the users to facilitate on-line filing of application
for obtaining Registration, using the new web based interactive system (e-LORA i.e.
e- licensing of radiation applications); establishment of an accreditation programme
for the agencies involved in providing quality assurance services; and decentralisation
of regulatory functions with the establishment of Regional Regulatory Centres (RRCs)
and Directorates of Radiation Safety (DRS). W ith these actions in progress, AERB
envisaged that majority of the x-ray facilities can be brought under the regulatory
purview of AERB.
88. Audit pointed out that AERB had not framed any rules to prescribe and fix the
fees for recovery of the cost of services rendered for the regulatory and consenting
process, as a result of which, it had to bear the cost of the consenting process. While
accepting that the fees are not being levied, AERB stated that it was fully funded by
the Central Government in the discharge of its regulatory functions. On a pointed
query as to whether AERB was in the process of framing rules to prescribe and fix the
fees for revamp of the sort of services rendered for the regulatory and consenting
process, the AERB stated that the existing rules viz. Rule No. 4 of Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 provides for levying of license fees and AERB was
already working out the details for establishing a system of levying fees for licenses/
consents.
V. COMPLIANCE  AND  EN FORCEMENT  OF   REGULATORY  REQUIREMENTS
89. Audit findings pointed out that AERB had not conducted 85 per cent of
regulatory inspections for both industrial radiography and radiotherapy units even
though these were identified as having a high radiation hazard potential. Shortfall of
over 97 per cent regulatory inspection in the case of diagnostic radiology facilities
every year shows that AERB is not exercising effective regulatory oversight over units
related to the health of the public. AERB has also not laid down the periodicity of
conducting regulatory inspections of such facilities in spite of the availability of
international benchmarks in this regard. According to IAEA Standards, each Government
should expressly assign the prime responsibility for safety to an entity and make it
responsible for compliance with regulatory requirements. The standards also provide
that the regulatory body should carry out inspections of facilities and activities to
verify that the authorized parties are in compliance with the regulatory requirements
and the conditions specified in the authorizations. Inspections of facilities and activities
are to include both announced and unannounced visits. As per the AERB Safety Code
on regulation of nuclear and radiation facilities, the objective of regulatory inspections
was to ensure that the operating personnel satisfy prescribed qualifications and are
certified, wherever applicable; the quality and performance of structures, systems and
components are maintained as required for safe operations; all prescribed surveillance
procedures, codes, standards and rules are complied with by the consentees; facilities
are operated as per approved technical specifications and as per the conditions
stipulated in the consents; and deficiencies as noted in the earlier inspections have

28
been rectified.
90. Audit findings pointed out that while the process of Rls in respect of nuclear
fuel cycle facilities including NPP was being followed as prescribed by AERB, there
were significant shortfalls in Rls in the case of radiation facilities. It was observed that
no frequencies of Rls had been prescribed for radiation facilities. Audit reviewed the RI
process of the major categories of radiation facilities i.e. industrial radiography and
radiotherapy, where annual Rls had been suggested by the IAEA-TECDOC. In the
case of both industrial radiography and radiotherapy units, the radiation hazard
potential had been rated as 'High'. It was seen that the shortfall in Rls was over 85 per
cent for both industrial radiography and radiotherapy during the seven-year period
2005-06 to 2011-12. DAE stated that IAEA had not made any recommendations regarding
the frequency and scope of Rls to be conducted in respect of radiation facilities.
It further stated that different countries have adopted different approaches in carrying
out regulatory control of radiation facilities in their countries, including inspections.
AERB had steadily improved the Rls carried out. The shortfall in the number of Rls was
due to rapid growth in the number of radiation facilities and inadequate infrastructure.
In spite of this, AERB continues to monitor these facilities through the safety status
reports mechanism. Only sample checks of radiation facilities could be carried out.
With augmented manpower. AERB was giving priority towards completion of Rls of
these facilities.
91. Audit reviewed the RI process of the minor category of radiation facilities i.e.
nuclear medicine, nucleonic gauges and diagnostic radiology (x-ray equipment). Audit
assessed the adequacy of Rls for nuclear medicine, nucleonic gauges and diagnostic
radiology (x-ray equipments) with reference to the minimum frequency of Rls prescribed
in IAEA-TECDOC with the data relating to Rls for the same conducted for the period
2005-06 to 2011-12. Audit findings pointed out that in the case of nucleonic gauges
and diagnostic radiology (x-ray equipments), there had hardly been any inspection at
all.
92. As regards the regulating inspections, the Chairman AERB submitted during
oral evidence that :—
"You have asked about the regulatory inspections. The manual, as I said, is in
the advanced stage of development which spells out the frequency of regulatory
inspections. It has to go through several committees; it is waiting for the final
committee to give the clearance. After that, it will be issued; so, it is perhaps a
matter of couple of months, when the meeting of the high level committee takes
place. It says that 85 per cent were not done, where does this 85 per cent come
from? What has happened is that it looks like the auditors have looked at the
IAEA's TECDOC and compared it with that. It is not a kind of a stipulating the
regulatory inspections. It is giving some kind of indicative numbers which various
countries are following. So, they took the most stringent one and compared it
with that. That is how this number looks a little vague that 85 per cent is not
done. We have to see it in that context."
93. The representative of DAE further supplemented as under:—

29
"I would like to add one more point to this. IAEA does this process of review at
two levels — one is the review of the regulatory body which the Chairman,
AERB explained, that it may take next year and the second is the review of the
plant safety itself; that goes through OSAT missions and we have already
requested the IAEA for one such mission. If my memory serves me right, this
mission for our two reactors in Rajasthan is starting on 29th of this month."
94. On an affirmative assertion by the Committee during oral evidence that it
was the minimum frequency and not the maximum frequency of the RI prescribed
that the assessment of adequacy for nuclear medicine, nucleonic gadgets and
diagnostic radiology, x-ray equipments were made in reference to, the Chairman,
AERB finally submitted that:—
"Okay. I correct myself. But these are not recommended; TECDOC is just a
compilation of what various countries are doing. Different countries have
different practices. We have practice. We have a different norm."
95. The Committee further sought to know what that different norm was the
Chairman, AERB responded as under:—
"Following a graded approach, the facilities with the higher potential, their
regulatory inspection's frequency is once a year, whereas for lower ones, it
goes down like once in five years, and so on....... we have prescribed something
in our manual which is getting issued may be in the next two months."
96. On a pointed query as to what steps did AERB take as different countries
adopted different approaches regarding the frequency and scope of regulating
inspection to be conducted in respect of radiation facilities, AERB submitted that a
draft Safety Manual titled "Regulatory Inspection and Enforcement for Radiation
Facilities" has been prepared. This document provides procedures relating to the
inspection methodology, frequencies and enforcement actions. Presently, with the
recent augmentation in its manpower, and the projected expansion in the future, AERB
has planned to enhance the inspection coverage of the radiation facilities, in
accordance with the frequency of inspections as per this manual.
97. On the aspect of regulating control measures, DAE stated that with regard
to nuclear medicine and nucleonic gauges, the low hazard potential of the sources
and the availability of periodic safety status reports for review were considered while
deciding the regulatory control measures and targeted inspections were undertaken
based on these inputs. With regard to the issue of Rls for all types of radiation
facilities, DAE stated that as a part of enhancing the regulatory control for radiation
facilities, AERB had undertaken the preparation of a Safety Manual titled ‘Regulatory
Inspection and Enforcement for Radiation Facilities'  which was in the final stage
of production. Audit pointed out that this confirmed the lack of commitment and
laxity in addressing the issue for over 29 years since the creation of AERB.
98. Safety Review Committee for Operating Plants (SARCOP) monitors and
enforces safety regulations in NPPs and other radiation facilities identified by the
Central Government. Audit found that although SARCOP was meant to enforce safety
regulations in NPPs and other radiation facilities, it could not ensure compliance of

30
its recommendations which are pending for several years. As a nuclear safety
regulator, AERB should have prescribed timelines for implementation of its
recommendations. There was also a need to review all recommendations pending
for more than certain threshold periods.
99. When the Committee sought to know the status of SARCOP
recommendations to fast track the implementation process so that enforcement in
safety regulations wasn't compromised, the AERB clarified that SARCOP
recommendations could not be equated to the safety regulations. SARCOP was a
platform where the experts on nuclear safety came together and discussed the
experience and issues related to safety, in the context of Indian plants as well as the
overseas experience and developments. In this forum, the problems and issues were
discussed in an open and frank manner. The recommendations arising out of these
discussions were mainly aimed at adopting the best practices. Most of these were
far beyond the realm of statutory requirements and "safety regulations", which were
the minimum requirements specified by the regulatory bodies, for compliance.
Therefore, the perception that enforcement of safety regulations was being
compromised because of apparent delays in implementation of some of the SARCOP
recommendations was not correct.
VI. RADIATION PROTECTION
100. According to the IAEA Safety Guide, exposure to radiation can occur as a
result of various human activities, including work associated with different stages of
the nuclear fuel cycle, the use of radioactive sources and radiation in medicine,
research, agriculture and industry. Exposure in excess of the limits prescribed based
on medical research, has serious health implications for all living organisms and
environment. Radiation protection is thus intended to ensure that the amount of
radiation absorbed by an organism does not have negative consequences. According
to the IAEA Handbook, nuclear law must establish a legislative framework for the
safe management of all sources and types of ionizing radiation. It should, in particular,
ensure that individuals, society and the environment are adequately protected against
radiological hazards. Finally, it should impose restrictions on the dose that an
individual may incur so that no person is subject to an unacceptable risk attributable
to radiation exposure. As per the provisions of the Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal of
Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987, the responsibility for safe disposal of radioactive
waste is placed on the licencees and AERB has the mandate of ensuring that the
licencees perform their responsibilities, suggesting an abdication of regulatory
responsibility by the regulator. RPR 2004 also specifies the responsibilities of
various parties, viz, the employers, licencees. Radiological Safety Officers and
workers, with respect to radiation protection. The Rules also specify the powers of
AERB with respect to specifying requirements in respect of safety, health surveillance
of workers, radiation surveillance and records to be maintained; issuing directives;
inspections and enforcement actions.
101. As regards radiological protection of workers in Nuclear Power Plants,
each NPP had a Health Physics Unit (HPU) which was entrusted with the responsibility
of providing radiological surveillance and safety support functions; monitoring of
areas, personnel, systems and effluents, as well as exposure control and exposure
investigations. These HPUs were initially part of the BARC and were independent of
the NPPs, with direct channels of communication with the top plant Management of

31
the Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd (NPCIL) in enforcing the radiation
protection programme. The HPUs in all NPPs were transferred from BARC to NPCIL
in May, 2009 by DAE. This means that the function of monitoring of radiological
exposure as well as the responsibility of radiological surveillance of NPPs now lay
with NPCIL which was an operator of NPPs.
102. The Secretary, DAE apprised the Committee about the setting up of Health
Physics Unit by stating as under:—
"Like all other countries in the world, they have started with the health physics
programme in the research institutions because that is where the knowledge
resided about the effects of radiation on the health, how to measure it, how to
control it. In all the institutions, health physics activity is started from BARC
which was a repository in this. There was a Directorate of Radiation Protection
which was fully under Government Control."
103. AERB reported that during the period from 2005 to 2010, the effective dose
to the public was far less than the prescribed annual limit of one Milli Sievert (mSv)
1 in
all the sites.
(i) Radiological Protection of Environment
104. On the issue of radiological protection of environment, audit pointed out
that the Environmental Survey Laboratories (ESLs) of the Health, Safety and
Environment Group, BARC carry out environmental surveillance over an area of 30 km
radius around the nuclear reactors at all the operating NPP sites and provide AERB
with periodic reports on radiological conditions of the NPPs and the results of
environmental surveillance but they are not per se under the direct control of AERB.
For monitoring the performance of the regulated entity, the independent regulator
should have direct authority on the monitoring agencies. Accordingly, it should
strengthen its role with adequate infrastructure and manpower to conduct independent
surveillance of exposure control and exposure investigations.
105. The Chairman, AERB while deposing before the Committee reiterated that
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre is the technical support centre to AERB for surveillance
of environment.
106. The Committee enquired whether steps were being taken to bring the
Environmental Survey Laboratories (ESL) under the direct authority of AERB for better
performance monitoring of the regulated entities, AERB explained that the present
arrangement had been satisfactory from the regulatory control stand point and
effectiveness. AERB also conducted regulatory inspection of these ESL units at all
NPPs once a year, with respect to ensuring compliance to the issues connected to
environmental surveillance.
107. As per RPR 2004, AERB has the responsibility for ensuring radiation
protection by prescribing collective dose budgets, reviewing excess exposure cases,
conducting regulatory inspections and reviewing radiological safety aspects of radiation
1Milli Sievert being the derived unit of dose equivalent radiation which attempts to quantitatively
evaluate the biological effects of ionizing radiation.

32
facilities, mainly based on the prescribed reports submitted by the Radiological
Safety Officers (RSO) of the facilities. Audit pointed out that there were 89 cases of
excess exposure, i.e. exceeding 30-mSv at radiation facilities during the period from
2005 to 2010. Out of this, the exposure was more than 50 mSv in 41 cases. This indicated
that wrong work practices were prevalent among radiation workers and the excess
exposures will have negative consequences and adverse effects on the health of
workers in the short as well as long term.
108. Insofar as the verification of exposure to workers in a radiological facility is
concerned, the RPR, 2004 envisages that the RSO should be responsible for radiological
surveillance, including those relating to personnel and to furnish periodic reports on
safety status to AERB.
109. DAE stated that in case the limit of 30 mSv is exceeded for a worker, he is
engaged in non-radiation areas for the remaining period to keep the five yearly total
dose within the limit of 100 mSv. For investigation of cases of overexposure, AERB
took the help of RSOs appointed in the radiation facilities. Reports of the preliminary
investigations carried out by the RSOs were first scrutinized and reviewed by AERB.
AERB carried out further inspections and undertook investigations for the cases as
necessary. Based on these investigations, improvements in the working conditions
and safety culture at the facilities were considered. DAE further stated that the number
of over-exposures had been less than 0.1 per cent of the total number of radiation
workers in the last five years. The stated facts of DAE addressed post-exposure
measures rather than preventive action. Shortage of RSOs and inadequacy in respect
of RI of radiation facilities impacted independent verification and review of radiological
safety aspects in respect of a large number of radiation facilities available in the country
and there was need for increased efforts to prevent even a single case of over-exposure
which could impair the health of the people in the affected areas. Further, insofar as the
responsibility of reporting by RSOs was concerned, there was an acute shortage of
such officers, particularly in the case of diagnostic radiology and nucleonic gauges,
both of which are radiation facilities.
110. Clarifying the issue on the radiation doses, the Secretary, DAE stated during
oral evidence that:—
"It is true that today the international regulatory system is bound by what is
prescribed by ICRP, International Council for Radiation Protection Guidelines as
to what is safe. There, the prescription is what they call linear no threshold
hypothesis. Any small amount of radiation today, tomorrow is all collecting
finally leading to some figure that is not considered acceptable. This is a
hypothesis and not a fact. Now, what is the fact? It was started in a decade where
nothing was known."
111. Setting aside any apprehension of genetic impact of radiation, the Secretary
DAE, submitted that:—
"After Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings, a generation of people, who were
exposed, went through their life-cycles starting from womb to the end point.
It was found out that there is no genetic effect of radiation. If the parent and

33
mother have been exposed or even child as a young has been exposed to that
huge amount of radiation, they have not gone to genetic mutation. That was the
fundamental fear which came out of the experiments on fruit-flies. Since the low
level creatures have not evolved fully, they get damaged by certain kinds of
radiation, but not human-beings or larger animals. So, that theory is disproved.
Second, some of them will undergo cancer. This has been conclusively decided
based on this database covering lakhs of people that below a radiation level of
10R, that is, 100 milli sieverts, nobody who was exposed has got cancer in their
whole life-time.
112. The representative further deposed about the general apprehension about
radiation:—
"We are actually far too conservative. To cause damage instantly or major damage
immediately, we require a dose of 100R. People who have got 10R and less have
not had any effect. What is prescribed by regulators is 100
th  of that at the nuclear
power plant boundary. What the nuclear plant people are able to achieve is 100th
of what the regulator has prescribed. So, we have a got a margin of almost 10,000
on what can really cause harm, even a remote possibility of cancer. Since we
have all along been very comfortable living within that one per cent guideline
given, nobody questioned this. But it does not mean that in case of an accident,
that same guideline must be pursued because it would be a different situation.
Sir, this is science behind it. That is why, in the Department of Atomic Energy
and also many other labs outside, we are now questioning that hypothesis
through only statistical data because there is enormous statistical database.
Even in our Kerala monazite beach sand areas, the levels of radiation are almost
70 times higher than what is considered acceptable by the regulator for exposure
coming through nuclear power plant. Now, those people have been living there
for generations. We have examined some four lakh people throughout their life-
cycles."
(ii) Radioactive Waste Management
113. As per the IAEA Handbook, when a sealed radiation source reaches the end
of its useful life, it should be disposed of or returned to the manufacturer for recycling.
However, at times, disused sources are often discarded and may give rise to accidents.
It is, therefore, essential that the regulatory body be provided with the means necessary
for effectively controlling all major sources in the country. It is also essential that the
regulatory body maintains effective communication with the holders of licences for
these sources.
114. The Committee sought to know how secure and safe the monitoring process
was in terms of radioactive waste management, the AERB Chairman responded during
oral evidence as under:—
"Coming to radioactive waste, a comment was made that we have difficulty in
controls. If the question relates to nuclear power plant and the fuel cycle facilities,
I think the control is impeccable. There is no problem with the controls there.
The radioactive waste management, in fact, the part of licensing of nuclear

34
power plants requires that wastes be managed safely,  viz., liquid discharges
have to meet very stringent requirements. They are monitored. The actual
performance data from the nuclear power plants shows that the actual discharges
through air and through water route are a fraction of what is stipulated by AERB
and which is in line with the international practice. For solid radioactive wastes
at nuclear power plants again there are provisions and those provisions are part
of our regulatory requirements. There are codes and guides which we follow and
those codes require that the nuclear power plant cannot be licensed unless they
have satisfactory solid radioactive waste storage which can be stored safely.
The other dimension of radioactive waste is what is spent fuel. I think that is
another question and, in fact, that is related to the philosophy of the nuclear
programme. Ours is the closed cycle."
(iii) Absence of Detailed Inventory of Radiation Sources and Proper Mechanism for
Safe Disposal of Disused Sources
115. While the systems and procedures for the disposal of disused sources in
respect of NPPs and other nuclear fuel facilities are in place, the same are not so in the
case of other radiation facilities due to inadequate monitoring on account of shortfalls
in Rls and inadequate strength of RSOs in these facilities.
116. The University of Delhi procured radiation equipment containing a gamma
cell in 1970, which was operated till 1985. AERB stated that this unused equipment
containing the gamma cell was sold to a local scrap dealer in a public auction. Thereafter,
the equipment was dismantled and the source assembly was handled by persons with
bare hands. This resulted in serious radiation injuries to these persons, including in
the death of a person. These casualties occurred due to unsafe and unauthorized
disposal of radiation equipment at Mayapuri, New Delhi in April 2010. The nature of
the incident was classified as level 4. It was apparent that the accident was the result
of ignorance about practices for safe disposal of radioactive waste. While confirming
that Delhi University was not aware of the provisions of the Atomic Energy (RP) Rules,
2004 and the Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal of Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987. AERB
stated that the incident occurred primarily due to violations by Delhi University of the
clear and unambiguous requirements specified in the applicable rules, about safe
disposal practices of radioactive wastes. Audit pointed out that the sources mixed
with scrap metal used for subsequent recycling could lead to contamination of industrial
plants and the environment resulting in serious consequences.
117. In the context of Mayapuri incident, the Committee asked what was being
done to prevent such incidents in the future. The Chairman, AERB replied during oral
evidence that:—
"Now, if we are talking about radiation facilities, Mayapuri is an example that
also is a radioactive waste gone wrong. Now, after Mayapuri incident, we did a
very, very intensive work to strengthen our system of management of disused
sources. That was a legacy source which was in existence before regulatory
regime came into being and it was just out of that system. When the regulatory
regime came, the tracking of radiation sources from cradle to grave is no problem.

35
They are all in place. Now, for older legacy sources what we did was, we contacted
the suppliers of radiation sources world-wide which were known suppliers. They
were able to give us historically what they supplied to this country like that
Gamma Chamber in the Delhi University and beyond that; through the Ministry
of Steel, we wrote to their utilities, their various organizations where could be
radiation sources. We did very extensive surveys and we have updated our data
base on radiation sources. We believe that radiation sources of higher category
are all now in our data base."
118. Further supplementing on this issue, the Chairman, AERB stated that:—
"Mayapuri situation is radiation sources and radiation source is something that
AERB regulates. The AERB is responsible for regulation and the problem in
Mayapuri was that gamma chamber was a legacy source. It was not on the radar
of AERB. As I mentioned earlier, after this, we have done a very extensive survey.
Now all the gamma chambers in the country are in our data base. They have all
been looked at."
119. The Committee also found that AERB does not have a detailed inventory of
all radiation sources to ensure effective compliance of regulations for safe disposal of
disused sources. No proper mechanism was in place to ensure that waste radioactive
sources have actually been disposed of safely after utilization. In terms of the IAEA
Handbook, a regulatory body was to be provided with the means necessary for
effectively controlling all major sources in the country. It was also essential that the
regulatory body maintains effective communication with the holders of licences for
these sources. Prior to the establishment of AERB, radiation facilities were under the
regulatory control of BARC. AERB did not obtain sufficient data relating to radiation
facilities operating in the country when the regulatory work was assigned to it.
120. AERB stated that following the Mayapuri incident in April 2010, it has
undertaken a vigorous campaign to establish and maintain an inventory of all the
radiation sources used in the country and to improve their regulatory control. The
measures taken as part of this include inter-alia sensitizing all academic, medical and
R&D institutions to prepare inventories of radiation sources under their possession
and review their existing safety procedures; asking all the suppliers/manufacturers for
details of the sources supplied by them till date; and strengthening the AERB data
base on source inventory by identifying and bringing on record, the legacy sources.
AERB had also initiated a process of developing an advanced web-based interactive
system for managing the regulation of radiation sources and facilities. Audit, however,
concluded that AERB still does not have an effective system in place to ensure
continuous collection and updating of its inventory of all radiation sources, to ensure
effective compliance of regulations for safe disposal of disused sources.
121. Audit further pointed out that during the period 2005-06 to 2011-12, AERB
had reported the following instances: forty eight cases of loss, theft or misplacement
of radioactive sources since 2000, in which radioactive material found its way into the
environment and 15 cases where the source was never found; several incidents of
radioactive packages remaining uncollected at airports, including 67 unclaimed packages

36
found at Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata and Mumbai airports in 2001; and the mistaken
handing over of a radioactive package containing 6.539 GBq (Gigabecquerel) Y-90
(Yttriga - 90) to a waste disposal agency in 2004-2005, by the staff at Mumbai airport.
122. AERB stated that the radioactive sources in use in the country were large in
number and were regulated through a graded approach, commensurate with their
hazard potential. AERB dealt with cases of loss, theft and misplacement of sources
through regulatory action, awareness programmes and help from the police and IG
security (DAE). The reported cases of loss and theft of sources were mainly from
radiation facilities having low hazard potential. AERB ensures that all the licencees
immediately report any incident of loss and theft or misplacement of sources to enable
prompt action for tracing and recovering the sources. If the cases of loss, theft or
misplacement of the sources were known to be due to negligence from the side of the
licencees, appropriate regulatory action was initiated against them.
123. When the Committee sought to know as to what were the penal actions
available with AERB ensuring safe keeping of radiation sources, AERB stated that the
enforcement of regulatory actions such as suspension on use of radiation sources,
withdrawal of licence prohibits all activities involving use of any radiation sources by
the concerned user/facility which was itself a very severe penalty and generally led to
heavy financial losses as well as loss of credibility to the radiation facility concerned.
In this context, even a warning letter serves as effective deterrent to the owners of the
sources, in order to prevent recurrence of such incidents.
124. AERB further stated that due to the increased awareness regarding radiation
safety amongst airport Managements, Customs officials, importers and exporters, AERB
got information on time and took prompt action to resolve the issues. AERB has been
undertaking many campaigns through various awareness programmes about the safety
and security of radioactive sources used in the country. In view of this, such incidents
were expected to come down in the near future with proper monitoring of the sources
with the help of the advanced web-based active system.
125. The Committee also sought to know the periodicity of the updation of the
Inventory of all the radiation sources available in the country. AERB therupon replied
that it was an on-going process and the records of source inventory were updated as
and when the source receipt information was received from the stakeholders.
(iv) Acute Shortage of Trained Manpower including Radiological Safety Officers
126. According to Rule 7 of RPR 2004, no licence to handle radioactive material or
to operate radiation generating equipment should be issued to a person unless, in the
opinion of the competent authority, an RSO is designated in accordance with Rule 19
of RPR, 2004. The duties and functions of an RSO are defined in Rule 22 of RPR, 2004
and Rule 13 of Safe Disposal of Radioactive Waste Rules, 1987. Audit observed that
RSOs have been assigned enormous responsibilities under these rules for radiation
protection and safe disposal of radioactive waste and they are vital links between the
licencees and the regulator in securing compliance of the rules for radiation protection
and safe disposal of radioactive waste. The regulator was mainly dependent on the
RSOs in ensuring the compliance of various provisions under these rules. It was also

37
pointed out that there was an acute shortage of qualified RSOs in comparison to the
total number of registered units, indicating that most of the units of radiation facilities
were working without RSOs.
127. The Committee sought to know whether in the absence of competent RSOs,
was AERB in the process of issuing licenses to units to handle radioactive material to
operate radiation generating equipment. AERB replied that licences were issued only
after confirming the availability of competent RSOs as per the provisions of AE (RP)
Rules, 2004.
128. On a pointed query during the oral evidence as to whether manpower in
AERB was sufficient, the Chairman, AERB replied in the negative.
129. The Secretary, DAE and Chairman, AEC further supplemented on this issue
on shortage of trained manpower and totally agreed to the Committee's opinion of the
need for linkage with younger group of students in universities as under:—
“Exactly. We will try to put that into focus — what we are discussing just now.
The first is, where are they and how many are they? This is the first question to
be answered and then, the next level would be on what they are doing, whether
that is acceptable today or not. These are two things at the lower level. At higher
levels, everything is on the agenda generally. The Chairman, AERB has already
mentioned. To be able to do that, we need to implement that at the State level,
about which also we discussed quite a lot. We need to convince the State
Governments to set up the Directorate; then, it would be a very good
recommendation coming from this Committee to help them. In that case, manpower
will be required. But manpower inspection and visiting x-ray clinics is not highly
qualified. I understand  that this requirement would be only low level — a few
months training would be good enough for them to identify — whether it is
there, at what level the radiation is located and where, etc. At the higher level,
I agree with you; at the moment, we are primarily giving manpower from the
training school system at the highest level which is there in the Department of
Atomic Energy's all the units; AERB is included in that; but of late now, we are
also having an option available to take scientists and engineers from outside
which you call technical officers. Even without training, they can join."
130. The Committee pointed out the imperative need for changing mindsets and
for encouraging more nuclear research by the universities. The representative of DAE
responded during oral evidence as under:—
“I will try to tell you about recent initiatives in this area. First of all, to ensure that
we are able to take advantage of the strengths in other institutions to help us, we
started — I will name them now — a programme, which was started in the year
2000; we call it DAE Graduate Fellowship Scheme. The idea was that if any
student has taken admission in any of the IITs for M.Tech programme and if he
is interested in a career in DAE, we provide him higher fellowship and then, he
does the course work in the IIT in which he has joined; and the project work, on
a topic of interest to the DAE's mission; and he has, for this purpose, two
supervisors — one from the DAE system and the other from the IIT system. This

38
scheme was started as a pilot scheme in IIT, Kanpur; subsequently we have
extended to all the old IITs where the M.Tech system is well established, that is,
IIT, Mumbai, Chennai, Kanpur, Kharagpur and Roorkee. Recently, BHU, IT, has
shown interest; we are talking to them also. I am not aware of the latest status of
that. So, this scheme has been running with a pilot scheme, in 2000, which is now
extended to all the places. This is one, where we are trying to make use of the
entire system."
VII. EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS FOR NUCLEAR AND RADIATION
FACILITIES
131. Preparedness and responses to emergencies were important responsibilities
of an operating organisation, which had to establish and maintain the necessary
emergency plans and procedures for all emergencies by having an on-site emergency
preparedness plan and an off-site emergency preparedness plan. While the off-site
emergency plan was the combined responsibility of the operator, the district authorities
and other associated authorities such as NDMA, the CMG of DAE, etc., the other
emergency plans fall within the domain of responsibility of the operator. AERB has the
responsibility to ensure that these emergency preparedness plans were submitted by
the operators to it for approval, review and updation.
132. On-site emergency preparedness plans are put in place by the plant
managements of NPPs and nuclear fuel cycle facilities. These emergency preparedness
plans are tested by actual periodic exercises prescribed, based on the types of
emergencies, by the plant managements of NPPs. Plant Emergency Exercises (PEE) are
conducted once in a quarter, while Site Emergency Exercises (SEE) are conducted once
a year. AERB only reviews the reports of these exercises conducted by the plant
Managements and does not directly associate itself in these exercises, even as observers
of PEE and SEE. Audit pointed out that AERB as the nuclear safety regulator should
associate itself as an observer in these exercises on selection basis to exercise adequate
regulatory supervision in these exercises and accordingly AERB was now contemplating
deputing observers during on-site exercises on a sample basis.
133. Statedly, AERB has a role with respect to on-site emergency exercises,
which include review and approval of on-site emergency preparedness and response
plans, specifying the frequency and requirements of conduct of exercises, ensure that
the plants are conducting the exercises at specified periodicity and review of reports
on on-site emergency exercises. A basic principle in safety management was that the
owner/operator have the prime responsibility for safety. As part of regular operations,
the operator carries out a large number of tests, surveillances, in-service inspections,
drills and exercises. In line with the principle of graded regulation, the regulator carries
out direct observation of selected important activities, while for others, it resorts to
review of reports or sample inspections. The role of AERB with respect to emergency
response and preparedness at nuclear facilities varies with the type of emergency.
134. AERB stated that presently, it was not mandated to take follow-up action
with the district/State authorities on deficiencies in emergency preparedness pointed
out by it. However, it was considering asking the plant managements to obtain and

39
submit information on the status of corrective measures taken subsequent to the
OSEEs (Off- site Emergency Exercises) by the local authorities. Audit observed that
this confirms the weakness in the regulatory regime since AERB has no authority to
enforce rules in the instances of malpractices and departures from the approved plans.
135. The Committee enquired about AERB's mandate vis-a-vis follow up action
with the District/State authorities on emergency preparedness. AERB thereupon stated
that emergency response in the public domain by the District/State Authorities was a
subject coming under the National Disaster Management Act, 2005. Within the ambit
of the current regulations, AERB has sufficient mandate to take follow up actions with
the plant managements that were its licensees. AERB has mechanisms to review/
monitor the status of off-site emergency preparedness with respect to each NPP. In
case of any deficiency or inadequacy, which can lead to inability for taking response
action, AERB was empowered to take enforcement measures, including stoppage of
NPP operation and suspension of its operating licence.
VIII. DECOMMISSIONING  OF  NUCLEAR  AND  RADIATION  FACILITIES
136. Audit scrutiny pointed out that there was no legislature framework in
India for decommissioning of nuclear power plants and AERB does not have any
mandate except prescribing of codes, guides and safety manuals on decommissioning.
At the end of the life of any NPP, nuclear fuel cycle facility or radiation facility, it
needs to be decommissioned, decontaminated and demolished so that the site was
made available for other uses. The decommissioning activity for a NPP may be divided
into three phases viz initial activities; major decommissioning; and storage and licence
termination activities.
137. The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 was for all aspects of handling, use and
disposal of radioactive substances, which encompasses decommissioning also and
the broad scope of decommissioning was already covered in various codes and guides
of AERB. However, AERB does not have a role in deciding or stipulating the time frame
for decommissioning. When the Committee specifically asked whether the Department
considered bringing about legislation for decommissioning of nuclear power plants,
DAE stated that the existing rules under Atomic Energy Act, 1962, viz, Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 and Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal of Radioactive
Wastes) Rules, 1987, have requirements with respect to decommissioning. Rule 3 (1)
(b) of Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004, specifies, "No person shall,
without a license, decommission a radiation installation". Rule 34 of Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 provides for decommissioning of radiation
installation viz, when a radiation installation or radiation generating equipment ceases
to be in use, the employer shall ensure its decommissioning; no employer shall
decommission a radiation installation without the prior approval of the competent
authority; the decommissioning plan shall take due cognizance of disposal of radioactive
wastes, recycling of materials, and reuse of equipment and premises; and the license
shall comply with such directive as may be issued by the competent authority to
ensure adequate protection of the persons in and around the decommissioned
installation. Also, Rule 3 (a) of Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal of Radioactive Wastes)
Rules, 1987, specifies, "No person shall dispose of radioactive waste, unless he has

40
obtained an authorization from the competent authority under these Rules". In order
to meet the financial resources that will be required in future for decommissioning of
NPPs, a decommissioning levy at the rate of 2 paise per unit was being collected by the
utility. These provisions along with a regulatory mechanism for ensuring safety aspects
provide adequate mechanism for addressing the issues with respect to
decommissioning.
138. On being asked as to whether there was specific provision in the laws
defining the responsibility of decommissioning activity, the AERB stated that presently,
as per the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962, NPPs can be owned and operated
only by the Government either by itself or through any authority or corporation
established by it, or by a Government Company. The Atomic Energy (Radiation
Protection) Rules, 2004 prohibits anyone from establishing such a facility without a
valid license from the competent authority. The Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection)
Rules, 2004 also have provisions for ensuring that the facilities are decommissioned,
as well as the necessary regulatory control of the same. As per the provisions of
Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004, the responsibility for
decommissioning was on the 'employer'.
139. The AERB safety manual on decommissioning of NPPs published in March
1998 states that facilities which were already in operation should prepare preliminary
decommissioning plan and submit them to AERB within five years of publication of the
manual and new facilities should do the same before construction/operation licenses
were issued. However, none of the NPPs operating in the country have decommissioning
plans. Audit findings pointed out that of the 20 units of NPPs operating in the country
at present, 10 plants came into operation before the publication of the AERB Safety
Manual on 'Decommissioning of Nuclear Facilities'. None of these 10 plants have
prepared preliminary decommissioning plans so far indicating that licences for operation
were issued without AERB insisting upon the submission of decommissioning plans
resulting in all NPPs in the country operating without any decommissioning plans.
140. Audit further observed that even after the lapse of 13 years from the issue of
the Manual, NPCIL, the agency responsible for drawing up decommissioning plans for
nuclear power plants, had not submitted decommissioning plans for any of its plants
despite the fact that Tarapur Atomic Power Station (TAPS)-1 and 2 has already
completed over 30 years of operation and the Rajasthan Atomic Power Station
(RAPS) - 1 is under shutdown condition since 2004 resulting in none of the NPPs
undergoing decommissioning as of date. AERB replied that the Manual published by
it is advisory and neither mandatory nor recommendatory in nature. It further stated
that NPCIL has submitted notes on decommissioning aspects for TAPS-3 & 4,
Kaiga-3 & 4, Rajasthan Atomic Power Project (RAPP)-5 & 6, Kakrapar Atomic Power
Project (KAPP)-3 & 4 during the design review stage itself to AERB. As regards
RAPS-1, the techno-economic feasibility of further operations was under review. As
and when a decision was taken for decommissioning, detailed plans will be submitted
to it for approval.
141. The Committee sought to know as to why there was no decommissioning
plan for the Nuclear Power Plants including those operating for over 30 years and

41
those that have been shut down. DAE thereupon stated that decommissioning of
NPPs were well known and documented. These were submitted by the utility for
individual plants, at the time of design reviews. Aspects .related to management and
disposal of solid radioactive wastes arising from decommissioning were considered
during the initial licensing. The detailed procedures for decommissioning were best
prepared at the time of need, for the following reasons viz, actual decommissioning
activities, beyond removal of nuclear fuel, etc. are usually carried out after a lapse of
several years, for the short lived radioactivity to die down; the plans need to be taken
into account other existing facilities existing at the site, at the time of decommissioning;
and state-of-art of available technologies, which would be existing, need to be
considered at the time of decommissioning. For example, today, laser cutting techniques
and robotic technologies were available, which were not available earlier. Indeed, this
technology has been extensively used in the large scale removal of coolant tubes,
prior to their replacement, by NPCIL, in six reactors. Removal of coolant tubes will also
be a major step in the eventual decommissioning of Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors.
For any facility, which was not operational, for which a decommissioning application
had not been submitted, AERB was ensuring safety surveillance, treating the facility
as an operational facility, with consideration of the safety implications posed by the
facility in the given state, following a graded approach.
142.  A notification was issued in December 1988 by the NPCIL to levy a
decommissioning charge of 1.25 paise per KWH energy sold from the nuclear power
stations in the Country. The NPCIL revised the levy of decommissioning charges to
2 paise per KWH energy sold in October, 1991. The notification stipulated that the
receipts on account of decommissioning charges should be credited to a separate
fund to be known as the 'Decommissioning Fund', to be maintained by NPCIL.
143. On a pointed query by the Committee whether this levy was already
functional, the Secretary, DAE submitted during oral evidence as under:—
“The NPCIL does levy a decommissioning charge of about 2 paisa per unit. In
fact, I must tell that decommissioning means that you remove the spent nuclear
fuel from the core. It is part of life every year. From the Tarapur reactor, for
example, 1/3rd of the fuel is removed and it is replaced, and in nuclear power
plant, Pressurised Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR), we remove even the pressure
tubes, which contain nuclear fuel. All the 306 channels of the six reactors—
namely, Rajasthan Unit-I; Madras Unit-I & II; Narora-I & II and Kakrapara-I—
have been removed by a process of cutting and removal of entire channel, which
contains the nuclear fuel. The most highly radioactive systems have already
been handled in this manner. So, that technology is existing here. Now, with this
levy and the technology already generally understood, we are confident that
when the time comes for decommissioning, it can be done in the technological
manner and AERB will handle this task in the manner, which has been prescribed
by one of their guide for decommissioning."

42
144. Asked to explain the technical meaning of decommissioning in the context
of extension of 20 years to the Tarapur NPP which originally had a life of 40 years, the
Secretary, DAE explained:—
“A reactor (core) sits in the middle of a reactor and that contains the highest
radioactivity. It is the nuclear fuel and the structures that you are seeing are
neutron, which gets radioactive. Firstly, you remove the nuclear fuel, which is
being done in any case. Then you remove the components, which are having the
highest level of radioactivity in PHWR — six reactors. We have already done
similar exercises. Whatever further remains will be material, which has not been
so highly radioactive, but may still have some radioactivity. So, we have to cut
them into pieces and deposit them in repository, which will be able to
accommodate it. The outside building and all that are not actually activated.
They are like any other structural building and they can be taken care of. Some
of the pipelines may be radioactive, but that also simply we have to manage. We
can send cutters through the pipe and cut it out and remove it. In fact, similar
work has been done in the Cirus reactor. Cirus reactor was set up in 1960. We
have done a lot of removal of the old systems and replacement with the new
between 2000 and 2004."
145. On being asked whether the cost of decommissioning a Nuclear Power Plant
exceeds that of the total cost of setting it up, the Secretary, DAE replied in the negative.
146. Audit observed, while reviewing the adequacy of the decommissioning
reserve, which the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
had published a study of decommissioning of nuclear plants, in which decommissioning
cost estimates by various member countries such as Belgium, Germany, Italy, and
USA, etc. has been indicated. Considering the span of the decommissioning periods,
the cost of decommissioning can exceed the cost of construction of such facilities,
after providing for inflation. Audit pointed out that AERB had not worked out the
decommissioning cost formula in any of its documents.
147. Audit pointed out that NPCIL was collecting the levy amounts for
decommissioning of power plants on behalf of the Government and these were being
credited to the Decommissioning Fund account which accumulated ` 920.22 as on
March, 2011. An expert committee had been constituted by the Government to judge
the adequacy of the Decommissioning Fund, among its other responsibilities and the
Expert Committee had, in its recommendations of June 2009, expressed inability to
accurately estimate the decommissioning levy since the calculations were very sensitive
to the assumptions regarding the escalation rate and the interest rate. The Expert
Committee, therefore, had recommended retention of the levy of 2 paise/kWh and had
recommended that a review should be undertaken in future when better estimates were
available for future expenditure on decommissioning at the end of reactor ives. However,
Audit pointed out that no further action on the same had been taken since 2009.

43
IX.  MAINTAINING LIASIONS WITH INTERNATIONAL BODIES DEALING
WITH  NUCLEAR  REGULATORY  ISSUES
148. IAEA, set up as the world's 'Atoms for Peace' organization in 1957, had
played a central role in international nuclear safety. India has been one of the member
States of the agency since 1957. Article 2 of the statute of IAEA provides that it shall
seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity, throughout the world.
149. Audit further observed that AERB was associated with the following
International agencies/fora related to nuclear and radiation safety viz. International
Atomic Energy Agency; forum for the Canada Deuterium Uranium Senior Regulators
for exchange of information on issues specifically related to Safety of Pressurised
Heavy Water Reactors; United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission; Directorate
General for Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection, France: and Radiation Safety
Authority, Russia. Audit, however, observed that though AERB maintained liaisons
with international nuclear organisations, it was slow in adopting international
benchmarks and good practices.
150. DAE and AERB were involved in IAEA's activities related to enhancement
of nuclear and radiation Safety. The knowledge and experience brought back by the
Indian experts, who participated in the IAEA activities had a significant impact in
shaping AERB's regulatory approach and framework. India had also presented its
national report under the convention, for peer reviews in 2008 and 2011, wherein
member States have accepted the safety record of the Indian NPPs and the efforts and
initiatives of AERB, its technical support organizations and the plants for achieving
the international benchmarks on safety. AERB stated that it was the first regulatory
body to adopt the recommendations of the International Commission of Radiation
Protection (ICRP). Audit pointed out that on key issues of regulatory independence,
underpinned by the enactment of comprehensive regulations, the verification of
compliance of regulation and enforcement of regulations, which were the key
characteristics for an independent nuclear regulator, the AERB had, however, been
found to be sharply out of alignment with its international peers. Audit, also pointed
out that in contravention of the IAEA Safety Standards, AERB had not yet developed
a radiation safety policy even after nearly three decades of being entrusted with this
function.
151. The Committee sought to know as to what action was being proposed by
DAE/AERB to establish the structured process of self-assessment of its regulatory
framework, AERB stated that it had already initiated a self-assessment of its processes
and systems in 2010. A Committee constituted by AERB and a number of working
groups under it have been carrying out this work. The assessment include comparison
of AERB's systems vis-a-vis the IAEA Standards to see how the intent of the IAEA
standards are incorporated in AERB's processes. The assessment was intended to
identify the strengths of the practices being followed and the need for any additional
enhancements. This self-assessment was 'presently in an advanced stage'. However,
AERB had not indicated a specific time period by which the self-assessment exercise
will be completed.

44
152. IAEA's safety review and appraisal services, called the Integrated Regulatory
Review Service (IRRS) aims to strengthen and enhance the effectiveness of the State's
regulatory infrastructure in nuclear, radiation, radioactive waste and transport safety,
whilst recognizing the ultimate responsibility of each State to ensure the safety of
nuclear facilities, protection against ionizing radiation, safety and security of radioactive
sources, safe management of radioactive waste and safe transport of radioactive
material; to carry out comparisons against IAEA regulatory safety standards with
consideration of regulatory technical and policy issues and to provide an opportunity
for a balance between technical and policy discussions among senior regulators;
sharing of regulatory experiences; harmonization of regulatory approaches among
member States and mutual learning opportunities among regulators. IAEA offers external
peer review services either of a specific regulatory activity or of the performance of a
regulatory body as a whole.
153. Audit pointed out that through the IRRS, the IAEA assists its member
States in strengthening an effective and sustainable national regulatory infrastructure,
thus contributing towards achieving a strong and effective global nuclear safety and
security regime. Sixteen countries including Canada, China, France, Pakistan, UK and
USA have availed of the opportunity of benefits of IRRS missions as of 2010. Audit,
however, observed that AERB had not availed of the opportunity of the peer review
services of 1RRS to get its regulatory framework and effectiveness reviewed so far.
AERB had not even conducted any self-assessment regarding its regulatory practices
against the IAEA safety standards.
154. DAE stated that the Government of India had already committed to host an
IRRS mission of IAEA for peer review of AERB in the near future. AERB had initiated
a self-assessment exercise in 2010 in preparation of the peer review and the self-
assessment was presently at an advanced stage of its regulatory framework. However,
Audit pointed out the Committee constituted by AERB in November 2010 for internal
assessment of the preparedness of AERB for IRRS had not yet submitted their report
till date. Also, India had fallen behind many countries in availing of the opportunities
of peer review of its regulatory framework by IRRS.
155. When the Committee enquired about the time frame within which AERB will
be peer reviewed by IAEA, the DAE replied that the Government of India has already
committed to host an Integrated Regulatory Review Services (IRRS) mission of IAEA,
for peer review of AERE in near future. AERB has not yet hosted the Integrated
Regulatory Review Services of IAEA for peer review. AERB as well as the Government
was committed to hosting the IRRS Mission. However, that AERB has not indicated a
time frame in which its peer review will be done.
156. On the issue of implementation of international standard on Nuclear safety,
another representative supplemented during oral evidence as under:—
"In so far as international cooperation is concerned, being a member of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the only platform that is available to us for
information exchange, particularly in the area of safety this platform has already
been available and now we are signatories to the Convention on Nuclear Safety

45
which has membership coming from all the member countries of IAEA
generally, and we have been presenting our systems and safety related activities
which we are performing which has received the international acclaim there.
In addition, in a bilateral mode, particularly you mentioned US, we have been
having bilateral relationship with some of the other regulators also like US
Nuclear Regulatory Commission and our Atomic Energy Regulatory Board.
We have periodic interactions. On the safety related platform there are some
interactions going on. But it does not mean that these interactions have in any
way suffered any deficiencies or breached anything because we have interacted
with others. We have no deficiencies so far. In fact, many other countries have
faced one or the other problem.
157. Referring to the culture of safety, the representative further deposed:—
"But, because of our grooming culture, we have never been lacking in
implementation of any of the international standards which should have been
followed in many countries. We have come out of even difficult situations in
terms of technology by adopting measures which have not led to degenerate
into unsafe situations. This way, I can say that internationally we stand at par
with every other regulator. When we buy imported reactors, the essential
requirement is that the reactor must be licensable in the country of origin and
before it comes here our regulator also must certify that it meets our country's
regulatory requirements."
158. Whether there was a regime of sanctions of technology denials between
1998 and 2008, the representative of DAE testified:—
"I will start from 1974 when the first set of embargo started. Yes, there was a
period when we were isolated and that was the period when the only major
cooperation which continued was with Germany under the Indo-German
agreement. That started papering off as the programme in Germany started
papering off; but otherwise it continued throughout all these years. Subsequent
to 1998, there was an intense effort on our part also to try to see if we can
cooperate on R&D front with various other countries. In this regard, cooperation
with France was the first to be started after 1998. It was in 2000 in the form of an
intense lndo-French dialogue and that particular dialogue turned down to joint
agreement under which Indo-French R&D Committee was set up which meets
periodically and joint projects have been going on right from 2000 onwards and
that intense cooperation continues. We have been having relationship with
Russia for a long time, beginning, I think, from late 80s under the ILTP Programme.
That continued and now specifically between the Atomic Energy, there is an
agreement on cooperation in R&D which has been signed with Russia as a result
of this on-going dialogue. Again, topics have been identified and we are moving
on with Russia as well. As a result of these dialogues which we have with
various countries, India could become a full partner for the Project. That is a
project which is being set up in the South of France near Marseille on fusion
reactor and India is a full partner where we are contributing ten per cent of the
cost in kind and then we attend meetings. There is no hidden sort of thing there.

46
All the drawings, all the analysis is open. In every respect, we are able to share
knowledge with various other countries. The other partners in this venture are
USA, Russia, Japan, South Korea, China and EU — EU as an entire block. So,
there we are partner and we are working on. With USA also, apart from the
agreements on reactors etc., commercial negotiations are going on, but there is
a separate agreement — lndo-Nuclear Civil Working Group for cooperation in
R&D. There we have had several meetings. I think the first meeting was in
January, 2006 and subsequently we had four more meetings. While we have
been having discussions, but on ground things have not started proceeding as
yet — maybe we have to have more dialogue before things start proceeding on
ground. Sir, you raised a specific issue about visa. 'Yes', visa in case of USA, it
continues to be an issue. Sometimes it is delayed whenever our people have to
go for conferences, there is a delay there. Another issue you raised is whether
we are invited to various meetings or not. The answer is 'Yes'. We are now
getting invitations for all the meetings. Even in the nuclear energy agency for
OECD, there again we have taken membership of some of the groups."
159. On specifically being asked whether it was post 2008 after the India-US
Nuclear Deal Agreement, the representative supplemented as under:—
"It is after that only. This nuclear energy agency is very recent. As Secretary
Shri Sinha, just indicated, our regulatory board is a part of many meetings—
many such initiatives which take place amongst essentially OECD countries
where they are getting invited. We are setting up a global centre for nuclear
energy partnership specifically for cooperation with other countries and
specifically with regard to that, MoUs have been signed with France, Russia,
U.K and some dialogues with USA also in that area is going on."
160. On the issue of peer review by IAEA, the Chairman AERB submitted during
oral evidence as under:—
"Starting with peer review of AERB by International Atomic Energy Agency, in
fact, this is a voluntary service and many countries have availed of this, that is,
getting their regulatory bodies peer reviewed by an international team. In fact,
India has requested and they have made a commitment that they will also formally
come to them for this review. We plan to do this very soon, may be in the next
year 2013, we will get the peer review done for our nuclear power plant facilities.
We are planning to get it done for our regulatory system for nuclear power
plants. In fact, we have made a commitment to the IAEA that we would get it
done soon. It will happen."
161. On a pointed query as to whether any sort of peer review would affect the
NSRA Bill, 2011 which was introduced in Lok Sabha on 7 September, 2011, AERB
stated that based on the understanding that the Bill was the property of the House, it
was felt that it may be advisable to host the IRRS Mission for peer review after
completion of the legislative process AERB otherwise had no difficulty in proceeding
ahead with the IRRS Mission.

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 Introduction : The Committee note that radiation and radioactive
substances have many beneficial applications, ranging from power generation
to uses in medicine, industries and agriculture but the risks that may arise from
these applications to the people working in these fields, the general public and
the environment are enormous and hence, there is an imperative need for their
accurate assessment and effective control. The criticality of the issue of radiation
risks and safety compounded by the fact that such risks can transcend national
borders, necessitated international co- operation to promote and enhance global
safety by exchanging experiences as well as by improving capabilities for
controlling hazards, preventing accidents, responding to emergencies and
mitigating harmful consequences. The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB)
was set up in 1983 under the provisions of Section 27 of the Atomic Energy Act,
1962 (AE Act) which allowed the Central Government to delegate any power
conferred or any duty imposed on it by this Act to any officer or authority
subordinate to the Central or State Governments. The mandate of AERB was to
carry out certain regulatory and safety functions envisaged under Sections 16,
17 and 23 of the AE Act. Against this background, the C&AG conducted a
performance audit on the activities of AERB by studying the structure and status
of AERB and the effectiveness of its role as the nuclear regulator of India. The
performance audit of AERB, conducted through examination of management
controls and administrative procedures with licensing, inspection and
enforcement activities for the period  2005-06 to 2011-12 and review of the
functioning of emergency preparedness in related nuclear power plants and
districts pointed out glaring weaknesses in the regulatory framework and
several failures on the part of AERB in carrying out its mandate. The Committee's
subsequent examination of the subject and their recommendations for systemic
improvement are contained in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. Grant of Independent Status to AERB: The Committee are surprised to
find that while Countries such as Australia, Canada, France, United States of
America, etc. have already conferred legal status to their nuclear regulating
bodies by enacting appropriate laws in recognition of the paramount need for
independent and empowered regulatory bodies as stressed by the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the legal status of AERB of India remained
that of a mere subordinate Authority with powers delegated to it by the Central
Government. The Committee observe that the failure to have an autonomous
and independent regulator is clearly fraught with grave risks as brought out
poignantly in the report of the Fukushima Nuclear Accident Independent
Investigation Commission. The Committee are dismayed to find protracted
delays in the DAE's efforts to confer statutory status with enhanced legal
powers to AERB. The Committee also note that under the AE Act, 1962, the
powers conferred for imposition of penalty vests with the Central Government
and not with the AERB. Moreover, the process of enforcement as available
47

48
under penal Sections 24 and 30 (3) of the Act were also available with the DAE
and not with AERB. Mindful of the fact that an independent regulator should
have adequate powers to frame rules, enforce compliance and impose
appropriate penalties, the Committee observe that such systemic lacunae in
the legislative framework stands in the way of AERB being truly an independent
and effective r egulator. The Committee further note with profound concern
that even after a lapse of more than three decades after the Meckoni Committee
Report of 1981 which recommended creation of AERB with statutory status
and powers to lay down safety standards, the matter continues to hang in the
balance. Admittedly, while AERB never found its present status to be an
impediment in the discharge of its assigned responsibilities in an autonomous,
professional and effective manner as was evident from the numerous regulatory
enforcement actions taken by it with respect to nuclear power plants and
radiation installation with even shutdown orders of plants or suspension of
their activities, the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill (NSRA), 2011
which seeks to confer statutory status to the regulator was introduced in Lok
Sabha on 7 September, 2011. The Department related Parliamentary Standing
Committee (DRSC) on Science and Technology in their 221st Report on the
NSRA Bill, 2011 observed that the Bill by and large seems to meet three out of
the four core values viz ., competence, independence, stringency and
transparency,  but it still lacks somewhat on the count of independence. The
dissenting minute appended to the said report of the Standing Committee points
out categorically, that unless clauses 14, 42 and 48 of the Bill are fully deleted
or drastically amended, the NSRA will have no meaningful autonomy. The
Committee were assured that the Department of Atomic Energy have initiated
the process of formulating amendments to accommodate the recommendations
of the Standing Committee in consultation with the Ministry of Law and
Justice. Taking note of the grave structural lacunae and weaknesses in the
legislative framework intended to avert nuclear accidents, the Committee
concur with the recommendation of the Standing Committee on Science and
Technology that the Regulating Authority should be more independent and
autonomous so that it functions effectively, builds greater credibility and
inspires public trust. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the DAE
should seriously re-examine the provisions of the Bill and take necessary steps
urgently so as to ensure that the nuclear regulator becomes an independent
and credible body at par with similar regulators in other Countries. The
Committee may be apprised of action taken in the matter within six months of
the presentation of this report to Parliament.
3. Discharge of Regulatory Functions: Notably, a regulatory body must be
equipped to exercise its key regulatory functions viz. , standard-setting,
authorization. inspection and enforcement without preserve or constraint.
Moreover, Article 8 of the Convention on Nuclear Safety of the IAEA, ratified by
the Government of India stipulates effective separation between the functions of
the regulatory body from those of others. The representative of DAE laboured to
convince the Committee that the de-facto independence of AERB was
evident from impeccable safety performance of Nuclear Power Plants and
Fuel Cycle Facilities which were on par with international benchmarks and that
the functional independence of AERB was not compromised as the DAE extends
only administrative/service support to AERB which submits its

49
budget to AEC. The representative further submitted that enhancement and
strengthening of the existing legal framework was under process with the
introduction of the NSRA Bill, 2011 pending in Parliament. The Committee,
however, find that AERB's independence is circumscribed by certain aspects viz.,
absence of institutional separation of regulatory and non-regulatory functions
with the Chairman, AEC and Secretary, DAE being embodied in one person thereby
negating the very essence of such a separation; absence of a fixed term of office of
Chairman, AERB with extension granted on case to case basis; dependence of
AERB on DAE  for budgetary and administrative support; and apparent conflict
of responsibilities and interest with Chairman, AERB reporting to Chairman.
AEC who is also Secretary, DAE. The Committee do note that the NSRA Bill seeks
to constitute an empowered and independent Council of  Nuclear Safety headed
by the Prime Minister and serviced by DAE to report on overall policy with regard
to nuclear and radiation safety with the Report of this Council envisaged to be
presented to Parliament. The Committee hope that the enactment of the NSRA
Bill in the form as recommended, help establish a truly autonomous regulatory
body with independent decision making powers to perform three basic functions
viz, enact a set of appropriate, comprehensive and sound regulations, verify
compliance to such regulations and enforce established regulations by imposing
appropriate corrective measures in the form of penalties, punishments in the event
of departure from licensing conditions, malpractice or wrongdoing by persons,
organizations under regulatory oversight. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the action taken in the matter within six months of the
presentation of this Report.
4. Nuclear and Radiation Safety Rules : The Committee are concerned to
note that AERB did not have any authority for framing rules relating to nuclear
and radiation safety as the rule-making power under Section 30 of the AE Act,
1962 vests with the Central Government, that is, with the DAE and the AERB is
involved in the consultative process. The Committee also note delay by the DAE
in designating AERB as the Competent Authority in respect of the Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 leaving gaps in the accountability regime
during the intervening period. The Committee further note the ambiguity in
the Atomic Energy (Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 wherein the word 'any
person' in Rule 30 left the definition of competent authority to inspect premises,
radiation installation and conveyances rather vague and unspecific. In terms of
the oft-repeated recommendation of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation,
Lok Sabha (COSL) provisions in rules should not be vague or ambiguous capable
of tolerating different interpretations. The Committee hope that as assured by
DAE, a new set of rules devoid of such lacunae would be promulgated on
enactment of the NSRA Bill, replacing the RPR, 2004. Keeping in view that
rules are the real teeth that enable enforcement of provisions made in Acts of
Parliament, the Committee desire that the DAE take appropriate steps to review
and scrutinize all their existing rules and regulations and confer necessary powers
on the AERB so that all such lacunae are cured expeditiously.
5. Need for a Deterrent Fine: The Committee note with deep concern that in
terms of Section 30 (3) of AE Act, 1963, the penalty for contravention of the provisions
of the Act and Rules made thereunder remained abysmally low at a maximum fine

50
of  Rs. 500. Obviously, such undeterring penalties for contraventions related to
nuclear and radiation facilities involving substantial risks only points to the systemic
weakness in the legal framework of the Country's nuclear regulatory oversight
mechanism. Surprisingly, the Committee find that in 50 years of operation of DAE
and 29 years of existence of  AERB, the penal provisions under Section 24 or 30 (3)
of AE Act, 1962 were never invoked, rendering the penal provision virtually a dead
letter. The Committee were informed that AERB had been using far more  effective
enforcement actions such as suspension/withdrawal of consents and curtailment of
operations as the preferred tool for ensuring compliance, the economic penalty of
which was huge with potential of seriously affecting the financial health of
stakeholders. Apparently, such a contention of AERB makes the penal provision
relating to fine redundant compared to the economic penalty. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the penal provisions in the NSRA Bill, 2011 may be
relooked so that the proposed new law contains a sound provision to act as an effective
deterrent against the violators. The Committee further desire that such provisions
should be adequately  published and made known to all concerned including Institutes,
Academicians, Facilities as well as the public in general.
6. Formulation of Nuclear Radiation Safety Policy : The Committee note
that even after nearly three decades of its existence,  AERB is yet to formulate a
nuclear and radiation safety policy for the Country in spite of a specific mandate
in its Constitution Order of 1983. The Committee observe that the absence of
such a policy at a macro-level can hamper micro-level planning of radiation
safety in the Country. Intriguingly, though the need for hastening the process of
development of safety documents viz., codes, standards, guides and manuals was
stressed since the Meckoni Committee Report way back in 1987 and the Raja
Ramanna Committee in 1997, AERB is yet to bring out 27 required codes and
guides relating to nuclear and radiation safety. Admittedly, AERB has developed
adequate policies for radiation, industrial and nuclear safety and their
regulations and the 27 documents pointed out by Audit have since been identified
by AERB and are at various stages of development and expected to be published
progressively by December, 2014. Keeping in view the fact that a comprehensive
nuclear and radiation safety policy is the essential first step towards a more
effective regulation, the Committee desire that the consolidated Safety Policy
Document, statedly under preparation, may be brought out expeditiously as also
the other safety documents under various stages of development within a
stipulated time frame and the Committee apprised.
7. Development of Safety Codes and Guides: The Committee are happy to note
that subsequent to the Fukushima nuclear incident, AERB had set up a high level
Committee on Nuclear Safety, the recommendations of which were statedly under
implementation. As regards non-identification of external agencies for development
of safety codes and guides despite the recommendations of the Raja Ramanna
Committee, it was submitted that the process of document preparation, review and
incorporation/disposition of stakeholder views were done through a multi-tier
system of expert Committees and since AERB documents deal with very specialized
and advanced technology areas, experts in related areas though utilized by AERB
are limited in number. Mindful of the fact that standard setting being an essential
part of the function of a regulatory Authority and reiterating the imperative to set

51
up minimum benchmarks and safeguards to provide full assurance for safety in
nuclear and radiation facilities, the Committee hardly need to undertake the urgent
need for development of requisite safety codes and guides. Reposing immense faith
in the technological capabilities and the potential power of our science and scientists,
technocrats as well as experts, the Committee exhort the DAE to explore the
possibility of putting in place a suitable mechanism for adequate linkages with
renowned Universities and Institutions like IITs, etc. so that preparation of such
important safety codes and guides is undertaken and constantly updated keeping
pace with the frontiers of science and emerging technologies.
8. Gaps in Regulatory Regime for Want of Human Resource: The Committee
note that regulatory consents in the form of licenses, authorizations and
registrations from the Competent Authority secure an effective assurance that
the safety of the workers employed, the public at large, of the environment as well
as of plant and equipment was not at risk and that all activities were carried out
in accordance with prescribed processes and systems. AERB, being the competent
authority is mandated to grant such regulatory consents under RPR, 2004. The
Committee are surprised to find not only instances of delays in submission of
applications for renewal of licenses but an overall unsatisfactory licensing and
renewal process for even high radiation potential hazard units such as research
accelerators, industrial radiography and radiotherapy. The Committee observe
that AERB's painfully slow progress in bringing radiation users in the country
under its regulatory control indicated lack of sufficient manpower. Admittedly, it
was only from the year 2006 subsequent to the enforcement of the Atomic Energy
(Radiation Protection) Rules, 2004 that AERB had been able to issue formal
licenses and the backlog was expected to be completed with significant increase
in manpower. The Committee were apprised that in addition. AERB initiated a
number of measures to strengthen the system for monitoring and renewal of
consents to radiation facilities as well as related regulatory activities viz. e-
licensing system for filing of applications and issue/renewal of consents; increased
inspection coverage for radiation facilities; conduct of awareness programmes
and establishment of Regional Regulatory Centres (RRC). Needless to say, the
huge manpower shortage has left a large gap in the regulating and monitoring
regime. Taking note of the fact that capacity building is crucial for effective
monitoring, the Committee hardly need to emphasize that the AERB need to
augment their manpower requirement at various levels through appropriate
recruitment and training policies based on periodic cadre review. The Committee
further observe that a robust regulatory inspection regime with built in provisions
for mandated periodic as well as surprise checks remains the key requirement
for stringent enforcement of safety regulation. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the definitive measures in this behalf.
9. Monitoring and Authorizations: The Committee are anguished to note that
there was no system in place for monitoring the expiry of authorizations and their
renewals with instances of protracted delays for periods as long as 24 years.
Alarmingly. 70 out of 135 Gamma Chamber units continued to function without
valid authorizations. The Committee find that subsequent to  the Mayapuri
incident, AERB has taken steps to ensure that operational gamma chambers are
subjected to close regulatory monitoring and non-operational ones are safely

52
disposed of within a reasonable time frame. Reportedly, measures have been taken
to revamp the regulation of radiation facilities viz., updating the inventory of
radiation sources; introduction of e-Licensing of Radiation Applications for filing
of applications and issue of consents, for effectively managing the regulation of
radiation sources and facilities; increased inspection coverage for radiation
facilities; conduct of awareness programmes; and establishment of Regional
Regulatory Centres (RRC) to cater to the requirements of regulatory inspections
at the Eastern and Southern zones in India. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the outcomes of such measures.
10. Monitoring of  Medical x-ray Units: The Committee are deeply concerned
to note that the regulatory mechanism concerning x-ray units was virtually
non-existent. Out of a total of 57.443 medical x-ray facilities operating in the
Country, only 5270 units had been registered and were under the regulatory
control of AERB, leaving the balance 52,173 units constituting almost 91% of
the total units without registrations. The representatives of AERB admitted
that with its centralized workforce of 300 engineers and scientists, it was
impossible to regulate 57,443 odd x-ray machines. The marked accelerated
growth of ionising radiation such as medical x-rays used as an essential
diagnostic tool pose risks to health of workers and the public in the vicinity of
these facilities. Surprisingly, even after the Supreme Court directive for setting
up a Directorate of Radiation Safety (DRS) in each State for regulating the use
of medical diagnostic x-rays, the Committee find that out of 28 States and 7
Union Territories, DRS have been set up only in Kerala and Mizoram. The
Committee were however, assured that the roadmap to bring medical x-ray
facilities under AERB's regulatory control includes inter-alia steps to enhance
awareness levels on regulatory requirements related to diagnostic x-ray
facilities, through advertisements in the newspapers, awareness programmes
and information provided in AERB website; simplification of regulatory
requirements for the end-users of diagnostic x-ray facilities; regulatory control
on manufacturers/suppliers, through type approval of the equipment and
arrangements for sharing information on the purchasers/users of x-ray
equipment; development of an easy and approachable interface for the users to
facilitate on-line filing of application for obtaining Registration, using the new
web based interactive system (e-LORA i.e. e-licensing of radiation applications);
establishment of an accreditation programme for the agencies involved in
providing quality assurance services; decentralisation of regulatory functions
with the establishment of Regional Regulatory Centres (RRCs) and State level
Directorates of Radiation Safety (DRS): rationalization and simplification of
the existing regulations for users in diagnostic x-ray practice, by way of
amendments of AERB Safety Code; enhancing regulatory control on
manufacturers/suppliers as well as users; etc. The Committee hope that the
AERB's roadmap for regulating control of Medical x-ray units, hitherto
effectively out of their ambit would fructify in the near future. The Committee
also urge that the process of setting up Directorates of Radiation Safety in all
the States as per the Supreme Court directive may be expedited. Taking note of
lack of proper linkage between AERB and the Ministry of Health on issues
related to Public Health due to radiation, the Committee desire that appropriate
institutional mechanism be set up providing for healthy exchange of information
and the Committee apprised.

53
11 . Framing of Rules Prescribing Fee for Cost of Services: The Committee
are concerned to note that AERB has not yet framed any rules to prescribe and
fix fee for recovery of the cost of services rendered for the regulating and
consenting process as a result of which it had to bear such costs despite clear
provision in Section 30 of the AE Act read with the RPR, 2004 framed
thereunder. The Committee impress upon the AERB not to undermine the
importance of revenue generation through recovery of requisite cost of
services and urge the AERB to frame requisite rules for levying suitable fees
for recovering the cost of the consenting process for licenses with appropriate
provision for periodic review and revision.
12. Inspection of Units: The Committee note that as per IAEA standards, each
Government should expressly assign the prime responsibility for safety to an entity
and make it responsible for compliance through stringent inspection of facilities
and verification of requisite specifications. The Committee are, however, dismayed
to find that AERB has not conducted 85 per cent of regulating inspections during
the seven year period 2005-06 to 2011-12 for both industrial radiography and
radiotherapy units identified as having high radiation hazard potential. Alarmingly,
there was shortfall of over 97 per cent regulatory inspection in case of diagnostic
radiological facilities every year. Worse, AERB has not even fixed any frequency for
Regulatory Inspections (RI) of such facilities inspite of the availability of
international benchmarks in this regard. Instances of non-submission as well as
delays in submission to responses to RI reports only confirmed the weaknesses in
the regulatory oversight. Admittedly, the shortfall in the number of Rls was due to
rapid growth in the number of radiation facilities and inadequate infrastructure
with the result that only sample checks of radiation facilities could be carried out
and an advanced web-based interactive system was being developed to minimize
the time lags. The Committee find the contention of AERB that enforcement of
safety regulations does not appear to be compromised consequent to delay in
implementation of SARCOP (Safety Review Committee for Operating Plants) far
from tenable. Also, keeping in view the onerous mandate of SARCOP to monitor
and enforce safety regulations in NPPs and other radiation facilities identified by
the Central Government and the revelation that it could not ensure compliance of
its recommendation pending for several years, the Committee recommend that the
DAE take appropriate measures to implement the recommendation of SARCOP in
right earnest based on their relative importance.
13. Protection against Radiation : The Committee note that radiation
protection is intended to ensure that the amount of radiation absorbed by an
organism does not have negative consequences and the nuclear law must establish
a legislative framework for the safe management of all sources and types of
ionizing radiation. While AERB is entrusted with the function of prescribing
acceptable limits of radiation exposure to occupational workers and members
of the public, the actual task of radiological protection of workers in Nuclear
Power Plants is carried out by the Health Physics Unit (HPU). The Committee
note that with the transfer of HPUs in all NPPs to NPCIL in May 2009, the
responsibility of AERB to monitor radiation protection in NPPs stands diluted.
As regards radiological protection of the public, the Committee are pleased to
note that during the period from 2005-2010, the effective dose to the public was
far less than the prescribed annual limit of one mSv (Milli Sievert) in all the

54
nuclear facilities site. The Committee note that the Health, Safety and
Environment Group of the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) carries
out environmental surveillance through its Environmental Survey Laboratories
(ESLs) and thus functions as a technical support center to AERB. The Committee
observe that the absence of any direct role of AERB in verification of compliance
with regard to environmental surveillance issue apparently weakens its
authority to monitor the performance of the regulated entity though AERB
consider the present arrangement satisfactory as ESLs have to share survey
data with AERB. Further, as per AERB guidelines, the annual dose limit for
occupational exposure to radiation is 30 mSv (Mili Sievert) with the condition
that it should not exceed 100 mSv in a span of five years. However, Audit findings
pointed out 89 cases of excess exposure exceeding 30 mSv at radiation facilities
during the period from 2005-2010, out of which the exposure was more than 50
mSv in 41 cases. Admittedly, the number of over exposure had been less than 0.1
per cent of the total number of radiation workers in the last five years. The
Committee note that the discharge of radioactive waste from radiation
installation in India was governed by the Atomic Energy (Safe Disposal of
Radioactive Wastes) Rules, 1987 which mandated that for every radiation
installation, authorization from AERB was required for disposal of radioactive
waste. The Committee are, however, dismayed to observe the confirmation given
by AERB that a renowned and prestigious institution like the Delhi University
was totally ignorant of the rule pertaining to safe disposal of radioactive wastes,
which unfortunately resulted in the tragic Mayapuri incident. The Committee
are dismayed to observe that such an important aspect of safe handling and disposal
of radioactive waste by institutes/facilities was neglected to the grave peril of the
public and the environment. The representative of DAE admitted that Mayapuri
incident was an example of radioactive waste gone wrong and a case of a legacy
source, in existence before the regulating regime came into being. While
emphasizing that the radioactive waste control management in so far as it relates
to nuclear power plant and fuel cycle facilities has impeccable record in the
Country, the representatives further submitted that AERB did intensive work
subsequent to the incident to strengthen the system of management of disused
sources by conducting extensive surveys and updating the database on radioactive
sources. The Committee are happy to note the impeccable radioactive waste
management control mechanism in existence in nuclear power plants and fuel
cycle facilities and hope that the same is maintained scrupulously. In view of the
aforesaid observations and candid admissions made by the representatives of DAE
and the AERB, the Committee recommend that:—
(i) The AERB should have independent assessment and monitoring of
HPUs so as to ensure radiological protection of workers in NPPs;
(ii) The AERB may be entrusted with the responsibility of environmental
surveillance with the close cooperation of ESLs;
(iii) Though the number of over exposure has been less than 0.1 per cent
of the total number of radiation workers, AERB should make vigor-
ous efforts to augment preventive action in addition to the remedial
action post-exposure to safeguard their health;

55
(iv) Comprehensive inventory may be prepared and constantly updated
of all radioactive radiation sources across the Country indicating
the suppliers/manufacturers and suitable awareness created for safe
handling and disposal of radioactive waste to prevent Mayapuri like
incidents in future;
(v) Suitable institutional mechanism be evolved and put in place by
establishing suitable and regular linkages with the schools and
colleges and community for disseminating greater awareness about
the advantages of atomic energy and the safeguards provided against
radiation and radioactive substances; and
(vi) Fur ther, an appropriate curriculum be included in NCERT/CBSE
syllabi for enhanced sensitization of the impressionable young minds
of students towards the lurking dangers of radiation over-exposure
as also to their potential application with adequate safeguards.
Vocational courses on radiological safety may also be introduced.
The Committee should like to be apprised of all prophylactive and
preventive measures taken in this regard.
14. Shortage of RSOs: The Committee are concerned to note that there is
an acute shortage of Radiological Safety Officers, who are required to be
designated for all radiation units in accordance with the provisions in Rule
22 of RPR, 2004 and Rule 13 of Safe Disposal of Radioactive Waste Rules,
1987. Having regard to the fact that RSOs are assigned enormous
responsibilities for radioactive protection and safe disposal of radioactive
waste and also function as vital links between the licencees and the regulator
in securing compliance, the Committee observe that effectiveness of safety
procedures remains deeply compromised due to their acute shortage. The
Committee are concerned to find that there was acute shortage of not only
RSOs but also of trained manpower in general in AERB. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that (i) the DAE should take proactive measures for
augmentation of RSOs and other requisite trained human resource at all levels
of recruitment at various levels; (ii) impart appropriate training and also
launch talent search to attract students from Universities for their appropriate
orientation for posts in AERB; and (iii) considering the fact that fundamental
science of today is the technology of tomorrow, the DAE should incentivize
nuclear research by having appropriate linkages with the Universities/IITs.
15. Preparation of Emergency Responses: The Committee note with profound
concern that off-site emergency exercises carried out highlighted inadequate
emergency preparedness even for situations where the radiological effects of an
emergency originating from NPP are likely to extend beyond the site and affect the
people around. Article 16 of the Convention on Nuclear Safety of  IAEA, ratified by the
Government of India in 2005, stipulates development of emergency response plans in
conformity with international practices so that any eventuality with a potential to
result in undue radiological risks to plant, personnel and the public, is handled
effectively. The Committee find that while emergency preparedness plans are to be
approved by AERB, it has no authority to enforce rules in instances of malpractices

56
and departures from approved plans. The Committee also find that as regards off-site
emergency response plans, the responsibility rests with district authorities under
the overall coordination of the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA).
Notably, the cardinal principle in safety management is that the operator has the
prime responsibility for safety. Having regard to the fact that the number of radiation
applications in various areas have grown continuously and high strength radioactive
sources are being used extensively in industry, hospitals and other irradiation
facilities, the Committee recommend that the AERB need to:
(i) Strengthen the regulating aspect of emergency preparedness in the area
of other radiation facilities as well which is almost non-existent;
(ii) Prescribe mandatory safety codes/procedures and emergency pre-
paredness plan based on strict assessment of risk factors; and
(iii) Put in place effective control mechanism for securing compliance
to the prescribed safety codes.
16. Preparation of Decommissioning Plans: The Committee are concerned
to note that there is no legislative framework in India for decommissioning
of nuclear power plants (NPPs) and AERB's mandate extends to that of only
prescription of codes, guides and safety manuals on decommissioning. Notably,
it is imperative that at the end of life of any NPP, nuclear fuel cycle facility, it
needs to be decommissioned, decontaminated and demolished. Moreover,
decommissioning can extend over lengthy periods of time requiring stringent
regulating supervision and control during the period. The Committee also
find that in India as per the provision of the Atomic Energy (Radioactive
Protection) Rules, 2004, the responsibility for decommissioning is on the
'employer' while in countries like USA, UK, Canada, Spain, France, etc.,
designated competent authority, often the nuclear regulator, plays a major
role. The Committee observe that in view of such gaping weaknesses and also
stipulations by IAEA in this regard, the role of AERB with reference to
decommissioning needs to be strengthened urgently. The Committee also note
with profound concern that all the NPPs in the Country including those
operating for more than 30 years, were operating without any decommissioning
plans. The Committee further observe that AERB, as a regulator was not in a
position to secure compliance with the provision of its Safety Manual on
'Decommissioning of Nuclear Facilities' even after a lapse of 13 years from
its issue on the plea that the absence of decommissioning plans does not affect
safety of operating units. Admittedly, AERB ensures safety surveillance on a
graded approach and while the broad conceptual approaches for
decommissioning of NPPs were already prepared, it did not have any role in
stipulating time frames for decommissioning. The Committee recognize the
need to set clear timelines for decommissioning plans as also specific
provisions in rules defining the authority to enforce stringent supervision
and regulation during the decommissioning period. The Committee are further
dismayed to find that neither the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 nor the Rules framed
thereunder have any provision for creation of decommissioning reserves by
the utilities. Worse, while decommissioning charges have not been revised
since 1991, AERB has no defined role for ensuring availability of adequate
funds. The Committee observe that as per IAEA stipulations, clear and

57
specific provision must be made in the rules for covering the aspect of financial
arrangements for decommissioning. The Committee find that NPCIL had
accumulated ` 920.22 crore in the Decommissioning Fund as of March 2011
through levy of decommissioning charge of 2 paisa per KWH energy sold and
while an expert Committee had recommended review of the levy for future
expenditure on decommissioning, no action has yet been taken so far on this
aspect. The Committee feel that considering the span of decommissioning
period, the cost of decommissioning can even exceed cost of establishment of
Nuclear facilities and therefore recommend a more robust system of financial
arrangement and timeline for decommissioning and desire that the DAE should
initiate requisite steps for putting in such a system and also for periodic review
of levy charges so that the ‘Decommissioning Fund' is adequately funded.
17. Adoption of International Benchmarks and Peer Review: The Committee
note that although AERB maintains liaison with international nuclear
organization, it has been slow in adopting international benchmarks and good
practices in the areas of nuclear and radiation operation. The role of AERB in
relation to implementing international legal commitments has not been
specifically defined in its Constitution Order. Further, the AERB has not yet
availed of the opportunity of peer review and appraisal services of IAEA to get
its regulatory framework and its effectiveness reviewed by them. The Committee
find that though AERB has initiated a structured process of self-assessment of
its regulating framework, processes and systems, which was statedly in an
advanced stage, it has not yet hosted the Integrated Regulatory Review Services
(IRRS) of IAEA for peer review though committed to the mission. Admittedly,
AERB was awaiting the completion of the legislative process of the NSRA Bill,
presently in Parliament, to host the IRRS Mission for peer review. The
Committee hope that once the law is enacted, the AERB will start peer review
and appraisal services of IAEA to help make the nuclear regulatory infrastructure
effective, sustainable and more creditable. The Committee also desire that
loopholes in the existence legal framework may be addressed appropriately for
speedy and effective implementation of the international legal commitments.
18. Conclusion: In fine, the Committee's examination revealed inter-alia,
diminished legal status of AERB which remained a mere subordinate authority
lacking due autonomy of an empowered and independent regulator as existent
in many other Countries; failure of AERB to develop safety policy, standards,
codes and guides; weak consenting process and monitoring system resulting in
substantial number of radiation facilities units operating without valid licenses
as evident by the non-registration of 91 per cent of medical x-ray facilities in
the country which therefore, remained out of the ambit of the regulating control
of AERB; absence of rules to prescribe fees for  recovery of the cost of services
for regulating and consenting process; failure to enforce safety provisions and
compliance to frequency of regulatory inspections for both industrial
radiography and radiotherapy units and shortfall of over 97 per cent inspection
in case of diagnostic radiology facilities; absence of a detailed inventory of all
radiation sources to ensure effective compliance of regulation for safe disposal
of disused sources; inadequate emergency preparedness for nuclear and
radiation facilities; absence of a legislative framework for decommissioning of

58
Nuclear Power Plants; and total absence of peer review and appraisal services
of IAEA. Although, as submitted by the representative of AERB, because of its
grooming culture, India has never been lacking in international standards and
by adopting measures, unsafe situations have been avoided. The Committee,
however, reiterate the need for granting independent and autonomous status of
AERB given the thrust on tapping atomic energy to surmount the rising energy
need of the country. Also, considering the paramount right of the nation to be
safe from nuclear accidents, the Committee strongly recommend that the
deficiencies noticed in the realm of nuclear regulatory oversight framework
must be addressed with a sense of urgency as recommended herein above within
six months of the presentation of the report and the Committee apprised.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
04 November, 2013 Chairman ,
13 Kartika , 1935 ( Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13)
The Committee sat on Friday, the 26th October, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1740
hrs. in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
4. Shri Ashok Tanwar
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Dr. Baliram
8. Dr. Shashi Tharoor
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
12. Shri N.K. Singh
13. Prof. Saif-ud-Din-Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
59
Server3\Report 2013\3742ls\3742ls1(32-62)

60
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Jayant Sinha  — Principal Director of Audit
2. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director of Audit (SD)
3. Shri Dharam Singh — Director of Audit
4. Shri Gurpreet W alia — Deputy Director
Representatives of the Department of Atomic Energy
1. Dr. R.K. Sinha — Secretary, DAE & Chairman, AEC
2. Shri S.S. Bajaj — Chairman, AERB
3. Dr. R.B. Grover — Principal Adviser, DAE
4. Shri R. Bhattacharya — Secretary, AERB
5. Shri Rahul Kulshreshth — Joint Secretary (ER), DAE
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members, the representatives of
the Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India and the representatives of the
Department of Atomic Energy to the sitting of the Committee convened for briefing on
the subject 'Activities of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board' based on C&AG Report
No. 9 of 2012-13 (Performance Audit). Thereafter, the Chairman impressed upon the
witnesses to keep the deliberations of the sitting confidential until the report on the
subject was presented to the House.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Department of Atomic Energy explained
the legal status and regulatory framework of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board; the
existing management controls and administrative procedures connected with licensing
and enforcement activities. The representatives of the Department responded to some
of the questions and concerns of the Members regarding nuclear safety and radiation
safety policy; licensing and registration mechanism; formation of Directorates of
Radiation Safety in the States; shortage of Radiological Safety Officers in different
types of radiation facilities; and the measures being taken to strengthen the surveillance
of exposure control; preparation of inventory of all radiation sources to ensure safe
disposal of disused sources as per norms.
4. The Chairman, then thanked the representatives of the Department of Atomic
Energy for appearing before the Committee and furnishing information desired in
connection with examination of the subject. He also directed them to furnish written
replies to questions, which they could not reply or replied partly, within a fortnight.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2013-14) HELD ON 17TH OCTOBER, 2013
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 17th October, 2013 from 1130 hrs. to
1235 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Ramen Deka
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
7. Dr. Baliram
Rajya Sabha
8 Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Shri N.K. Singh
10. Smt. Ambika Soni
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and  Auditor General of India
1. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director of Audit (RC)
2. Ms. Gurveen Sidhu — Principal Director of Audit (SD)
3. Shri Purushotam Tiwary — Principal Director of Audit (PAC)
61
Server3\Report 2013\3742ls\3742ls1(32-62)

62
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the Committee. The Chairman then apprised the
Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt three Draft
Reports.
3.  The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on " Activities of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board "
(Department of Atomic Energy) based on C&AG Report No. 9 of 2012-13;
and
(iii) *** *** ***
4.  After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above Draft Reports with
some modifications/amendments. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to
finalise the three Reports adopted by them, in light of their suggestions and the factual
verifications received from the Audit and present the same to the House on a date
convenient to him.
5. The Chairman thanked then the Members for their valuable suggestions on
the consideration of the Draft Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matters not related with this report.