SEVENTY-FIFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
CANTEEN STORES DEPARTMENT
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-eighth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.3.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.3.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)

PAC No. 2002
Price : Rs. 40.00
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13).................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................... 12
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government........................................................ 25
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which required reiteration.................. 26
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies ...................... 31
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the  Thirty-seventh  sitting  of  the  Public
Accounts Committee (2012-13) held on 19th March, 2013... 32
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Forty-eighth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) ....................................................................... 34

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13.Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected w.e.f.  6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(iii)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Forty-eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Canteen Stores Department' based
on C&AG Report No. 14 of 2010-11 relating to the Ministry of Defence.
2. The Forty-eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 28th December, 2011. It contained Nineteen Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of
Defence in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly
categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Paragraph Nos. 1-3, 6-8, 10-18
Total: 15
Chapter  II
(ii)Observations/Recommendations, which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Recommendation Paragraph Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter  III
(iii)Observations/Recommendations, in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which required
reiteration:
Recommendation Paragraph Nos. 4-5, 9 & 19
Total: 4
Chapter  IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations, in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
Recommendation Paragraph Nos. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter  V
3. The Forty-Eighth Report on 'Canteen Stores Department' was based on C&AG
Report No. 14 of 2010-11. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee
had revealed certain very disquieting aspects in the functioning of Canteen Store
1

2
Department which inter-alia included consistent withdrawal of money by the CSD
from CFI; distribution and utilization of QD in a non-transparent manner; treating
profits of the URC as non-Public Fund; welfare measures for the trops from their own
contributions; and unjustifiable discrimination with the URC employees etc. The
Committee had accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in the
Forty-eighth Report.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence to each of the
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee contained in their Forty-eighth Report
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.
I. CONSISTENT WITHDRAW AL OF MONEY  BY THE CSD FROM THE
CONSOLIDATED FUND OF INDIA (CFI)
Recommendation (Para Nos. 4 and 5)
5. In their Forty-eighth Report, the Committee had observed that according to
the Ministry/Services, URCs were operated from the non-public funds/regimental funds
of the three Services and the profit was spent on the welfare of the troops. They had
therefore, argued that the URCs should be kept out of the purview of the C&AG. But
the Committee's in-depth examination of the subject had revealed that there was a
definite umbilical cord between the source of funding of the CSD and the URCs. The
Committee found that during the last five fiscals there had been consistent withdrawal
of money from the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) by the CSD to enable them to buy
goods to be sold the URCs. The argument that the amount withdrawn from the CFI was
returned in excess i.e. profit generated by the URCs, did not make the money non-
public fund in view of the C&AG's remark during evidence of the Minsitry that there
was "no way in which any non-Public Funds could be routed through the CFI". The
Committee had therefore concluded that the assertion of the Services that the
involvement of the CFI began at the CSD and ended there was not sustainable.
6. During the examination of the subject, the Committee were also informed that
the accounts of the URCs were closely monitored and audited by the Boards of Officers,
Commanding Officers, etc. at various levels besides the Chartered Accountants which
had stood the test of time and were transparent. In their Forty-eighth Report, the
Committee had noted the views of the Services that the time-tested routines and
procedures of the armed forces should not be altered as they had never ever let down
the nation in any manner whatsoever and as any such changes might affect the morale
of the troops. The Committee failed to understand how auditing of the URCs would be
so  intrusive as to have an adverse impact on the functioning of the URCs or for that
matter on the morale of the troops. Respecting the professional efficiency of the
Services and the challenges of their core function, the Committee were of the considered
view that the audit of URCs by the C&AG would only redound to the common zeal of
the troops and as such the Services should have no objection or slightest reservation
on this score. The Committee had further commented that such an Audit would provide
greater assurance to the superior commands, the Government and the Parliament and

3
as the expert advice of the C&AG would involve no extra cost, there should be no
qualm or compunctions about their visit to remote and restricted areas vis-a-vis the
non-governmental persons.
7. In response to both the Observations/Recommendations, the Ministry in their
Action Taken Note have stated that the Observations of the Committee have been
noted.
8. The Committee deplore that instead of initiating specific action on their
Observations/Recommendations, the Ministry have merely 'noted' their
recommendations. Such vague and inane reply is not acceptable. The Committee
would like to caution the Ministry to desist from such inanities and furnish concrete
action taken replies on the above mentioned Observations/Recommendations within
three months of the presentation of this Report.
II. DISTRIBUTION AND UTILISATION OF QUANTITATIVE DISCOUNT (QD) IN
A TRANSPARENT MANNER
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
9. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that the CSD provided
Quantitative discount (QD) in the form of free stores to all the URCs which was
disbursed through the Budgetary Grant of the Ministry of Defence. Taking note of the
fact that during the six years from 2002-03 to 2007-08 an amount of Rs. 883.46 crore was
transferred in the form of QD and that the benefit of such QDs was not passed on to
the consumers and instead added to the profits of the URCs, the Committee had
opined that such a discreet transfer from the CFI to the non-Public fund did not
conform to the provisions contained in the General Financial Rules. The Committee
further observed that the Ministry's contention that QD was a bulk discount which
was released in the form of stocks against indent and it was never given in cash did not
make it a case for transferring of funds from the CFI to the non-Public fund. Observing
that the benefit accrued from such discount was never passed on to the customers and
hence it could not be termed as trade discount as intended, the Committee had
recommended that QD should not be used as an instrument to transfer funds from the
CFI to non-Public fund and if such transfers were made they must conform to the
provisions of the GFR and the advice tendered by the C&AG.
10. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have stated as under:
"In line with the recommendations of the C&AG and the PAC, guidelines for
disbursement and utilization of QD in a transparent manner have been formulated
and released on 20th March, 2012 in consultation with tri Services and Defence
Finance. These guidelines have been made generally in conformity with the
GFRs."
11. The Committee are pleased to note that pursuant to their Recommendations,
Guidelines for the disbursement and utilization of the Quantitative Discount (QD) in
a transparent manner have been formulated and released on 20th March, 2012.
However, the Committee wish to stress that the Guidelines so formulated must conform
to all the requirements specified in the GFRs on regulating disbursement of the

4
Grants-in-Aid to the grantees. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the QD
already given for the fiscal 2011-12 and to be given in subsequent financial years be
treated as/in the form of 'Grants-in-Aid', in accordance with the provisions contained
in the GFRs and the advice of the C&AG. The Committee would also like to know
whether the process of changing the object head from "Contribution' to "Grants-in-
Aid' had been completed and made effective in view of the Audit observation and the
Constitutional Provision (Article 150) which enjoins that the accounts of the Union
and of the States shall be kept in such form as the President may, on the advice of the
C&AG , prescribe.
III. TREATING PROFITS OF THE URC AS NON-PUBLIC FUND
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
12. In their Forty-eighth Report, the Committee had found that a three judge
Bench of the Supreme Court while hearing the Civil Appeal No. 3495 of 2005 had inter-
alia observed (para 10) "The question whether the URC can be treated as an
instrumentality of the State does not fall for consideration as that aspect has not been
considered by CAT or the High Court". It was evident from this judgement that it
confined itself to the limited issue of whether and URC employee was to be treated as
really a Government servant or not and the Court had abstained from making any
observation on the business of the URC being an instrument or otherwise of the State.
But the Service Chiefs, while tendering evidence, took recourse to the above said
Supreme Court Judgement to justify that profits generated by the URCs were non-
Public fund and hence it should be kept out of the purview of the C&AG, even though
such profits were deposited in the CFI. The Committee had opined that the way the
judgement had been interpreted by the Services was not what the purport of the
judgement was, since the funding pattern of the URCs and the nature of the funds
were neither an issue before the Supreme Court not were they called upon to decide
such issues. Although the Services consistently maintained that the large amount of
money involved in the operation of the URCs came from non-Public funds or sources,
the fact remained that the whole genesis of the URC was integrally connected to the
CSD. Taking into consideration the fact that with the pecuniary benefits that the URCs
got from the State in terms of Soft Loans, Quantitative Discounts, Budgetary Provisions,
free land, Government transport, deputation of the Service personnel to man the URCs
etc., the Committee were of the view that these URCs could not be deemed to be
private institutions as they had all the trappings of Government/semi-Government
organization. The Committee had recommended that the Defence establishment should
not have any difficulty or hesitation and certainly not on the basis of the above cited
Supreme Court judgement to let the URCs audited by the C&AG so that the end shape
of the large amount of money involved in the operation of the URCs was taken to its
logical conclusion in accordance with the appropriate accounting policy.
13. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
"There are no direct 'pecuniary benefits' given by the Government to the URCs.
The loans given by the CSD to URCs are paid back in full and there are no
obligations to grant any financial assistance by the CSD to URCs nor were there
any obligations to create such URCs. Further, there are no 'budgetary Provisions'

5
made by Government for URCs as such. CSD gives an incentive (QD) to the
URCs in terms of stores. Some aspects of contentions of C&AG regarding URCs
using Government facilities are explained below:
URCs Pay Rent and Allied Charges for Government Premises: The primary
objective of running URCs within Government premises is to provide essential
items of daily needs to the troops and their families including separated families,
who are co-located within cantonments. URCs pay rent and allied charges at the
laid down rates from their profits, like any other vendor.
URCs are Run by Civilian Employees: URCs are run by Civilian Employees who
are paid out of the URC account. Service Personnel, wherever employed, are
performing these duties in addition to their primary duties, on payment of
honorarium by the URCs.
URCs Uses Civil Hired Transport: URCs use their own funds for hiring of civil
transport for transporting their goods. In exceptional and inescapable cases, for
example URCs deployed in some parts of J&K and other intense terrorism affected
areas, use service transport.
The Ministry has accepted the recommendations of the Committee regarding
audit of URCs that accounts of URCs will be brought under accountability
regime and, will be audited by the C&AG to be extent of the QD accounts and
not the non-public funds maintained by the URCs. The checklist enumerating
what would be seen in the audit would also be shared with commanders concerned
as per the existing procedures."
14. The Committee are not convinced with the reasonings adduced by the Ministry for
treating the profits generated by the URCs as non-Public funds. Firstly, when a loan
is being provided to the URCs at a concessional rate through the Consolidated Fund
of India (CFI), it amounts to Budgetary Provision and repayment of the loan amount in
full, which is required under the accounting procedure, does not in anyway make the
loan/profits non-Public funds. Secondly, the Ministry's claim that no direct pecuniary
benefits are given to the URCs does not hold good in view of the fact that benefits in the
form of QD, free stores, etc. as provided to the URCs are pecuniary benefits and it
does not matter whether such benefits are given directly or indirectly and in cash or
in kind. Mindful of a host of pecuniary benefits that the URCs get form the State in
terms of Soft Loans, QDs, Budgetary Provisions, deputation of the Service Personnel
to man the URCs, Government transport used for the URCs, the Committee reiterate
that the large amount of money involved in the operation of URCs cannot be treated as
non-public funds and the Committee find no valid ground for excluding the URCs
from the ambit of C&AG's Audit more so, when the turnover of the 4500 URCs is over
` 10,000 crore (approx.) and the profit generated in the operation of the URCs is close
to ` 500 to ` 600 crore (approx.) (as on December, 2012). The Committee also reiterate
that since the URCs have the trappings of Government/Semi Government organizations,
the URCs must be audited by the Supreme Auditor for greater assurance of
transparency in the operation of the URCs. The matter therefore needs earnest
reconsideration at the highest level in the Ministry of Defence asserting its authority
to ensure compliance of constitutional and statutory provisions and the Committee be
apprised of the position within three months of the presentation of this Report.

6
15. According to the Ministry, URCs are run by the Civilian employees who are
paid out of the URC account. The Ministry have further stated that the Service
Personnel, wherever employed, are also catering to the URC services, in addition to
their primary duties, on payment of honorarium by the URCs. But Audit has pointed
out that very often Serive Personnel are assigned full time duties to run the URCs.
Also, according to a source information received by the Committee, out of the 4500
URCs operating in the country, around 1500 URCs are run by the civilian employees
whereas as many as 80,000 Service Personnel are deployed on a full time basis to run
the remaining 3000 URCs, in violation of Clause No. 2 (b) & 2 (c) of the Army Order
No. 584/73 under the Manual of Unit Run Canteens 2005 which specifically says "no
military personnel or free transport is to be used in the running of the Canteens".
The Committee feel that deployment of uniformed personnel to run the URCs in
restricted/disturbed/insurgency prone areas may be justified but their deputation/
employment, that too on full time basis in the URCs situated in normal/peaceful areas
defies logic in view of the undisputed fact that the primary job of the Combatants is to
guard the frontiers of the Country and cater to other emergencies and certainly not
to get themselves engaged in the day to day mundane business activities of the URCs
which should be more appropriately managed by Civilian employees. Besides, the
Government spend huge amount of money on the selection and rigorous training and
development of the regular Combatants so as to keep them in a state of full
preparedness. Obviously, this deployment of Combatants on a regular basis to run the
URCs leads to colossal waste of public money and defeats the very purpose for which
the Uniformed Cadre is created besides impinging on the security of the nation. The
Committee would like to know the magnitude of the deployment of the Uniformed
Personnel in the URCs in non restricted/disturbed areas. Based on the findings,
corrective measures like complete withdrawal of the Combatants from the URCs be
taken in the National interest so as to preserve, protect and spur their martial spirit.
I V . WELFARE MEASURES FOR THE TROOPS FROM THEIR OWN
CONTRIBUTIONS
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
16. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that the welfare activities
were extended to the jawans from their own contributions which was against the very
principle of social welfare. The Committee had noted that there was an apparent and
inherent contradiction in the statement of the Services that they provided welfare
measures for the jawans but they did it with private funds i.e. burdening the troops to
self-contribute for their own welfare. Expressing surprise at the inability of the Ministry/
Services to come before Parliament and get requisite funds as sought and sanctioned,
regardless of the quantum, for the welfare of the jawans, the Committee had observed
that no organ of the State would have any objection if funds were allotted for the
socio-economic welfare of those who make supreme sacrifices for the country. The
Committee had fervently urged the Ministry to link the welfare measures of the jawans
with the CFI which would enable grant of the funds to meet the much needed welfare
requirements of the jawans reflective of the commitment of the Government and the
generosity and adulation of Parliament for the armed forces.

7
17. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Note, have sated as follows:—
"The Ministry accepts the observations of the Committee, however, it is submitted
that, though many welfare activities are funded directly from the CFI, it may be
appreciated that some welfare activities under taken by the local units/formations
are for immediate welfare need like counselling, immediate relief for death cases
etc. which are not covered by Government schemes. The importance of providing
the local commanders the ability to respond in emergent situations for URC
operations should be appreciated."
18. While taking due cognizance of the importance of providing the local
commanders the ability to respond to the welfare needs of the jawans in emergent
situation, the Committee wonder what prevents the Ministry/Services to cover the
immediate welfare needs and relief measures under the Government schemes and
funding them directly from the CFI. The Committee wish to reiterate with all the
emphasis at their command that welfare activities extended to the jawans from their
own contributions are not in consonance with the principle of Welfare State as
enshrined in the Constitution. The Committee, therefore, desire that all the welfare
needs of the jawans be brought before Parliament to seek the requisite funds as every
organ of the State would be pleased to extend its support towards the socio-economic
welfare of the soliders who selflessly service the country and are ever prepared to
make supreme sacrifice for the cause of the motherland.
V. FIXING OF THE PRICE OF THE GOODS/ARTICLES IN THE CSD IN FAIR
MANNER
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
19. In their Forty-eighth Report, taking note of the shortcomings/deficiencies
pointed out by Audit with regard to the pricing policies, credit of funds and recovery
of the outstanding dues and the remedial measures suggested by Audit to improve the
position which had been agreed to by the Government, the Committee had recommended
that the Ministry should impress upon the CSD to fix the prices of goods/articles in a
fair and transparent manner taking into consideration the actual cost incurred and
accurate application of the existing taxation provision so that the intended benefits
accrued were passed on to the Defence personnel. The Committee had further desired
that immediate and appropriate measures to be taken to closely monitor the timely
credit of funds into the CSD account, clear the outstanding credit and debit items and
recover the outstanding amounts.
20. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have submitted as under:—
"Pricing Policy: CSD has already taken measures to ensure that actual cost
incurred by the Department is taken into consideration while fixing the prices of
goods/stores. Towards this, a number of policies of the Department like liquor
license fee, freight rebate, etc. have been reviewed and necessary amendments
have been issued. Also, the existing taxation provision has been revisited and
accurate application of the same is being ensured by the Department.

8
Timely credit of Funds: A Circular has been issued to all CSD Area Depots
stating that they must ensure that their dependent URCs are on 'Core Banking'
mode. Suitable instructions in this regard have also been issued by the office of
DDG Canteen Services, New Delhi, to all concerned. The matter has also been
taken up with bankers to ensure timely payment of penal interest to CSD.
As a result of the efforts stated above, the penal interests to the current period
is being regularly received by CSD. However, old outstanding amounts of certain
Depots are still under verification by the bankers for their correctness and
settlement of the claim. Towards this, availability of records prior to the
FY 2000-01 with the Bankers is a major challenge. Nevertheless, the matter is
being vigorously followed by liaising with their HQs. at Mumbai for early
settlement. In the last few years with constant follow up, the Department has
received ` 97,76,748/- as penal interest from the Bankers. Finalization of Penal
Interest claim in respect of few Depots like Jabalpur is in the final stages of
clearance from the Bank. The likely date of completion of the above task is
March, 2013.
Outstanding Credit and Debit Items: The action on this aspect has already been
taken and the old outstanding credit balances have already been merged with
Profits in the Annual Accounts for the Financial Year 2010-11.
A special drive has been initiated by CSD to recover the old outstanding amounts.
Further, a Statement of Case (SoC) of irrecoverabale debit notes has been sent to
CDA (CSD) for their concurrence and write off sanction by the competent
authority. Observations raised by CDA (CSD) on the SoC are being rectified for
finalization. To settle the matter in a time bound manner, a Board of officers has
been convened including the representatives of CDA (CSD) for giving instant
clarification on the subject. The task is likely to be completed by December,
2012."
21. The Committee are pleased to note that pursuant to their Recommendations
the Ministry have initiated a number of measures to ensure fixing of the prices of the
goods/articles in a fair and transparent manner, timely credit of funds into the CDS
account, recovery of the outstanding amounts etc. Such initiatives on the part of the
Ministry inter-alia include review of the licence fee, freight rebate, taxation provision,
receipt of regular penal interest from the Bankers, special drive to recover the old
outstanding dues etc. The Committee feel that these are steps in right direction and
their fruition would be beneficial both to the Defence personnel and the public
Exchequer. As the process of the finalization of the penal interest claim in respect of
few Depots like Jabalpur would reportedly be completed by March,  2013, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress/status of settlement of al the penal interest
claims within three months of the presentation of this Report. The Committee would
also like to be informed of the status of the special drive launched to recover the
old outstanding amounts, the process which was reportedly to be completed by
December, 2012.

9
VI. UNJUSTIFIABLE DISCRIMINATION WITH THE URC EMPLOYEES
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
22. During the course of the examination of the subject, the Committee were
informed that the URCs were getting the basic pay as per the recommendations of the
5th Central Pay Commission (CPC) whereas other Allowances like DA and HRA, as
applicable to the Central Government Employees were not being paid to them. After
the implementation of the recommendation of the 6th CPC, even the basic pay had not
been given to the URC employees on several grounds like operation of URC and
payment of salary to the employees from the non-Public funds, no administrative
control of the CSD over the URCs, different terms and conditions of service for both
the categories, no recruitment test or upper age limit or educational qualification for
the URC employees, etc. In this context, the Committee in their Forty-eighth Report
had found that the Central Administrative Tribunal, Jodhpur directed that the URC
employees were Government employees and were entitled to pay and allowances and
other benefits similar to the pay and allowances as available to the CSD employees.
The judgment of the CAT was challenged in the Supreme Court by the Ministry of
Defence, but the Apex Court in its judgment dated 4th January, 2001 upheld the CAT
decisions, but left it to the Government either to frame separate conditions of service
or to adopt the Fundamental Rules. The Ministry preferred the first option and framed
separate rules regulating the service terms and conditions of the URC employees.
Subsequently, the Supreme Court in its judgment dated 28th April, 2009 had inter-alia
observed that URCs were purely private ventures and their employees were by no
stretch of imagination, employees of the Government of CSD. Having taken all these
developments into account, the Committee had expressed their serious concern that
the virtue of the Supreme Court judgment of 2001, the Government could have very
well adopted the Fundamental Rules for the URC employees. Instead, they framed
separate rules, of course in accordance with the other option given by the Supreme
Court governing the terms and conditions of the service of the URC employees. The
Committee had felt that it was done primarily on the erroneous plea that the operations
of URCs were carried out through the non-Public funds, which was devoid of truth.
The Committee's apprehensions were reinforced in view of the persistent reluctance
on the part of the Services, despite the Ministry's willingness, to get the accounts of
the URCs audited by the C&AG. Further, the recommendations of the 6th CPC were
implemented in 2008 with retrospective effect from 2006, whereas the Supreme Court
observation was made in 2009, by which time the basic pay as per the 6th CPC could
have been implemented for the URC employees, as had already been done in case of
the 5th CPC. As regards the Raksha Mantri's letter to Chairman CoSL, Rajya Sabha that
URCs were not Government organizations in response to the CoSL’s 87th Report
which recommended the Government to treat the URC employees as Government
employees, the Committee were of the view that the case might not have appropriately
presented to the then Defence Minister. In view of the yeoman's service rendered by
the employees of the URC towards the welfare and overall betterment of the jawans,
including in far flung and remotest areas, the Committee had recommended that their
case may be considered sympathetically and on humanitarian grounds. Opining that
there was no cogent reason why the benefits of the 6th CPC should be denied to the

10
employees of the URCs when they were given the benefits of the 5th CPC, the Committee
had forewarned and cautioned that unjustifiable discrimination with the employees of
the URCs, the lurking fear of an uncertain future and sense of deprivation in them did
not augur well and must be addressed urgently by framing suitable terms and
conditions of service and providing reasonable pay scales and promotional avenues
for the employees of the URCs servicing the jawans in remote, often hostile and
restricted areas.
23. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note, have deposed as under:
"The employees of the URCs are employed by concerned Station/Unit authorities
and paid out of the profit generated by the URCs. They are getting paid as per
the rules regulating the terms and conditions of the services of the civilian
employees of the URCs, issued by Army Headquarters in April, 2003. These
Rules were made as per the directions of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India dated
4th January, 2001, in the case of Union of India v/s M. Aslam and others.
It has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in its order dated 28.04.2009, in
the case of R.R. Pillai v/s Commanding Officer HQ SAC (U), that employees of
URC are not Government Servants. Subsequent to implementation of Sixth Pay
Commission, the basic pay of URC employees was enhanced by 50 percent w.e.f.
01.02.2009 and by another 15 percent w.e.f. 01.12.2009 on humanitarian ground
and consideration by Hon'ble Raksha Mantri."
24. The Committee outright reject the reasons advanced by the Ministry for not
extending the benefits of Pay and Allowances to the URC employees at par with the
Government servants. The Committee wish to remind the Government that while
upholding the CAT decisions of treating the URC employees as Government employees
entitling them to pay and allowances and other benefits similar to the pay and allowances
as available to the CSD employees, the Supreme Court in its judgment dated
4th January, 2001 left it to the Government either to frame separate conditions of
service for the URC employees or to adopt the Fundamental Rules for them. Apparently,
the Supreme Court never restrained the Government to adopt the Fundamental Rules
in favour of the URC employees. Therefore, the Ministry's contention that Rules
were made as per the Suprme Court's directions is grossly misleading, unfair and
unjust. If CSD Wholesale Outlets can be brought under the CFI and the CSD employees
treated as Government employees, the Committee find no valid reason as to why the
URC employees cannot be treated at par with the CSD employees. That the URC
employees are appointed by the Station/Unit authorities under Rules issued by the
Army Headquarters in April, 2003 is no reason for denying the URC employees a
legitimate Government employee status, because the Government can very well frame
and adopt Rules governing the appointment of the URC employees. It is no consolation
to the Committee that subsequent to the implementation of Sixth Pay Commission,
the basic pay of the URC employees was enhanced by 50 percent w.e.f. 1st February,
2009 and by another 15 percent w.e.f. 1st December, 2009 on humanitarian ground
and consideration by the Raksha Mantri. In fact, 100 percent enhancement in the
basic pay of the URC employees would have been approved by the Raksha Mantri from
1st January, 2006, the date of the implementation of the Sixth Pay Commission on

11
legitimate grounds had the proposal been worked out fairly, In view of the services
rendered by the URC employees in catering to the needs of the jawans in remote,
hostile and restricted areas, the Committee strongly reiterate their earlier
Recommendation that the Ministry must urgently address the lurking fear of an
uncertain future and a sense of despair and deprivation persisting amongst the URC
employees and take immediate steps to treat them at par with the CSD employees in
every respect.
25. The Committee learn that thousands of civilian employees (permanent/
adhoc/contractual/casual) working in the URCs across the country have been on
indefinite strike since 3rd December, 2012 demanding implementation of the
Recommendations of the PAC as contained in their earlier Report. The Committee
are also informed through a representation that the services of thousands of adhoc/
casual employees engaged in the running of the URCs have been terminated as they
joined the strike with the permanent employees. In order to give due regard to the
democratic value and maintain the principle of natural justice, the Committee would
like the Ministry to consider reinstating the services of the terminated adhoc/
contractual employees besides initiating measures by issuing appropriate
Presidential directive to regularize such casual employees who have been servicing
the jawans for years together in the URCs across the country.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations
The Canteen Stores Department (CSD) came into being as a Department under
the Ministry of Defence, in January, 1948. The CSD remained responsible for procuring
and selling consumer goods and other household articles of common use to the
personnel of the Defence services/civilians and certain other entitled categories like
the Coast Guard, Defence Research Development Organization (DRDO), Border Roads
Organization, Assam Rifles, etc., at a price lower than the prevailing market price. The
operations of the CSD are carried out from its Head Office at Mumbai and five Regional
Offices at Leh, Dimapur, Ahemadabad, Port Blair and Kochi. The CSD, through its
chain of one Base Depot at Mumbai and 34 Area Depots at various places in the
country services as the wholesaler. The retail operations through which the stores
reach the Service personnel and their families are carried out through the Unit Run
Canteens (URCs) which are under the control of  the local armed forces authorities.
The concept of URC became an accepted doctrine due to the initiatives taken by
General K.S. Thimaya with a view to retaining the profits from the sale of canteen
stores within the Unit/Formation itself and not passing on the same to the contractors,
as was the case earlier. About 3600 URCs some of which are located in far flung and
extremely remote areas cater to around 44 lakh beneficiaries. From a modest beginning
and turnover of  ` 1.65 crore in 1948, the CSD has now a turnover of more than ` 8,500
crore. The CSD transfers money from the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) in the form
of Quantitative Discount, which is distribution of stores free of costs to the URCs. The
Committee find that during the six years from 2002-2003 to 2007-2008; Rs. 883 crore was
transferred to the URCs as Quantitative Discount alone. The Committee further observes
that the CSD provides soft loans at subsidized rates of interest varying from 4.5 to
6.5 per cent annum for setting up these canteens and to keep sufficient inventory. As
on 31st March, 2010, ` 4.15 crores was outstanding with the URCs as subsidized loan.
During the years 2005-2006 to 2007-08 the budgetary provision for the operations of
the CSD was ` 4138 crore, ` 4541 crore and ` 5420 crores respectively. It was in the
above context that the C&AG decided to conduct a performance audit of the functioning
of the CSD covering its transactions from 2003-04 to 2007-08. Records of the Ministry
of Defence and Canteen Stores Department were examined. The audit scrutiny centered
around broadly on three areas viz. (i) Financial Operations, (ii) Business Operations,
and, (iii) Pricing and Quality of Goods. The Committee's examination of the subject is
discussed in detail and commented upon in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Para 1 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
12

13
Action Taken by the Government
Observations of the Committee have been noted.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministery of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee are dismayed to note that the Audit was denied access to
the records of the URCs by the Army Headquarters in spite of repeated requests
on the ground that the URCs are regimental units and are being run from the
non-Public fund. What is more intriguing is the fact that such denial was made
despite the directions of the Ministry of Defence to make the records of URCs
accessible to Audit. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Defence, while
tendering evidence before the Committee confirmed that the Ministry had
indeed written to the three Service Chiefs to give the opportunity to the C&AG
to audit the URCs. It is pertinent to mention here that it was on the
recommendation of the PAC (1964-65) that the finances of the CSD were brought
within the ambit of the Consolidated Fund of India (CFI) w.e.f.  1st April, 1977.
But such parliamentary oversight was restricted up to the CSD Depot level
only and it was extended to the URCs, the retail outlets of the CSD. Such a
disjoint and disconnect is unjustifiable as without the URCs, the CSD can not
reach the consumers i.e.  the Service personnel. Surprisingly and for no cogent
reasons, the URCs continue to be treated as private regimental institutions
outside the purview of the Parliamentary Control. Neither the budget documents
nor the proforma accounts of the CSD reflect the operations of the URCs. With
a view to enabling the financial statements of the CSD to depict the entire
operation of the organization truly, it is imperative to ensure that all the URCs
follow accounting policies/principles and their operational results are disclosed
in the proforma accounts of the CSD. Such a uniform and correct accounting
principle can be adhered to only if the records of the URCs are made available
to the C&AG. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Financial
parameters of Services must be harmonized with financial principles of the
Government and the URCs be brought under the unified accountability regime
so that they do not escape the unremitting the Parliamentary financial oversight.
Let there be no apprehension on the part of Services if the accounts of URCs
are audited by the C&AG in view of the assurance that the C&AG would not
audit the non-public fund of any Unit and that the checklist enumerating what
would be seen in audit would be shared with the Services and the results of
such audit would also be shared with the Commanders concerned as per the
existing procedure. Considering that the URCs are the only interface between
the CSD and its customers and the level of satisfaction of such consumers
being completely dependent upon the efficient functioning of the URCs, the
Committee are of the considered view that an assessment of the overall

14
functioning of URCs by the C&AG is of paramount importance and therefore
must be subject to statutory Audit.
[Para 2 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry accepts the recommendations of the Committee that accounts of
URCs will be brought under accountability regime and, will be audited by the C&AG to
the extent of the QD accounts maintained by the URCs and not the non-public funds
maintained by the URCs. The checklist enumerating what would be seen in the audit
would also be shared with commanders concerned as per the existing procedures.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee do not agree with the Ministry's contention that the operational
jurisdiction of the CSD does not extend to the URCs. In fact, the operations and
management of the URCs are carried out as per the instructions of the Ministry of
Defence and Army Headquarters. Not only that, the rules for creation/setting up of a
URC and its day-to-day management are laid down in AHQ orders and the CSD
recognizes and registers a URC only after the conditions enunciated in the above-said
orders are fulfilled. In addition, the orders issued by the BOCCS of which the Raksha
Rajya Mantri is the Chairman, govern the rates/prices of the goods sold by the URC
and the profit margin charged thereon. Thus, as a matter of fact, the URCs are not
independent of the control of the CSD. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
URCs, being the extension of the CSD and working in remote and restricted areas, be
brought under the purview of the Parliamentary scrutiny like the CSD. In this context,
the Ministry’s statement that it would not be operationally possible to compile, collate
and incorporate the operational results of approximately 3600 URCs in the proforma
accounts of the CSD is not tenable in view of the manpower and expertise in accounting
matter available with the office of the C&AG whose help and guidance can very well be
sought to ensure financial propriety and discipline.
[Para 3 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry accepts the recommendations of the Committee that accounts of
URCs will be brought under accountability regime and, will be audited by the C&AG to
the extent of the QD accounts maintained by the URCs and not the non-public funds
maintained by the URCs. The checklist enumerating what would be seen in the audit
would also be shared with commanders concerned as per the existing procedures.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence

15
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that the CSD provides Quantitative Discount (QD) in the
form of free stores to all the URCs which is disbursed through the budgetary grant of
the Ministry of Defence. During the six years from 2002-03 to 2007-08 an amount of
Rs. 883.46 crore was transferred in the form of QD. One disquieting aspect that has
come to the notice of the Committee is that the benefit of such QDs is not passed on to
the consumers and instead added to the profits of the URCs and as such, the incentive
in the form of QD cannot be considered as trade discount. Such a discreet transfer from
the CFI to the non-Public fund does not conform to the provisions contained in the
General Financial Rules, as also pointed out by the Audit. The Ministry's contention
that QD is a bulk discount which is release in the form of stocks against indent and it
is never given in cash does not made it a case for transferring of funds from the CFI to
the non-Public fund. It does not matter whether the said discount is given in cash or in
kind. It is disconcerting to note that the benefit accrued from such discount is never
passed on to the customers and hence it cannot be termed as trade discount as
intended. The Committee are, therefore, of the opinion that QD should not be used as
an instrument to transfer funds from the CFI to non-Public fund and it such transfers
are made they must conform to the provisions of the GFR and the advice tendered by
the C&AG.
[Para 6 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
In line with the recommendations of the C&AG and the PAC, guidelines for
disbursement and utilization of QD in a transparent manner have been formulated and
released on 20th March, 2012 in consultation with tri-services and Defence Finance.
These guidelines have been made generally in conformity with the GFRs.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that a decision was taken by the BOCCS in 1986 that
50 percent of the Trade Surplus of the CSD deposited with the CFI for a particular year
would be distributed as 'Grants-in-Aid' in the subsequent year from the CFI and this
would be utilized by the CSD for regular Grants and ad hoc Grants. This practice
continued unbroken for two decades. In 2006, the BOCCS suddenly realized that the
usage of the term 'Grant-in-Aid' was inappropriate and in their wisdom they changed it
to 'Contribution' reportedly with the aim to clearly distinguish it from Grant-in-Aid
which is from the Government budget. But before making such a drastic change,
surprisingly, the Ministry did not consult the C&AG, as mandated under Article 150 of
the Constitution of India. However, not that a fresh reference on the issue has been
made to the Ministry of Finance, as noted from the Minutes of the meeting between
the representatives of the Ministry/Services and the Office of the C&AG, and a final

16
decision will have to be taken by them in consultation with and the concurrence of the
C&AG, the Committee would like to be expeditiously apprised of the final decision in
this regard. Until such time, the Committee desire that further use of the term
'Contribution' be discontinued since it has been done by flouting the established
norms and procedures and the disbursement of profits to the eligible organizations
should be made as 'Grant-in-Aid' as was the practice for decades in accord with the
standing accounting policy
[Para 7 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
As per the recommendations of the Committee, Ministry has initiated the case to
change the object head from 'Contribution' to 'Grants-in-Aid'.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee also desire that the Ministry as assured by them, should expedite
taking effective measures and issuing suitable instructions to sanction the regular and
ad hoc Grants-in-Aid in a transparent manner on the basis of detailed proposals in
order to ensure compliance with the provisions of the GFR. The Ministry should also
impress upon all concerned to ensure that the grants so sanctioned are utilized only
for the welfare and betterment of the service personnel, commensurate with the
objectives of the CSD. Any aberration in this regard must be viewed seriously and
responsibility be fixed on the delinquent officials, if found deviating from the prescribed
rules and financial procedures.
[Para 8 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
In line with the recommendations of the C&AG and the PAC, guidelines for
distribution and utilization of CSD Annual Trade Surplus have been formulated and
released on 9th March, 2012 in consultation with tri-Services and Defence Finance.
These guidelines have been made generally in conformity with the GFRs.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
One of the most peculiar characteristics of the funcitoning of the CSD/URC in
general and the welfare measures for the troops in particular, that has come to the
notice of the Committee from the examination of the subject, is that such welfare
activities are extended to the jawans from their own contributions. To say that the
welfare measures for the jawans from their own contribution is against the very principle
of social welfare would be an understatement. The Committee wonder how long the
Ministry of Defence would continue to claim justifiably that they are taking welfare

17
measures for the troops with the hard earned money of the soldiers themselves. There
is an apparent and inherent contradiction in the statement of the Services that they
provide welfare measures for the jawans but they do it with private funds i.e. burdening
the troops to self-contribute for their own welfare. The Committee fail to understand
what restrains the Ministry/Services to come before Parliament and get requisite funds
as sought and sanctioned, regardless of the quantum, for the welfare of the jawans.
The Committee are confident that no organ of the State would have objection if funds
for the socio-economic welfare of those who make supreme sacrifices for the country.
The Committee, therefore, fervently urge the Ministry not to delink the welfare measures
of the jawans from CFI, being detrimental to their interest. On the contrary, linkage with
the CFI would enable grant of funds to meet the much needed welfare requirements of
the jawans reflective of the commitment of the Government and the generosity and
adulation of Parliament for the armed forces.
[Para 10 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry accepts the observation of the Committee, however, it is submitted
that, though many welfare activities are funded directly from the CFI, it may be
appreciated that some welfare activities undertaken by the local units/formations are
for immediate welfare need like counselling, immediate relief for death cases etc. which
are not covered by Government schemes. The importance of providing the local
commanders the ability to respond in emergent situations from URC operations should
be appreciated.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
Taking note of the shortcomings/deficiencies pointed out by the Audit with
regard to the pricing policies, credit of funds and recovery of the outstanding dues
and the remedial measures suggested by the Audit to improve the position which have
been agreed to by the government, the Committee ardently appeal to the Ministry to
impress upon the CSD to fix the prices of goods/articles in a fair and transparent
manner taking into consideration the actual cost incurred and accurate application of
the existing taxation provisions so that the intended benefits accrue and pass on to the
Defence personnel. The Committee further desire that immediate and appropriate
measures be taken to closely monitor the timely credit of funds into the CSD's account
clear the outstanding credit and debit items and recover the outstanding amounts.
[Para 11 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Pricing Policy:  CSD has already taken measures to ensure that actual cost
incurred by the Department is taken into consideration while fixing the prices of goods/
stores. Towards this, a number of policies of the Department like liquor license fee,
freight rebate, etc. have been reviewed and necessary amendments have been issued.
Also, the existing taxation provision has been revisited and accurate application of the
same is being ensured by the Department.

18
Timely Credit of Funds: A Circular has been issued to all CSD Area Depots
stating that they must ensure that their dependent URCs are on 'Core Banking' mode.
Suitable instructions in this regard have also been issued by the office of DDG Canteen
Services, New Delhi, to all concerned. The matter has also been taken up with the
bankers to ensure timely payment of penal interest to CSD.
As a result of the efforts stated above, the penal interest of the current period is
being regularly received by CSD. However, old outstanding amounts of certain Depots
are still under verification by the bankers for their correctness and settlement of the
claim. Towards this, availability of records prior to the FY 2000-01 with the Bankers is
a major challenge. Nevertheless, the matter is being vigorously followed by liaising
with their HQs at Mumbai for early settlement. In the last few years with constant
follow up, the Department has received Rs. 97,76,748/- as penal interest from the
Bankers. Finalisation of Penal Interest claim in respect of few Depots like Jabalpur is in
the final stages of clearance from the Bank. The likely date of completion of the above
task is March 2013.
Outstanding Credit and Debit items: The action on this aspect has already been
taken and the old outstanding credit balances have already been merged with Profits
in the Annual Accounts for the Financial Year 2010-11.
A special drive has been initiated by CSD to recover the old outstanding amounts.
Further, a Statement of Case (SoC) of irrecoverable debit notes has been sent to CDA
(CSD) for their concurrence and write off sanction by the competent authority.
Observations raised by CDA (CSD) on the SoC are being rectified for finalizaiton. To
settle the matter in a time bound manner, a Board of Officers has been convened
including the representatives of CDA (CSD) for giving instant clarification on the
subject. The task is likely to be completed by December, 2012.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that the recording of reasons for acceptance or rejection of
items proposed for induction into the CSD inventory is being done from
February 2009, only after Audit pointed out the deficiencies in the regard. The Ministry's
explanation that as a large number of products were received, the reasons could not be
recorded inadvertently being far from convincing is unacceptable. It is imperative for
any business establishment to record meticulously the items received so that the
inventory is fault free and inspires confidence. It is also equally important to record the
reasons for rejection of any item proposed for induction into the inventory for keeping
at bay the allegations of favoritism to any particular supplier. The Committee, therefore,
exhort the Ministry/Services to ensure that the CSD invariably records the reasons for
acceptance or otherwise of any item proposed for inclusion in the CSD, irrespective of
the volume of the products.
[Para 12 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The recording of reasons for rejection of items was made in the Master Folder for
most of the years barring a few meetings held during 2007-08. It could not be done for

19
all items due to a very large number of items which were offered for introduction. The
recording of reasons for acceptance or rejection of items proposed for introduction in
the CSD inventory is being regularly done with effect from Feb. 2009 onwards. The
action on this aspect is already implemented.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee are highly concerned to note that in some cases the receipt of
quality test reports of the goods/items got delayed due to the wide range of products
and a limited number of Composite Food Laboratories (CFLs) located only at Jammu,
Delhi and Mumbai. Delays have also attributed to non-availability of particular batch
number of the product, inadequate TDS from the suppliers etc. The Ministry informed
the Committee that measures were underway to increase the number of Government
recognized test centers to facilitate faster routine testing of stores to avoid issue of
substandard stores. Since delay in receipt of quality test reports defeats the very
purpose of the quality assurance, the Committee recommend that the measures initiated
to set up more CFLs be expedited and routine and procedural rigmaroles like non-
availability of batch number, inadequate TDS etc. be sorted out promptly so that test
reports are received in time and the jawans get quality stores. Further, displaying zero
tolerance for any compromise in the supply of perished stores to the troops, the
monitoring and review mechanism be strengthened to ensure that the consumption of
the perishable stocks at the ultimate consumer's end remain well within the residual
shelf life period.
[Para 13 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
An Institutionalized system of monitoring and recording of testing of Food and
Liquor items with nominated Depots exists. The testing by Government approved test
centers is hastened and identification of additonal test centers is in process.
The system of product testing and levy of penalty is a deterrent to the erring
supplier and sale of products are placed in suspension, if required. The policy of
maintenance of stack cards has been reiterated to all Depots for strict compliance.
The action in this aspect has been initiated including the nomination of additional
Government Approved Laboratories for testing of Food and Liquor products to
strengthen procedure of quality control in CSD as well as to ensure speedy testing and
recordings of test results. The likely date of completion of the above task is Dec. 2012.
The action on an effective mechanism to oversee strict implementation of the quality
control measures at all levels of supply chain has been implemented. The recordings of
shelf life i.e. Date of Expiry of Food items especially of Baby Food items in the stack
cards maintained in the depots is being done.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence

20
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that some of the major reasons for denial of the CSD stores
to the troops are non-supply of sufficient stocks by the firms due to various factors,
spurt in demand for certain products, changes in state regulation such as imposition of
entry tax etc. and inability of the firms to give adequate Bank Guarantee. In order to
overcome the above problems, the Ministry are reportedly taking a number of measures
which inter-alia include periodic review of inventory and constant interaction with
the firms to increase availability of fast moving items. As denial of demanded stores to
the jawans is a serious matter, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to strengthen
the measures already initiated besides innovating other appropriate measures to
effectively address the impediments in the supply of all indented stores to the jawans.
[Para 14 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken by the Government
Canteen Stores Department is listed with wide range of items to meet the
requirement of troops located in various parts of the country. The department has a
scientific system of procuring stores based on the demand pattern of all Unit Run
Canteens (URC). Due to various reasons viz. change in demand patterns of the URCs,
movement of URCs from one place to another, levy of higher duty due to different tax
norms including octroi by various State Governments, items may not be available for a
short period with the depots. The department has been taking the following measures
to ensure availability of items to the troops:—
(a) Fast track placement of supplementary/special demands raised by depots to
cater to the needs of the URCs/Customers.
(b) Regular review of inventory for deletion of slow, non-moving and obsolete
items and in lieu, introduction of popular items available in the civil market
into Canteen Stores Department.
(c) All request of firms for price revision, one-to-one replacement, change of
model, change of grammage, change of packaging, change of product
specifications are given utmost priority while processing the cases to ensure
availability of item and avoid any hindrance in supplies.
(d) Availability of items with the depots has improved significantly due to regular
sharing of information with the Business Partners to ensure uninterrupted
supplies to improve the availability of items to enhance customer satisfaction.
(e) Additional Bank Guarantee is obtained wherever required from the firms for
continuation in supplies to ensure availability of these items at the depots.
(f) Department is ensuring availability substitute/functional equivalents in respect
of all generic group items so that customers have wide choice of items.
(g) In respect of white goods, these are in 'Against Firm Demand (AFD)' category
and due to frequent changes in the specifications and technology; it becomes
necessary to introduce latest models. Department is interacting with the firms

21
on regular basis for early submission of documents/clarifications to ensure
smooth supply of new items to Defence Clientele.
(h) A working Group under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (A) has
also been constituted on 08.02.2012 for examining various issues of CSD,
especially regarding proper budget control with CSD, management of demand
for white goods and liquor.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O & N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee find that the CSD has to block the funds in terms of the VAT paid
for the items routed through the Base Depot to other States. In response to the Audit
suggestion to review the concept of a centralized Base Depot in view of the above
anomaly, the Ministry have inter-alia reported that after reviewing the Audit suggestion
they would initiate suitable action as required. Taking into consideration the functioning
of the Base Depot at Mumbai since 1971 and the services rendered by it in the supply
of CSD stores, the Committee desires that an amicable solution be arrived at so that
neither the entire supply chain management is adversely affected nor the payment of
V AT is blocked or delayed.
[Para 15 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Base Depot at Sewri, Mumbai is functioning since 1971 as a feeder Depot to all
CSD Area Depots for stores other than those which are dispatched directly to the Area
Depots by the suppliers against the orders placed by CSD HO, Mumbai or those which
are placed locally against Local Supply Orders (LSOs) by the Managers of Area Depots.
Out of total 558 suppliers, only 14 small suppliers (2.5%) are supplying their stocks
entirely through Base Depot and 333 suppliers supply only partly through Base Depot
to cater to the requirement of troops being serviced by small and medium depots and
those located in far flung areas. Only about 19% values of supplies are routed through
Base Depot and the rest approximately 81% worth of stocks of major suppliers are
supplied directly by them to the Area Depots. For instance, during the period 2005-06,
under audit, stocks worth Rs. 486.54 crore were routed through Base Depot out of total
purchases to the tune of Rs. 2501.5 crore.
The following categories of supplies are routed through Base Depot for dispatch
to CSD Area Depots located across the length and breadth of the country:
(a) Small and Micro Enterprises.
(b) Ex-servicemen Enterprises.
(c) Medium and Large Scale Enterprises which do not have their supply chain
network co-located or in the vicinity of our CSD Area Depots situated in
far-flung areas viz. North-East, J&K and Port Blair etc.

22
(d) Suppliers who do not have the supply chain network to cater to the
requirement of CSD Depots located even in peace/well connected stations.
(e) Dispatches to those Area Depots whose monthly requirement does not
constitute full truck-load.
In all such cases, Centralized Orders are placed by CSD HO, Mumbai on the
suppliers for supply at Base Depot in bulk. Quantities/consignments so received from
various suppliers are then clubbed Depot-wise to constitute full truck-load and
dispatched to various Area Depots through transporters as per the transport contract.
Freight rebate is taken by CSD from each and every supplier for supply of their
goods Ex-Base Depot, Mumbai. The percentage of rebate is decided based on the
recommendations of Price Negotiation Committee (PNC) in respect of newly introduced
items and are revised annually in respect of already existing items of the above mentioned
categories of suppliers who find it difficult to deliver the goods in bits and pieces (in
small quantities) at the Area Depots located all over the country. Not only that, based
on internal study carried out by the Department, the minimum percentage for freight
rebate has been fixed depending upon the value of full truck load which is taken as
'Bench-mark'. The PNC make all endeavors to obtain freight rebate over and above the
said bench mark as far as possible during negotiation with the suppliers.
Base Depot does not carry out any sales to URCs and the exemption from payment
of Value Added Tax (V A T) does not apply to Base Depot. However, clarification was
sought from V A T authorities regarding exemption of V AT on purchases made at Base
Depot and transfer to Area Depots. On the basis of clarification from V AT authorities, the
set-off claims were worked out for the years 2006-07 and 2007-08 and in the meantime,
Audit also pointed out for filling of the said claims. Accordingly, set-off claims for the
years 2006-07 and 2007-08 were filed in March 2009 and the claim for the year 2008-09 was
filed in November 2009. The delay took place for want of clarification from V A T authorities
and in compiling enormous data for the purpose. Efforts towards obtaining outstanding
V AT refund due from the State Government of Maharashtra are on.
As regards blockage of funds towards V AT, some amount of time gap is
unavoidable due to procedural formalities for compliance with State Government's
regulations. CSD, being a Department running on commercial lines, has no other option
but to make provision for such contingencies as long as it does not affect adversely its
cost of operation and surpluses generated during the year. It is reiterated that it is
essential to have a Base Depot for efficient functioning of the CSD and to enable it to
serve the troops in all parts of the country.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O & N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that by resorting to several measures like raising liquor
indent strictly in accordance with the strength of the URCs, sale of liquor through
smart cards and taking strict disciplinary action against the delinquent personnel, the
Ministry intend to prevent the leakage of Defence liquor into the civilian market. The
Committee appreciate the measures taken by the Ministry for the purpose and desire

23
that such measures be continued unabated to exercise an effective control for the
prevention of the leakage of the liquor meant for the Defence personnel into the
civilian market.
[Para 16 of the Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
CSD and the Services have ensured that liquor is demanded by and issued to the
URCs strictly as per their authorization to prevent its leakage in the civil market and
have put in place following measures to implement the same.
(a) The liquor indent is being raised strictly in accordance to the strength of the
units which includes the requirements of Messes, Institutes, special occasions
like raising day etc. and strength of Ex-Service Man (ESM) dependent on the
URC and vetted by the Station commander/Commanding officer.
(b) The issue of liquor has been streamlined by sale of liquor through smart card
to ensure only authorized quantity is issued to avoid any leakage in the civil
market. Strict disciplinary action is taken against personnel involved in leakage
of Defence liquor which includes withdrawal of canteen facilities. There has
been effective control exercised on the issue.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that although the Ministry are reportedly taking early action
to implement a computerized Management Information System (MIS) with automated
documentation to control the functions of the CSD, they are not extending the same
facility to the URCs. The Committee find no reason why the business transactions and
commercial operations of the URCs, the retail outlets of the CSD, should not be provided
with a computerized Management Information System. They, therefore, recommend
that URCs, being the integral part of the CSD, should be extended the facility of
computerized MIS with automated documentation so that the entire Supply Chain
Management is streamlined and controlled efficiently.
[Para 17 of the Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Action Taken by the Government
CSD has embarked upon a turnkey project, Integrated Canteen Stores Department
System (ICSDS) Phase II for computerization of Canteen Stores Department. On
completion of the above project, MIS, Manpower, Accounting and Operations would
be streamlined for better efficiency.
Business transactions and commercial operations of the URCs are carried out
through their own Management Information System Canteen Inventory Management
System (CIMS) has been implemented in URCs.

24
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee are unhappy to observe inordinate delay on the part of the
Ministry of Defence in responding to the Audit observations as contained in the
C&AG Report on the subject. The Audit findings were referred to the Ministry on
30th December, 2008, but the reply thereto could not be furnished till June, 2010. Such
a callous attitude on the part of the Ministry belies the statement made by the
representatives of the Ministry that they have accorded utmost importance to the
Audit findings on the functioning of the CSD. The engagement of the C&AG of India
as the Chairman of the UNO Audit team to conduct external audit of organizations of
repute like WHO and UNESCO should send a positive signal to the Government how
our C&AG is acclaimed internationally. Considering the immense potential for further
improvements in the operation of the CSD pursuant to the valuable observations made
by the C&AG, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to respond to Audit
observations with due dispatch and take necessary corrective and remedial action.
[Para 18 of the Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Ministry will ensure reply of all the findings of C&AG in time in future.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence

CHAPTER   III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
25

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRED REITERATION
Observations/Recommendations
The Ministry/Services are of the view that the URCs are established from non-
public funds, with statutory backing of the regulations for the Army, Navy and Air
Force, by respective Service formations out of their regimental funds created by
contributions from the Defence personnel. Thus, according to the Ministry/Services,
URCs are operated from non-public funds/regimental funds of the three Services and
the profit is spent on the welfare of the troops, they therefore, argue that the URCs
should be kept out of the purview of the C&AG. But, the Committee's in-depth
examination of the subject has revealed that there is a definite umbilical cord between
the source of funding of the CSD and the URCs. The Committee find that during the
last five fiscals there has been consistent withdrawal of money from the Consolidated
Fund of India (CFI) by the CSD to enable them to buy goods to be sold to the URCs.
The argument that the amount withdrawn from the CFI is returned in excess i.e. profit
generated by the URCs, does not make the money non-public fund in view of the
C&AG's remark during evidence of the Ministry that there is 'no way in which any non-
Public Funds can be routed through the CFI.' The assertion of the Services that the
involvement of the CFI begins at the CSD and ends there, is therefore, not sustainable.
[Para 4 of  Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Observations of the Committee have been noted.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Comments of the Committee
Please See Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter - I
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee are informed that the accounts of the URCs are closely monitored
and audited by the boards of Offices, Commanding Officers etc. at various levels
besides the Chartered Accountants which has stood the test of time and transparent.
The Services are of the view that the time-tested routines and procedures of the armed
forces should not be altered as they have never ever let down the nation in any manner
whatsoever and as any such changes may affect the morale of the troops. The Committee
26

27
fail to understand how auditing of the URCs would be so intrusive as to have an
adverse impact on the functioning of the URCs or for the matter on the morale of the
troops. Respecting the professional efficiency of the Services and the challenges of
their core function, the Committee are of the considered view that the audit of URCs by
the C&AG would only redound to the common zeal of the troops and as such the
Services should have no objection or slightest reservation on this score. Such an
Audit will provide greater assurance to the superior commands, the Government and
the Parliament. Moreover, the expert advice of C&AG would involve no extra cost and
there should be no qualm or compunctions about their visit to remote and restricted
areas vis-a-vis the non-governmental persons.
[Para 5 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Observations of the Committee have been noted.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Comments of the Committee
Please See Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter - I
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee find that a three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court while hearing
the Civil Appeal No. 3495 of 2005 has inter alia observed (para 10)  "The question
whether the URC can be treated as an instrumentally of the State does not fall for
consideration as that aspect has not been considered by CAT or the High Court". It is
evident from this judgement that it confines itself to the limited issue of whether an
URC employee was to be treated as really a Government servant or not and the Court
abstained from making any observation on the business of the URC being an instrument
or otherwise of the State. But, much to the consternation of the Committee, the Service
Chiefs, while tendering evidence, took recourse to the above said Supreme Court
judgement to justify that profits generated by the URCs are non-public fund and
hence it should be kept out of the purview of the C&AG, even though such profits are
deposited in the CFI. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the way the judgement
has been interpreted by the Services is not what the purport of the judgment is. The
funding pattern of the URCs and the nature of the funds were neither an issue before
the Supreme Court nor were they called upon to decide such issues. Although the
Service consistenly maintain that the large amount of money involved in the operation
of the URCs comes from non-public funds or sources, the fact remains that the whole
genesis of the URC is integrally connected to the CSD. As a matter of fact, with the
pecuniary benefits that the URCs get from the State in terms of Soft Loans, Quantitative
Discounts, Budgetary Provisions, free land, Government transport, albeit reportedly
in insurgency prone areas like J&K deputation of the Service personnel to man the
URCs etc., the Committee are of the view that these URCs cannot be deemed to be

28
private institutions since they have all the trappings of Government/semi-Government
organization. Therefore, the Defence establishment should not have any difficulty or
hesitation and certainly not on the basis of the above cited Supreme Court Judgement
to let the URCs audited by the C&AG so that the end shape of the large amount of
money involved in the operation of the URCs is taken to its logical conclusion in
accordance with the appropriate accounting policy.
[Para 9 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
There are no direct 'pecuniary benefits' given by the Government to the URCs.
The loans given by the CSD to URCs are paid back in full and there are no obligations
to grant any financial assistance by the CSD to URCs nor there are any obligations to
create such URCs. Further, there are no 'budgetary Provisions' made by Government
for URCs as such. CSD gives an incentive (QD) to the URCs in terms of stores. Some
aspects of contentions of C&AG regarding URCs using Government facilities are
explained below:
URCs Pay Rent and Allied Charges for Government Premises: The primary
objective of running URCs within Government premises is to provide essential items
of daily needs to the troops and their families including separated families, who are
co-located within cantonments. URCs pay rent and allied charges at the laid down
rates from their profits, like any other vendor.
URCs are Run by Civilian Employees: URCs are run by Civilian Employees who
are paid out of the URC account. Service Personnel, wherever employed, are performing
these duties in addition to their primary duties, on payment of honorarium by the
URCs.
URCs Uses Civil Hired Transport: URCs use their own funds for hiring of Civil
transport for transporting their goods. In exceptional and inescapable cases, for example
URCs deployed in some parts of J & K and other intense terrorism affected areas, use
service transport.
The Ministry has accepted the recommendations of the Committee regarding
audit of URCs that accounts of URCs will be brought under accountability regime and,
will be audited by the C&AG to the extent of the QD accounts and not the non-public
funds maintained by the URCs. The checklist enumerating what would be seen in the
audit would also be shared with commanders concerned as per the existing procedures.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Comments of the Committee
 Please See Paragraph No. 14 and 15 of Chapter - I

29
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee are informed that the employees of the URC are getting the basic
pay as per the recommendations of the 5th Central Pay Commission (CPC) whereas
other Allowances like DA and HRA, as applicable to the Central Government Employees
are not being paid to them. After the implementation of the recommendation of the
6th CPC, even the basic pay has not been given to the URC employees on several
grounds like operation of URC & payment of salary to the employees from the non-
public funds, no administrative control of the CSD over the URCs, different terms and
condition of service for both the categories, no recruitment test or upper age limit or
educational qualification for the URC employees etc. In this context the Committee
find that the Central Administrative Tribunal Jodhpur directed that the URC employees
are Government employees and are entitled to pay and allowances and other benefits
similar to the pay and allowances as available to the CSD employees. The judgment of
the CAT was challenged in the Supreme Court by the MoD, but the Apex Court in its
judgment dated 4th January, 2001 upheld the CAT decisions, but left it to the Government
either to frame separate conditions of service or to adopt the Fundamental Rules. The
Ministry preferred the first option and framed separate rules regulating the service
terms and conditions of the URC employees. Subsequently, the Supreme Court in its
judgment date 28th April, 2009 had inter-alia observed that URCs are purely private
ventures and their employees are by no stretch of imagination, employees of the
Government or CSD. Having taken all these developments into account, the Committee
are concerned to find that by virtue of the Supreme Court judgement of 2001, the
Government could have very well adopted the Fundamental Rules for the URC
employees. Instead they framed separate rules, of course in accordance with the other
option given by the Supreme Court governing the terms and conditions of the service
of the URC employee. The Committee feel that it was primarily done on the errneous
plea that the operations of URCs are carried out through the non-Public funds, which
is devoid of truth, as discussed in the preceding paragraphs. The Committee's
apprehensions are reinforced in view of the persistent reluctance on the part of the
Services, despite the Ministry's willingness, to get the accounts of the URCs audited
by the C&AG. Secondly, the recommendations of the 6th CPC were implemented in
2008 with retrospective effect from 2006, whereas the Supreme Court observation was
made in 2009, by which time the basic pay as per the 6th CPC could have been
implemented for the URC employees, as had already being done in case of the 5th CPC.
As regards the Raksha Mantri's letter to Chairman CoSL, Rajya Sabha that URCs are
not Government organizations in response to the Co';s 87th Report which recommend
the Government to treat the URC employee as Government employees, the Committee
are of the view that the case might not have been appropriately presented to the then
Defence Minister, In view of the yeoman's service rendered by the employees of the
URC towards the welfare and overall betterment of the jawans, including in far flung
and remotest areas, the Committee recommend that their case may be considered
sympathetically and on humanitarian grounds. There is no cogent reason why the
benefits of the 6th CPC should be denied to the employees of the URCs when they
were given the benefits of the 5th CPC. The Committee wish to forewarn and caution
that unjustifiable discrimination with the employees of the URCs, the lurking fear of an

30
uncertain future and sense of deprivation in them does not augur well and must be
addressed urgently, The Government, therefore, need to frame suitable terms and
conditions of service and provide reasonable pay scales and promotional avenues for
the employees of the URCs servicing the jawans in remote, often hostile and restricted
areas.
[Para 19 of Part II of the 48th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
Canteen Stores Department (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The employees of the URCs are employed by concerned Station/Unit authorities
and paid out of the profit generated by the URCs. They are getting paid as per the rules
regulating the terms and conditions of the services of the civilian employees of the
URCs, issued by Army Headquarters in April 2003. These rules were made as per the
directions of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India dated 4th January 2001, in the case of
Union of India Vs. M. Aslam and others.
It has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in its order dated 28.4.2009, in the
case of R.R. Pillai v/s. Commanding Officer HQ SAC (U), that employees of URC are
not Government Servants. Subsequent to implementation of Sixth Pay Commission,
the basic pay of URC employees was enhanced by 50% w.e.f 1.2.2009 and by another
15% w.e.f. 1.2.2009 on humanitarian ground and consideration by Hon'ble Raksha
Mantri.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O&N)
Ministry of Defence
Comments of the Committee
Please See Paragraph No. 24 and 25 of Chapter - I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
31

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING  OF THE  PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 19TH MARCH, 2013
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th March, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Bhattruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
7. Shri Ashok Tanwar
8. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri Prakash Javadekar
11. Shri J.D. Seelam
12. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1.   Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.   Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3.   Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
4.   Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
5.   Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
6.   Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
7.   Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
32

33
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
2. Shri Venkatesh Mohan — Director General of Audit
3. Ms. Anim Cherian — Principal Director (ST)
4. Shri Rajiv Kumar Pandey — Principal Director of Audit
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then
apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider the following Draft Reports
of the Committee:
( i ) **** **** ****
(ii) **** **** ****
(iii) **** **** ****
(iv) **** **** ****
(v) **** **** ****
(vi) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Forty-eighth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on
'Canteen Stores Department';
(vii) **** **** ****
(viii) **** **** ****
(xi) **** **** ****
( x ) **** **** ****
3. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/suggestions
of the Members.
4. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above-mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to Parliament
on a convenient date.
5. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Reports.
The Committee, then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY -EIGHTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations 19
(ii)Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been accepted
by the Government:
Total : 15
Para Nos. 1-3, 6-8 and 10-18 Percentage – 78.94%
(iii)Observations/Recommendations to the Committee do not desire which pursue
in view of the replies recieved from the Government:
Total : 0
—NIL— Percentage - 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in repect of  which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration.
Para Nos. 4-5, 9 and 19 Total : 04
Percentage – 21.06%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
—NIL— T otal : 0
Percentage - 0%
34
GMGIPMRND—22LS—14-05-2013.