REVIEW OF GRANT NO. 1—
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
COOPERATION
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
56


FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
REVIEW OF GRANT NO. 1—
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND
COOPERATION
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
Presented to Lok Sabha on  27.04.2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2012/V aisakha, 1934 (Saka)


P.A.C. No. 1971
Price: ` 31.00
©2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12).............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory ........................................................................................... 1
II. Surrender of unspent provisions............................................................ 1
III. Unnecessary Supplementary Grants ...................................................... 2
IV . Distortion of Budget Provision .............................................................. 4
V. Unrealistic Budgeting ............................................................................. 7
VI. Rainfed Area Development Programme .................................................. 8
VII. Persistent Savings .................................................................................. 10
VIII. Outstanding Utilization Certificates....................................................... 13
IX. Field Visits .............................................................................................. 14
PART II
Observations/Recommendations ........................................................... 17
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the PAC held on 23.9.2011................ 21
II. Minutes of the Twenty-first Sitting of the PAC held on 24.04.2012 ........ 24

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt.  A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
*Elected w.e.f. 29th August 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-2012), having been authorised
by the Commitee, do present this Fifty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Review
of Grant No. 1—Department of Agriculture and Cooperation' based on C&AG Report
No. 1 of 2010-11, Union Government, Accounts of the Union Government (Paras 8.1 to
8.12 of Chapter VIII), relating to the Ministry of Agriculture.
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table of
the House on 18th March, 2011.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture
on the subject at their sitting held on 23rd September, 2011. The Committee considered
and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 24th April, 2012. Minutes of the Sittings
form Appendices to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Agriculture for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite
information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
24 April, 2012 Chairman,
4 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

PART I
REPORT
I. INTRODUCTORY
1. Agricultural development is vital in a country like ours where a vast majority of
the workforce derives its livelihood from it. The Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation under the Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for formulating and
implementing national policies and programmes aimed at achieving rapid agricultural
growth and development through optimum utilization of India's land, water, soil and
plant resources. The Department essentially supplements  and complements the efforts
being made by the State Governments to promote agricultural production and
productivity as well as to raise farmers' income. It also directly intervenes in matters
connected with trade, price policy, credit etc.
This Report is based on Chapter 8 'Review of Selected Grants' Grant No. 1—
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation of Audit Report No. 1 of 2010-11 (Union
Government) Accounts of the Union Government. Audit paras 8.1 to 8.12 relating to
the Grant No. 1 which deals with various deficiencies and shortcomings in the utilization
of financial resources allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture. Broadly, these deficiencies
include unrealistic and defective budgeting leading to entire and/or large portion of
funds being unspent; faulty, short-sighted and poor anticipation of disbursement
leading to unnecessary supplementary grants; improper and indiscriminate use of
delegated powers of re-appropriation of funds thereby diluting the process and
procedure of Parliamentary authorization; non-receipt/inordinately delayed receipt of
utilization certificates, feeble and incredible internal audit mechanism etc. The
Committee's examination of these deficiencies and the observations thereon have
been extensively dealt with in this Report.
II. SURRENDER OF UNSPENT PROVISIONS
2. According to Audit, the overall position of budget provisions, actual
disbursements and savings under the grant for the last three years is as given below in
the tabular form:
(` in crore)
Y ear Budget Provision Actual Disbursement Savings
Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital
2007-08 7840.13 296.32 7765.34 265.84 74.79 30.48
2008-09 10735.62 344.93 10039.00 136.29 696.62 208.64
2009-10 12045.53 92.55 11890.40 44.60 155.13 47.95
1

2
3. According to Rule 56(2) of the General Financial Rules, savings in a grant or
appropriation are to be surrendered to the Government as soon as these are foreseen,
without waiting for the end of the financial year. Savings are also not to be held as
reserve for any possible future excess. However, the Audit observed that the Department
surrendered a large part of its unspent provisions under revenue and capital sections
on the last day of the financial years in all the three years i.e. from 2007 to 2010.
4. On being asked about the reasons for not adhering to the GFR 56(2) which
inter-alia stated that unspent provisions in a grant/appropriation were to be surrendered
to the Government as soon as these were foreseen without waiting for the end of the
financial year, the Ministry in its reply stated as:—
“As per existing practice, savings from the budget allocation are surendered to
the Ministry of Finance in the last week of March. Further, though total savings
to be surrendered is known, on the basis of revised estimates approved by
Ministry of Finance the schemes and object heads under which these savings
are available is known only at the fag-end of the year and as such it may not
always be possible to surrender funds earlier.”
The Ministry further submitted that the Department was in regular touch with
implementing States regarding progress of implementation of schemes, actual
expenditure incurred as well as the requirement of funds for the remaining period of
financial year. It was also added that States generally informed the department regarding
savings only in the later part of the financial year.
5. When the Committee sought to know if the Ministry had taken any punitive
action against those States which had not informed it about the savings well in advance
and informed only at the fag-end of the financial year, the Ministry in its note stated as
under:
“The Department released funds to States under each scheme after reviewing
their past performance. The first instalment of funds was released after taking
into account the unspent balances under the scheme at the close of the previous
financial year. The second instalment was released only after examining the
progress of utilization of the first instalment of funds. The States were addressed
through D.O. letters at the level of Secretary/Addl. Secretary for better utilization
of funds. However every State was not in a position to fully and effectively
implement all schemes. Funds remaining unutilized by lagged State had in the
past been allocated to States with good performance, especially under Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), Macro Management on Agriculture (MMA) etc.”
III. UNNECESSARY SUPPLEMENTARY GRANTS
6. The Ministry of Finance taking into consideration the Observations made by the
Public Accounts Committee of 10th Lok Sabha in its 88th Report, in August, 1996, had
directed all the Ministries/departments to ensure that supplementary grants were
obtained in emergent cases only. It further directed that the supplementary demands
should be restricted and confined to genuine unforeseen expenditure which could not
be envisaged at the time of preparation of annual budget or to meet the requirements

3
of decisions or developments that take place after the approval of the budget i.e. post
budget decisions and not for continuing schemes and programmes.
7. Examination of Appropriation Accounts for the period 2007-2010 revealed that
the Department of Agriculture and Co-operation had obtained supplementary grants
under sub-heads in anticipation of higher disbursement but the entire or large portion
of these remained unutilized at the end of the financial year.
( ` in crore)
Y ear Sub-head Original Supple- Actual Saving
provision mentary disbursement
grant
2007-08 2401.00.800.35- Nil 4.00 Nil 4.00
Additional Central
Assistance Scheme
to State Plan for
Agriculture
2008-09 2401.00.105.18- 11.00 1.05 8.41 3.64
National Project
on Promotion of
Organic Farming
8. On enquiring whether there was any monitoring mechanism in place to monitor
the progress of expenditure and utilization of resources before seeking Supplementary
Grants, the Ministry in its written submission made to the Committee informed as
under:—
“Expenditure is being monitored regularly by AS & FA and Secretary in the
weekly Senior Officers meetings and guidelines of Ministry of Finance are being
followed scrupulously. Proposals for Supplementary Demands for Grants were
submitted for emergent cases only and were restricted and confined to genuine
unforeseen expenditure which could not be anticipated at the time of preparation
of budget or to meet requirement on account of post-budget decisions of the
Government.”
9. When asked to justify the unspent amount out of the provisions of the
supplementary budget, the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
deposing before the Committee explained as under:—
“Budget estimate is an estimate of the Department and the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission also clears that Budget. So, it is not that the Department
alone is doing something. Ideally, there should be very little saving and the
re-appropriation at the end of the year.
... ... Even in the second supplementary and the third supplementary sometimes
you keep getting money so late, whereas you may have required that money
upfront, that you cannot spend that money at all. Then, you basically are forced
to surrender that money.”

4
10. In order to overcome the problem of Unnecessary Supplementary Grants, the
Secretary, added as under:—
“We have suggested to the Planning Commission that atleast for Agriculture
you allow us flexibility in the budgeting exercise itself in the shape of windows
for funding of identified activities rather than 52 scheme where rigidity does not
allow addressing actual needs and results in all these kinds of re-
appropriation(s).”
11. The Secretary further added that Ministry of Agriculture had requested the
Ministry of Finance to give it a flexible window under RKVY for their priority. In this
regard, the Finance Minister had announced  in the month of February in the Budget
that even before the financial year began, the Ministry could  discuss with the States,
understand from them their priorities, design guidelines accordingly and release money
in April itself.
12. Subsequently, the Ministry in its post-evidence reply submitted that:—
“The priorities  indicated by State Governments are given due consideration
while approving their Annual Action Plans (AAP). These are also given due
importance during the weekely video conferencing with the States and funds are
released as per their requirement as per approved AAP. For example, in respect
of the announcement made by the Hon'ble Finance Minister in his Budget Speech
for 2011-12 to launch initiatives under the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana window
to address issues relating to the production of Pulses, Oilpalm, nutri-cereals,
vegetables and fodder, extending green revolution to eastern India and
implementing rainfed area development programme, the Department held
discussions with the State Governments and other stakeholders and formulated
and issued guidelines in the month of March itself so that funds could be
released to the State Governments and implementing agencies before the
commencement of the Kharif Season.”
13. With regard to conduct of exclusive study by experts of financial/budget
management to accurately assess the financial requirements/disbursements of
Department, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:—
“The Department has not undertaken any such study. The Department prepares
budget proposals based on detailed instructions issued by the Ministry of
Finance in the Budget circular and allocations are finalized by Planning
Commission after detailed discussions.”
IV.  DISTORTION  OF  BUDGET  PROVISION
14. Based on the Observations contained in the 147th Report of Public Accounts
Committee (8th Lok Sabha), Ministry of Finance had issued instructions that the
delegated powers of re-appropriation of funds should be exercised by the Ministries/
departments in such a manner that the original objective for which the provisions were
made under various sub-heads were not substantially altered by exercise of power of
re-appropriation.
15. Audit of re-appropriation orders issued during the years 2007-2010 revealed that
large re-appropriation of funds between the different primary units of appropriation

5
were made by the Department. During the year 2009-10, a total of 135 re-appropriation
orders were issued by the Department in the grant involving ` 3,875.48 crore thereby
distorting the authorization approved by the Parliament.
(` in crore)
Y ear Budget Re-appropriation Re-appropriation Surrende- Expen-
Provision orders issued orders issued red diture
transferring funds transferring funds amount
from sub-heads to sub-heads
No. of Amount No. of Amount
orders orders
2007-08 O 5947.21 101 1444.97 36 1387.28 57.69 8031.18
S 2189.24
2008-09 O 10734.45 100 1878.59 38 1146.54 732.05 10175.29
S 346.10
2009-10 O11915.22 102 2018.27 33 1857.21 161.06 11935.00
S 222.86
16. When the Committee enquired about the reasons for large scale re-appropriation
of funds by Department between the different primary units of appropriation, the
Ministry in its submission put forth as:—
‘‘As per instructions of the Ministry of Finance,10% of Plan funds are earmarked
for projects/schemes for NE region and Sikkim (NES). These lump-sum provisions
are to be re-appropriated to the functional  head of a scheme with the approval of
Secretary. During 2007-08 and 2008-09, re-appropriation for NES was ` 550.13
crore and ` 515.00 crore respectively. Further, in order to meet the exigencies
arising out of drought, funds from some schemes has to be re-appropriated for
meeting the additional requirements under other schemes. Thus, during 2009-10,
saving of  ` 1857.21 crore were re-appropriated for meeting equivalent additional
requirement under various sub-heads. Out of savings of ` 1857.21 crore,
`  522.64 crore pertain to schemes/projects in North Eastern Areas which was re-
appropriated from funds provided under Major Head 2552/4552 to functional
major head as per extant instructions. Funds were also re-appropriated for meeting
urgent additional demands under National Agricultural  Insurance Scheme
(` 716.90 crore), reimbursement of losses suffered by NAFED in price support
operations, (` 425 crore) diesel subsidy in drought and deficit rainfall affected
areas (` 22.94 crore) etc.’’
17. Elaborating on the various issues raised in the Audit paras, the Secretary,
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation submitted before the Committee as:—
‘‘While there are certain uncertainties in regard to the weather the other constraints
that we face is that we operate through the States. They have their own budget
procedures. They have their administrative constraints which sometimes impinges
on our budget expenditure. The reason I raised the question of vagaries of

6
nature is that in 2009-2010, we actually faced this situation. Then, we faced the
problem of straitjacketing of schemes. We have about 50 odd schemes in the
Department of Agriculture, each with its own set of norms and guidance.
Fortunately by 2009-10, we had a scheme called Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
which allowed a lot of flexibility and therefore, we could move around funds from
one component to another. Similarly, last year, when the Government gave us
this specific task that our annual pulse production had been between 14-15
million tonnes. We moved around funds, we  could achieve the production of 18
million tonnes of pulses.’’
He also submitted that:—
‘‘If we straitjacket the schemes, it gives a silo for each scheme and it becomes
very difficult to adopt scheme to each and every condition in 2007-08. When we
introduced Rashtriya Krishi Vikash Yojana and gave complete flexibility to the
States to design the schemes as per the particular requirement of the State,
district and region, it worked very well. In agriculture this problem will persist if
we continue with the same kind of budgeting. So, we have done a huge exercise
in the Ministry and suggested to the Planning Commission that we do not want
52 schemes and that we want just five or six national missions. After five or six
national priorities, rest we want to leave to the States through the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana. So, this is the scheme we have proposed to the Planning
Commission. I have had  discussions at the level of Member (Agriculture),
Planning Commission. They are in principle agreeable to this structure. There
had been a lot of re-appropriation. We had not allowed the over expenditure to
go down, overall we did not save any money, we could utilise the allocations.”
Subsequently, the Committee were informed by the Ministry that final decision on
the National Mission had not been taken by the Planning Commission.
18. When the Committee sought to know what these national missions/priorities
were, the Ministry in a note elaborated as under:—
‘‘The following are the six National Missions which have been identified as
National Priorities:
(i) National Horticulture Mission
(ii) National Food Security Mission
(iii) National Mission on Seeds and Planting Material
(iv) National Mission on Farm Mechanization and Energy
(v) National Oilseeds and Oil-plam Mission
(vi) National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture
In addition, following four schemes have also been identified:
(i) National Farmers Income Security Scheme
(ii) Central Agriculture Infrastructure & Establishment Scheme (CAI&ES)

7
(iii) National Agriculture Infrastructure and Information Development Scheme
(NAIDS) or RKVY (Infra and Info)
(iv) Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana
The above-mentioned missions/schemes are proposed to be implemented during
12th Five Year Plan (2012-2017).”
V .  UNREALISTIC  BUDGETING
19.  According to Rule 48(2) of the General Financial Rules, 2005 and annual budget
circular issued by the Ministry of Finance, Ministries/Departments are required to
prepare their budget estimates keeping in view the disbursement  trends during the
previous years and other relevant factors such as the economy instructions issued by
the Ministry of Finance from time to time.
20. However, Audit Scrutiny had revealed that excessive provisions under various
sub-heads were made by the Department which resulted in large provisions remaining
unutilized during the years 2007-2010 and were either re-appropriated to other heads or
surrendered.
        (` in crore)
Sl. Sub-head Budget Actual Savings Saving
No. provision expendi- as a
ture percentage
of BE
12 3 4 5 6
2007-08
1. 2401.00.800.23-Establishment 20.00 5.00 15.00 75
of Agricultural Clinic Agriculture
Business Centres
2. 2401.00.800.24- 29.28 13.62 15.66 53
Strengthening/Promoting
Agricultural Information System
3. 3601.03.436.11-Rainfed Area 55.00 - 55.00 100
Development Programme
4. 6401.00.190.04- State Farm 12.00 - 12.00 100
Corporation of India
2008-09
5. 2401.00103.31- Grants to 21.00 - 21.00 100
SFCI/NSC for restructuring
6. 2401.00.108.27- Rainfed Area 25.00 - 25.00 100
Development Programme
7. 3601.03.437.08- National 19.00 0.05 18.95 100
Project on Promotion of
balanced use of fertilizers

8
2009-10
8. 2401.00.108.27- Rainfed Area 25.00 - 25.00 100
Development Programme
9. 2401.00.800.35- Rashtriya 14.38 1.36 13.02 91
Krishi Vikas Yojana
10. 4401.00.113.13-Estt. of  Farm 12.20 1.87 10.33 85
Machinery Training and Testing
Institute
11. 6425.00.107.01-Loans for Land 58.00 35.00 23.00 40
Development Bank
21. When asked about the adherence to the Rule 48(2) of GFR, the Ministry in a note
stated as under:—
‘‘The Department had adhered to GFR 48(2) while preparing budgetary provisions
for the years 2007-2010. Non-utilization of funds under some schemes such as
RADP was due to non-approval of the scheme during these years. Provision of
funds were made anticipating early approval of the scheme by the competent
authority.”
VI.  RAINFED  AREA  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMME
22. In the Budget speech of the Union Finance Minister for 2007-08, a new scheme,
the Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP) was announced and a provision of
Rs. 348.00 crore and Rs. 154.00 crore made during 2008-09 and 2009-10 respectively
remained entirely unutilized due to non-approval of the scheme.
23. On the Audit observation, Secretary,  Department of Agriculture and Co-operation
while deposing before the Committee, put forth his views as under:—
‘‘In this country maximum area is rainfed and this is a very important programme.
We have been trying each and every year, for the last three years to introduce
this scheme. In fact, it was announced in the Budget and that is how money was
provided in 2007-08. Every year we tried to get it passed, but we could not get it
passed. Finally, last year and again because of the flexible RKVY scheme both
Planning Commission and Expenditure agreed to put RADP as a window in the
RKVY and we could immediately roll it from this April.”
The Secretary also submitted that Rainfed Area Development Programme was their
priority and Ministry kept convincing the Planning Commission and Department of
Expenditure about this and they could succeed only this year. He added that the
Government had created the National Rainfed Authority primarily for this purpose.
24. During the course of examination of the representatives of Ministry of Agriculture,
the Committee wanted to know if the RADP Scheme was started on the basis that
sanction for the Scheme would come in due course and to this, the Secretary replied
as:—
‘‘Sir, I agree to that.”
12 3 4 5 6

9
25. Then the Committee sought to know if 3 years had been lost in getting the
Scheme sanctioned and to this the Secretary deposed as under:—
‘‘It is a pathetic thing. I admit it.”
26. When the Committee desired to know the reasons for inordinate delay in getting
the RADP project cleared under RKVY, the Secretary, Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation submitted as under:—
‘‘RADP was doing the rounds of Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance and
our Ministry, in the same year 2007-08, the Government did introduce Rs. 25,000
crore project, the Rashtriya Krishi Vikash Yojana and a Rs. 5,000 crore project,
the National Food Security Mission. While the National Food Security Mission
was targeted on wheat, rice and pulses, under the RKVY many of things which
normally would have been taken up under RADP was getting done by the States
because power to sanction is delegated to States through the RKVY . That does
not ofcourse give me an excuse as to why RAPD project could not be cleared.
For that certainly I am to blame, the Finance is to blame and planning Commission
is to blame. No scheme should take three years to be cleared.”
27. When the Planning Commission was asked to explain the reasons for the
inordinate delay in granting approval to RADP under RKVY , its Agriculture Division in
a written submission explained:—
‘‘The 11th Five Year Plan had kept an amount of Rs. 3500 crore for introducing a
new scheme of Rainfed Area Development Programme (RADP). During the course
of examining the proposal of RADP, it was observed that there were a number of
watershed development programmes with similar content being implemented  by
different Departments. Department of Land Resources has been implementing
Integrated Watershed Development Programme, Drought Prone Area Programme
and Desert Development Programme for development of watersheds in rainfed
farming areas. Department of Agriculture and Cooperation was implementing
National Watershed Development Programme for Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA),
and Enhancing Productivity of Degraded Lands, in the Catchments of River
Valley Projects and Flood prone Rivers as part of the centrally sponsored Scheme
of Macro Management of Agriculture. For the Eleventh Five-Year Plan Department
of  Land Resources proposed the Integrated Watershed Management Programme
(IWMP), merging all their programmes, with an 11th plan Outlay of over
Rs. 15,000 crore. While considering proposal of the Department of Land Resources
on Integrated Watershed Management Programme the Cabinet referred the matter
to a Group of Ministers to recommend, inter alia, measures for establishing
linkages with other relevant programmes/schemes. The Group of Ministers in its
meeting held on 18th February, 2009 recommended that all or most of the
programmes may be brought under one centrally sponsored scheme supervised
by one Ministry of Government of India. The National Rainfed Area Authority,
which was constituted in 2006, was also assigned the task of looking into
multiplicity of these programmes and formulate common guidelines for
implementing watershed development programmes. The NRAA formulated

10
common guidelines in 2008. The proposal of RADP of the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation was considered in the light of the recommendation
of the Group of Ministers and it was decided that in view of larger institutional
presence of the Department of Land Resources sponsored State Level Nodal
Agency (SLNA) only Department of Land Resources should implement Integrated
Watershed Management Programme and other Programmes should be merged
therein. In view of this, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation recast its
proposal in April, 2010 on RADP on a farmer-centric farming system driven
approach in order to benefit from many points of convergence with IWMP. It
was advised to the Department to operationalise the proposal through a window
in RKVY. The Department is implementing RADP as a sub-scheme of RKVY for
the year 2011-12.”
28. To a question regarding time limit for granting approval to projects/schemes, the
Planning Commission submitted as under:—
‘‘The Planning Commission accords 'in-principle' approval for the projects/
schemes within four weeks. 'In-principle' approval is required for the projects/
schemes that are not included in the eleventh Plan document so as to avoid
proliferation of schemes involving duplication and avoidable expenditure on
implementing machinery. Planning Commission appraises schemes and projects
for the approving authorities for  which the time frame has again been stipulated
at four weeks.”
VII. PERSISTENT SA VINGS
29. Audit scrutiny revealed that there were persistent unspent provisions under
various sub-heads during 2007-10 in the Appropriation Accounts of the Department
Large/entire unspent provisions under these grants reflected deficient budgeting by
the department affecting the proper implementation of scheme(s)/project(s).
(` in crore)
Sl. Sub-head Y ear Budget Actual Savings Reasons
No. provision expendi- given by the
ture Ministry
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. 2401.00.108.27 2007-08 40.00 Nil 40.00 Entire
-Rainfed Area P rovision
Development remained
Programme unutilized
due to non-
approval of
the schemes
2008-09 25.00 Nil 25.00 -do-
2009-10 25.00 Nil 25.00 -do-

11
2. 3601.04.436.12- 2008-09 282.00 Nil 282.00 -do-
Rainfed Area 2009-10 112.00 Nil 112.00 -do-
Development
Programme
3. 2401.00.109.26- 2007-08 206.00 149.38 56.62 Unspent
Support to State balance of
Extension previous
Services years was
available
with States
2008-09 257.00 185.80 71.20 -do-
2009-10 260.25 178.59 81.66 -do-
4. 2401.00.119.40- 2007-08 1150.00 919.18 230.82 -do-
National
Horticulture 2008-09 1100.00 1010.50 89.50 -do-
Mission 2009-10 1100.00 800.00 300.00 -do-
30. When the Committee desired to know the reasons for persistent weakness in
containing the unspent savings, the Ministry in its note replied that:—
‘‘...savings were not due to un-realistic budget provisions but due to
circumstances beyond the control of the department, such as delay in obtaining
necessary approvals of competent authority viz. CCEA, EFC for some schemes,
lesser demand of funds than anticipated from State/Implementing agencies, etc.
Most of the schemes of the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation were
implemented through the State Governments. Even though the department
remained in regular touch with each State to ensure the implementation of each
plan scheme, every State was not in a position to fully and effectively implement
all schemes to the extent desired. States also underplayed their inability to
effectively implement the schemes in the expectation that the situation in terms
of their capacity to provide matching resources, manpower, etc. would improve.
Further, when this did not happen, the pace of expenditure slowed and savings
were generated.’’
31. On being asked about the Action plan/programme that was put in place in
coordination with the State Governments/ implementing agencies to arrest the trend of
persistent savings, the Ministry submitted that:—
‘‘The Department issues administrative approval in respect of individual schemes
every year in the month of April/May indicating annual Major Head-wise
allocations, major activities to be implemented and incorporating general and
scheme specific instructions. This administrative approval is addressed to all
States/Implementing agencies. The States/implementing agencies accordingly
submit their Annual Action Plans which include all details regarding the
12 3 4 5 6 7

12
implementation of the scheme such as outputs and outcomes, provisional UC
etc. Based on detailed examination of AAP submitted by each State/Implementing
Agency, Annual Action Plan is approved. In respect of major schemes the
Annual Action Plan is approved after detailed discussions in which major issues/
difficulties/hurdled/challenges  faced by States/Implementing Agencies are
discussed before AAP is approved. The Department monitors  implementation/
progress of schemes through field visits, periodic review meetings etc.... Based
on the feedback and progress reports received from the States, the available
funds are reallocated and released to good performing States as additional release.
The unspent balances of previous years available with the States are fully
adjusted against the releases of next financial year.’’
32. When asked to enumerate the reasons for not phasing out the expenditure
uniformly throughout the financial year, the Ministry replied that:—
‘‘Expenditure was phased out in the Detailed Demands for Grants as per Monthly
Expenditure Plan/Quarterly Expenditure Allocation and regulated accordingly.
Wherever necessasry, approval of Ministry of Finance was also obtained.’’
33. The Committee sought to know if the Ministry/Implementing agencies could
spend constructively the amounts released during last quarter of financial year for the
purpose for which it was actually sanctioned. To this, the Ministry submitted:—
‘‘Funds were released after due assessment of actual requirement including
provision of funds through Supplementary Demands with the approval of
Ministry of Finance/Parliament. Any unspent funds at the end of the year were
revalidated for utilization during the next financial year. First instalment of funds
during subsequent financial year is released after receipt of Provisional UCs and
Progress Report relating to the funds released during the preceding financial
year. Any unspent funds at the end of the year are  revalidated for utilization
during the next financial year. Officials of the concerned Divisions in the
Department review utilization through personal visits to the States as well as
through meetings.”
34. When enquired about the oversight mechanism prevalent in the Ministry of
Agriculture to ensure that there was accountability for financial management and
appropriate use of public funds, the Ministry in its response stated as:—
‘‘The expenditure is reviewed in weekly Senior Officers' meetings chaired by
Secretary of this Department. The Internal Finance Wing headed by the Financial
Advisor and supported by CCA scrutinizes each and every proposal for release
of plan expenditure thoroughly as per GFR and other instructions issued by
Ministry of Finance and only after concurrence of Integrated Finance Division
(IFD) expenditure sanction is issued by the Division.”
35. The Committee desired to know the mechanism the Ministry had devised or
proposed to devise to look into the progress of  expenditure of individual States for
implementation of scheme(s). The Ministry apprised the Committee as:—
‘‘The instructions issued by Ministry of Finance are always kept in view while
finalizing budget estimates. The progress of expenditure is regularly monitored

13
at the level of AS & FA/Secretary and also discussed in the weekly senior
officers meeting regularly. This activity is also included in the weekly
audio-visual conferences held with the States for reviewing crop situation,
availability of inputs, etc.”
VIII. OUTSTANDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES
36. Audit observed that 373 Utilisation Certificates (UCs) involving  ` 1,757.70 crore
were outstanding in respect of grants-in-aid released by the Department upto 31.3.2009.
Large number of outstanding UCs involving huge amount of grants indicated that the
Department had failed to devise any mechanism to tackle the phenomenon of non-
submission of UCs by the entities receiving grants.
37. When the Committee wanted to know how the UCs were outstanding in respect
of grants in-aid released, the Ministry informed as under:—
‘‘State Governments and Implementing Agencies were regularly reminded to
submit pending UCs. Second instalment of funds were generally released only
on receipt of provisional UCs. Audited UCs were difficult to be obtained from
the agencies who had taken one time grant-in-aid. However, the Department
keeps reminding such institutions to submit pending UCs in accordance with
prescribed rules.”
38. Regarding the timeline by which the State Governments/Implementing Agencies
were supposed to submit the provisional UCs so that second instalment of funds
could be released, the Ministry submitted that:—
‘‘As per provisions of GFR 212(1) the Utilization Certificate should be submitted
within twelve months of the closure of the financial year by the Institution or
Organisation concerned to whom the grants have been released. Where such
certificate is not received from the grantee within the prescribed time, the Ministry
or Department will be at liberty to blacklist such institution or Organisation from
any future grant, subsidy or other type of financial support from the Government.”
39. On being specifically asked about the action taken in terms of GFR when the
State Governments/Implementing Agencies did not comply with the timeline as
prescribed for submitting provisional UCs, the Ministry in its written submission
stated as under:—
‘‘Direction had been issued to all Pay & Accounts Offices of the Ministry of
Agriculture to closely monitor submission of UCs and not be make payment if
UCs were due against any States/UT/Agency. IFD of the Ministry may not
accord financial concurrence for further release of grants in such cases where
UCs were due against any State/UT/Agency. Year-wise and  State-wise UCs had
been analysed and detailed list of Agencies and schemes had been prepared
against whom UCs were outstanding. It has also been decided to conduct audit
of the defaulting grantee units (Agencies) by the Internal Audit wing of CCA to
verify actual utilization of Grants released to them. Special Audit Team was
formed under the supervision of CCA/CA and the audit of major defaulting units

14
shall start from November, 2011. During such audit the expenditure related records
and the target and outcome of the schemes for which the grants was released
would be examined to ensure that the grants had been utilized properly for the
purpose for which they were released.”
40. The Secretary, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation in his deposition
before the Committee on the issue of obtaining Utilization Certificates, submitted as:—
‘‘This has been a big issue not only in Agriculture but in every Department, my
understanding was that, suppose the Government is giving money to an outside
agency, an NGO or a private entity, we look for a utilization certificate from that
entity. But, when Government is  giving it to the Government, in most of the
schemes the money goes to the State Government. The States are audited by the
CAG. There is no escape from that. So, it will be tracked down as to whether they
are using that money for the correct purpose or not. What is more important,
especially for Agriculture, is to see that, if you give money for the National Food
Security Mission to produce 10 lakh tonnes of pulses, whether you produced
those pulses or not. Can we have a re-look at insistence on UCs between
Governments? That might save a lot of time for bureaucracy which should rather
than look for the outcome.”
He further elaborated that when money was given to State, it was transferred from
Central Government to the State Government through a  scheme of the Government of
India and Government of India gave money to the States through plan exercise.
41.  Putting forth the problem face in obtaining audited Utilisation Certificates from
agencies which had taken one time grants-in-aid, the Ministry in its  submission has
admitted that:—
‘‘Agencies which had taken one time grant were generally not forthcoming with
UCs as they had no further interest in the matter.”
It was added that:
‘‘In order to overcome this problem, this Department has initiated Audit of such
grants through internal audit party.”
42. To a pointed query as to whether the release of 2nd instalment of funds in
respect of those agencies which had not furnished provisional UCs had ever been
withheld, the Ministry replied:—
‘‘The Department released second instalment only after receipt of provisional
UC and progress report for previous year plus progress report indicating
utilization of funds released in the current year.”
IX. FIELD VISITS
43. The Committee were apprised that the Ministry undertook field visits to oversee
the actual implementation of Schemes/Projects. In this regard, the Committee sought

15
to know the field visits undertaken by the Ministry during last two years. It was replied
as under:—
‘‘The details of field vists undertaken in respect of Rashtriya Krishi Vikas
Yojana (RKVY) and  National Food Security Mission (NFSM) are given
below:—
(i) RKVY was started in August, 2007 as a State Plan Scheme for implementation
in the States/UTs. The National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD),
Hyderabad was engaged as National Consultant for monitoring and
implementation of RKVY in the States during the period 2008-09 to 2010-11.
Officers of NIRD had been regularly visiting the States during these years
and submitting reports on the basis of field visits made by their officers.
Apart from this, senior officers of the Department are also making field
visits to the States for assessment of the implementation of RKVY.
Implementation of RKVY is also monitored during SLSC meetings of the
States held under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary of the concerned
States.
(ii) NFSM:— There are nine National Level Monitoring Teams (NLMTs)
involving all the nine Crop Development Directorates consisting of eminent
scientists/stakeholders constituted for monitoring the scheme during 11th
Plan period. About 27 visits were undertaken by the NLMTs during last two
years. Besides, a dedicated Project Management Team has been created for
monitoring of NFSM scheme which frequently visit NFSM states for
monitoring of implementation of the programme, in addition to zonal review
meetings taken by this Ministry. The outcomes of the reports of the NLMTs/
tour reports of the PMT are communicated to the concerned States for
taking appropriate action.”
44. Regarding the preparation and submission of the report on the outcome
of field visits and follow up action taken on the same, the Ministry submitted as
under:—
‘‘The Reports of the National Level Monitoring Teams (NLMT/Project
Management Teams (PMT) conveying their feedback on the monitoring of
National Food Security Mission (NFSM) were communicated to the concerned
States for taking appropriate action. Based on these reports and the feedback
received thereon from the States as per field level requirements, guidelines for
implementation of the NFSM have been modified from time to time. For example,
improved farm machineries like Laser Land Levelers, Ridge Furrows and
Zero Till Multi-Crop Planters were included as admissible items of equipments/
machinery eligible for funds under NFSM on the basis of this feedback. Similarly,
the pulse component of ISOPOM was merged with NFSM during 2010-11 on the
basis of feedback received from these teams which helped avoid duplication of
schemes/efforts.

16
The Team of officers from National  Institute of Rural Development (NIRD)
which was entrusted with the monitoring of implementation of RKVY during
2008-09—2010-11 submitted their report after each visit which were  sent to the
concerned States for taking necessary actions/steps for better implementation
of the scheme. A document, Thought for Food, was compiled,  printed  and
delivered to the States on the basis of these reports to help them prioritize
interactions under RKVY .”

PART  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS
1. The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation under the Ministry of
Agriculture is responsible for formulating and implementing national policies and
programmes aimed at achieving rapid agricultural growth and development through
optimum utilization of India's land, water, soil and plant resources. The Department
essentially supplements and complements the efforts being made by the State
Governments to promote agricultural production and productivity as well as to raise
farmers' income. It also directly intervenes in matters connected with trade, price
policy, credit etc.
While examining the Grant No. 1 of Chapter 8 'Review of Selected Grants' of
Audit Report No. 1 of 2010-11, the Committee found various deficiencies viz. unrealistic
and defective budgeting leading to entire/large amounts being saved; unnecessary
supplementary grants which were entirely unspent; indiscriminate use of delegated
powers of re-appropriation of funds, diluting the process of Parliamentary
authorization; non-receipt of utilization certificates in time, weak internal audit
control mechanism and so on. The Committee's examination of these deficiencies
and their findings have been dealt with in detail in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. The Committee observe that the Department surrendered a large part of its unspent
provisions under revenue and capital sections on the last day of the financial years in all
the three years i.e. during 2007—2010. As per Rule 56(2) of the General Financial
Rules, unspent provisions in a grant or appropriation are required to be surrendered to
the Government as soon as these are foreseen, without waiting for the end of financial
year. Asked to explain why the financial rule was defied, the representative of the
Department while conceding the delay in surrender of unspent provision, attributed the
delay to the States who informed the Department regarding savings only in the latter part
of the financial year. The plea of the Department is unacceptable being violative of the
General Financial Rules. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
should strictly monitor the release of funds and pace of expenditure so as to overcome
situation of underspending or delays in surrender of unspent provisions.
3. The Committee in their earlier Report (88th Report—10th Lok Sabha) had
specifically recommended that supplementary grants be obtained in emergent cases
only. Further, it was also recommended that supplementary demands were to be
restricted and confined to genuine unforeseen expenditure which could not be
envisaged at the time of preparation of annual budget. The Committee are perturbed
to note that despite the instructions of the Ministry of Finance to that effect, the
Ministry of Agriculture sought supplementary grants under sub-heads in anticipation
of higher disbursement but a large portion of the grant remained unutilized at the
end of the financial year. The Committee are appalled to note the cavalier approach of
17

18
the Ministry while seeking supplementary grants as the entire supplementary grant
of ` 4 crore was surrendered during 2007-08 and `3.64 crore was surrendered as
against the supplementary grant of `1.05 crore during 2008-09. The Committee
wish to reiterate that the supplementary grants be obtained in  exceptional
circumstances and justify the same by appropriating the grants within required time
and for approved purposes. Further, it is necessary that the Ministry project
requirement of funds on realistic assumptions at the estimate stage itself which
could thus prevent supplementary grants being sought.
4. The Committee deplore that during the year 2009-10, a total of 135 re-
appropriation orders involving `3875.48 crore were issued between the different
primary units of appropriations issued by the Department which had the effect of
distorting the authorisation approved by the Parliament. Reasons for such large
scale re-appropriations of funds by the Department were attributed to the vagaries of
nature, straitjacketing of schemes and the procedural hurdles in dealing with the
States. Taking cognizance of the reasons advanced by the Department, the Committee
are sanguine that these hurdles can certainly be overcome if proper scientific studies
of weather conditions are done with regular coordination with the Department of
Agriculture, Research and Education (DARE), National Remote Sensing Agency
(NRSA) and the Department of Meteorology. Taking note of such large scale-re-
appropriations, the Committee hardly need to stress that there is an imperative need
to streamline the budget allocation process and to re-orient the priorities given to
different schemes based on ground realities and the ability of the implementing
agencies to deliver within the given timelines. Further, based on the requirements,
the Department need to convince the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance
with regard to the number of Central Schemes and the flexibility needed by the
Department for their successful implementation.
5. While examining the issue of unrealistic budgeting, the Committee observe
that excessive provisions under various sub-heads had resulted in `233.96 crore
remaining unutilized during the years 2007— 2010. Strangely, the Ministry
informed the Committee  that non-utilisation of funds under some schemes such as
Rainfed Area Development Programme was due to the non- approval of the Scheme.
The Committee find that the Planning Commission accorded approval to the Scheme
only after 3 years of budgetary provision for the same being approved by Parliament
in 2007-08. Asked to explain the anomaly, the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture
admitted that it was pathetic that three years had been lost in getting a Scheme
sanctioned. The Committee deplore that such an important scheme approved by
Parliament was delayed in implementation. The Committee wish to caution the
Government not to rush to Parliament for launching a  new Scheme without necessary
inter-departmental consultation and concurrence and ensure that once funds are
approved for a  Scheme by Parliament, the scheme must be implemented without
delay. The Committee note with serious concern the delay on the part of the Planning
Commission in approving the RADP Scheme and the unusually long time it took to
merge the various watershed development programmes into one Centrally Sponsored
Scheme, being implemented by different Department s. Further, the Secretary,
Ministry of Agriculture while deposing before the Committee suggested that there

19
had to be flexibility in the Budget and Budget releases should be in two tranches
which would match with the 'Rabi' and ‘Kharif’ crop patterns. Considering the
merit of the observation, the Committee, recommend that the matter be taken up
with the Ministry of Finance for feasibility of passing the budget during July-
August so that money is released by October, thereby coinciding with the 'Rabi'
season and the second allocation may be released in March-April coinciding with
the 'Kharif' season.
6. Mindful of the crunch of resources and the competing claims of various
Departments for allocation of resources, the Committee are perturbed to note that
the Department of Agriculture could not spend funds to the tune of `1313.80 crore
under various sub-heads during 2007—2010 thereby affecting adversely the
implementation of the Schemes/Projects. The Committee are not inclined to accept
the reasons advanced by the Department as there are always causes and  reasons
having their effect on the implementation of the scheme. In their considered view the
Department need to adopt a deterministic approach based on causes and effects to
avoid situations of underspending/overspending/reappropriation. The Committee also
find that the Ministry has shifted the responsibility on the beneficiaries for Savings
that were noticed during 2007—2010, and absolved itself of the responsibility of
monitoring and overseeing the implementation vis-a-vis utilization of earmarked
funds. The Committee, therefore, consider it incumbent upon the Ministry to remove
all infirmities and bottlenecks that slow down the pace of expenditure so that funds
approved by Parliament are spent on the approved schemes and within the given
financial year based on strict monitoring of the physical outcome.
7. The Committee's examination of submission of Utilisation Certificates in  respect
of grants-in-aid released by the Department (upto 31.03.2009) revealed that 373 UCs
involving `1757.70 crore were still outstanding. This clearly indicated that the
Department had failed to devise any mechanism to tackle the phenomenon of non-
submission of UCs by the organizations that were receiving grants. Though the
Ministry has stated that State Governments and Implementing Agencies were being
regularly reminded to submit pending UCs, the Committee find the reply rather
routine without any assurance whether the grants disbursed by the Department were
being utilized for the purposes for which they were meant. Further, the Committee
also note that the Department's procedure in vogue about releasing the second
instalment of funds only on receipt of provisional UCs is not being strictly followed.
The plea of the Ministry to do away with the requirement of submission of UCs on the
ground that the grants given to State Governments are audited by CAG is not acceptable,
as the CAG conducts only test check. The  Committee are apprehensive that doing
away with utilization  certificate would lead to financial indiscipline. The Committee
therefore underline the need for simplification of procedure, strict adherence of the
prescribed financial procedure and greater reliance on e-governance so as to bring
transparency and efficiency. In respect of the problem faced by the Ministry in
obtaining audited UCs from agencies which had taken one time grant-in-aid, the
Committee recommend that all these cases be enquired into to ascertain whether
there was any misappropriation. Appreciating the Ministry's efforts with regard to
setting up of a Special Audit Team to audit defaulting units, the Committee would like
to be apprised about the outcome of this measure.

20
8. Detailing the oversight mechanism that was prevalent in the Ministry in order
to ensure accountability with regard to financial management and appropriate use of
public funds, the Ministry apprised the Committee that expenditure was being reviewed
through weekly Senior Officers' meetings chaired by Secretary of the Department.
The Committee were apprised that each and every proposal for release of plan
expenditure was thoroughly scrutinized by Internal Finance Wing headed by the
Financial Adviser. About the progress of expenditure, the Committee find that regular
monitoring at the level of AS&FA/Secretary was being carried out alongwith weekly
audio-visual conferences held with States for reviewing crop situation, availability of
inputs and so on. Inspite of all this, the Committee find that there are systemic
deficiencies which have remained unaddressed for long. The Committee desire that
the Ministry review the progress of expenditure more meticulously whereby the
scope for defective internal budgeting is eliminated or drastically reduced. About
implementation of Schemes, the Ministry informed the Committee that it organized
field visits to monitor the progress. Asked to share the details of field visits, the
representative of the Department conceded that most of these visits were confined to
Universities rather than to farmers' fields. The Committee would like the Ministry to
desist from such 'luxury visits' and instead the inspecting teams be directed to visit
the farmers' fields across the country in different climatic zones and submit their
detailed findings to the Government. The Committee would also like to be apprised of
the names of officers who undertook field visits during the last three years, the fields
they visited and the report they submitted to the Department and the follow up action
taken thereon.
9. The Committee observe that agriculture has been a way of life in India over eons
and continues to be the single most important source of livelihood of the masses.
Notwithstanding the declining contribution to GDP, agriculture continues to be a
critical component from the perspective of income distribution as it accounts for
about 58 per cent employment in the country according to 2001 census. Given the
enormity of the challenge of feeding the 1.2 billion plus people and their nutritional
requirements, the Committee recommend that priority be accorded to agriculture as
food security has implications for macro-economic stability, the national security
and India's Standing in the comity of nations. The nation can ill afford to be oblivious
of the 'ship to mouth' food crisis and the hard fact that food exports can be used to
advance geostrategic aims by the supplier nation(s). Considering the implications of
food security and the multiplier effect of agriculture sector on the economy, the
Committee are of the  considered view that comprehensive and coordinated strategies
need to be evolved to enhance agriculture production and productivity with right
admixture of traditional and modern farming practices with greater focus on
sustainable agriculture. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken
and the strategies evolved in this behalf.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
24 April, 2012 Chairman,
4 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 23RD SEPTEMBER, 2011
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 23rd September, 2011 from
1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Shri Adhi Sankar
10. Shri K. Sudhakaran
11. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Naresh Gujral
14. Shri Prakash Javadekar
15. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms.  Rekha Gupta — Deputy C&AG (RC)
2. Ms. Subha Kumar — Director General of Audit (Report Central)
3. Shri  A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director of Audit (ESM)
21

22
Representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation)
1. Shri P.K. Basu — Secretary (A&C)
2. Shri Ashish Bahuguna — AS & FA
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of C&AG to the Sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then apprised the
Members that the Sitting was convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) on Review of
Selected Grants — Grant No. 1' based on C&AG Report No.1 of 2010-11 (Para Nos. 8.1
to 8.12)
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation) were then called in. The Committee thereafter proceeded with the
examination of the subject. The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture informed the
Committee that the Ministry had made a suggestion to the Planning Commission not
to have 52 different schemes for agriculture sector. They, in fact, suggested that only
5 or 6 important national mission schemes may remain with the Ministry of Agriculture
and the rest may be left to the States through the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana. The
Secretary informed the Committee that discussions were held at the level of Member
(Agriculture), Planning Commission and that in principal they were agreeable to the
proposal. The Secretary further observed that though there were a lot of
re-appropriations and surrender in the Budget, the Ministry had not allowed the funds
to go waste.
4. The Secretary further informed the Committee that to keep an eye on the various
schemes being implemented by the State Governments funded by the Centre, the
Ministry of Agriculture sent officers to monitor the projects. The Committee asked the
Secretary to send the names of the officers, the fields they visited and the report they
submitted during the last three years to the Committee. The Committee also directed
the officers visiting the States to meet the farmers in distant areas rather than restricting
it to State Capitals/Universities.
5. The Committee emphasized the need for compilation of accurate statistics with
regard to production of crops with the help of ISRO. The Committee were informed by
the Secretary that through remote sensing method, efforts were being made for mapping
the exact yield as every crop had a partricular surface temperature. The Committee
cautioned the representatives of the Ministry not to be oblivious to the adverse
consequences of new seeds, fertilizers and pesticides on India's centuries old good
agricultural practices and the wisdom of our farmers.
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture suggested that the need for obtaining
Utilization Certificates should be done away with as it would save a lot of time. The
Committee were, however, of the opinion that this would lead to financial
indiscipline.The Committee therefore underlined the need for simplification of
procedure, reliance on e-governance so as to bring in greater transparency and efficiency.
7. The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture informed the Committee that there had to

23
be flexibility in the Budget and the Budget releases should be in two tranches which
would match with the Rabi and Kharif crop patterns. Some Members of the Committee
suggested that the Budget should be passed during July/August so that money could
be released by October coinciding with the Rabi Season and thereafter the next allotment
made in March-April coinciding with the kharif season. The Secretary stated that the
matter would be re-looked into. The representatives of the Ministry clarified the various
other points raised by the Members.
8. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry for deposing before
the Committee in a free and frank manner. The Chairman also thanked the representatives
of the office of the C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance to the  Committee
in the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
9. After the witnesses and the officers of C&AG withdrew, a Member, referring to
the media reports on the issue of 2G spectrum, stated that since the subject was still
unfinished, the Committee need to look into the matter. The Chairman observed that it
would not be proper to react on the basis of media reports and therefore took the view
that a copy of the said note from Finance Ministry along with all connected documents/
correspondence would be called for and examined. He assured the Members that the
matter would be looked into after the note was received.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting  has been kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX  II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 24TH APRIL, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday the 24th April, 2012 from 1500 hrs.
to 1600 hrs. in Room No. '51' (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.M. Bajaj Pr. Director, Audit
2. Ms. Geetali Tare Pr. Director, Audit
3. Ms. Sudha Rajan Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the Comptroller  and Auditor General of India to the sitting of the Committee.
Apprising the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt
four Original Draft Reports of the Committee, the Chairman desired that the said Reports
be taken up one by one for consideration for appropriate incorporation of the views, if
any, of the Members therein.
24

25
3. Accordingly, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for consideration
and adopted the same:
(i) ‘Review of Grant No. 1—Department of Agriculture & Cooperation’ based on
the C&AG Report No. 1 of 2010-11 (Paras 8.1 to 8.12 of Chapter VIII);
(ii) **** **** ****
(iii) **** **** ****
(iv) **** **** ****
4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Draft Reports in
light of the factual verifications, if any, received from Audit and present the Reports to
the House on a date convenient to him.
5. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active participation
in the discussions. He also thanked the representatives of the Office of the C&AG for
their valuable inputs and assistance to the Committee in the examination of the subjects.
The Committee also appreciated the hard work put in by the Secretariat in drafting and
finalising 25 Reports during the current term of the Committee.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
****Not related to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—497LS—-02-06-2012

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
V asavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520 006.
(A.P.)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramma,
Muzaffarpur-842 002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110 001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110 009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110 024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110 001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110 052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110 002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110 002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110 054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110 003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110 006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110 005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P.B. No. 708, New Delhi-110 001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110 059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service, C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110 034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462 003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P .B. No. 2621,
Mumbai-400 002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400 002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605 001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641 012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600 014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad  (U.P.).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building, Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226 001.
PRINTED BY THE  GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.