NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION
OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-
SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS (2010-11)

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE

2011-2012

FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA



FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2011-2012

(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)

NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS
IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN
NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED AUDIT
PARAGRAPHS
(2010-11)

MINISTRY OF FINANCE

Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2012

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2012/Vaisakha 1934 (Saka)


P.A.C. No. 1973

Price: हैं 48.00/-

© 2012 By Lox SABHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

nn ae


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12) (iii)
CoMPOSITION OF THE PuBLic ACCouNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11) (v)
Composition oF SuB-ComMirTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
Commartee (2010-11) .... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ....... (9
REPORT
PARTI
1. Introductory ... 1
I. Pendency position of remedial/corrective action taken notes with
various Ministries/Departments .. 2
Ill. Pendency position of action taken notes relating to Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)... 3
IV. Role of monitoring cell, Department of Expenditure 4
४ Committee of Secretaries... 9
VI. Variation in the figures relating to pending action taken notes ............... * 10
PARTII
Observations and Recommendations 4
ANNEXURE
I. Statement showing position of Audit paras pending with various
Ministries/Departments as on 25.06.2010... 7
Il. Statement showing consolidated status Reports on pending action
taken notes and position of audit paras pending with various
Ministries/Departments as on 31.05.2010...... 21
गा, OM No. 12(2)/E. Coord./2010 dated 2nd August, 2010 of the Ministry
of Finance, Department of Expenditure (E. Cord branch) 27

@


Vi.

@

DO Letter No. 1/11/2010-MC dated 4th November, 2010 of theOffice
of the Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance, Depart-
ment of Expenditure ..... .

DO Letter No. 1/11/2010-MC dated 22nd November, 2010 of the
Office of the Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance,
Departmen of Expenditure .....

DO Letter No. 2/5/2009-MC dated 9th June, 2011 of the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Expenditure, Office of the Controller General
of Accounts, Monitoring Cell ......

APPENDICES

|. Minutes of the eighth sitting of sub-committee-I of the Public Accounts

Committee (2010-11) held on 20.04.2011 .......

|. Minutes of the twenty-first sitting of the Public Accounts Committee

(2011-12) held on 24.04.2012......

PAGE

37


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE

2011-1
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi

2)

Chairman

MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Dr. Baliram

Shri Sandeep Dikshit

Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Shripad Yesso Naik

Shri Sanjay Nirupam

. Shri Jagdambika Pal

Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao

. Shri Adhi Sankar

.. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
. Shri K. Sudhakaran

. Dr. M. Thambidurai

. Dr. Girija Vyas

oP NAA # ४७ ७

Rajya Sabha

. Shri Tariq Anwar

. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee

. Shri Naresh Gujral

. Shri Prakash Javadekar

. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
. ShriJ.D. Seelam*

. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz

‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Devender Singh
2. Shri H.R. Kamboj

Joint Secretary
Additional Director

“Elected wef. 29th August 2011 vide the vacancy
Minister w.e,f. 12th July, 2011

Gi)

occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi _ Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Dr. Baliram
Shri Ramen Deka
Shri Naveen Jindal
Shri Satpal Maharaj
. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
. Shri Yashwant Sinha
. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. ShriD. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha

Seen 9 ए # ४२ [७

16. Vacant*
17. ShriN. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. ShriN.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
‘SECRETARIAT

Shri Devender Singh = Joint Secretary

* Vacaney occured vice Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appomied so Minisws ef Sew wep oa” been appointed as Minister of State w.e,f. 19th
January, 2011.

wy)


COMPOSITION OF SUB- COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11)

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab_ — Convenor
MEMBERS,
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal — Alternate Convenor

3. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao

Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Kalraj Mishra

(vii)


लय किम किक मम रमन

ne ae


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Fifty-eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Non-Compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action
Taken Notes on Non-selected Audit Paragraphs (2010-11)' relating to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure).

2. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time frame, the Public Accounts
Committee (2010-11) took up the subject for detailed examination and teport. A
sub-Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation with the
Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of the Ministry of Finance. In
the process, the Sub-Committee called for Background Notes/Written replies and took
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).

3. The Sub-Committee-I took evidence of the Tepresentatives of the Ministry of
Finance on 20th April, 2011. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at
their sitting held on 24th April, 2012. Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the
Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

5. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee of their predecessor Committee for
their efforts in examining the subject in detail.
’

6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Finance for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and furnishing
information that the Sub-Committee/Committee desired in connection with the
examination of the subject.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

New Deuut; DR. MURLIMANOHAR JOSHI
24 April 2012 Chairman,
4 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

|


gens


PART I
REPORT
LINTRODUCTORY

The Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, after being laid in
the Parliament as per Article 151 of the Constitution of India stand referred to the
Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. As the Audit Reports contain several
Paragraphs and issues, it is not possible for the Public Accounts Committee to go
through each and every Report and issue dealt with in the various Audit Reports. It is
therefore important for the Committee to be selective in its approach. Accordingly, at
the starting of each term, the Public Accounts Committee, generally, select a few
ralatively more important paragraphs from the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for in-depth examination.

2. As regards the Audit Paragraphs that were not selected by the Committee for
detailed examination, there was no system for ascertaining the Action Taken by the ,
Ministries/Departments thereon till 1981. However, the Public Accounts Committee :
(1981-82) at their sitting held on 30th June, 1981 decided that the Ministries concerned
be asked to furnish notes indicating the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken by them on
the points raised by the Audit in respect of all such paragraphs in the Reports of the
C&AG for the year 1979-80 as had not been selected by the Committee for detailed
examination. Subsequently, the Public Accounts Committee at their sitting held on
7th April, 1982 decided that the various Audit Reports for the year 1980-81 be referred
to the Ministries concerned for furnishing notes duly vetted by Audit showing
Remedial/Corrective Action Taken on all the paragraphs contained therein. The
Committee also decided on 16th April, 1982 that these instructions were to be treated
as 'standing instructions’ for future also. Accordingly, the Lok Sabha Secretariat informed
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on 19th April, 1982 that the
Ministries concerned be asked to furnish in future notes indicating the Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken by them on the various Audit Paragraphs contained in Audit
Reports for the year 1980-81 as soon as the same were laid on the Table of the House.

It was also specified that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) was to
coordinate and collect the notes from the various Ministries and forward the same to
the Lok Sabha Secretariat.

3. Taking note of the inordinate delay and persisting failure on the part of the
Ministries in reporting to the Committee the Corrective Action Taken on Audit
Paragraphs, the Committee in their 105th Report (10th Lok Sabha—1 995-96) observed
that the results of audit of Government's financial transactions would largely remain in
vain, unless an adequate mechanism was devised to ensure timely submission of the
Action Taken Notes. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Action Taken
Notes on all paragraphs of the Reports of C&AG should be furnished to the Committee
through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a period of
4 months from the date of laying of Audit Reports on the Table of the House (Starting


2

from 31st March, 1996 onwards). The Remedial Action Taken Notes and briefs on‘non-
accepted’ paras are then circulated to the Members of the PAC for their perusal and
then the Remedial Action Taken Notes reach the stage of finality. If situation warrants,
any of these categorized Paras/Reports/Subjects can be taken up for in-depth
examination and Report. From the year: 2009-10 onwards, the Public Accounts Committee
have been examining vigorously the subject ‘Non-compliance by the Ministries/
Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-Selected Audit
Paragraphs’ the Reports on which are also presented to the Parliament.

4, Since excessive delays were noticed in the receipt of Action Taken Notes from
the various Ministries/Departments, the PAC (2008-09) took cognizance of the matter
and asked the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell), to
look into the matter and expedite submission of the Action Taken Notes. Taking a
serious view of the inordinate delay in submission of Remedial/Corrective Action
Taken Notes by various Ministries/Departments, the Public Accounts Committee
summoned the Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on
15th September, 2008 and directed him to take necessary action for furnishing all the

- pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes to the Public Accounts Committee
within a period of three months i.e. by 14th December, 2008. The Audit officials were
also requested to furnish Ministry/Department-wise position of the paras on which
Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were awaited from the concerned Ministries/
Departments.

5. Subsequently, the then Chairman, PAC (2008-09) addressed a letter to the
Hon'ble Prime Minister seeking his kind intervention in the matter so that the Remedial/
Corrective Action Notes were furnished expeditiously by all the Ministries/Departments
concerned to the Public Accounts Committee, within the stipulated time period.
Thereafter, the PAC (2008-09) at their sitting held on 19th January, 2009 reviewed the
position with regard to submission of pending Action Taken Notes by various
Ministries/Departments. The Committee's review of the position revealed that post
briefing, no perceptible improvement had taken place with regard to furnishing of
Action Taken Notes by various Ministries/Departments.

6. During the first sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2010-11) held on
21st May, 2010 the Comptroller and Auditor General of India apprised the Committee
about the pendency of large number of Action Taken Notes from various Ministries/
Departments. Consequently, the Committee selected the subject "Non-Compliance by
the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs of
the C&AG" for detailed examination and a Sub-Committee of the PAC (2010-11) was
constituted (Sub-Committee-I) for examination of this subject.

IL _PENDENCY POSITION OF REMEDIAL/CORRECTIVE ACTION TAKEN
NOTES WITH VARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS

7. As per the information furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure), a total of 4191 Action Taken Notes (to be reduced to 3099 after
reconciliation), as on 25th June, 2010 were pending with various Ministries/
Departments. An analysis of this statement reveals that in respect of Revenue Division

ae


3

of the Ministry of Finance viz. Central Board for Direct Taxes (CBDT), the Central
Board for Central Excise and Customs (CBEC) and the Department of Revenue, the
pendency position of ATNs was 3116 (2670 related to CBDT, 434 related to CBEC and
12 to Department of Revenue). The same is reproduced (Annexure I).

8. However, according to Audit, as on 31st May, 2010, a total of 3462 paragraphs
were pending with various Ministries/Departments. Out of these, 2397 paras alone
pertain to Revenue wing comprising CBDT, CBEC and Customs, followed by Railways
wings (411), Defence (187), Autonomous Bodies wing (135), Scientific Departments
wing (162) and Civil Ministry Wing (131). Further out of these 3462 pending paras,
Action Taken Notes in respect of 1849 paras were not received by the Audit even for
the first time. Further, Action Taken Notes in respect of 860 paras were received by
Audit but these were returned by Audit to respective Ministries/Departments. The
re-submission of the Ministries on them was still awaited. Action Taken Notes in
tespect of 605 paras were under vetting in Audit. The same have been reproduced
(Annexure II).

IL PENDENCY POSITION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES RELATING TO
MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

9. As stated above, the total number of Action Taken Notes pending with the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) which comprises Revenue Division
viz. CBDT, CBEC and Department of Revenue were 3116 as on 25th June, 2010.

10. When the Sub-Committee enquired about the note from the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) seeking deletion of paras from the pending list, a
Tepresentative of the Ministry during evidence submitted as under:

"The request for taking no further paragraphs for CBDT was definitely done,
and the PAC have been kind enough in its 11th Report of 15th Lok Sabha to
agree for not taking further 1092 paragraphs. a

11. When specifically asked about the request from the Monitoring Cell for
deletion of 21 old pending paras (Annexure VI) which were forwarded to the Committee,
the Ministry explained as under:

“As per existing practice and direction in terms of Lok Sabha Secretariat OMs
forwarding copy of the PAC report to concerned Ministry/Department; the Action
Taken Reports on PAC recommendations (duly vetted by audit) are required to
be sent to PAC Branch of the Lok Sabha Secretariat directly by the concerned
Department within the stipulated period of six months. The role of Monitoring
Cell in the Department of Expenditure is limited to reconciliation and updating of
the status of pending PAC paras. ATRs on PAC reports are not submitted through
the Monitoring Cell.

There was need to update the status of pending PAC paras in connection with
the review meetings of the Hon'ble Finance Minister and Secretary (Expenditure)
with Financial Advisors and meeting of the Committee of Secretaries, In the
Process, it was noted that 21 old pending PAC paras [7 paras pertaining to
8th Lok Sabha (1986—90) in respect of Department of Land Reforms and


4

14 paras pertaining to 9th Lok Sabha (1990-91) & 10th (1992—96) Lok Sabha in
respect of CBEC of the Department of Revenue] were pending as per record of
Monitoring Cell.

During informal inquiry it was learnt from the Committee Officer of the concerned
PAC Branch that as per their record, these para were not pending. Accordingly,
a formal communication was sent to PAC Branch seeking confirmation from
them that the said paras were not pending in the records of that office. The
intention was to ascertain the existing status of outstanding paras from the
purpose of reconciliation and record and not to request PAC Branch of Lok
Sabha Secretariat for deletion of the said 21 PAC paras pertaining to Department
of Revenue and Department of Land Resources. However, the miscommunication
is deeply regretted and the observations of the Sub-Committee-I of PAC have
been noted for further compliance."

॥५ ROLE OF MONITORING CELL, DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE

12. The Monitoring Cell under the Department of Expenditure (Ministry of
Fir.ance) has been entrusted to coordinate and collect the Remedial/Corrective Action
Taken Notes on the various Audit Paragraphs contained in different Audit Reports
from all the Ministries/Departments concerned duly vetted by Audit and forward the
same to the Public Accounts Committee within the stipulated period of four months
from the date of presentation of Audit Reports to the Parliament.

13. The Sub-Committee were informed that adequate opportunity was given by
C&AG to the Departmental Officers to offer their comments, before including any
matter in the Audit Report. Immediately on completion of audit, the Audit office
coimmunicates the findings to the Head of Office through an Inspection Report. The
Cfiicer in-charge of the audited entity is to furnish reply to the Inspection Report
within four weeks. Irregularities of a grave nature, which CA&G deems fit to be included
in their Audit Report to be placed in the Parliament, are communicated in the form ofa
‘Draft Audit Paragraph’ to the Secretary of the Ministry concerned demi-officially by
tw Principal Audit Officer requesting him to furnish their comments/observations and
explanations within a period of six weeks. The Secretary, in his reply, is expected to
(i) confirm facts and figures included in the draft paragraph and (ii) offer his comments
and observations on the matters included in the draft paragraph.

14, When the Sub-Committee desired to know the mechanism in place or proposed
to be devised by the Department of Expenditure to ensure timely submission of Action
Taken Notes within the stipulated time, the Ministry submitted as under:

“Monitoring mechanism for speedy liquidation of pending audit paras by
Ministries/Departments has been adequately streamlined with the setting up
of institutional mechanism by way of constitution of Standing Audit
Committee (SAC) and Action Taken Note (ATN) Adalat, review of progress in
resolution of pending paras by holding Committee of Secretaries (CoS)
meetings regularly, Finance Minister and Secretary (Exp.)'s review meeting
with the Financial Advisors of Ministries. It is expected that with the
computerized monitoring system for timely/expeditious submission of ATNs
on Audit paras at the level of Monitoring Cell becoming operational for User
ministries, Audit and PAC Branch; Ministries/Departments will be able to


5

show considerable improvement in the matter of reduction of the pending
Audit Paras.

Secretary (Exp.)'s letter dated Ist July, 2010 as reproduced in Annexure III
provides that Secretaries of Ministries/Departments shall be personally
responsible for ensuring (timely submission of) ATN's on Audit paras within
the prescribed time frame. Thereafter Jt. Secretary (Personnel), Ministry of
Finance had issued on OM dated 2nd August, 2010 addressed to all Secretaries
to Government of India wherein detailed instructions for constitution of
Standing Audit Committee (SAC) to be chaired by the Secretary of the Ministry
were given. It was inter-alia provided therein that the nominee of the C&AG
at the level of DG/PD will participate in the SAC in respect of Ministry of
Defence, Ministry of Railways, Department of Revenue (CBDT&CBEC) and
the Department of Telecommunications. The Standing Audit Committee SAC,
as a nodal agency, will monitor and review the submission of, ATNs on Audit
paras on a monthly basis so as to ensure that all Audit paras are responded to
within the stipulated time limit and also take appropriate remedial measures
for systemic and other required changes in order to prevent recurrence of.
persistent irregularities pointed out in the Audit paras.”

15. On being asked to state explain the delay in furnishing the ATNs within
4 months from the date of laying of Audit Reports, the Ministry submitted that a large
number of Audit paras were pending with the Ministries/Departments due to the
following reasons:

(i) Contents of some of the Audit observations relate to various autonomous
bodies and attached offices under Ministries/Departments as well as various
Centrally sponsored schemes and programmes which are implemented by
State Governments/UTs through grants-in-aid. It takes considerably long
time to collect data/requisite information from the field formations spread
across the country and also from State Governments/UTs to facilitate
preparation of Action Taken Note on Audit paras.

(i) Non-availability of timely information/clarifications from some other
Ministries/Departments in respect of audit observations which relate to more
than one Ministry/Department and involve inter-ministerial consultations,

(ii) Some Ministries/Departments have been facing difficulties in getting the
Hindi Translation of the vetted ATNs on Audit paras causing delay in
submission of copies of finalised ATNs to PAC.

(iv) CBDT and CBEC of the Department of Revenue have reported that the subject-
matter of a large number of Audit paras are sub-judice and Action Taken
Notes on these paras could be finalized only after the judicial process was
over.

Delays in finalization/vetting of draft action taken notes by Audit authorities
in some cases.

(श


6

16. When the Sub-Committee desired to know whether any responsibility had
ever been fixed for not furnishing Remedial Action Taken Notes on the pending Audit
Paragraphs, the Ministry stated as under:

"In terms of Secretary (Exp.)'s OM dated Ist July, 2010, Secretaries of
Ministries/Departments as Chief Accounting Authority will be personally
responsible for ensuring that ATNs/ATRs on Audit paras/PAC paras are
finalized within the prescribed time frame. Timely submission of ATNs/ATRs
has been included as one of the targets in the Results Framework Document
(RED) of each Ministry/Department as the responsibility of the Chief
Accounting Authority and assigned a weightage of two points. Jt. Secretary
(Personnel), Ministry of Finance had also written to all Secretaries to
Government of India vide OM dated 2nd August, 2010 (Annexure IIT) wherein
detailed instruction for constitution of Standing Audit Committee (SAC) to
be chaired by the Secretary of the Ministry were given. It was inter-alia
provided therein that the nominee of the C&AG at the level of DG/PD will
participate in the SAC in respect of Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Railways,
Department of Revenue (CBDT&CBEC) and the Department of
Telecommunication. The SAC, as a nodal agency, will monitor and review the
submission of ATNs on Audit Paras on a monthly basis so as to ensure that
all Audit paras are responded to within the stipulated time limit and also take
appropriate remedial measures for systemic and other required changes in
order to prevent recurrence of persistent irregularities pointed out in the
Audit paras."

17. On being asked to state whether non-furnishing of replies to a large number
of Audit Paragraphs should be taken as non-fulfilment of responsibilities by the Chief
Accounting Authority under Rule 64 of General Financial Rules and the system in the
Department of Expenditure to obviate such a situation, the Ministry stated that in
terms of Secretary (Exp.)'s OM dated Ist July, 2010, Secretaries of Ministries/Departments
as Chief Accounting Authorities will be personally responsible for ensuring that ATNs/
ATRs on Audit paras/PAC paras are finalized within the prescribed time frame. The
Ministry further submitted that ‘timely submission of ATNs/ATRs has been included
as one of the targets in the Results Framework Document (RFD) of each Ministry/
Department as the responsibility of the Chief Accounting Authority and assigned a
weightage of two points. Cabinet Secretary through the Committee of Secretaries is
also monitoring the progress of timely response to ATNs/ATRs'.

18, When asked whether the Ministry had evolved any formal system with the
concerned Ministries to hold regular discussions with Audit authorities through Audit
Committees to ensure timely submission of correct and complete replies and prompt
settlement of audit objections, the Ministry submitted as under:

"In consonance with the recommendations of the Committee of the
Secretaries, instructions have been issued to all the Ministries/Departments
by the Department of Expenditure to set up Standing Audit Committee (SAC)
under the Chairmanship of its Secretary and comprising Financial Advisor
and any other member the SAC may wish to co-opt. As per the decision taken
by the O/o C&AG, the nominee of the C&AG at the level of DG/PD participates
in the SAC in respect of Ministry of Defence, Railways, Department of Revenue

annem 9 AE



7

(CBDT&CBEC) and Department of” ‘Telecommunication. The SAC, being nodal
agency will monitor and review on a monthly basis the submission of ATNs
on Audit/PAC paras and take appropriate remedial measures, Meetings of
SAC chaired by the Secretary as Chief, Accounting Authority are being held
regularly in the Ministries.”

19. Supplementing the information, the witness deposed as under:

“First and foremost, the original suggestion of the Committee of Secretaries
was taken up. Two meetings of the Secretaries were held on 17th of June and
2nd of November to review the pendency of paragraphs and certain actionable
steps were drawn up by the CoS which through a letter from the Secretary
(Expenditure) was conveyed to the various Ministries and Departments. The
actionable point was, it was re-emphasised that the Secretary being the
Chief Accounting authority is responsible for the timely submission of the
ATNs. Secondly, as a part of the performance appraisal it was decided in the
CoS that it would be made part of the Result Framework Document with the
weightage of the two points.

‘That is all the Ministries are supposed to have their framework document as
part of their performance appraisal. This is part of the administrative reforms
which has been put into place. Now as part of the CoS decision it was
suggested that for the appraisal of the Secretary because the Secretary and
Ministry as a whole is to apprise through the RFT document. In that one of
the main aspects is the financial propriety which has many other points of
which one of the points is the timely submission of ATNs and ATRs which
has a weightage too as of now. The Standing Audit Committees were asked to
be constituted with the Secretary Chairing the Standing Audit Committees
with C&AG audit representatives in the Ministries of Railways, Defence,
Revenue and Telecom which has high pendencies. 66 Ministries out of
70 Ministries have already had the SAC constituted and remaining four is
which need to be constituted. There are basically Food Processing Industries,
Heavy Industries, Civil Aviation, Panchayati Raj, Statistics and Programme
Implementation and Justice and we understand all the paragraphs are nil
except may be for Justice they would be having one pending."

20. When the Sub-Committee enquired whether delay in submission of ATNs by
various Ministries was ever brought to the notice of the Committee of Secretaries
during the last five years, the Ministry stated that the delay in submission of ATNs by
various Ministries was reviewed by the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) chaired by
Cabinet Secretary on 17th J june, 2010 and 2nd November, 2010.

21. When the Sub-Committee desired to know about the efforts made the
Monitoring Cell to take up the issue with the erring Departments namely, Defence,
Health, Railways, Revenue (CBEC and CBDT)and Telecom, which register huge number
of pendency, the Ministry submitted as under:

"The Monitoring Cell is regularly taking up the issue of huge pendency with
the five Departments mentioned above. In view of large pendency; CRAG


8

agreed to nominate a representative at the level of DG/PD to the Standing
Audit Committee set up by these Ministries with a view to expedite resolution
of the large number of pending Audit paras. Monitoring Cell obtained relevant
updated data relating to said Ministries which was furnished to the Committee
of Secretaries.

As per the directions of the Committee of Secretaries; the Secretaries of the
Departments which have large pendency of Audit paras namely, Defence,
Railways, Revenue (CBEC and CBDT), Health and Telecommunications
attended the review meetings of the Committee of Secretaries. Subsequently,
there has been significant progress in the settlement of the pending Audit
paras of the said Ministries."

22. About the inclusion of Railways along with six other Ministries taken up for
examination, the Secretary testified as under:

"[ would like to clarify to the Committee that one of the points coming out of
the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) was having Standing Audit Committees in
every Ministry. Out of 70, 64 had already been constituted and presumably
held meetings. The six which I mentioned were those who did not constitute
it. Railways have constituted the audit Committee and they have held a meeting
on 31.12.2010 and the current pendency as I see it is about 285. There are also
four-five Ministries on which the CoS concentrated at the time of the meeting
for reducing pendency of which Railways was one; the other being Defence,
CBDT, CBEC, Telecom, Health & Family Welfare. Concentration of the CoS
was to reduce the pendencies in these Ministries. Hopefully that has resulted
in reducing the pendency.”

23. When asked how the Monitoring Cell deals with the Chief Accounting
Authority for the inordinate delays and persisting failures on the part of his/her Ministry/
Department in furnishing ATNs on CAG's Report the Ministry submitted as under:

"Earlier Monitoring Cell was corresponding regularly with the Ministries and
bringing the status of pending ATNs to the notice of the Secretaries as Chief
Accounting Authority. Ministry of Finance had instructed all Secretaries to
Government of India vide OM dated 2nd August, 2010 (as reproduced
(Annexure वा) wherein detailed instructions for constitution of Standing
Audit Committee (SAC) to be chaired by the Secretary of the Ministry were
given. It was inter alia provided therein that the nominee of ‘the C&AG at the
level DG/PD will participate in the SAC in respect of Ministry of Defence,
Ministry of Railways, Department of Revenue (CBDT&CBEC) and the
Department of Telecommunication. The SAC, asa nodal agency, will monitor
and review the submission of ATNs on Audit Paras on a monthly basis so as
to ensure that all Audit paras are responded to within the stipulated time limit
and also take appropriate remedial measures for systemic and other required
changes in order to prevent recurrence of persistent irregularities pointed out
in the Audit paras.

Timely submission of ATNs/ATRs has been included as one of the targets in
the Result Framework Document (RFD) of each Ministry/Department as the

ee



9

responsibility of the Chief Accounting Authority and assigned a weightage
of two points. As a result, the Chief, Accounting Authorities are paying more
attention/priority to ensure speedy settlement of pending Audit paras."

24. To a specific query whether any action was ever been taken against any
Chief Accounting Authorities so far, the Secretary, deposed as under:

"Subsequent to the 11th Report, in the Committee of Secretaries it was
Te-emphasised that each Secretary would do the follow up of it. As far as my
knowledge goes, no action has been taken so far on any Secretary per se."

V. COMMITTEE OF SECRETARIES

25. In their 105th Report (10th Lok Sabha) on "Follow up on Audit Reports" the
Public Accounts Committee were perplexed at the fact that despite heavy pendency of
Remedial Action Taken Notes in various Ministries/Departments, the Department of
Expenditure did not choose to take up the matter at appropriate forum like Committee
of Secretaries. However, subsequent to the evidence on the subject, the Committee
were assured that in future the Secretary, (Expenditure) would be discussing the matter
with the concerned Secretary whenever replies were not sent within four months and
the cases involving further delays would be placed before the Committee of Secretaries,

26. When the Sub-Committee enquired whether any mechanism exists in the
Ministries/Departments of the Government of India in general and in the Ministry of
Finance in particular to ensure that seriousness of ATNs furnished by the Ministries is
maintained by taking remedial measures that are Tequired to be taken, the Ministry
made a written submission as under:

"The ATNs submitted by Ministries/Departments are invariably approved
by the respective Secretaries and incorporate remedial measures taken by the
Ministries/Departments. The draft ATNs are vetted by the Audit authorities.
It is only when the Audit authorities are fully satisfied with the action taken
by Ministries that they convey their approval to Draft ATN submitted by
Ministry/Audit. This procedure ensures that Ministries/Departments maintain
seriousness about their remedial measure to be taken. However, Ministries/
Departments have -been advised to include pending ATNs in their Annual
Report (after vetting by Audit) from the year 2010-11. In the letter issued to all
Secretaries on 12th March, 2010, it has been mentioned that systems may be
devised to ensure that irregularities pointed out by C&AG do not recur in
subsequent cases. Further, where systemic deficiencies have been pointed
out particularly in performance Audit Reports, these may be addressed
promptly for remedial action, and where necessary reference may be made to
this Department in a time-bound manner. Further, the progress of settlement
of audit paras by Ministries are being reviewed in the meetings of Committee
of Secretaries (CoS) being chaired by the Cabinet Secretary.”


10

27. The Sub-Committee enquired from the Ministry whether the Department of
Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) carefully monitors uniformity of Action Taken Notes, so
that vital information/explanation is not excluded. The Ministry in reply submitted:

"Monitoring Cell examines the overall procedural requirement like submission
of requisite number of copies, availability of Hindi version and whether
comments of Audit have been suitably incorporated by the Ministry. However,
contents of the ATNs prepared by Ministries are vetted by Audit which takes
care of remedial measures and uniformity of action taken."

28. On being asked whether there were some Ministries which did not have a
Monitoring Cell, the Secretary submitted:

"That is correct. The Monitoring Cell sits with the CGA's office. The Monitoring
Cell per se is under the CGA's office and they are able to monitor the
information."

29. When the Sub-Committee desired to know the exact procedure for monitoring
uniformity of Action Taken Notes, the witness deposed as under:

“Normally, in all the Ministries, the work relating to the Audit paragraphs and
monitoring is with the Financial Advisors (FAs) of the concerned Ministry
and under him in the budget Section or in the Finance Division are the Chief
Comptroller of Accounts. It varies from Ministry to Ministry. So, they are the
interface points as to whom this training will be given. We will have to give
training to all the persons who will be involved in all the Ministries and to all
the stakeholders.

You have also mentioned about the Monitoring Cell, the status of the thing in
the Ministries and on our side. As the Special Secretary clarified, the
Monitoring Cell is only in the Ministry of Finance under the CGA's office.
What she had referred to was that the Standing Audit Committees have not
been constituted in six Ministries. But the Standing Audit Committees
regularly see that there is progress in the liquidation of the pending Audit
paragraphs.”
30. The witness further submitted as under:
"The Standing Audit Committees are there in every Ministry headed by the

Secretary so as to ensure that compliance and ATNs are submitted on time.
This is the process which has been subsequently started after the last Report."

VL VARIATION IN THE FIGURES RELATING TO PENDING ACTION TAKEN
NOTES

31. As per the information furnished by the Monitoring Cell, Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) as on 25th June, 2010, a total of 4191 Action Taken Notes
(which came down to 3099 after reconciliation) were pending with various Ministries/
Departments. An analysis of this statement reveals that in respect of the Ministry of
Finance, the pendency position of ATNs was 3116 (2670 paras related to CBDT, 434
relating to CBEC and 12 relating to Department of Revenue). However, as per Audit, as
on 31st May, 2010 a total of 3462 paragraphs were pending with various Ministries out
of which 2397 paras alone pertained to Revenue wing comprising CBDT, CBEC and
Customs.



I

32. When the Sub-Committee enquired whether there was any mechanism in the
Department of Expenditure to periodically reconcile the figures with Audit, the Ministry
submitted:

"The Monitoring Cell, of the Department of the Expenditure have been
coordinating with the concerned Ministries on regular basis, requesting for
reconciliation of difference in the pendency position reported by Monitoring
Cell and Audit and for submission of reconciled pending status after
consultation with the office of C&AG on Priority basis. Monitoring Cell
conducts workshops with concerned officers of 21 Ministries/Departments
in the first week of October, 2010 with a view to reconcile the status of pending
ATNs. Audit were separately requested to get the discrepancies in the figures
of pending ATNs reconciled in consultation with concerned Ministries and
to provide the reconciled status to the Department of Expenditure vide DO
letters dated 4.11.2010 and 22.11.2010 (Annexures IV & V). The web-based
Audit para monitoring system which is now operational will indicate exactly
where the Audit para is pending so that Monitoring Cell can take up with the
concerned authorities for expeditious submission to the Lok Sabha
Secretariat."

33. When further pursued about the benefit that has accrued as a result of
reduction of pending ATNs, the Secretary, testified as under:

“It will depend on the type of cases. I will not be able to comment on this
unless I know what were the type of. paras which were standing out on which
action has been taken. The most tangible result would be in CBDT or CBEC
where revenue issues are there.”

Another witness further submitted as under:

"Essentially when we began this task with about 4000 paras, our first tasks
was to get a clue as to what are those paras because we did not have too
much of an idea. The reconciliation process itself, gives us three or four leads
where we can request the CAG authorities for a little more interactional
dialogue. For example, we found that between the three primary stakeholders—
the Administrative Ministries of the Government, the CAG and the Secretariat
of the Monitoring Cell which works for the Lok Sabha Secretariat—we had to
have a commonality in the approach of how they were defining the paras. In
the process of this reduction we learnt that reporting was an issue that we
needed to improve. Within the CAG there are these various auditing
authorities across whom there needed to be greater commonality in the manner
in which they reported.

Secondly, we realized that a lot of times within the Ministries there was a need
for much greater education about the audit procedures not merely about
what constitutes a civil audit report and a commercial audit report. we found
that there was a mix up and therefore the larger numbers. The minute we
removed the commercial Audit paras which were really not the subject matter
of this PAC, we found that the numt ys were more manageable for the

\


12

Ministries. The upshot of it was that we realized that on the portal we need
necessarily to put down all procedural OMs. We have done that apart from
providing a hyper link to the CAG's digitized audit reports. There was a fair
amount of lack of understanding of the audit procedures within the Ministries
that we felt after this exercise. That, in a sense, is a learning exercise."

34. When enquired about the current pending Action Taken Notes as compared
with that of each of the last three years, the Ministry through a note submitted that as
on 31st March, 2011 the total number of 1262 audit paras in respect of CAG reports
tabled in Parliament upto the year 2009 were reported to be pending. The comparable
figures of the three years (i.e. between 31.08.2008 to 11.06.2010) are as follows:

Table of Pending ATNs
No. of audit paras pending As on
4216 11.06.2010
2857 15.10.2009
3042 31.08.2008

35. When the Sub-Committee desired to know about the Ministries’ plan to
decrease and finally nullify the number of pending Audit paragraphs and Action Taken
Notes with various Ministries/Departments, the Ministry through a note stated that
monitoring mechanism for speedy liquidation of pending audit paras by Ministries/
Departments has been adequately streamlined with the setting up of institutional
mechanism by way of constitution of Standing Audit Committee (SAC) and Action
Taken Note (ATN) Adalat, review of progress in resolution of pending paras by holding
meetings of Committee off Secretaries (CoS) regularly, Finance Minister and Secretary
(Exp.)'s review meeting with the Financial Advisors of Ministries. It is expected that
with the computerized monitoring system for timely/expeditious submission of ATNs
on audit paras at the level of Monitoring Cell becoming operational, User Ministries,
Audit and the PAC branch Ministries/Departments will be able to show considerable
improvement in the matter of reduction of the pending Audit paras.

36. Supplementing the information, the Secretary, Department of Expenditure
deposed as under:

” Another recommendation of the Committee of Secretaries was to reduce the
pendency by 50 per cent every quarter and I think this has been substantially
reduced. A.s we understand from the position in June, 2010, it was 4216 total
number of ATNs pending, in September it had come down to 2284 and as on
March, 20 11 it is 1262. There has been substantial decrease in the pendencies
and to ensure that these reconciliation of figures and finalization of ATNs
and workshops, adalats what they call it ATN Adalats were to be held by the
respective Ministries and about 24 Ministries have held such workshops. As
a part of the recommendations some of the other initiatives have been taken
by the Monitoring Cell.”

ee ee


13

37. When the Sub-Committee desired to know the reasons for the Action Taken
Reports not being complied with, the Secretary, during evidence submitted as under:

“The only additional points would be initiative taken by the Monitoring Cell
to help expediting the submission of ATNs. I would request my colleague to
elaborate on that."

Supplementing the information, another witness of the Ministry deposed as
under:

"Sir, from the side of the Monitoring Cell subsequent to the two meetings of
the Committee of Secretaries which had been chaired by the Cabinet Secretary,
we have been following up with the Ministries about the direct which had
been set and about the reduction in the numbers which were indicated by the
Cabinet Secretary. As the Secretary has mentioned the subsequent of two
meetings the pending paragraphs had come down from about 4216 to 1262.

In addition to this, the Secretary (Expenditure) had also taken meeting with
the Financial Advisors where he flagged this point so that it could be brought
to the attention of FAs. The Finance Minister had a meeting with the FAs and
he had brought this up before the Financial Advisors. He had articulated his
concern, as you are well aware, over Parliamentary matters. The result of it is
that there is substantial drop."


PARTI
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

In terms of Article 151 of the Constitution of India, the Reports of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India relating to the accounts of the Union are submitted to the
President who causes to be laid in Parliament. The Reports stand referred to the
Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. Since it is not possible for the committee
to go through every issue dealt with in the various Audit Reports, it is necessary for
the Committee to be selected in their approach. The Public Accounts Committee
tnerefore, generally, select for in-depth examination only a few relatively more
important paragraphs from the various Reports of Comptroller and Auditor General
of India. The audit paragraphs which are not selected for detailed examination by the
Committee, are dealt with by means ofa well-devised procedure. As per the procedure
evolved by the Public Accounts Committee in their 105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha)
with effect from 31st March, 1996, all the Ministries/Departments are required to
furnish the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to the Public Accounts Committee
through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on all the non-selected
audit paragraphs for examination. The remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes are
to be furnished within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports in Parliament.

2. As per the information obtained from the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure, as on 25th June, 2010 a total of 4191 Action Taken Notes (ATNs) were
pending with various Ministries/Departments. Out of the said 4191 pending ATNs,
3116 ATNs alone were pending with the Revenue Division of the Ministry of Finance
(2670 of Central Board for Direct Taxes (CBDT), 434 of Central Board for Excise
and Customs (CBEC) and 12 of Department of Revenue). Giving reason for the huge
pendency, the Ministry inter-alia explained that ‘considerable time is taken in
collection of data/information from various autonomous bodies and attached offices
which are spread across the country’. It was also submitted that besides,
interministerial consultations are required in respect of some audit observations’.
On the contrary, the Committee are concerned that the number of remedial/corrective
Action Taken Notes pending with the Central Board for Direct Taxes (CBDT) as well
as with Central Board for Excise and Customs (CBEC) has been steadily increasing.
During 2006-07 in respect of CBDT, 473 paras were pending which increased to 723
during 2007-08. Similarly, in respect of CBEC, 73 paras were pending during
2006-07 which increased to 143 during 2007-08. The Ministry of Finance, entrusted
with the responsibility of monitoring the pendencies of ATNs, lamentably, continues
to be the largest defaulter and some of the ATNs even relate to the period prior to
1997-98, The Committee find such a situation totally unacceptable as the Committee
expect the Ministry of Finance to play an exemplary role to reduce pendency of ATNs.
While expressing their unhappiness over the increasing pendencies of Remedi ial’
Corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee recommend that the Ministry chalk
out an effective and time bound procedure to reduce the pendency of ATNs on audit
paras. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard
within three months of the presentation of this report.


15

3. The Committee note that the figures supplied by the Ministry of Finance
(Monitoring Cell) with regard to number of audit paragraphs pending with them do
not tally with the figures given by the Audit. As on 25th June, 2010, the Monitoring
Cell had indicated the number of, pending paras as 3116 (CBDT 2670, CBEC 434 and
Department of Revenue 12). However, according to Audit as on 31st May, 2010, a total
of 2397 paragraphs were pending with the Ministry of Finance (Central Excise 376,
Customs 280 and Direct Taxes 1741). The Committee desire that all the Ministries/
Departments may be exhorted to take urgent steps to reconcile the figures in
consultation with the Audit and the correct figures submitted to the Committee while
furnishing the action taken replies on this Report in due course.

4. The Committee observe that there is a variation in figures between the
Monitoring Cell and the Audit with regard to the cut-off date on pending Action Taken
Notes with various Ministries/Departments. While the Audit compile the data on
pending ATNs as on 31st May, 2010, the Monitoring Cell maintains the data as on
25th June, 2010. The difference in the month invariably leads to discrepancy on the
pending ATNs. The Committee, therefore, recommend a common date may be fixed
for compilation of the pending ATNs with the concurrence of the C&AG to avoid
mismatch of figures. The Committee would like to be apprised of the new cut off date
evolved in this behalf within three months of the presentation of this Report.

5. The Committee were informed that the monitoring mechansim for speedy
liquidation of pending audit paras by Ministries/Departments has been streamlined
by constituting Standing Audit Committees (SACs), regular holding of ATNs
Workshop and review of progress by holding meetings of Committee of Secretaries
(CoS) chaired by the Cabinet Secretary. It was further submitted that the Finance
Minister hold review meetings with the Financial Advisors of the Ministries and all
the Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments have been asked to personally ensure
that Action Taken Notes on audit paras are furnished within the prescribed time
frame. The Committee note with concern that the number of ATNs pending with
various Ministries/Departments which were 2857 as 0n15.10.2009, increased to
4216 as on 11.06.2010. The ATNs in respect of 1849 paras had not been furnished to
the Audit by the concerned Ministries/Departments even for the first time. The
Committee, however, note the optimism of the Ministry that with the constitution of
Standing Audit Committee in various Ministries/Departments, the pendency of ATNs
would reduce considerably. During the course of oral evidence, the representative of
the Ministry informed the Committee that the pendency of ATNs stood substantially
reduced from 4216 to 1262 paras ason March, 2011. The Committee hope that if
such a trend is maintained, the huge pendency can be liquidated or reduced
considerably. The Committee therefore recommend that strict instructions may be
issued to the Ministries/Departments to set up Standing Audit Committees in case
they are yet to constitute the same. Further, all the Ministries/Departments may be
requested to hold regular meetings of SAC to review the Pending ATNs and also to

| ensure that ATNs in respect of new Audit Reports are furnished to the Monitoring
Cell within the prescribed time frame of four months. Further, the Committee of
Secretaries chaired by the Cabinet Secretary must meet at regular interval preferably



16

once in three months to take stock of the pendencies and to ensure that the ATNs are
invariably submitted within the prescribed period of four months after the presentation
of the Reports of C&AG to Parliament.

6. During the course of oral evidence the representative of the Ministry informed
the Committee that a web based Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) had been
developed and put in place which will indicate the location of the pendency and help the
Monitoring Cell in tracking the pendencies. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the impact of the APMS and the difference it has made in wipping out the pendencies.

New DELHI; DR. MURLIMANOHAR JOSHI
24 April,2012 Chairman,
4 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ििििभि्ंडंी भी किक ाा ा७॥ ७७७


17

s € z 0 _ _ _ _ _ 7 _ जा पथभ्थ voneunojul

0
6
8
t
9
है
+

sos _ 1 1 1 - - z - न _ Jomod
प्ट 9 s z s 0 € if - - या. uoneonpg J0y3tH
9 @ z 0 धो _ 1 _ 0 1 ना. woneonpg [००५०६
or z € I 1 t 0 जा जा I _ जा श्यणाप्त शष्पघ०प०/प्र
€91 es te घ्ट a ral or के 0 L 1 ) eouajoq
oe न ’ 9 के 8 1 1 £ 1 0 z aang
L 0 € I zt 1 - = _ =_ ज- _ sosauruiod
9 ¢ 1 0 0 _ - _ - _ - - है 18 2०]
दा L € 0 1 if - - - - - — — ABs2uq s1WOIy
‘voLuonvonpy
9 1 के 0 गो 1 _ - 0 0 0 - क्ष्श्व BY
to I 0 0 _ - _ - - _ — Arepuegsny yourtury
zo 0 0 0 गा _ - _ न — 40०० २ एश्ए
हा छा ca u 01 6 8 L 9 s ¥ ६ z

on

‘ON TOL Suipusg Suipusg —Burpusg Furpueg Burpusg Susp Suipueg BuIpuog — Butpueg Surpuog Supuog 1k

8002-4002 4007-9002 9002-s00z 500८+००८ ‘007-£007, ६002८-८00८ ZO0Z-100Z 1007-0002 0007-666 66-8661 86-1661
urpuod
seid jo 304 405 40 Joy 405 40g 403 405 405 1oyordn—quounuedag,

0107'9'Sz uo se suaunsedagysarysyurA शाणूुपार YIM Surpuad seawg PRY, JO UOHISog SuLMOYS pUDTII}EIG
1qaNXaNnv


18

0197
ray
80#

st

nen

6l

u
6

1€

घ्च्ः

Ord

tly

ll

न

nnn

61६

vy

as

9 ले ०४ ० तल

£97

67

mo

107

124

v61

£7

० ल ०

ole

sl

$6

8s

uy

st

(089) anuanay
anusAoy,
0

sosudsowg sand

sonsny
sisod
‘aanyrpusdxg
sou
snepy e327
snoqe]

“prog % एणाण्ण्ण्गुण

(३०००२३ yueg)
quouidojaaaq ue290,

‘sire WOH
Wee

जार Aturey
श्र jeusixy:

siso10g
के wouuonAug

“OE
“6
“87
“Lt
“9%
“st
कट
०4
424
पद
“07

“él
है.
way
“OL

st

“vl

vi

€1

दा

or

meen


19

66
L

ver

fol

tL

eonano

si

Lo

ono

a

Sb

oo

दा

oz

67

6

0z

ABojouysaL, २ २००००६ *

‘sounsnpuy

Busss001g poog '।
seomosoy weumny °
३००१६ *

quauidojaaog

शाप @ ००० %

suey

प्रशएणु Seasi94Q *
qwuoudojaag uequn
suey [equ
wstunoy, °

ब्थप्र्ण, *

wonourosg

३ Aotjog jetnsnpuy *

sosuidionug
WMUPOW ® [EUS ० जाव
sma

fuawdojanag feiny ~

(estoxg “Dysuioysnp)

onuaaay *

HuNUIMIODIOL “
Suddigg “s


20

“161y पम्प 660६ थ

umop 2903 ए[ए०७ sexed ZuIpuesino Jo उन्वृष्णाए [घण aIp एएए इछएवं PNY Jo पणाशा[-1०० JOYE 8८५1 01 0८92 एण्प्र 7०"एथ aq PINOM 0६ ‘ON 15 18एएह soMBy YL ५

161#

हा vee

ees

tly

67

6L7

6ट६

ofl

88

Br

901

1e10y,

z

= oo

noon

0

°

०००

0

if

0

usa "६9
हा]

-onod 7 S{BONISYD “79
seomog

ABsoug a[qemousy 7 MON “19

09

ysnty 65

sneyy aieodsog 8५

ld ३ sonsnas "६5

“9s

“ss

uodsuezy ond “pS

€s

ws

Is

“0s

ov

suodg 7 sIRBY UINOA “8p

‘dug छ aonsng e190¢ “Ly

cas

€L ral

or

z 1

pcr



21

asioxg,

9८६ 861 0 zu 99 sozz 1857 SI 600z-L661 —renUaD,
(wav)
16 6 0 ss £0 9Lt L9€ LI 6002-9661 vad
ve € 0z छः L ६9 16 Il 6002-€00%  4OVad
ट9 0 St 6t 81 see ८6६ £1 6002-4661 savod
6६ 0 0 कट st Lye 98६ 9. 600z-8661 LB
zor &z 0 871 I €8 see SZ 6002-9661 as
0% 0 L के 6 8६ as भरा. 600z-E00z WSa
ut 0 ve 5६ ty 96 Loz — 600८-5661 ZOVOG
or 6 8 L 9 s ’ € z 1
Ansiury ayy 4१ upny 4१ Buman
Dvd ग Answuiy —uoIsstugns-o1 sy oun 49ye Dvd = uoday,

ou Aq pommuigns — Zunreme st upmy ——asaty 94 उप 1 pomtmigns «= upny ay) wowed

५००१ tou ३0४ रा. एएए suortealasqo aaa AnsIUIW, u9eq 9aey ut papnjout 07

pny wus ४ 44 pauan qm poumar ayy Woy SNLV YoIUM — suoday —_payuasaid

Surpuad Suipuad — yyeuyy ०००३ acy nq peaisoss —_paatooar you uo syodar yqysereg = suoday
SNLV T8101, SNLV पणपृथ् SNIVJO ON SNIVJOON भर ३० ON VasSeieg Jo-ON = JON JOON eoK 2030

Surpuod ore sNy YoIyM uo sodas Vassered JO "ON,

0107'S "Te Uo se suoUnredagysaLysiUy
SNOLGA WIM SuIpUag sezeY }IPNY JO uontsod pur 5थ०ए uayey UoNJy ZuIpuag ए० suioday snyeys payeprjosuo>) SULMOYS JUdUII}EIG

WdaNXxaNNv


22

TOPE 509 Bel 098 rst 0६0घ६1 26991 _ _ 11201 #
sei v ce vs by col Bez _ 6007-6661 av
lly 901 67 601 “91 8601 68#1 घ्ट 6002-5661. Skemprey
saxel,

11240 0६1 0 061 18 07८9 186६ 6 8007-6661 paid
08t can 0 भ्र्दा टड 991T Aca cay 6007-9661 sworsn>
ol L 9 s v r4 t

mugen

निजी किक ७७४४७


23

let ६67. ६६०9 ६5६ €9% 991 Ist Set cay 98 a or st if t z ३०0४० Jo /ग्रशणात्॒
st 8 8 s 1 v 1 t 0 0 0 0 0 हु 0 0 0 SHB [euaIxy Jo Ansiury
uolgay waseg
0 oO ° 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 YON Jo qaudojenaq 3० Ansiuiy
“gt 55 of 1% €1 01 ध L € g z 0 L s 0 0 sougjad Jo Ansiuryy
€l 0 के z 0 £ 1 0 z 0 09 I 0 0 0 0 aMIND Jo Ans,
z 0 0 ॥॒ i 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 आप o1e0d105 Jo #परशणाव
CI २ ७४०० Jo #फाणाव)
€L पृ z 0 1 z € 0 0 1 z 09 1 0 0 0 १एणाश/[एफाप्पपा०३भश Jo yusUNEdeg
श्र्ट 6 L s v 0 T 0 0 09 0 0 0 0 0 0 (LI ‘WoD Jo /प्रशणाव्र) sisog jo
quaunredag uonnguasiq जवाब pur
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Poo, ‘sieyy sounsuoy 1० Ansty
s ot z oz 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Ansnpuy pur sosowwog 3० Knsturyy
€ ६ 0 o 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 TROD Jo #ग्रशणा्
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 WORBIAY [40 Jo Ansiuty,
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0. श्य्याप्राथ्य pue भष्जएा३५० jo Asin
zz @ 0 00 0 0 0 0 0 |] 0 0 0 0 0 aanynoUsy Jo Ansty
zt 91 st vl हा zl 11 ol 6 8 L 9 $ id £ z u

1४०1 600% 800८

400% 9002 5002 7002 ६००८ ८002८ 100Z 0002 6661 8661 ८661 9661 ५661

quduedagyknsiuy,

OLOZ'SO'TE Uo se juaupredag/saystuyy SnoLieA YIM Zupuog seed jIPHY Jo UON|sog


24

vl

Se

0६

°

sHeyy weIpU] seasi0AQ Jo ANSIUIA
आशा Auou Jo Aasiuyw

sour Jo AnSTUI,
sosuidiaug wmipay,

puv [lows ‘oI Jo KstUNA,
aonsny pue Mey Jo ANstUlW
quowXojdurg pue snogey Jo Anstur,
Sunseopeorg,

pue एग्प्रण्णणण Jo Ansiun
quowdojsasq

somnosoy पथ्णणाप्त Jo ANSIUTW
woreraa{iy (026०4

uegin pus Buisnoy Jo Ansty,
(in) sieyy ewoy Jo 0िशणाव
sirayy awoy 3० Asin,
sosudiawug sang

pue soinsnpuy Aavapy Jo Ansiun,
अथायह

आण्ब्व pue फराण्म Jo Ansturw
satnsnpuy

Butssa001g Pood Jo Ags

“i

91

sl

tl

13

7

I

or



st

25

lly

°

बहा

oul

gy

००

°

wz

००००

ira

००००

st

००००

००००

coe

००००

००००

coo oo

०००७०

sureye fequy, Jo Ansan
wisinoy Jo Ansiury,

sojnxay jo Ansimy,

Bais Jo Ansiuyy
vonruswaldusy swuresdorg
® sonsumgs ३० Ansiuiyy
qouomodurg

pure aonsne [0905 jo nsturyy
Burddtys jo Ansty,
qwourdojaaaq (शा jo Ansan,

skemySiyy
pur yodsues! peoy jo Ansimy,

skemjtey 1० Ansty

samog Jo Anstury

sep jeameny

एण्ड umajoneg Jo Ansiuiy
suoisuag pure sooueasiisy
diqnd ‘Jouuosiag Jo Ansty

sneyy
Arewowreiped jo Ansiuiy

fey neceyoueg Jo Ansimiy,


26

TIVE 8६9

006

9zs

19€

श्घ्ट

card

£6

Le

se

Sb

17

6

z Teioy, pues

ray

01

st

as
ve

€1

तल

ov

‘ABU
0. Aiqemousy pue MON Jo ASIN,
siso10g

0 pue juowuosAug jo ANSIUIA,
० soousiog पर्व Jo ANSIUI,
yoreasay ष्णएग Jo 1००० प्व्फ्ण
yoreasoy

Teamnoufy Jo jYounog weIpuy

pu] Jo ABAING [8००००
० 2005 Jo wounsedag
ypreasay jeunsnpul

0 एएश oynuoiog Jo wauniedag

°

°

ABojouys21
yeuojuy Jo wounredsg
0. ABsoug story Jo usuNIedag

ABojouysa,

0 ue aouaiag jo 1waunsedoq
इ्ञाष्प्रभश,

0 Jo quourdojaraq 40} anuad
0 Suodg pue आशाए प्राण jo Ans
quourdojaaaq

0 शाप pus ए०ए०७७ Jo /ग्रशणात
0 saomnosoy J01wy 3० ANSIUT,
0. wawdojaaag ueqin 3० Ansty

rat

91

st

vl

€l

दा

व

or



ANNEXURE पा

O.M. NO. 12(2)/8. COORD,/2010 DATED 2ND AUGUST 2010 OF THE MINISTRY
OF FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE (E.COORD. BRANCH)

No. 12(2VE. Coord/2010
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(E. Coord. Branch)

New Delhi, dated 2nd August, 2010.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM

Subject: Non-Submission/delay in submission of ATNs/ATRs. Constitution of
Standing Audit Committee (SAC)-reg.

Attention is invited to this Department's O.M. of even No. dated Ist July, 2010
on the subject cited above where in it was indicated that Standing Audit Committees
(SAC) would be constituted in all Ministries/Departments for which detailed
instructions would be issued in consultation with C&AG . In pursuance thereof, it has
been decided that the composition of the Standing Audit Committees would be
(i) Secretary of the Department, (ii) Financial Advisor, and (iii) Any other member the
SAC may wish to co-opt. The nominee of the C&AG at the level of DG/PD will participate
in the SAC in respect of Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Railways, Department of
Revenue (CBDT and CBEC) & Depertment. of Telecommunications, The SAC, as a
nodal agency, will monitor and review ona monthly basis the submission of ATNs on
C&AG's Audit Paras and ATRs on PAC recommendations and take appropriate remedial
measures.

2. Further, the Terms of Reference (ToRS) of the Standing Audit Committee
(SAC) will be as follows:—

() The main objective of SAC will be to ensure that all Audit Paras printed in CAG’s
Audit Report are responded to within the time limits to be specified by the SAC
concerned and in any case not later than that prescribed by CAG, and consider
fixing responsibility in all cases of non-adherence to such time-limits.

(ii) The SAC should cover the ATNs/ATRs pertaining to not only the Ministry but
also its subordinate offices, PSUs and Autonomous Bodies.

(iii) The SAC shall hold regular meetings to deal with the pending ATNs/ATRs by
classifying them in any manner that they may deem fit (e.g. thematically,
department-wise, age-wise etc.) in order to ensure speedy compliance.

(iv) The SAC may also oversee the effectiveness of functioning of Ad hoc Committees,
where these have been set up in terms of the instructions contained in the letter
No. 12(9)-E Coord./84 dated Ist January, 1985 (copies enclosed), which aims at
settlement of audit paras at the initial stages when it is issued through

27


28

Inspection Reports (IR). At this stage, if suitable remedialaction is initiated or
compliance made, it will have a positive impact of, on the one hand ensuring
better governance and on the other hand saving time on dealing with ATNs.

(v) The SAC shall ensure dissemination of the assurances given in the final ATNs
so that the cases where audit contention has been accepted are promptly complied
with by all concerned, in the Department and there is no recurrence of such
cases.

(vi) SAC may consider suitable incentive/disincentives to ensure settlement of
pending ATNs through speedy compliance of audit observations and circulate
best practices in this regard.

(vii) SAC shall hold discussions regarding systemic and other changes that may be
necessary in order to prevent recurrence of persistent irregularities coming to
their notice which may require change in any rule, procedure etc. which normally
do not get addressed at the lower levels leading to audit objection remaining
outstanding despite exchange of replies.

(viii) Any issues where there is difference of opinion between the Department and
Audit regarding interpretation of Rules/Notification could also be discussed by
SAC to reach a mutually acceptable conclusion and action for inclusion in the
ATNs.

A Nodal Officer may be appointed by the SAC to coordinate all matters relating
to ATNs/ATRs.

3. All Ministries/Departments are requested to constitute the SAC immediately.
A copy of the order issued in this regard may be endorsed to this Department.

(00

&

Sd/-

(Madhulika P. Sukul)
Joint Secretary (Pers.)

1. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
2. All Financial Advisers.
Copy for information to:

1. Cabinet Secretariat (Smt. Mala Dutt, Director), w.r.t. CoS meeting held on
17th June, 2010.

2. Smt. Rekha Gupta, Dy. Comptroller & Auditor General.



ANNEXURE IV
D.O. letter No. 1/11/2010- MC dated 4th November, 2010 of the Office of the
Controller General of, ‘Accounts, Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure
rr भारत सरकार
महालेखा नियंत्रक कार्यालय
वित्त मंत्रालय
व्यय विभाग
सातवीं मंजिल, 'सी' विग
लोक नायक भवन, नई दिल्‍्ली-110 003

ARCHANA NIGAM GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
ADDL. CONTROLLER GENERAL OF OFFICE OF CONTROLLER GENERAL
ACCOUNTS OF ACCOUNTS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE

DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE

7TH FLOOR, "C" WING,

LOK NAYAK BHAVAN, NEW DELHI- 1 10003

TEL. : 24690500 Fax: 24651591

D.O. letter No. 1/11/2010-MC DATE: 4th November 2010
Dear

Please refer to Ms. Rekha Gupta, Dy. C&AG's 0.0. Letter No, 138/I 10/Rep.
(central)/2010 dated 28.10.2010 to Secy. (Exp.) regarding the meeting of COs wherein it
was inter-alia intimated that total 2811 ATNs on CAG Paras are pending as on 20.09.2010,
as per record of Audit. In this connection, I would like to mention that as per information
available with Monitoring Cell, total 2284 ATNs in respect of Audit reports upto 2009
are pending against various Ministries as on 30.09.2010. Comparative statement
indicating difference in pendency position has been attached, Further, in pursuance of
recommendations of PAC in its 11th Teport of 15th Lok Sabha, Financial Advisers of all
Ministries/Departments were requested in August and October, 2010 to take expeditious
action to reconcile the discrepancies in the figures of pending ATNs in consultation
with the office of C&AG and furnish updated reconciled pending position. Copies of
Department's O.M. dated 11.08.2010 and 01 -10.2010 are enclosed. This Department's
O.M. ofeven No. dated 11.08.2010 and 01.10.2010 to you also refer.

I shall be grateful, if you could kind ly look into the matter personal ly and arrange
to get the discrepancies in the figures of pending ATNs reconciled in consultation
with the concerned Ministries on priority basis and make available to us, the reconciled
pending status of ATNs, Ministry-wise latest by 18.11.2010, to enable us to prepare
Action Taken Report on the PAC recommendations contained in the 11th Report of
PAC ( 15th Lok Sabha).

Regards

Yours Sincerely
Sd/-
(Archana Nigam)
Smt. Subha Kumar
Principal Director (Report Central)
O/o the C&AG of India,
9, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Marg,
New Delhi-1 10024
29


ANNEXURE V

D.O. letter No. 1/11/2010- MC dated 22nd November, 2010 of the Office of the
Controller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure

भारत सरकार

महालेखा नियंत्रक कार्यालय

वित्त मंत्रालय

व्यय विभाग

सातवीं मंजिल, “सी विंग

लोक नायक भवन, नई farett-110 003

ARCHANA NIGAM GOVERNMENT OF INDIA.
ADDL.CONTROLLER GENERAL OF OFFICE OF CONTROLLER GENERAL
ACCOUNTS OF ACCOUNTS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE

DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE,

7TH FLOOR, "C" WING,

LOK NAYAK BHAVAN, NEW DELHI- 110003

TEL.:24690500 Fax: 24651591

D.O. letter No. 1/11/2010-MC. DATE: 22nd Noverr ver 2010

Dear

Please refer to this Department's O.Ms of even No. dated 11.08.2010 and
01.10.2010 regarding reconciliation of discrepancy in the figure of pend’ng Action
Taken Notes on C&AG Paras in pursuance of the PAC recommendations ८ contained in
its Eleventh Report (15th Lok Sabha). As you are aware, PAC have expresseu displeasure
over the variation in the figures of pending ATNs which need to be reconciled between
‘Audit and Ministries/Departments to arrive at a precise figure. I would like to inform
that as desired by PAC, the progress made in this regard needs to be .ncorporated in
the Action Taken Note of Monitoring Cell of the Department and copies of ATN on the
llth report of PAC, duly vetted by Audit is required to be sent to PAC latest by the
extended timeframe i.e. by 09.12.2010. Copies of list of Pending Audit paras as on
30.09.2010 in respect of C&AG reports upto 2009 as per data available with Monitoring
Cell as well as the list provided by Audit as pending as on 20.09.2010 (including current
Paras) in respect of your Ministry/Department are enclosed for ready reference.

I shall be grateful, if you could kindly look into the matter personally and
arrange to get the discrepancies in the figures of pending ATNs reconciled in
consultation with the office of C&AG on priority basis and make available to us
reconciled pending status of ATNs, latest by 26.11.2010 positively to facilitate
preparation of Action Taken Note. Concerned Under Secretary/Section Officer may be
deputed to Monitoring Cell alongwith reconciled pending status of ATNs (year-wise/
para-wise) latest by 29.11.2010.

Regards
Yours Sincerely
Sd/-
(Archana Nigam)

30

epee म
a pussmumengan ans te hah aetna ७७३ “न


31
1. Concerned Financial Advisers of 14 Ministries/Departments where major
difference in the figures of pending ATNs have been noticed (as per list attached).

2. Shri S. Kumar, Commissioner (PAC), CBEC (Central Excise) Hudco Vishala
Building.

3. ShriS.K. Gotru, Director (CBDT) Hudco Vishala Building.
4. Shri R.P. Singh, Director CBEC (Customs) North Block.
Copy to:

Ms. Shubha Kumar for necessary action w.r. to DO letter dated 04.11.2010,
Principal Director (Report Central)

O/o of the C&AG of India, 9, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Marg,

New Delhi-1 10024

Sd/-
(Archana Nigam)


ANNEXURE VI

D.O. LETTER NO. 2/5/2009-MC DATED 9TH JUNE, 2011 OF THE MINISTRY OF
FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE, OFFICE OF THE CONTROLLER
GENERALOF ACCOUNTS, MONITORING CELL

No. 2/5/2009-MC
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
OFFICE OF CONTROLLER GENERAL OF ACCOUNTS
MONITORING CELL

Loknayak Bhavan, Khan Market,
New Delhi, 9th June, 2011

Subject: Examination of Non-Compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected CRAG paras—Meeting
of Sub-Committee-I of PAC held on 20.4.2011.

During the meeting of the Sub-Committee-I of PAC held on 20.4,2011,
Sub-Committee-I desired information regarding issuance of a letter from Monioring
cell of the Department of Expenditure requesting for deletion of PAC paras. The following
position is submitted:—

(iv) As per existing practice and direction in terms of Lok Sabha Secretariat OMs
forwarding copy of the PAC report to concerned Ministry/Departme:t; the Action
Taken Reports on PAC recommendations (duly vetted by audit) are required to
be sent to PAC Branch of the Lok Sabha Secretariat directly by the concerned
Department within the stipulated period of six months. The rolc of Monitoring
Cell in the Department of Expenditure is limited to reconciliation and updating of
the status of pending PAC paras. ATRs on PAC reports are not submitted through
the Monitoring Cell.

(र

There was a need to update the status of pending PAC paras in connection with
the review meetings of the Hon'ble Finance Minister and Secretary (Exp.) with
Financial Advisors and meeting of the Committee of Secretaries. In the process,
it was noted that 21 old pending PAC paras (7 paras pertaining to 8th Lok Sabha
(1986-90) in respect of Department of Land Reforms and 14 paras pertaining to
9th (1990-91) & 10th (1992-96) Lok Sabha in respect of CBEC of the Department
of Revenue) were pending as per record of Monitoring Cell.

(vi) During informal inquiry it was learnt from the Committee Officer of the concerned
PAC Branch that as per their record, these paras were not pending. Accordingly,
a formal communication was sent to PAC Branch seeking confirmation from
them that the said paras were not pending in the records of that office. The
intention was to ascertain the existing status of outstanding paras for the purpose
of reconciliation and record and not to request PAC Branch of Lok Sabha
Secretariat for deletion of the said 21 PAC paras pertaining to Department of
Revenue and Department of Land Resources.



33

3. However, the miscommunication is deeply regretted and the observations of
the Sub-Committee-I of PAC have been noted for further compliance.

Sd/-

(Sh. C.R. Sundaramurti)
Controller General of Accounts
Lok Sabha Secretariat
(PAC Branch)
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I ON "NON-
COMPLIANCE BY THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED
PARAGRAPHS OF THE C&AG OF INDIA" OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD
ON 20THAPRIL, 2011

The Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Wednesday, the
20th April, 2011 from 1430 hrs. to 1 800 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab - Convener
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
1. Shri Naveen Jindal
2. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
3. Shri Kalraj Mishra
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar - Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Anupam Kulshreshtha  - Deputy C&AG (Revenue Audit)
2. Ms. Meenakshi Gupta - Director General (Direct Taxes)
3. Shri Shourjo Chatterjee - Director (Direct Taxes)
4. Ms. Subha Kumar : Principal Director (Report Central)
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance
A. Department of Revenue: (CBDT)
1. Shri Sunil Mitra Secretary (Revenue)
2. Shri Sudhir Chandra Chairman
3. Smt. Poonam Kishore Saxena Member & Spl. Secy (A&J)
4. Shri R.N. Dash DG IT (International Taxation)
5. Shri S.K. Mishra हु JS(FT&TR)
6. ShriR.K. Yadav Commissioner (A&J)
7. Smt. Promila Bhardwaj DIT (International Tax)
8. Shri Shravan Gotru हु Director (PAC)

34



35

9. Shri Narender Kumar Addl. DIT (International Taxation)
B. Department of Revenue (CBEC)
10. Shri 5. Dutt Majumder Chairman
11. ShriS. Kumar Commissioner (PAC)
12. Shri Himanshu Gupta Commissioner (Service Tax)
13. Shri Deepankar Aron OSD to Chairman (EC)
14. Shri Shobhit Jain Director (Service Tax)
15. Shri Naresh Yadav Inspector (PAC)
C. Department of Expenditure
(Monitoring Cell)
16. Ms. Vilasini Ramamchandran Special Secretary (Expenditure)
17, ShriC.R. Sundramurti Controller General of Accounts
18. Smt. Madhulika P. Sukul Joint Secretary .
19. Shri Pradeep Rao JS&F (Department of Expenditure)
20. Ms. Poonam Goenka Vice President (Technical), [APL

2. At the outset the Convener Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts
Committee deliberated upon Memorandum No. 2 containing the request for seeking
approval of the Committee for deletion/striking off a total number of 114 paragraphs
from the consolidated list of pending Audit Paras. The Committee wanted to discuss
this matter with the officials of CRAG, However, the official of CAG were not available
at that time.

अंक ee tee

3. Thereafter, the Convener, Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts Committee,
welcomed the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the
Sub-Committee. The Audit Officers and the Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on
the various issues concerning the subject on ‘Non-compliance by the Ministries/
Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected
Paragraphs of the C&AG of India’.

4, tee अंक ae

5, *** ee ee

6. After a brief break, the Sub-Committee sat again and welcomed the officers of
the C&AG (Report Central) of India. The discussion was held on Memorandum No. 2
stating the request forwarded to the Committee for deletion/striking off a total number
of 114 paragraphs from the consolidated list of pending Audit Paras. The officers of
the C&AG stated that a formal reply regarding this issue would soon be communicated
to the Committee.

7. After this discussion, the Convener welcomed the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) and called for their
explanation to the Committee on their position regarding Non-compliance by the

*** Matter not related to this Report.


36

Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-
selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India. The Ministry apprised the Committee of
the initiatives taken by them in ensuring the timely submission of remedial action taken
notes by respective Ministries/Departments. The Convener directed the
representatives of the Ministry to furnish written information to the questions which
they could not answer or answered partly during evidence.

8. The Convener then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Finance for
appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing information in connection
with the examination of the subjects. The Convener also thanked the officers of the
C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance to the Sub-Committee in the
examination of the subjects.

A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.

The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

ee न मा ७७ ern)



APPENDIX II

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 24TH APRIL, 2012

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday the 24th April, 2012 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Room No. '51' (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House,
New Delhi.

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi ~_ Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Dr. Girija Vyas
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasant Chatterjee
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
‘SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh -- Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar _ Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty _ Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi _ Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.M. Bajaj Pr. Director, Audit
2. Ms. Geetali Tare Pr. Director, Audit
3. Ms. Sudha Rajan Director

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the sitting of the
Committee. Apprising the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider
and adopt four Original Draft Reports of the Committee, the Chairman desired that the
said Reports be taken up one by one for consideration for appropriate incorporation of
the views, if any, of the Members therein.

37


38

3. Accordingly, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration and adopted the same:—

(i) *#** कक के कक के
(ii) *** कं के कक

(ii) ‘Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of
Action Taken Notes on non-selected Audit Paragraphs 2010-11' relating to
the Ministry of Finance; and

(iv) *** ae ee

4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Draft Reports in
light of the factual verifications, if any, received from Audit and present the Reports to
the House on a date convenient to him.

5. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active
participation in the discussions. He also thanked the representatives of the Office of
the C&AG for their valuable inputs and assistance to the Committee in the exa’ tine: ion
of the subjects. The Committee also appreciated the hard work put in by the Secretariat
in drafting and finalising 25 Reports during the current term of the Committee.

The Committee, then, adjourned.

*** Matter not related to this Report.

MGIPMRND—577LS—28-07-2012.