21
CLEANLINESS  AND  SANITATION  ON
INDIAN  RAILWAYS
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF
THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR
EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT (FOURTEENTH
LOK  SABHA)]
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
 (RAILWAY BOARD)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
TWENTY-FIRST  REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

TWENTY-FIRST  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
CLEANLINESS AND SANITATION ON INDIAN
RAILWAYS
[ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
 COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR
EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)]
MINISTRY  OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)
Presented  to  Lok  Sabha  on  29 April, 2010
Laid in Rajya  Sabha  on  29 April , 2010
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2010/V aisakha, 1932 (Saka)

P.A.C. NO. 1916
Price: Rs.60/-
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10)........................... (iii)
INTRODUCITON ................................................................................................. ( v)
CHAPTER  I. Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government..............................................................
CHAPTER III. Observations/Recommendations  which  the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government.........................................................................
CHAPTER IV . Observations/Recommendations    in   respect   of     which
replies of  the Government have not been  accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration.............................
C
HAPTER V . Observations/Recommendations    in    respect   of    which
the Government have furnished interim replies...................
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the  Eleventh  Sitting  of  Public  Accounts
Committee (2009-10) held on 26.4.2010................................
II. Analysis  of  the  Action  Taken by the  Government on the
Observations/Recommendations  of  the  Public  Accounts
Committee   contained   in    their    Eighty-third    Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ......................................................
10
31
34
40
41
44
(i)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-2010)
*Shri Gopinath Munde— Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
$18. Vacant
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
* Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee w.e.f.  6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant
Singh resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
$ Vice Shri Ashwani Kumar retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2009-10), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Twenty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Eighty-third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Cleanliness and
Sanitation on Indian Railways”.
2. This Eighty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.2.2009. Replies of the
Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Report were
received on 30.10.2009. The Committee considered and adopted the Twenty-first Report
at their sitting held on 26th April, 2010. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observation/
Recommendations contained in the Eighty-third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH  MUNDE
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Eighty-third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Cleanliness and Sanitation
on Indian Railways".
2. The Eighty-third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.2.2009. It contained 20 Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Railways in respect of
all the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government.
Sl. Nos. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10,11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19 and 20
Total: 14
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government.
Sl. Nos. 2 and 17
Total: 2
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration.
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 9 and 18
Total: 4
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies.
Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-V
3. The Eighty-third Report of the Committee was based on Audit review of the
C&AG relating to Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways. The Audit review
was conducted to assess whether the plans and policies framed to maintain
cleanliness and management of waste generated in railway stations and in trains were
adequate, the measures taken on Cleanliness and Sanitation by Indian Railways at
1

2
railway stations and the feed back mechanism was adequate and useful in improving
the system. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed
various shortcoming/lapses on Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways and
the Committee had accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in the
Eighty-third Report.
GIST OF THE COMMITTEE'S OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
4. Some of the important Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee
in their Eighty-third Report were as under:—
• The Ministry of Railways should strengthen co-ordination efforts and put
in place an institutionalized mechanism at the Apex level dedicated towards
Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways.
• The Ministry of Railways should ensure that the Housekeeper should
undertake periodic inpsection within the trains several times a day. He
should also carry and display a checklist of his inspected items which may
be submitted to the concerned authorities at terminal stations.
• The Ministry of Railways should frame a policy on Waste Management and
lay down a mechanism whereby the quantum of garbage generated on
stations (including garbage collected from trains and disposed off at the
nominated stations) can be assessed realistically so that adequate collection,
segregation and disposal facilities along with necessary infrastructure can
be put in place.
• The Ministry should outlay a dedicated budget exclusively meant for
sanitation and cleanliness on Indian Railways with a provision for
year-wise increment on the same.
• The Ministry should draw up action plan for provision of setting up
adequate infrastructure viz., water supply, washable aprons, drains and
sewerage system and machines alongwith conducive platform surfaces for
each station duly prioritizing requirements.
• The Ministry should evolve a clear-cut and effective promotional policy for
Safaiwalas to boost their morale towards their duty.
• The Ministry should strengthen and modernize the existing mechanism of
grievance redressal. The Ministry should also ensure that the existing
complaint redressal system is modernized with effective use of technology.
• The Ministry should take steps to reduce the shortcomings of mechanized
cleaning in various A and B category stations. The Ministry should also
ensure that suitable infrastructure is laid down to carry out mechanized
cleaning on all selected stations.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs,
the Committee have dealt with action taken by the Government on some of their
Observations/Recommendations which need reiteration or merit comments.

3
A. INADEQUACY OF STANDARDS, ACTION PLAN AND NORMS ON
CLEANLINESS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1, Para No.116)
6. Consequent upon the detailed examination of the subject, the Committee in
their Eighty-third Report had observed that Indian Railways were yet to adopt any
standards or performance indicators ( i.e. the expected quality of the outcome) for
any cleanliness related activities carried out in various stations and in trains against
which the actual performance could be judged. The Committee had furhter noted
that standards for supervision were also not prescribed by Railways for any
cleanliness related activity on stations and in trains. Regarding the issue of prescribing
physical benchmarks for the standard of cleanliness in stations and trains, the
Committee had desired that Ministry must resort out-of-box thinking on this issue
and must display readiness and swiftness to measure the sanitary conditions. The
Committee had furhter recommended that the Divisional General Managers should
carry out daily routine checks and inspections at least once in every fortnight which
should be video recorded to clearly keep a track record of the sanitation levels
available on the platform and Railway premises. The Committee had also desired that
besides vigorously following the 'Clean Hour Concept', the recommendations given
by the Task Force constituted to address the issues of cleanliness, gadgets and
manpower should be executed in letter and spirit.
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note on the aforementioned
recommendation have stated as under:—
"There are frequent checks on the standards of cleanliness at different levels
which has lifted up the cleanliness standard considerably in the recent times.
V arious measures e.g. machine cleaning, outsources cleaning though reputed
and experienced agencies etc. have been taken to achieve this objective.
However, it is not feasible to quantify or lay down a benchmark for this. Providing
CCTV Cameras for this activity is also not feasible as CCTV cameras are also
provided/proposed to be provided for ensuring security in station premises. Both
the functions by one agency will not be possible.
With a view to improve the cleanliness and hygiene standard in coaching trains,
a number of policy decisions have been taken by the Ministry for use of standard
mechanized cleaning systems and also regular attention on board as well as on
enroute nominated stations. With these schemes, it is possible to standardize
the equipment and resources to be used by each of the Railways, requisite man
power, use of standard cleaning process and other required resources to sustain
the quality of work. These schemes will ensure improved cleaning of the coaches
before start of journey, enroute attention after certain kms. of travel and also in
select trains, regular attention by professional on board house keeping team.
In order to make adequate assessment of the cleaning quality for sustained
improvement, scheme also incorporates the system of monitoring each of the
activity of cleanliness and hygiene using a score card and a feedback from the

4
passengers. The score card maintained by the coaching depot will help assess
the standard of the cleanliness and also the passenger satisfaction".
8. The Ministry have furhter stated as under:
"Zonal Railways have been instructed to address the issue and take proper
remedial action. In order to improve upon the standards of Cleanliness and
Sanitation, mechanized cleaning of train rakes has been implemented on
41 coaching depots over Indian Railways. Besides, On Board Housekeeping
Services (OBHS) for frequent cleaning of coach toilets, doorways, aisles and
passenger compartments during the run of the trains has also been so far
implemented on 107 train pairs".
9. The Committee note that the Railways have initiated various measures viz.,
machine cleaning, outsourced cleaning through reputed and experienced agencies
etc. for streamlining the system of cleanliness and sanitation on Stations and in
trains. Besides, mechanized cleaning of train rakes has been implemented on
41 coaching depots on Indian Railways and On Board House Keeping Service (OBHS)
has been introduced in 107 train pairs. However, what concerns the Committee is
the Ministry's inability to quantify or lay down a benchmark to assess the level of
cleanliness at the Stations and in the trains. The Committee are not convinced with
the Ministry's contention that providing CCTV Cameras for this activity is not
feasible as CCTV Cameras are being used only for ensuring security in Station
premises and both the functions by one agency will not be possible. In view of the
desirability of lifting the standard of cleanliness in the Stations/Platforms/Railway
premises, it seems imperative that visual recordings of the performance of the
agencies engaged in such activities are maintained systematically so that corrective
measures, as and when warranted, can be resorted to. The Committee, therefore,
once again impress upon the Ministry to explore the feasibility of providing CCTV
Cameras to keep a track on the level of cleanliness in the Stations/platforms, possibly
by assigning the job to an agency other than that involved in ensuring security. The
Committee also desire that the mechanized cleaning of train rakes and On Board
Housekeeping Service (OBHS) be gradually extended to other coaching depots and
trains respectively in order to improve the standards of cleanliness and sanitation.
B. CREATION OF INSTITUTIONALISED MECHANISM AT THE  APEX LEVEL
FOR CLEANLINESS AND SANITATION
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3, Para No. 118)
10. Observing low priority being accorded to cleanliness in Indian Railways due
to lack of effective co-ordination amongst various departments of Indian Railways,
the Committee in their earlier Report, had recommended that the Ministry should
constitute a committee to look into the entire gamut of issues regarding lack of co-
ordination and clarity of approach vis-a-vis cleanliness and sanitation amongst
various departments of the Railways. The Committee had further desired that an
independent authority at the apex level solely responsible for cleanliness and
sanitation on Indian Railways be created to oversee and co-ordinate such efforts
amongst various departments of Indian Railways.

5
11. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have inter-alia stated as under:—
"Presently, there is no proposal to have an apex body exclusively for cleanliness
as functional members are looking after this area of concern. It is also not correct
to say that very low priority has been accorded to this activity. All the levels,
including the DRM, AGM, GM and Board and fully involved in making
improvements in this area."
12. The Committee appreciate to note the statement that all  the levels in the
Indian Railways including the DRM, AGM, GM and the Railway Board are fully
involved in making improvements in the cleanliness aspect. As functional members
are looking after this area of concern, there is no proposal to have an apex body
exclusively for cleanliness, contrary to the Recommendation made by the Committee
in their earlier report. What the Committee tried to emphasize was that as the
responsibility of maintenance of cleanliness, even within the Station premises, rested
with different departments which lacked effective coordination, there was a need to
have an independent authority at the apex level to oversee and coordinate the efforts
amongst various departments of the Railways. The Ministry perhaps could not
comprehened the essence of the Recommendation made by the Committee, as is
substantiated by the fact that they have constested the Committee's observation
regarding cleanliness being accorded a low priority by Railways. According to the
Committee, the comments made in their ealier Report were based on facts and
figures, furnished by the Ministry themselves and also the Audit. Moreover, the low
level of cleanliness at Railway Stations/Platforms is an open secret. The Committee,
therefore, are of the view that it is high time the Ministry realized the importance
of proper cleanliness/sanitation at the stations/platforms. In order to achieve that,
measures should be taken to put in place an effective mechanism at the apex level
to oversee and coordinate the efforts by various agencies, entrusted with the job of
keeping the Stations neat and clean.
C. STRENGTHENING OF INSPECTION OF CLEANLINESS STANDARDS ON
RUNNING TRAINS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4, Para No. 119)
13. The Committee in their Eighty-third Report, had observed that under the 'On
Board Housekeeping Scheme', which was outsourced by the Railways, the Contractor
had appointed an Executive Housekeeper, who was required to supervise and
oversee the cleaning/sanitation operations in the running trains. In that context, the
Committee had recommended that the presence of this Executive Housekeeper in
running trains should be made more visible by providing him a special uniform and
nameplate. His presence should be widely publicized to the travelling passengers by
way of public address system at the beginning of the journey.
14. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as follows:
"Under the On Board Housekeeping Scheme, the Executive Housekeeper is
required to have a specially designed uniform. Carrying a nameplate is also
mandated so as to make his presence more visible. Zonal Railways have been

6
advised to undertake public awareness campaign including announcement
through Public-Address systems."
15. The Committee note that under the 'On Board Housekeeping Scheme', the
Executive Housekeeper is required to have a specially designed uniform alongwith
a nameplate. Whether the Executive Housekeeper is actually doing so is the moot
point. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should prevail upon
various Zonal Railways to carry out surprise checks in the running trains in order
to ensure that the Executive Housekeepers are making their presence visible to
the passengers in need. The Committee also desire that the public awareness
campaign including announcement through Public Address System, as reportedly
initiated by the Railways, should be continued unabated so that the passengers can
easily approach the Executive Housekeeper for cleaning/sanitation work in the
running trains.
D. POLICY ON W ASTE MANAGEMENT
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 120)
16. Taking note of the absence of a policy on waste management and provisions
for proper disposal of waste in the contract of Indian Railways Catering and Tourism
Corporation (IRCTC), the Committee in their Eighty-third Report, had recommended
that Railways should frame a policy on waste management and lay down a mechanism
whereby the quantum of garbage generated on stations (including garbage collected
from trains and disposed off at norminated stations) could be assessed realistically
so that adequate collection, segregation and disposal facilities along with necessary
infrastructure could be put in place by the authorities. The policy should be in
compliance with the extant regulations and be applicable even in the case of
outsourced contracts. The Committee had further recommended that while making
use of plastic for such purposes, the Ministry must not lose sight of environmental
concerns and ensure that applicable rules were adhered to.
17. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
"Garbage disposal system is already in place on Indian Railways. Its quantification
is also done before tendering for fixing the appropriate agency for this work.
Over the past three years cleanliness has also improved due to improved
mechanism and monitoring.
Presently it does not seem practical to provide separate bins in busy stations
on account of heavy traffic usage. We would consider such a system while
developing the new world class stations.
As regards the absence of provisions in the contracts of IRCTC with licensees,
with respect to proper disposal or segregation of waste before it is disposed of,
IRCTC have been advised to take corrective measures in this regard."
18. According to the Ministry, the garbage disposal system is already in place
on Indian Railways. Similarly, IRCTC has been advised to incorporate suitable

7
provisions in its contracts with the licensees for proper disposal or segregation of
waste before disposal. In this context, the Committee are of the opinion that huge
dumps of waste at various stations, as observed by Audit during their survey, indicate
that poor and adhoc collection and disposal practices were followed by the Zones
and IRCTC, thus undermining the Ministry's statement that garbage disposal system
is already in place. If at all such a system has been developed, the Committee desire
that is should be steamlined and monitoring mechanism strengthened to enfore
effective adherence of instructions relating to adequate and proper collection,
segregation and disposal of waste in Railway Stations and by IRCTC also.
E. SHORTAGE OF WATER-TAPS AT THE STATIONS/PLATFORMS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9, Para No. 124)
19. In their Eighty-third Report, the Committee had observed that the number of
coaches in long distance as well as short distance trains had increased and on the
contrary to this, the number of water-taps at the platform was not enough to
realistically cater to the demand of the increased quantum of passengers. In view of
the above, the Committee had recommended that the number of water-taps be
increased expeditiously in a phased manner at all stations throughout the country.
The Committee had also desired that possibility should be explored to introduce
modernized taps such as push button taps as used at the Airports not only to
maintain the clealiness standards but also to check littering in terms of discarded
water bottles.
20. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
"Regarding increasing number of water taps at stations, this issue has been
examined along with other passenger amenities at stations by a Committee of
Executive Directors. Revised norms for passenger amenities at stations as per
category of stations have been laid down and necessary insturctions issued to
all Zonal Railways for implementation on 17th January, 2007. Further examination/
revision at such a short interval is not called for."
21. The Committee note that revised norms for passenger amenities, including
the provisioning of increased number of water taps, as per the category of stations
have been laid down consequent upon the examination of the matter by a Committee
of Executive Directors and necessary instructions were accordingly issued on
17th January, 2007. According to the Ministry, further exminations/revision of the
matter at such a short interval is not called for. The Committee are surprised to
note the indifferent statement of the Ministry on such an important matter of public
utility. The instructions were issued in January, 2007 and the updated Action Taken
Notes were furnished to the Committee in February, 2009. Even after two years of
the issuance of the instructions, the Ministry are of the view that no further
examination is needed as the intervening period is too short. It depicts utter callous
attitude, to say the least, on the part of the Ministry. The Committee are of the firm
view that the Railways are not doing any favour to the passengers by extending them
basic amenities like drinking water facilities. In fact, it is their moral and social

8
obligation towards the travelling public. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the
Ministry to discard the apathetic attitude towards basic passenger amenities, review
the instructions of January, 2007 at the earliest and take urgent measures to
provide adequate water taps, including push button taps, at the Stations/Platforms
commensurate with the increase in the number of trains/coaches and volume of
passengers.
F. INADEQUATE GRIEV ANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18, Para No. 133)
22. Observing inadequacy in the grievance redressal mechanism evolved by the
Railways, the Committee in their earlier Report had recommended that the Ministry
of Railways should strengthen the existing mechanism of grievance redressal by
effective use of technology, ensuring easy accessibility of the designated officers to
the passengers etc.
23. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:—
"Indian Railways function as a public utility service. In view of the enormity of
operations and interface with a large number of passengers every day, grievances
do occur and efforts are undertaken for their redressal and to find ways to
eliminate causes for such complaints. Indian Railways has a well knit Public
Grievances Redressal Machinary which takes prompt action on grievances/
complaints registered by the traveling public.
At the Railway Board's level, Executive Director (Public Grievances) is the Public
Grievances Redessal Officer. At the Zonal Railway's level, the Additional General
Managers function as the Directors of Public Grievances and coordinate the
work of redressal of public complaints. At the Divisional level, Additional
Divisional Railway Managers have been norminated as Public Grievances
Redressal Officers. They hold periodical meetings with the concerned officers/
Station Managers in this regard. At the stations, the Station Managers are
personally responsible for the public grievances. Suggestion Boxes/Public
Grievance Booths/May I Help You Booths' have been kept at important stations.
Complaint and suggestion boxes are also available at key places like Stations/
Refreshments Rooms/Reservation Offices and with the Train Superintendent/
Guards of trains."
24. The Ministry have further stated as follows:—
"Comments/suggestions boxes in properly latched/locked conditions have been
provided in all important trains over and above the complaint/suggestion books
already available at important stations and trains. In trains these boxes are
available with the Guard SLR. The process of providing these boxes in the pantry
cars of trains is under progress. It has also been instructed to screen these
complaints/suggestions at divisional level and bring the same to the GMs
knowledge for taking appropriate remedial action. Railways have been advised
to give wide publicity to the existence of these complaint/suggestion boxes also
through Public Address System and publicity campaigns."

9
25. The Committee note that the Railways have nominated various officers at
the Headquarters as well as the Zonal, Divisional and even at the Station levels to
register and redress the complaints/grievances of the passengers. Comments/
Suggestion boxes in properly latched/locked conditions have been provided in all
important trains over and above the complaint/suggestion books already provided at
important stations. The process of providing such boxes in the Pantry Cars of trains
is under progress. The Committee are further informed that Railways have been
advised to give publicity to the existence of these complaint/suggestion boxes through
Public Address System and publicity campaigns. The Committee appreciate the
measures initiated by the Railways to redress the complaints/grievances of the
passengers. They are, however, of the view that mere putting in place some
mechanism or simple issuance of advisories to make the passengers aware of the
existence of such mechanism will be of little help unless there is periodical and
proper monitoring to ensure effective implementation of the measures initiated for
the purpose. As a matter of fact, the enormity of operations by the Indian Railways
and the interface with a large number of passengers call for a systematic and
methodical monitoring of the arrangements put in place for the redressal of
grievances. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the railways to intensify their
'public awareness' campaign and monitoring system at every level so that the
complaints/grievences of the travelling public are timely registered and suitably
redressed.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation and Recommendaiton-119
The Housekeeper should undertake periodic inspection within the trains several
times a day and may also be required to carry and display a checklist of his inspected
items which may be submitted to the concerned authorities at terminal stations. In
addition, the Committee is also of the view that if required the help of Traveling
Ticket Examiners (TTEs) or any other person so authorized may be taken to
complement the work of the Executive Housekeeper. The person so authorized may
not only be directly responsible for cleanliness and sanitation, but may also help in
ensuring the system of checks and balances as far as cleanliness in the running
trains is concerned.
As regards the designated officer resonsible for Sanitation on running trains,
the Ministry have informed the Committee that under the On Board Housekeeping
Scheme, which is outsourced, the Contractor has an Executive Housekeeper, who is
required to supervise and oversee the cleaning/sanitation operations in the running
trains. The Committee feel that this executive housekeeper's presence should be made
more visible. It can be done by providing him a special uniform and nameplate. His
presence should be widely publicized to the traveling passengers by way of public
address system at the beginning of the journey.
[Sl. No. 4 Appendix........., Para No. 119 of  83rd Report of  PAC (14th Lok  Labha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Under the On Board Housekeeping Scheme, the Executive Housekeeper is
required to have a specially designed uniform carrying a nameplate is also mandated
so as to make his presence more visible.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
The response is partial. Though instructions exist, the mechanism in place to
enfore adherence is not addressed. The issue of making the passengers aware by
providing wide publicity has also not been addressed.
Ministry's Comments
Zonal Railways have been suitably instructed. It has also been advised to
undertake public awareness campaign including announcement through Public
Address system.
10

11
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009. )
Comments of the Commitee
Please See Para No. 15 of Chapter-I
Observation and Recommendation-120
Another area which has caught the serious attention of the Committee and
where the Ministry need to take concerted action is the area of Waste Management.
The Committee are appalled to note that the Ministry does not have a policy on
waste management. The Ministry in their reply have categorically informed the
Committee on this issue. Review of selected stations over all Zonal Railways
revealed that Railways did not have any mechanism to realistically assess the
quantum of gardbage generated at any of these stations. Consequently, large
quantities of garbage were either not reaching the vats or were strewn all over the
place in the surrounding areas and around the vats at any given point in time
creating an unhygienic atmosphere within the station premises. Large quantities of
garbage were removed sporadically once in a while. Moreover, in the absence of
any assessment of quantum of garbage generated, the infrastructure provided for
garbage collection and arrangements made for garbage disposal in railway stations
were adhoc, inadequate and unrealistic. The Committee, therefore, recommend to
the Ministry to upgrade the existing infrastructure relating to garbage disposal on
railway stations. The Ministry in a note furnished to the Committee have admitted
that the tools and implements, used in this regard are still very rudimentary. It is
very disturbing to note that the Ministry have been found wanting with regard to
their efforts towards garbage disposal and management.
Scrutiny of the standard conditions of contract of Indian Railways Catering and
Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) revealed that there were no provisions regarding either
proper disposal or segregation of waste before its disposal. Further, no penalty was
prescribed for improper disposal of waste. The Committee desire that the Ministry
must form a high level study group to clearly bring out the various deficiencies in
the existing mechanism and must take steps to modernize garbage collection and
disposal methods being undertaken on Indian Railways. The Committee strongly
recommend that Railways must frame a policy on waste management and lay down a
mechanism whereby the quantum of garbage generated on stations (including garbage
collected from trains and disposed off at nominated stations) can be assessed
realistically so that adequate collection, segregation and disposal facilities along with
necessary infrastructure can be put in place by the authorities. The Committee desire

12
this to take place within 6 months of the presentation  of the Report. The policy so
framed should be in compliance with extant regulations and be applicable even in
the case of outsourced contracts.
The issue of garbage segregation into biodegradable and non-biodegradable
by providing separate bins for garbage collection must be seriously taken care
of by the Ministry and should be accorded due priority. It is dismaying to note
that except for Gwalior and Jhansi, there was no mechanism to segregate such
waste, not even in the four metropolitan cities. The Committee further recommend
that while making use of plastic for such purposes, the Ministry must not lose
sight of environmental concerns and ensure that applicable rules are adhered to.
The Committee would like to be informed in detail about the corrective measures
taken by the Railways in this regard in Action Taken Replies furnished by the
Ministry.
[Sl. No. 5 Appendix........, Para No. 120 of 83rd Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Garbage disposal system is already in place on Indian Railways. Its quantification
is also done before tendering for fixing the appropriate agency for this work.
Presently it does not seem practical to provide separate bins at busy stations
on account of heavy traffic usage. We would consider such a system while developing
the new world class stations.
As regards the absence of provisions in the contracts of IRCTC with licensees,
with respect to proper disposal or segregation of waste before it is disposed of, IRCTC
have been advised to take corrective measures in this regard.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
The response is partial. Framing a waste management policy and remedial
measures put in place to enforce effective adherence of instructions relating to
collection and disposal of waste in railway stations and by IRCTC have not been
addressed. Audit observed that huge dumps of waste were collected at stations
due to poor and adhoc collection and disposal practices followed by the zones.
Audit had also observed that pantry car  waste was being thrown from running
trains in violation of extant rules and instructions.
Ministry’s Comments
Garbage disposal system is already in place on Indian Railways. Its quantification
is also done before tandering for fixing the appropriate agency for this work. Over
the past 3 years cleanliness has also improved due to improved mechanization and
monitoring.
IRCTC has been advised to take corrective measures in adherence to the
observation.

13
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements
on the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I
Observation and Recommendation-121
The Committee found that lack of co-ordination in budgetray provisions and
absence of an overall financial plan to tackle cleanliness related issues acted as a
major impediment towards realizing cleanliness related goals in Indian Railways. The
Committee have been given to understand that the working group on cleanliness
suggested creation of a separate minor head under operating expenses traffic to book
all the expenses of operating nature for cleanliness and housekeeping of stations,
platforms, concourses and other areas. However, in stark contradiction to this
suggestion the expenditure on various cleanliness activities was booked to different
accounting heads depending upon the department undertaking the activity. The
Committee have also learnt that the Railways did not have a mechanism to either
assess the extent of expenditure incurred on cleanliness or to monitor this activity.
The Committee are of the opinion that creation of a separate minor head under
operating expenses will definitely rationalize the accounting process and will at the
same time bringforth an alignment in the budgeting process geared towards specific
allocation for cleanliness and sanitation. The Ministry however, in a written note
have informed the Committee that the accounts of expenditure on specific items of
sanitation and cleanliness, which form part of the projects under various plan heads,
are not amenable for separation. Therefore, it may not be possible to work out the
percentage of surplus being allocated specifically for sanitation and cleanliness. Not
agreeing with the contention of the Ministry, the Committee recommend that Railways
need to assess the financial requirements for cleanliness related activities and provide
for them in the budget specifically. This would also enable Railways in monitoring of
the cleanliness initiatives and to find focused attention to this prime area. They also
need to have an overall financial plan for provision of infrastructure, amenities, user
awareness campaigns etc. as per an action plan and actual field requirements.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the Action Taken by the Railways
in this regard at the earliest but definitely whilst furnishing the Action Taken Replies
to the Committee within the stipulated time frame. Further it has come to Committee's
notice that foot over bridges, booking offices, washable aprons, drains, water supply,
waiting hall/shed, seating arrangements etc., which impact the cleanliness levels is
booked to Plan head 'Passenger Amenities'. Even under this Plan head, the Railways

14
spent Rs. 256.24 crore during 2005-06, equivalent to only 1.5 per cent of the total
capital expenditure incurred and 1.69 per cent of the earnings from passenger services.
Thus, the Railways had spent comparatively a very meagre amount for providing
infrastructure and amenities to the passengers on railway stations. This resulted in
inadequate infrastructure, amenities and resources which had an adverse impact on
the cleanliness and sanitation levels of Railway premises. The Ministry in a note
furnished to the Committee have informed that the amount likely to be spent on
creating additional cleanliness related facilities is very nominal in the current year
i.e. 0.1% of the investible surplus, the same will increase substantially in the coming
years considering the cost of the projects undertaken. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry must outlay a dedicated budget exclusively meant for sanitation
and cleanliness on Indian Railways with a provision for year-wise increment on the
same. The Committee  expects the incremental increase to be registered in the ensuing
Railway Budget.
[Sl. No. 6 Appendix.........., Para No. 121 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Adequate powers have been delegated to the DRMs for the following:
(a) Purchase of all tools and plants required for carrying out various sanitation
related activities.
(b) Granting specialized contracts involving large component of mechanized
cleaning and pest control contracts.
(c) Awarding one time contract cleaning of any area.
It has also been stipulated that Budget allocation under demand no. 9 minor
head 200 and detailed Head 291/293 for payment under this activity should be
allocated to each division for above purpose.
Zonal Railways have further been directed to go for mechanized cleaning at all
A & B category stations. For this purpose, exclusive Health Inspectors should be
provided at these stations. At A-I category stations having annual passenger earning
of more than Rs. 50 Crore, Health Inspectors should be provided round the clock
along with exclusive supervisors for the Engineering, Electrical & Commercial
Departments for ensuring cleanliness/proper upkeep of the station premises. At A
category stations, one or more Health Inspectors should be provided as per
requirement. For B category stations, one Health Inspector should be provided. Posts
for supervisors can be created, where necessary, by matching surrender on the
Divisions. Such creations should be completed within one month and compliance
reported to the Board.
The Inspectors/Supervisors of all departments exclusively provided for the
cleanliness supervision will be under the administrative control of the Station Supdt/
Station Manager for the purpose of attendance, leave pay, awards, DAR etc.

15
Station Supdt/Station Managers should be provided with adequate cash imprest
exclusively for cleaning.
Rag picking contracts are to be made available at all A-1, A, B and C category
stations for areas around the station. DRMs ensure that these contracts are always
current and renewal takes place timely. In case of any unforseen delay in finalization
of such contract, existing contract are suitably extended within the rules. DRMs have
been instructed to ensure foolproof feedback system so that there is no discontinuity
caused to such contracts. Any discontinuity is treated with urgency at par with
accident cases. Garbage disposal contracts are also to be covered accordingly.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
The level of overall expenditure/spend on cleanliness and sanitation also needs
to be progressively enhanced to achieve improved level of cleanliness.
Ministry's Comments
The audit observation has been noted in Railway Board.
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation-122
The Committee has observed several shortcomings in the garbage collection area.
The Committee understands that vats are secondary collection points where the garbage
from dustbins and garbage off loaded from trains is dumped for carting away to land-
fill sites. After going through the entire information and evidence collected by the
Committee they feel that this area is still a neglected area. The Committee recommends
that number of vats should be increased at the stations so that littering of the waste is
not common sight around the station areas. They also recommend that such vats should
be covered and hygienically maintained and periodically cleaned as per the established
guidelines. The Committee strongly desires that Railways prioritize provision of garbage
collection units after assessing the requirement on a realistic basis and ensure proper
collection and disposal of garbage. Suitable manpower should be deployed to man
these collection centres. In case where such activities are outsourced the erring
contractors must be penalized for lack of proper disposal and non adherence to quality
benchmarks meant for this purpose. Responsibility and accountability should be clearly
identified to enable action for deficient performance. A senior level officer should be

16
designated for overseeing and supervising these activities on a weekly basis. The
Ministry must ensure that garbage disposal undertaken at these units is done as per
extant rules and regulations. Transportation of garbage to disposal sites should be
done in the most careful way by resorting to highest professional standards. Garbage
disposal contracts and Rag picking contracts must be given to very reputed
organizations through a very transparent process. Performance of the contractors
should be regularly reviewed. The Committee also desire that a penal clause should be
prescribed and resorted to in all outsourced contracts where disposal of waste is done
in an improper way. The Committee have found that all kinds of garbage, both recyclable
and non-recyclable were collected in the same bins in violation of extant rules in various
zonal railways including at the four metropolitan cities, i.e. New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai
and Chennai. The Committee have taken a very serious view of this laxity on the part
of Ministry and desire that the Ministry must ensure that this practice is discontinued
with immediate effect and they must take necessary action to provide all the requisite
infrastructure for this purpose.
[Sl. No. 7 Appendix.........., Para No. 122 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
As regards absence of penal clause in all outsourced contracts where disposal
of waste is done in an improper way, IRCTC has been advised to include in all
contracts the requisite penal clause.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
The response is inadequate. The mechanism of monitoring the performance of
garbage disposal contractors at railway stations and the issue of increasing the
capacity of existing vats have not been addressed.
Ministry's Comments
Presently the garbage disposal system is already in place and is being monitored
regularly at various leveles. At present a total of 202 major stations have garbage
disposal contracts. The Penal clause has been included in all garbage disposal
contracts and is being implemented wherever required.
Noted IRCTC has been advised to take corrective measures in adherence to the
observation.
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)

17
Observation and Recommendation-123
The Committee are of the opinion that Railways need to draw up a plan of action
with identified milestones for provision of adequate infrastructure namely water supply,
washable aprons, drains and sewerage system and machines alongwith conducive
platform surfaces for each station duly prioritizing requirements. In this connection
the Chairman, Railway Board during the course of the evidence held on the subject
informed the Committee about 22 stations proposed to be developed into world class
stations. The Ministry further apprised the Committee about 593 stations selected as
model stations for the purpose of providing upgraded passenger amenities. Instructions
given to DRMs regarding picking up of five stations on an annual basis towards their
development on the touch and feel basis to have the best of the passenger amenities,
cleanliness circulating area etc. is a step in the right direction.
The Committee nevertheless, desire that Railways must ensure that these steps
are taken at the earliest and the Ministry must not adopt a lackadaisical approach in
this case. Decentralization of financial powers to DRMs with delegation of power for
sanctioning works up to Rs. 30 lakhs for a particular station on passenger amenities is
also an attempt which will help in improved standards of Sanitation and cleanliness.
However, the Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure that involved executives
must display caution as well as responsibility while exercising these powers. The
Committee further recommend that the Ministry should devise a time frame within which
the selected stations will be upgraded to desired levels as far as passenger amenities
are concerned. The Committee desire that the Ministry expedite all the efforts in this
direction and they should inform the Committee about the developments made in this
direction in a phased manner. The repair and maintenance of the infrastructure so
created should be ensured through a suitable monitoring mechanism.
[Sl. No. 8 Appendix......., Para No. 123 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Upgradation of passenger amenities, commensurate with increase in passenger
traffic, at stations including water supply, washable aprons, drains and sewerage
system, etc. is a continuous process and is undertaken through Annual Works
Programme depending upon availability of funds and other relative priorities. For
provision of adequate infrastructure with respect to upgraded passenger amenities,
number of stations identified for development as World Class Station has increased
to 35. Following two new schemes for providing upgraded passenger amenities have
also been introduced through Railway Budget 2009-10:
1. Adarsh Stations (361 nos.)
2. Multi-functional Complexes (64 nos.)

18
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
The reply is partial. Ministry of Railways has not set out a time frame within
which the stations would be developed as World Class stations, Adarsh stations
and Multi-functional complexes.
Ministry's Comments
Instructions have been issued to the Zonal Railways for development of 358
stations as Adarsh stations within a period of one year from September, 2009.
Monitoring of work of development at the apex level is being evolved. Development
of World Class stations and Multifunctional complexes involves time consuming global
tendering process and acquisition of land from local bodies. Moreover, it is an on-
going process and therefore no time-frame can be set out for completion of the work.
Audit vide U.O.No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation-125
The Committee are of the firm opinion that Railway must not lose sight of the
big picture while executing their duty to the nation. Cleanliness and Sanitation on
Indian Railways should be manifested as a top priority in every fresh project that
the Railways undertake and consolidated emphasis paid to the existing ones.
The experience of Delhi Metro in monitoring Cleanliness and Sanitation
standards is worth emulating. While contesting the Committee's suggestion regarding
practice and procedures being followed by the Delhi Metro the Ministry stated that
Delhi Metro is not catering to the kind of heterogeneous crowd that Railways do.
However, Delhi has increasingly started catering to crowd from various walks of life
which includes literate, semiliterate and illiterate passengers. Moreover, sanitation
and cleanliness are very contagious. It has been observed that in Delhi Metro the
entire work culture and attitudes of both the functionaries and travelling public have
been more amenable to clean and neat surroundings. And this has been made possible
only by the prevalent neat and clean conditions on the Metro premises. The Committee
understand that major part of Metro operations are covered and fully air-conditioned
and the journey is comparatively of lesser duration. Still that cannot be a reason for
the Railways not to emulate this experience. With the availability of bins and clean
surfaces, supervision with CCTV cameras, regular announcements regarding this
subject and visible presence of staff who cater to this aspect, Committee are sure
that Railways can definitely achieve the targets in this respect. Ministry's submission
in this regard stating inclusion of modern machines, active supervision and
overhauling of existing infrastructure by overhauling of platform surfaces with the

19
inclusion of kota stone etc. is a positive signal. It needs to be followed to the extent
where the difference is tangibly felt by the passengers. The Committee still feel that
Ministry's efforts in this regard should be widely publicized and should be
spearheaded by the Chairman, Railway Board itself coupled with on-the-spot checks
by Board Members or divisional Managers on a bi-monthly basis that will send a
clear signal to all concerned regarding the seriousness of the senior executive towards
this cause. The Committee recommends very strongly that the Ministry display
enhanced enthusiasm towards this aspect and lead by example. Moreover, while
handling out contracts to private parties, the Ministry must ensure that the
functionary and supervisory authorities are not the same.
[Sl. No. 10 Appendix........., Para No. 125 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Railway Board has recently issued instructions to zonal Railways to accord high
priority for cleanliness at Railway stations, trains and railway premises. Zonal Railways
have also been advised to keep a check on cleanliness and keep the Railway Board
apprised of the improvement of the same. The objective, strategy and action plans
which need to be adopted have also been circulated. It has been emphasized that
inspections has to be carried out on cleanliness once a fortnight by GMs and once a
week by the DRMs. Other PHOD/SAG officers have also been nominated for
inspection of trains and stations under specifically laid down schedules. Clear duties
have also been assigned to staff and officers by zonal Railways for improvement of
cleanliness and passenger amenities.
Audit vide their U.O. No.153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation-126
Another area which has drawn attention of the Committee is the upgradation of
toilets standards. After analyzing all the information, the Committee recommend that
the Railways should expedite the process of providing Controlled Discharge Toilet
System/Zero Discharge Toilet System toilets in as many trains/coaches as possible
to improve the quality of hygiene. The Committee have been informed that Indian
Railways have planned to instal environment friendly green toilet projects on all
passenger coaches. Further more funds to the tune of Rs. 2450 crore have been
sanctioned to fit "Green Toilets" in 24500 coaches to start with. The Committee hope
and desire that this project is completed within a specified time frame. The Ministry
should unequivocally intimate the Committee about the time schedule made for this
purpose. Also the Ministry must ensure that the money meant to be spent for the
purpose is not transferred elsewhere and is judiciously spent.

20
The Committee have also been informed during the course of the evidence that
the Railways have started providing concrete aprons on the tracks so that they can
be washed soon after the train departs. In this respect, the Committee desire that the
Ministry must ensure that there is no paucity of these aprons while the entire Railway
system is provided with Zero Discharge Toilets. The Commttee further recommend
that the Ministry must ensure that there is no manual scavenging in violation of
'Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of dry latrines (Prohibition)
Act 1993' and direction of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Explaining the delays in
providing concrete aprons, Railways have informed that it was mainly due to long
traffic blocks required and that the design was undergoing changes. In Committee's
view Railways' reply only underlines the fact that non-provision of washable aprons
and deficient maintenance of the existing ones has compromised effective cleaning
of Railway tracks adjacent to platforms. The Committee are unhappy with the
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry towards the cleanliness of railway tracks. The
Committee strongly recommend that Ministry should implement all the projects
geared towards sanitation on platforms and railway tracks in an efficient and time
bound manner and should keep the Committee informed about the developments.
The Committee have noted that there has been manifold surge in the number of
passengers using railways as their mode of transportation. The Committee are not
oblivious to the fact that all passengers amenities are directly related in terms of
numbers and infrastructure to the increase in number of passengers. In this context,
the Committee can clearly see that the number of toilets at the Railway stations have
not increased proportionately with the increase in quantum of passengers. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the number of toilets, urinals, at the platform/
waiting rooms should be increased forthwith under intimation to the Committee. The
Committee further recommend that the Ministry must ensure that toilets meant
especially for the facility of people with special needs and bassinets for infants should
be adequately provided both on Railway stations and on running trains. While
supplying this reply, the Committee would like to know that total number of existing
toilets at the time of presentation of this Report and accretion in the number that
took place on the recommendation of the Committee.
[Sl. No. 11 Appendix......., Para No. 126 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Indian Railways have designed modular toilets with improved aesthetics and
controlled discharge systems for use in Rajdhani and Shatabdi trains. A new design
of stainless steel toilets fitted with concealed piping, improved interiors and fittings
have also been designed and developed for use in air conditioned coaches being
manufactured by RCF and ICF. As a step further, Indian Railways have also taken
up project for development of environment friendly green toilets suitable for Indian
Railways environment. The green toilets are under various stages of development

21
and field trials. One rake fitted with green toilet has already been put up in service
for monitoring the performance and design validation. Further procurement is on
hand for fitment in 25 more rakes being manufactured at RCF and ICF. The
development work is also going on alternative technology/design being developed
by Defence Research and Development Establishment (DRDE)/Gwalior, and another
project under technology mission of Railway Safety taken up jointly by RDSO and
IIT/Kanpur.
With the introduction of green toilets on Railways, direct dropping of human
waste will be eliminated and waste will biologically treated before discharge.
Regarding increasing number of toilets/urinals at platforms and waiting rooms
proportionately with the increase in passenger traffic, the issue has been examined
along with other passenger amenities at stations by a Committee of Executive
Directors. Revised norms for passenger amenities have been laid down and necessary
instructions have been issued to all Zonal Railways for implementation on
17th January, 2007. Moreover, upgradation of passenger amenities commensurate with
increase in passenger traffic is an on-going process and is undertaken depending
upon availability of funds and other relative priorities. As regards toilets/urinals for
people with special needs (Disabled persons), instructions exist for provision of at
least one disabled friendly toilet/urinal at all A-1, A and B category stations. Such
toilets/urinals have already been provided at A-1 and A category stations and at
B category, these are planned to be provided by March 2010.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
The time frame for provision of Controlled Discharge Toilets/Zero Discharge
toilets has not been specified. Action initiated for maintaining an improved level of
cleanliness of railway tracks adjacent to platforms has not been specified.
Ministry's Comments
Production Units have been advised to prioritize the fitment of CDTS in LHB
design Coaches, ICF design coaches fitted with CBCs and in AC coaches and Sleeper
class coaches in that order. A total number of approximately 1300 such coaches have
been manufactured.
Field trials are also being conducted with different design/types of Environment
friendly 'Green Toilets’ and based on evaluation of these trials, a final view shall be
taken on the type of environment friendly toilets to be adopted in Indian Railway
coaches.
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements

22
on the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation-127
The committee have been informed by the Ministry that additional General
Manager at Zonal level, Additional Divisional Railway Manager at Divisional level
and station Manager/Station Superintendent at station level are the nodal officers/
supervisors who co-ordinate with various departments responsible for sanitation and
cleanliness. The Committee desire that Railways should prescribe norms for regular
inspection by various officers for all categories of stations and ensure that deficiencies
pointed out by the inspecting authorities are actively followed up and rectified. The
committee have been informed by the Ministry that there is no flying squad in the
Ministry to conduct surprise check ups with regard to Cleanliness and Sanitation.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should formulate a permanent
mechanism to conduct such surprise checks. The frequency of these periodic checks
should be clearly outlined and the creation of a deterrence should be accorded top
priority by the Ministry.
[Sl. No. 12 Appendex........, Para No. 127 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
There is already a well laid down schedule of inspections for various levels.
Surprise checks are also made frequently. In fact, these measures only have resulted
in improvement in the sanitation standards in the recent times.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
The mechanism in place in the zones to actively follow up the deficiencies
pointed out by the various inspecting authorities has not been brought out.
Ministry's Comments
Zonal Railways have been suitably instructed.
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements
on the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30.10.2009.)

23
Observation and Recommendation-128
The Committee have noted shortcomings in execution of penalty against those
involved in defacing of Railway property and littering etc. In this regard the Committee
desire that enforcement of penalty and proper fencing should be ensured by the
Ministry at the divisional level. Moreover, the Ministry should clearly look at the
sources of Garbage generation and try to avoid its spillage on the Railway premises.
The Committee have also noted that garbage from the pantry cars is dumped in the
station yard itself without adhering to prescribed procedures of further disposal. Apart
from the disposable glasses, polythene, water bottle etc. create bulk of the garbage
and also block the drain leading to water logging and accumulation of fifth. The
Committee further strongly recommend that vendors operating on the stations should
be directly held responsible for the spillage and should be suitable penalized. the
Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure complete and adequate fencing of
station premises thus avoiding entry of unauthorized persons like beggars, urchins
and unauthorized vendors as they also contribute towards lack of cleanliness and
sanitation on the Railway premises. The security on the station premises should be
a key concern for the Ministry and presence of unauthorized persons on the station
has to be dealt by any renewed mechanism to be devised by Railways in the manner
they deem appropriate. The Committee further recommend that penal measures be
strengthened to serve as an adequate deterrent against unauthorized occupation and
misuse of Railway property.
[Sl. No. 13 Appenedix..........., Para No. 128 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
At present, persons entering station premises unauthorizedly are dealt with as
per extant provisions of section 147 of the Railways Act, 1989, which stipulates
imprisonment for a term extending to six months or with fine which may extent to
Rs. one thousand or both. Persons involved in unauthorized vending/hawking in
station premises/trains are being dealt under section 144 of the Railways Act which
envisages imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which
may extend to two thousand rupees or both.
In the year 2008, about 14 lakh offenders were prosecuted by the RPF under various
sections of the Railways Act, out of which, position regarding prosecution of offenders
under sections 144 & 147 in the year 2008 was as under:—
Section Offence No. of offencers
prosecuted by RPF
144 Unauthorised 1,34,671
vending/hawking
147 Trespassing 2,36,856

24
To enhance the surveillance mechanism over railway stations, Railway Board
has decided to install an Integrated Security System at important stations with the
following broad areas;
(a) CCTV System
(b) Access Control
(c) Personal and baggage screening system
(d) Explosive detection and disposal system
Fencing of station premises already exist at most of the important stations,
especially A-1, A, B category stations. Further, provision of fencing/boundary wall
at stations is a continuous process and is undertaken on need basis subject to
availability of funds and other relative priority.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed the
followings:—
The existing penal provisions are inadequate and does not serve as a deterrent
as seen in Audit. Apart from preventing entry of unauthorized persons, effective
measures for permanently evicting the existing unauthorized users/encroachments
needs to be put in place on priority.
Ministry's Comments
A proposal for amendments in the Railways' Act is under consideration of the
Board to enable RPF to conduct enquiry and prosecution of offences related to thefts
of passengers belongings and drugging of passengers in railways. This will facilitate
immediate registration of cases, effective enquiry and prosecution with regular
montioring on daily basis from the Railway Board.
RPF staff are being deployed for access control duties at the major railway
stations of country. Besides above, regular drives are being conducted by the RPF
against unauthorized persons. During the year 2008, more than thirteen lakh offenders
have been prosecuted under various sections of the Railways' Act by RPF.
To strengthen access control and surveillance mechanism, an Integrated Security
System has been approved for sensitive/vlunerable Railway stations of the country.
The above system comprises of the following four broad areas:—
• CCTV surveillance system
• Access control
• Personal and Baggage screeing system
• Bomb detection and disposal system
In Works-Programme 2009-10, approval has been accorded for implementation
of this scheme at 195 sensitive stations of the country at an estimated cost of
Rs. 344.31 crore.

25
An amount of Rs. 67.09 crore has been sanctioned for procurement of modern
security equipment like Door Frame Metal Detector, Hand Held Metal Detector, Night
Vision Devices, Walkie-Talkie, VHF sets etc. to strengthn RPF. Proposal of Rs. 14.26
crore for purchase of vehicles for RPF/RPSF is under consideration.
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II8-3/2006 (MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation-129
The Committee are perturbed to note the Audit observation regarding heavy
absenteeism, poor work ethics and lack of motivation among the Safaiwalas. The
Committee are of the opinion that role of the Safaiwalas is very important and low
morale of these Safaiwals will definitely cause sanitation efforts on Indian Railways to
suffer. While explaining their case on the matter and the efforts taken to remedy the
situation, the Ministry informed the Committee that heavy absenteeism, poor work ethics
and lack of motivation among the Safaiwalas is due to multiple factors viz. lack of
promotional avenues, low self esteem, lack of variety in work environment,
repetitiveness of job, shift duties, etc. The Committee have been further informed that
counseling by supervisors on the job, development of training module and periodic
training provision, awards and incentives for outstanding performers, improvement in
work environment by increasing mechanized cleaning, better implements and equipments
viz. floor scrubber and dryers, floor washing and scrubbing machines, high pressure
jet cleaner, wet and dry mops, vacuum cleaners, manual sweeping machines etc. are
some of the steps taken to upgrade the morale of these Safaiwalas. The Committee are
appalled to note that there was no training module for these safaiwalas and it was only
after the Audit observations that the Ministry realized such a need. It is needless to
mention that priority be accorded by the Ministry to sanitation work. The Committee
hope that the Ministry will take up this issue in right earnest and also take steps to
strengthen the cadre of Safaiwalas.
[Sl. No. 14 Apendix.........., Para No. 129 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
With utmost thrust on mechnized cleaning of stations through expert agencies,
the strength of staff in safaiwala category is continuously being reviewed. The aspect
of training is also taken care of whenever mechanized cleaning gets introduced.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed the
following:—
Cleaning activities in a large number of stations continue to be vested
departmentally and it is imperative that Safaiwalas are adequately and apropriately
trained.

26
Ministry's Comments
Instructions have been issued to the Zonal Railways to take immediate action
on the observation of Audit and ensure that all Safaiwalas are adequately trained.
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation—130
Whilst deposing before the Committee, the Chairman, Railway Board was candid
enough in his admission that there lie some anomalies regarding the promotion of
Safaiwalas which negatively contributed towards their morale and also affected their
performance. The Committee are happy to note this candid admission by the
Chairman, nevertheless, they feel that Railway Board has not addressed this problem
effectively enough so as to take it to logical conclusion. In all the information supplied
by the Railways to the Committee, it is gleaned that no clear-cut promotional avenues
have been put in place to regulate the promotion of Safaiwalas working not only at
the platform but also at the yards and other establishments of Railways. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that clear-cut and effective promotional policy for
Safaiwalas to boost their morale towards their duty should be devised by the Railways
within six months under intimation to the Committee and should be implemented
expeditiously.
[Sl. No. 15 Appendix........., Para No. 130 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
As per extant instructions, in all Departments, quotas for Group 'D' staff for their
promotion to Group 'C' have been earmarked. It is around 50% in all Technical
Departments and other categories like Office Clerks, Commercial Clerk, Ticket
Collectors. There were 4 grade structure viz. Rs. 2550-3200,  Rs. 2610-3540,
Rs. 2650-4000 and Rs. 2750-4400(RPS) available within Group 'D' in the fifth CPC
scales. Safaiwalas were promoted as Sr. Safaiwalas and Peon within Group 'D' and
also eligible for promotion to clerical categories in Group 'C' and for further promotion
as Technicians and Artisans in Technical Departments. Provision for Safaiwalas of
all departments for induction in Workshop cadre against 10% quota exists too. In
Railway hospitals, Safaiwalas are eligible for promotion as Dressers and Laboratory
Attendants.
Consequent upon implementation of the recommendations of the Vth CPC
Assured Career Progression (ACP) Scheme Vide which two financial upgradations
were to be given to Group 'D' staff on completion of 12/24 years' regular service, was

27
introduced and adopted on the Railways. Now, VI CPC has recommended three
upgradations under ACP Scheme after the interval of 10, 20 and 30 years of regular
service, which are still under consideration. The VI CPC have also recommended
upgradation of all Group 'D' employees to Group 'C' in PB-I (Rs. 5200-20200) with
grade pay of Rs. 1800 and those employees who do not possess the minimum
qualification of Matric/ITI will be placed in PB-I (Rs. 5200-20200) with grade pay of
Rs. 1800 after suitable training. In addition, staff can also avail the benefit of
promotion under GDCE Scheme if they possess the direct recruitment qualification
prescribed for such posts.
In view of the above, promotional prospects for Group 'D' staff including
Safaiwalas are considered to be adequate.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006(MIP) dated 15.09.2009 have vetted the
Action Taken Note.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation—131
The Committee have taken due note of the existing deficiencies in contract
management which as observed have led to compromise in quality of service rendered
by the contractors and have also resulted in ineffective cleaning initiatives. The
Committee have  found that the terms and conditions of various outsourced contracts
were not well defined. While in some cases the processes and frequencies of
cleanliness activities were not defined, in many others, the manpower to be provided
and the cleaning machines to be utilized by the contractor, were not spelt out. As a
result, the contractors across various  zonal railways employed lesser resources
thereby compromising the quality of cleanliness. Audit further revealed that penal
clauses for unsatisfactory discharge of cleaning activities were not incorporated in
five agreements of outsourced works. In three stations, no agreement was entered
into though cleaning activities were outsourced. Award of contracts to the contractors
without prescribing any maximum standard that the contractors would have to adhere
to and also to the lowest bidder irrespective of viability of rates has been viewed
very seriously by the Committee. In this connection, the committee very  strongly
desire that the Ministry must fine tune the system of Outsourcing in Railways. The
Ministry should explore the possibilities of  fixing  responsibility  on those officials
who handed out faulty contracts and must ensure that system for outsourcing is
made fool proof. Moreover, the Committee desires that there should be an effective
supervisory mechanism in place to ensure that such anomalies are not repeated in
future.
[Sl. No. 16 Appendix......, Para No. 131 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Necessary action will be taken to improve the existing contracting system as
observed by the Committee.

28
All zonal railways have been instructed to follow standard model mechanized
cleaning and trains based on pilot project of Puri Coach Depot/East Coast Railway.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed the
following:—
The issue of accountability for finalizing faulty contracts has not been addressed
in the response.
Ministry's Comments
Zonal Railways have been suitably instructed.
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation—134
The Committee have learnt that various flaws exists in the execution of
mechanized cleaning in various A and B category stations. The Committee have noted
that in major stations like Howrah, Asansol, Bangalore Cantt., Hubli, New Delhi,
H. Nizamuddin, Delhi, Chennai Central, Chappra etc. mechanized cleaning remained
largely ineffective due to non-availability of smooth platform surfaces and various
associated problems. It has been quite clear to the Committee that the Railways tried
to execute this program without necessary infrastructure in place. The Committee
note that the Ministry's approach in this regard lacked proper vision and
comprehensive planning. The Committees are appalled to note that such an ambitious
program was initiated without keeping in view the hurdles and possible solutions in
mind. The Committee, therefore, very strongly recommend that the Ministry ensure
that a suitable infrastructure is laid down to carry out such cleaning on all selected
stations. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry must identify the flaws
that were not perceived at the planning stage of this program and take steps to rectify
the same without any further loss of time.
[Sl. No. 19 Appendix.......,  Para No. 134 of 83rd Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
As regards smooth surface of the platforms at major and important stations,
home/main platforms have already been resurfaced with Kota-stone for smooth
cleaning at most of such stations. More and more works are sanctioned through
Annual Works Programme for resurfacing of platforms with Kota-stone or other means
for smooth and mechanized cleaning. Further, 637 stations have been identified for
modernization under 'Touch & Feel' Scheme. One of the area for improvement at such

29
stations is "Improvement to the platform surface." More than 70% stations have
been modernized under this scheme and the remaining are targeted for completion
during this fiscal year.
Audit vide their U.O No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation—135
Providing safe, tasty and hygienic food on Indian Railways is the duty of the
Ministry and the concerned department i.e. the Indian Railway Catering and Tourism
Corporation (IRCTC). The satisfaction level of traveling public which provides
revenue to the Ministry should be given top priority. The Committee has noted various
complaints regarding lack of hygiene and maintenance of base kitchen in the Railways.
The Ministry in their reply have apprised the Committee about various certifications
that   have been acquired by house keeping services of the Ministry. The Committee
laud the acquisition of international certifications and hopes that the corporation
will provide efficient services to the traveling passengers and take into account the
various tastes of the heterogeneous traveling public while serving them with a smile.
The rates of various eatables both on the running trains and on platforms must be
rationalized. The Ministry must curb the tendency of various vendors to charge
exorbitant prices from the traveling public as far as food and beverage is concerned.
The Ministry must inform the Committee about the steps taken in this regard. The
Committee further recommends that the menu available on various prestigious trains
like Rajdhani, Shatabdi etc. should have more variety and the passengers should be
given an opportunity to exercise their choice whole selecting the menu. The
Committee have also taken note of the fact that outsourcing in catering services has
not yielded very satisfactory results. The Committee,  therefore, recommends that
Ministry should enquire into the matter in depth and if necessary the role of the
Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) be further enhanced to
expand its catering services within the running trains and starting more food outlets
at the stations. Where any inadequancy is found in getting the quality food by the
passengers, the Ministry must take stern action.
[Sl.  No. 20 Appendix......, Para No. 135 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
As regards providing safe, tasty and hygienic food  on Indian Railways, regional
varieties and choice of menu available on various prestigious  trains like Rajdhani,
Shatabdi etc. Other a-la-carte items  and regional cuisine are sold by the mobile
licensees besides the standard items. As regards rationalization of rates in Mail/
Express trains and at static catering units, the rates  of tea/coffee, standard meals
and breakfast are fixed by Railways and are uniform over Indian  Railways.
Instructions also exist that the waiters and bearers have to carry the menu card
indicating the tariff duly approved by the licensing authority.

30
Stickers have been put on all the coaches/pantry cars of all the trains managed
by IRCTC so as to advise the passengers about the quantity and prices to eliminate
case  of less quantity and avoid overcharging. Bi-lingual Menu Stickers have been
designed depicting standard veg/non-veg meal and breakfast items along with the
quantity and rates. The rates for other standard items such as packaged drinking
water, readymade tea an standard coffee have also been indicated. Other
miscellaneous information such as IRCTC website address and zonal control office
nos. have been indicated for effective complaint redressal system. The drive for
pasting of menu stickers was launched by IRCTC.
Besides, various drives by zonal railways and IRCTC takes care about
overcharging by the licensee while serving various standard food items and
proprietary food products, such as, packaged drinking water, biscuits, cold drinks
etc. Stringent action is taken against the defaulting licensee by imposing severe fines
etc.
As regards the recommended enhanced role of IRCTC in railway catering, it is
stated that IRCTC has been formed to upgrade and professionalize the catering and
hospitality services of Indian Railways. Accordingly, management of catering activities
along with staff has been handed over to IRCTC. Presently, IRCTC is managing
catering units at A, B and C category stations and in trains. Catering services at D, E
and F category stations will be handed over to IRCTC when the corporation becomes
equipped to take over these units.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
(Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)

CHAPTER  III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Observation and Recommendation-117
The Committees are constrained to note that low priority has been accorded to
sanitation and cleanliness activities on Indian Railways owing to a wide spectrum of
responsibility assigned to various functionaries like Chief Health Inspector/Health
Inspector (CHI/HI), Station Masters/Managers etc. Moreover, absence of a
comprehensive action plan at the apex level led to efforts towards cleanliness
remaining as isolated efforts, with sporadic instructions being issued from time to
time without being cohesive. It is appalling to learn that even at the Railway Board
level different directorates were responsible for different areas of cleanliness related
activities and schemes. It is observed that multiple departments like commercial,
medical and engineering departments are involved in cleaning operations. The
Committee are of the opinion that the responsibility for cleaning should lie with one
department most preferably with the medical department since their awareness levels
and sensitivity regarding cleanliness is expected to be better than others. V arious
small controls handed out  to various departments/agencies should be clubbed
together for effective handling and financial viability. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should create a comprehensive mechanism with a clearly laid out reporting
structure whereby the responsibility of maintaining cleanliness and hygienic
surroundings at railway stations and in trains, exclusively vests with one nodal
agency i.e. medical department. Also all the other departments such as Engineering,
mechanical and others would work in conjunction and unison with Medical
Department. The Commitee recommend that the decision taken by Railways should
be finalized within six month of the presentation of  this report.
[Sl.No. 2 Appendix..........., Para No. 117 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
There is now a clean demarcation of responsibilities amongst the various
departments involved in this activity. It is not practically possible to handle all
activities by one department alone. The improvements seen in cleanliness standard
during the recent times amply bring out the validity of the present set up.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3-/2006(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have vetted
the Action taken Note.
(Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
31

32
Observation and Recommendation—132
The Scheme 'Clean Train Station' (CTS) was launched in October 2002 as a major
initiative for improving train cleanliness. Under this scheme mechanized enroute
cleaning of trains was introduced during halts at identified stations on major trunk
routes of Indian Railways. As per the scheme select trains were to be cleaned at the
nominated stations and necessary arrangements were to be made on the specified
platforms in a planned manner. However, to the utter dismay of the Committee it has
been found that a large number of nominated trains could not be attended due to
non-placement of the trains  on the nominated platforms. At some stations in East
Railway, even the nomination of platforms was not done judiciously, Inadequate
coordination between departments also resulted in non-availability of adequate
infrastructure and requisite time for implementing the scheme. Thus the CTS scheme
though ambitious and well intentioned could not achieve its perceived goals.
Chairman, Railway Board, during the course of evidence also apprised the Committee
of various initiatives being taken by the Ministry which included cleaning of the
trains at their originating  point with high powered jet machines. The Committee hope
that Ministry will take remedial action to plug the gaps and intensify their efforts
towards achieving the said objective of the scheme in a sustained manner.
[Sl. No. 17 Appendix.........., Para No. 132 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
All efforts are made to place the passenger carrying trains on the nominated
platforms. However, sometimes this is not feasible due to the late running of trains,
maintenance of platform/tracks and other operational constraints etc. In those
conditions, the affected train has to be placed at other suitable platform. However,
announcements are made well in advance about the new platform of the train giving
ample time to the CTS staff to equip themsleves at the new platform.
In order to provide clean and hygienic environment in trains, railways are
progressively adopting intensive mechanized cleaning of coaches/trains in the
coaching maintenance depots before originating.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3-/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
The response is partial. Apart from ensuring that the designated trains are brought
on nominated platforms adequate manpower needs to be ensured so as to clean all
the reserved coaches of the trains within the scheduled stoppage time. Otherwise
CTS is largely restricted to cleaning the AC coaches.
Ministry's Comments
Clean Train Station scheme has so far been made operational at 27 important
stations of Indian Railways. The standard project specifications for this scheme details
the manpower requirements besides other resource specifications. Railways have been
advised to ensure adherence to the specifications.

33
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation and Recommendation-116
The Committee note that Indian Railways cover over 8 thousand stations and
ferry around 16 million passengers everyday which comprise of various socio-
economic backgrounds and literacy levels. Keeping in view the magnitude and scale
of operations of Railways, the Committee has examined this subject with utmost
profundity. The Committee's Recommendations which have been brought out in the
successive paragraphs are based on the audit findings and Committee's own inquiry
based on written and oral evidence tendered before the Committee by the officials
of the Ministry of Railways. The Committee also sought responses from interested
organizations and members of the public for understanding this subject in depth. A
close scrutiny of the subject and the material gathered by the Committee reveals a
sorry state of affairs as far as cleanliness and sanitation on Indian Railways is
concerned. The deficiencies and shortcomings which warrant immediate attention
of the railways have been brought out in the successive paragraphs. Committee's
examination of the subject has led to inescapable conclusion that cleanliness and
sanitation activities on Railways require immediate attention of the Ministry. The
Committee are astonished to note that Railways are yet to adopt any standards or
performance indicators (i.e. the expected quality of the outcome) for any cleanliness
related activity carried out in stations and in trains against which the actual
performance could be judged. The Committee also note that standards for supervision
were also not prescribed by Railways for any cleanliness related activity on stations
and in trains. The Ministry in their detailed reply in this regard have stated that
they have devised a comprehensive plan for the purpose which admitting that
prescribing physical benchmarks for the standard of cleanliness is not possible as
the level of cleanliness is not quantifiable. In this connection the Committee strongly
feel that Ministry must resort to out-of-box thinking on this issue and must display
readiness and swiftness to measure the sanitary conditions. The Committee
recommend that there should be daily routine checks by the Divisional General
Managers and inspections at least once in every fortnight and it should be video
recorded to clearly keep a tract record of the sanitation levels available on the platform
and Railway premises.  Strict action must be taken against the offendres who resort
to spillage etc. on the platforms. This can be easily done with the help of CCTV
cameras on all the major stations across the country which have been earmarked
for 'World Class Standards'.
The Committee further note the 'Clean Hour concept' i.e. during a notified
lean period entire station premises are thoroughly cleaned on daily basis should
34

35
be vigorously followed by all the Zones. In this connection, the Committee desire
that the Recommendations, furnished by the task force constituted to address
the issues of cleanliness, gadgets and manpower should be executed in letter
and spirit. Moreover, the Ministry must bring out a status report on the subject
of execution of these recommendations within six months of presentation of this
report.
[Sl. No. 1 Appendix..........., Para No. 116 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
There are frequent checks on the standard of cleanliness at different levels which
has lifted up the cleanliness standard considerably in the recent times. Various
important measures e.g. machine cleaning, outsourced cleaning through reputed and
experienced agencies etc. have been taken to achieve this objective. However, it is
not feasible to quantify or lay down a benchmark for this. Providing CCTV Cameras
for this activity  is also not feasible as CCTV cameras are also provided/proposed to
be provided for ensuring security in station premises. Both the functions by one
agency will not be possible.
With a view to improve the cleanliness and hygiene standard in coaching trains,
a number of policy decisions have been taken by the Ministry for use of standard
mechanized cleaning systems and also regular attention on board as well as on enroute
nominated stations. With these schemes, it is possible to standardize the equipment
and resources to be used by each of the Railways, requisite man power, use of
standard cleaning process and other required resources to sustain the quality of
work. These schemes will ensure improved cleaning of the coaches before start of
journey, enroute attention after certain kms. of travel and also in select trains, regular
attention by professional on board house keeping team.
In order to make adequate assessment of the cleaning quality for sustained
improvement, scheme also incorporates the system of monitoring each of the activity
of cleanliness and hygiene using a score card and a feedback from the passengers.
The score card maintained by the coaching depot will help assess the standard of
the cleanliness and also the passenger satisfaction.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
Though various measures have been initiated to acheve a higher level of
cleanliness in station premises and in trains, remedial measures initiated towards
systematic and effective implementation of these initiatives have not been addressed
in the response. Audit observed that schemes such as 'Pay and Use toilets' and 'Clean
Train Stations' and initiatives such as mechanized cleaning were poorly implemented
in the zones.
Ministry's Comments
Zonal Railways have been instructed to address the issue and take proper
remedial action.

36
In order to improve upon the standards of Cleanliness and Sanitation, mechanized
cleaning of train rakes has been implemented on 41 coaching depots over Indian
Railways. Besides, On Board Housekeeping Services (OBHS) for frequent cleaning
of coach toilets, doorways, aisles and passenger compartments during the run of
the trains has also been so far implemented on 107 train pairs.
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways’  case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I.
Observation and Recommendation-118
The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that Additional General
Manager is the nodal officer at the Zonal level. The Committee strongly recommend
that the Ministry should constitute a Committee to look into the entire gamut of
issues regarding lack of co-ordination and clarity of approach vis-a-vis Cleanliness
and Sanitation amongst various departments of the Railways. The Committee desire
that they be informed about the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure better co-
ordination between the various concerned departments. Regarding the creation of a
new post of Member exclusively for cleanliness and Sanitation, the Ministry have
informed the Committee that this will lead to overlapping/duplication of functions
with the other Board Members which itself will defeat the very purpose for which
the post is created. The Ministry have also stated that responsibility of cleanliness
has been appropriately distributed among Board Members and they are looking after
their respective areas of cleanliness with utmost focus and control over the
department under them. This does not address the anomalies that allocation of
multiple and varied tasked to specialized functionaries resulted in diffused focus on
maintaining cleanliness on railway stations. Owing to wide spectrum of responsibilities
assigned to Station Master/Manager etc., cleanliness was viewed as a very low
priority area. Since the responsibility of maintenance of cleanliness even within the
station premises rested with different departments various areas were left unattended
due to lack of effective co-ordination. The Committee have taken a very serious view
of the matter and desire that an independent authority at the apex level solely
responsible for cleanliness and sanitation on Indian Railways should be created under
intimation to the Committee to oversee and co-ordinate such efforts amongst various
departments of Indian Railways. This will facilitate a focused approach in policy
making and development of a comprehensive action plan at the apex level including
budgetary considerations for a subhead specifically assigned for Cleanliness and

37
Sanitation activities. In view of this, the committee very strongly reiterate that the
Ministry must strengthen co-ordination efforts and put in place an institutionalized
mechanism at the Apex level at the earliest but definitely by the time of furnishing
ACTION TAKEN replies to the recommendations contained in this report dedicated
towards Celeanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways to establish a clear cut
administrative control in this respect. If required, the function of medical department
may be placed directly under this apex body.
[Sl.No. 3 Appendix..............., Para No. 118 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Presently, there is no proposal to have an apex body exclusively for cleanliness
as functional members are looking after this area of concern. It is also not correct to
say that very low priority has been accorded to this activity. All the levels, including
the DRM, AGM, GM and Board are fully involved in making improvements in this
area.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I.
Observation and Recommendation-124
The Committee understand that the number of coaches in long distance as well
as short distance trains have also increased with increased quantum of passenger
traffic. Contrary to this the Committee find that number of water-taps at the platform
are not enough to realistically cater to the demand of the increased quantum of
passengers. At times, especially during the summer months, long queues are seen at
the taps. Frightening situation is also observed if the stoppage time of the train is of
very short duration. In view of this, the Committee feel that this situation can be
easily solved by increasing the number of taps of potable water at all the stations.
By doing so lesser number of passengers will accumulate on one tap at a given point
of time which will check the spilling of water around the tap and will also help in the
cleanliness of surrounding area of the tap. Possibility should also be explored if
modernized taps such as push button taps as seen at the airports can be introduced
not only to maintain the cleanliness standards but also to check littering in terms of
discarded water bottles. The Committee, therefore, desire that the number of taps be
increased expeditiously in phased manner at all stations throughout the country. The
steps initiated in this regard should be intimated to the Committee and they are
confident that the Ministry will take all necessary steps based on their
recommendations to bring about tangible results.
[Sl. No. 9 Appendix.........., Para No. 124 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

38
Action Taken by the Government
Regarding increasing number of water taps at stations, this issue has been
examined along with other passenger amenities at stations by a Committee of Executive
Directors. Revised norms for passenger amenities at stations as per category of
stations have been laid down and necessary instructions issued to all Zonal Railways
for implementation on 17th January, 2007. Further examination/revision at such a short
interval is not called for.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have vetted
the Action Taken Note.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Observation and Recommendation—133
In Committee's view a responsive and effective grievance redressal of
passengers at railway stations and in trains with respect to cleanliness and sanitation
is of extreme importance in order to restore faith of the traveling passengers on
the systems in place in the Indian Railways. Responding to a question about the
mechanism evolved by the Ministry in this regard the Ministry informed the
Committee that there is a laid down system of registration of complaints including
cleanliness, by passengers. At all the stations a complaint cum suggestion book is
maintained with the station manager/station superintendent. In trains, guards of
passenger and Mail/Express trains carry such complaint books. In addition, the
Manager of the pantry car is also required to make the complaint book available to
passengers on demand. The Complaints/suggestions given by the travelling public
are duly acknowledged at the time of registration. The Committee are not happy
with the reply of the Ministry. The Committee recommend that the Ministry must
strengthen the existing mechanism of grievance redressal. The designated officer
meant for the purpose should be easily approachable to the travelling passengers.
The Ministry should further ensure that this system is modernized with the effective
usage of technology. There should be an automatic system of complaint
registration and a time limit should be prescribed for the redressal of these
complaints. The Committee strongly recommend the setting up of a call centre
especially for the purpose. This facility can also be utilized for voicing and
registering security concerns of the travelling passengers. A team of officials should
be allocated this task and they should be allocated this function on the running
trains. While selecting the team, the Ministry must keep in mind that it displays
readiness and cheerfulness in sorting out the problems of those in distress.
Moreover contact numbers of the concerned officials should be prominently
displayed within the coaches to reassure the passengers on the subject.
[Sl. No. 18 Appendix.........., Para No. 133 of 83rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Indian Railways function as a public utility service. In view of the enormity of
operations and interface with a large number of passengers every day, grievances

39
do occur and efforts are undertaken for their redressal and to find ways to eliminate
causes for such complaints. Indian Railways has a well knit Public Grievances
Redressal Machinery which takes prompt action on grievances/complaints registered
by the travelling public.
At the Railway Board's level, Executive Director (Public Grievances) is the Public
Grievances Redressal Officer. At the Zonal Railway's level, the Additional General
Managers function as the Directors of Public Grievances and coordinate the work of
redressal of public compliants. At Divisional level, Additional Divisional Railway
Managers have been nominate as Public Grievances Redressal Officers. They hold
periodical meetings with the concerned officers/Station Managers in this regard. At
the stations, the Station Managers are personally responsible for the public
grievances. Suggestion Boxes/Public Grievance Booths/May I help you Booths have
been kept at important stations. Complaint and suggestion boxes are also available
at key places like Stations/Refreshment Rooms/Reservation Offices and with the Train
Superintendent/Guards of trains.
Audit vide U.O. No. 153/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 15.9.2009 have observed
the following:—
The response only elaborates the existing system of responsibility/accountability
at various levels for redressal of grievances. The issues of easy accessibility and
complaint/suggestion books, promoting awareness amongst users have not been
addressed. The survey conducted as a part of Audit indicated a low awareness level
amongst users.
Ministry's Comments
Comments/suggestion boxes in properly latched/locked conditions have been
provided in all important trains over and above the complaint/suggestion books
already available at important stations and trains. In trains these boxes are available
with the Guard SLR. The process of providing these boxes in the pantry cars of
trains is under progress. It has also been instructed to screen these complaints/
suggestions at divisional level and bring the same to the GMs knowledge for taking
appropriate remedial action.
Railways have been advised to give wide publicity to the existence of these
complaint/suggestion boxes also through Public Address System and publicity
campaigns.
Audit vide U.O. No. 168/RA-II/8-3/2006/(MIP) dated 20.10.2009 have observed
the following:—
The replies of the Ministry of Railways may be taken as vetted by Audit.
However, since these instructions need to ultimately translate into improvements on
the ground, the actual condition obtaining on the ground would be assessed
subsequently in future and the PAC suitably apprised.
(Ministry of Railways' case No. 2009-BC-PAC/XIV/83 dated 30-10-2009.)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
40

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 26TH APRIL, 2010
The Committee sat on Monday, the 26th April, 2010 from 1530 hrs to 1650 hrs. in
Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Satpal Maharaj
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Yashwant Sinha
9. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
11. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Rekha Gupta, — Dy. CAG Central (RC)
2. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
3. Ms. Usha Sankar — Director General (Autonomous Bodies)
4. Shri Gautham Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence
Services)
5. Shri P .K. Kataria — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central
(RC)
6. Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central
(Economic & Services Ministries)
41

42
7. Shri R.G . Viswanathan — Pr. Director of Audit, (Scientific
Departments)
  8. Shri C.M. Sane — Pr. Director of Audit (Air Force &
Navy)
  9. Shri H.K. Dharmadhekari — Pr. Director (State Report Audit)
10. Shri Rajvir Singh — Accountant General (Audit) Delhi
11. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Pr. Director of Audit. (Railways)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members of the Committee
and the Audit Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then apprised
the Committee that out of the eleven Draft Reports slated for consideration, eight
have been finalized by Sub-Committee V . Thereafter, the Committee took up the
following Draft Reports for consideration and adoption:
(i) Draft Report on " Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected Audit Paragraphs”
(Ministry of Finance-Department of Expenditure);
(ii) Draft Report on "Functioning of A.D.G .E.S. Radar, Procurement of Special
Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment and Delay in Execution/Renewal
of lease" (Ministry of Defence) based on Chapter 1 of C&AG Report
No. PA 5 of 2008 (Air Force and Navy), Para No. 3.1 of C&AG Report No.
CA 4 of 2008 (Army) and Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 4 of 2007 (Army)
respectively;
(iii) Draft Report on "Revenue loss due to delay in levy of Toll Fees" (Ministry
of Road Transport and Highways) based on Chapter XIV of C&AG Report
No. CA 2 of 2007;
(iv) Draft Report on "Administration of Universal Service Obligation (USO)
FUND" (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology-
Department of Telecommunications) based on Chapter 1 of C&AG Report
No. PA 1 of 2008;
(v) Draft Report on "Loss of Revenue due to Short Levy of Tax, Incorrect
Classification of Excisable Goods and Non-fulfillment of Export Obligation"
(Ministry of Finance-Department of Revenue) based on Para No. 3.24.4 of
C&AG Report No. 8 of 2007 (Direct Taxes), Para No. 2.2.1 of C&AG Report
No. CA 7 of 2008 (Central Excise) & Para No. 7.1 of C&AG Report No. 10 of
1998 (Customs) respectively;
(vi) Draft Report on "Disaster Management and Land Management in Indian
Railways" (Ministry of Railways) based on Chapter I and Chapter II
respectively of C&AG Report No. 8 of 2008;
(vii) Draft Report on "Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger Reserves"
(Ministry of Environment and Forests) based on C&AG Report No. 18 of
2006;

43
(viii) Draft Report on "Procurement of Stores and Inventory Control"
(Department of Space) based on Chapter II of C&AG Report No. PA 2 of
2008;
(ix) Draft Report on "Freight and Wagon Management on Indian Railways"
(Ministry of Railways) based on Chapter I of C&AG Report No. 6 of 2007
(Railway-Performance Audit);
(x) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Development of Land by Delhi Development
Authority" (Ministry of Urban Development); and
(xi) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty-third Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways"
(Ministry of Railways).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports with some modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports
in light of the suggestions made by the Members and the consequential changes
arising out of the factual verfication by the Audit and present the same to Parliament.
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active
participation in the Committee's deliberations. He also thanked the PAC Secretariat
and the Audit Officers for the assistance rendered to the Committee in the examination
of the subject and finalization of the Reports.
5. The Members of the Committee thanked the Chairman for his guidance in the
smooth conduct of the meetings of the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of  Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT ON  THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTY -THIRD REPORT
 (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 20
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government;
Paragraph Nos. 4-8, 10-16, 19 and 20 Total: 14
Percentage: 70%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 2, 17 Total: 2
Percentage: 10%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 1,3,9 and 18 Total: 4
Percentage: 20%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
-Nil-
GMGIPMRND—2518LS(S4)—18.08.2010.
44