91
ADARSH CO-OPERATIVE HOUSING
SOCIETY, MUMBAI
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE 2013-2014
NINETY-FIRST REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

NINETY-FIRST REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-2014)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ADARSH CO-OPERATIVE
HOUSING SOCIETY ,
MUMBAI
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 9 December, 2013
Laid  in Rajya Sabha on 9 December, 2013
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)

PAC  No. 2018
Price:  ` 143.00
© 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2013-14)  . . . . . . . . . . . . ( iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . (vii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (ix)
REPORT
PART  I
I. Introductory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
II. Denial of Records to Audit  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
III. Genesis  of  the  Land  Sought by ACHS and its Physical Survey and
 Inspection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
IV . Possession of the Land by Army  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
V. Issue of  NOC  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
VI. Khukri Eco Park  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
VII. Objectives of  the Society  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
VIII. Membership of  the Society and its Expansion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
IX. Concessions Granted by the Government of  Maharashtra  . . . . . . . . 19
X. Modification of  t he MMRDA  Development  Plan  for  the  Area  to
 Accommodate the Society  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
XI. Grant of Additional Floor Space Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
XII. Further  Relaxation  to  Grant  Additional  FSI in  lieu  of  Recreation
Ground  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
XIII. Raising the Height of  the Building Beyond Approval  . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
XIV . Relaxation of  Eligibility Conditions in Favour of the Members  . . . . . 26
XV . Environmental Clearance under Coastal Regulation Zone Notification  . . . . 28
XVI. Status  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 1

PART  II
Observations and Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
ANNEXURES
I. Chronology of Events  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
II. List of 102 Members of  the Society on V arious Dates  . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
III. Copy  of  the  D.O.  Letter  from  Additional Chief  Secretary (Revenue),
Government of  Maharashtra  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the  Ninth Sitting  of  the  Public  Accounts  Committee
(2011-12) held on 10.10.2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
II. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2013-14)  held on 17.10.2013  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-2014)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi   —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambidurai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
‡18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
§20. Dr. V. Maitreyan
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Smt. Ambika Soni
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh —  Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
† Elected w.e.f. 14th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija V yas appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban
Development & Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
‡ Elected w.e.f.  3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his
retirement as a Member of Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
§ Elected w.e.f.  3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister
of State for Commerce and Industry  w.e.f.  17th June, 2013.
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi   —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
**11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
††13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh —  Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
** Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012  vice  Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
†† Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(v)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi   —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh —  Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar —  Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice  Smt. Jayanti Natarajan
appointed Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
(vii)
*21.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2013-14), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Ninety-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Adarsh
Co-operative Housing Society, Mumbai’ based on C&AG Report No. 11 of 2011-12,
Union Government (Defence Services) relating to the Ministry of Defence.
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 9th August, 2011.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence and Ministry of Environment & Forests on the subject at their sitting held on
10th October, 2011. The Government of Maharashtra through Ministry of Defence
took the plea that a Commission of Enquiry had been ordered to look into the matter
including the title of the land allotted to Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society. The
CBI was handed over the matter for thorough investigation including allegations of
Benami Transaction/Benami holding of flats in the Adarsh Society. The order of
Ministry of Environment and Forests to demolish the land is rendered sub-judice with
the ACHS challenging the order in the High Court of Bombay. The Committee considered
and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 17th October, 2013. Minutes of the
Sittings form Appendices I & II of  the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Environment & Forests for tendering
evidence before them and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in
connection with the examination of the subject.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI ; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
04 November, 2013 Chairman,
13 Kartika, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

REPORT
PART  I
I. INTRODUCTORY
As per the agreement in 1958, between the Ministry of Defence (MoD) and the
then Government of Bombay, 41 Acres and 8 Guntas of Defence Land from Santacruz
Rifle Range was transferred to the Government of Bombay for construction of Western
Express Highway, on the condition that the State Government in lieu shall give land, in
Block VI, Colaba, Bombay, failing which the State Government shall pay the market
value of the land. A piece of land measuring approx. 3837.57 sq. meters in Block VI,
Colaba was part of the land which was under consideration for exchange with the State
Government in lieu of the aforesaid Santacruz land. This piece of land (which was later
transferred by the State Government to the Adarsh Cooperative Housing Society) had
been under occupation of the Army. The land in Block VI, Colaba was not transferred
in favour of MoD. The claim for payment in lieu of Defence Land already transferred
to the State Government was also not finalized.
2. The old records indicated that some Defence properties were constructed way
back in 1940-41. A wall was constructed by Military Engineering Service (MES) around
the plot. This plot of land had been converted into “Kukri Park” and was inaugurated
by Maj. General B.A. Cariappa, General Officer Commanding (GOC), Mumbai Area on
27.10.1996.
3. In February 2000, Shri Ramchandra Sonelal Thakur, a serving Sub-Divisional
Officer in the Defence Estates Office (DEO), Mumbai in his capacity as Chief Promoter
of Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society had addressed a letter to the then Chief
Minister of Maharashtra for allotment of 38542 square metres of land in Block No. VI of
Back Bay Reclamation Scheme (BBR), Colaba, Mumbai for construction of residential
building for the welfare of serving and retired personnel of Defence Services. It was
found that the Chief Minister had recorded on the letter on 19 February, 2000 as:—
“Pr. Sec. (Rev.) Pl. call for the proposal and put up. Sd.”.
4. Audit undertook a review of the performance of the Defence Estates
Management during the period from June 2009 to September 2010. It was during the
course of this audit, the case of issue of ‘No Objection Certificate’ (NOC) in favour of
Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society was noticed. The Audit scrutiny of management
of Defence land indicated dismal performance on all aspects of land management.
Apart from poor record keeping, lack of mutation of the land already in possession of
the Armed Forces contributed to the mismanagement of Defence land. Many cases
were noticed, where, though the land was in possession of the Armed Forces for long,
adequate efforts had not been made to get such land mutated in favour of the Ministry
of  Defence. There was rampant encroachment on Defence land. Multiplicity of agencies

2
managing Defence land had further contributed to the mismanagement. The lines of
responsibility and consequently of accountability were blurred and on many aspects
of land management, no agency accepted responsibility. Audit had further pointed out
that questionable decisions were taken by various Departments and Agencies of the
Government of Maharashtra. Thus, Audit had expanded its examination to cover the
concerned Departments and Agencies of the Government of Maharashtra dealing with
the issue. In most cases it was found that decisions that were taken resulted in undue
favour to the Society. Many of the officials who were involved in such decisions were
direct beneficiaries. Either they or their relations already were or later became members
of the Society.
5. Audit pointed out that the stand taken by the Local Military Authorities
(LMA) was contrary to the facts, thereby allowing the select few—the members of the
Society—to get the piece of prime land which was in possession of the Army for
decades though it was not formally transferred and mutated to the Ministry of Defence.
It allowed in October 2004 the transfer of the plot of land measuring 3824.43 square
metres in Colaba, to the Society for ` 10.19 crore in the name of welfare of servicemen,
ex-servicemen and their widows.
6. Audit further found that in various correspondence from the Society, the
Defence Authorities and Government of Maharashtra at different points of time had
stated that the prime reason for allotment of the land was for welfare of service personnel
and ex-servicemen. The grounds used for seeking relaxations in favour of the Society
at different points of time were “Girls’’ hostel for wards of army officers posted in far
flung areas”, “welfare of Kargil war heroes”, “welfare of widows of servicemen”, “welfare
of soldiers who have served their motherland”.
7. The chronology of the events (Annexure – I) indicates the alacrity with which
the varied requests of the Society were attended to. It also illustrates how permissions
were sought, and granted, on grounds which did not stand to public scrutiny. It was
also indicative of how vague clearances, susceptible to multiple interpretations, were
provided so as to facilitate the rather dubious intentions of the members and promoters
of the Society. The complicity, as was evident from the Audit scrutiny, was from the
organs of the State Government, the Armed forces, the Central Government as well as
Local Bodies.
8. The Committee selected the Subject with the above backdrop for detailed
examination and report. In the process, the Committee obtained background notes and
written replies from the Ministries of Defence and Environment and Forests. The
Committee took oral evidence of the Ministries and obtained post-evidence clarifications
too. Despite several requests/reminders, the State Government of Maharashtra did not
come out with their responses to the questionnaire sent to them. Based on the written
and oral submissions, the Committee examined the subject in detail as discussed in the
succeeding paragraphs.
II. DENIAL OF RECORDS TO AUDIT
9. Audit sought to examine records relating to the case in April-May 2010.
However, the related records were denied to them by the Headquarters Maharashtra,

3
Gujarat and Goa Area, Mumbai (HQ MG&G) and Headquarters Southern Command,
Pune. Subsequently, access to the records at HQ MG&G Area was given during
September - October 2010.
10. When the Committee sought to know the reasons for Audit not being given
access to the records at HQ MG&G Area, Mumbai in April-May, 2010, the Army Head
Quarter (AHQ) submitted as under:—
“Access was not denied to the audit authorities for records related to NOC in
favour of Adarsh Housing Society, Mumbai. The requirement of audit related to
Adarsh, Sukna and Agra was received by QMG Branch vide Dir. Gen. Audit,
Defence Service DO letter No. 56/ECPA/012009-10/PA-DLM dated 07 June 2010.
The audit authorities were requested by QMG Branch vide DO letter No.
B/89915/Audit Obj/Plg(Lands) dated 30 June 2010 to intimate dates and stations
so as to enable it to coordinate the same with the concerned Military Authorities.
The visits were coordinated where intimation was received. The Audit for NOC
at Sukna was carried out on 10 Aug. 2010 in Eastern Command and for Adarsh
Housing Society between 14 Sep. to 14 Oct. 2010 at Station HQ Mumbai with
necessary cooperation and assistance by Local Military Authority (LMA).
MG-IC-Adm., HQ Southern Command was nominated as the nodal officer to
facilitate the further requirements of Audit for Adarsh Society.
Audit Authorities were not denied any access to any records. However it may be
appreciated that Army being hierarchical organisation, the visits/inspection by
outside Government agencies are coordinated at appropriate level.”
III. GENESIS OF THE LAND SOUGHT BY ACHS AND ITS PHYSICAL SURVEY
AND INSPECTION
11. Detailing the genesis of the land that was sought by ACHS, the MoD informed
the Committee as under:—
“Sometime between 1997 and 1999, Shri R.C. Thakur, SDO, Defence Estates
Office (DEO), Mumbai Circle floated the said Society (ACHS). He took up for
allotment of land with the Government of Maharashtra in 2000. Site inspection
by Collector, Mumbai City indicated that the land was enclosed by a boundary
wall constructed by the Military Department.”
12. The Ministry of Defence also submitted that:—
“On 29.03.2000, Collector Mumbai had written to the GOC, Hqrs., Maharashtra &
Gujarat (M&G) Area Colaba, Mumbai regarding the proposal of the ACHS. The
Collector had requested to confirm whether there was any objection to allot the
said piece of land to the proposed society of the service personnel by the
Government of Maharashtra. The GOC, Hqrs. Maharashtra, Gujarat & Goa
(MG&G) Area in turn asked the DEO, Mumbai circle on 30.3.2000 to confirm the
status of the said land. The DEO, Mumbai Circle on 30.3.2000 informed the GOC,
Hqs., MG&G Area that the said land forms part of Block VI of Colaba Division
(Back Bay Reclamation Scheme) which belongs to the Government of
Maharashtra and falls outside the Defence Boundary. On 05.04.2000, HQ M&G

4
Area informed the Collector that the land fell outside the Defence boundary and
necessary action as deemed fit may be taken for the welfare of Service regarding
allotment of the plot of land. On 16.6.2003, DEO wrote a letter to the District
Collector, Mumbai conveying certain facts including security concerns against
the proposal to allot land for at Block VI/VII in Colaba adjacent to the Army POL
Depot. The DEO, Mumbai further wrote to HQ, MG&G Area vide his letter dated
14.07.2003 to withdraw the No Objection Certificate (NOC) issued by them to the
State Government.”
13. The Committee sought to know if any physical survey/inspection was carried
out by the DEO, Mumbai and HQs Maharashtra and Gujarat Area in respect of the land
sought by ACHS before certifying that the land was outside the Defence boundary.
In reply, it was stated as under:—
“The said piece of land was under the possession of Army/HQ MG&G Area
Mumbai before certifying that the land fell outside Defence boundary and hence
it is assumed that they were well aware of this fact and as such there was no
requirement of carrying out any physical survey/inspection of land.”
IV. POSSESSION OF THE LAND BY ARMY
14. According to Audit, facts of the case as gathered from various
correspondence available in Government of Maharashtra as also from records of DEO,
Mumbai had proved that the land was in possession of Army, a fact that the officials of
Government of Maharashtra, HQ M&G area and Defence Estates Office had not taken
cognizance of at the time of issuing NOC. Audit also found that the title to the land was
never formally transferred to the Ministry of Defence (MoD).
15. With regard to the above, the Committee sought the views of the MoD and
they stated as under:—
“Title of the Adarsh land
(i) According to Section 172 of the Government of India Act, 1935, with
effect from 01 Apr. 1937, all Government lands in a province which
were at the time under use for the purposes of the Federal Government
or lands and buildings formerly used for Federal purposes or intended
to be used for the Federal purposes shall vest in His Majesty for the
purposes of the Federal Government. Thus if the ‘Adarsh Land’ existed
prior to 01 Apr. 1937, its title would vest in MoD. As per Governor
General Order (GGO) dated 25th August 1821 the whole Island of
Colaba was declared to be a Military Cantonment (Appx. ‘A’).
(ii) As per 1897 Map of the Island of Bombay (Appx. ‘B’),Colaba Road or
today’s Nana Bhai Moos Road running from North to South is visible.
To the West of this road there is another smaller parallel road which
appears to be Duxbury Lane. To the West of this road there is a strip of
land towards the sea and to the West of this strip of land is considerable
portion of rocky outcrop extending into the sea. Adarsh Land was part

5
of this rocky outcrop. After Independence, no land reclamations took
place in Block VI, Colaba on which Adarsh land is situated, except for
BEST which reclaimed land for its depot.
(iii) Land in Block V III was sold to the Military consequent to arbitration
between the Government of Bombay and the Government of India vide
‘The Bombay Government Gazette’ dated 19 June 1930. Block VII was
leased to the Military and later sold to it in 1957. After lease of Block VII
land, the entire island of Colaba including the now reclaimed land which
also included the subject land of Adarsh was military land. The Block
Boundaries were drawn subsequent to reclamation as straight lines
(Appx.’C’). Adjoining the ‘Adarsh Land’, the ‘SHO Complex land’ has
military buildings constructed in 1941 and has been in possession of
the Army much before that. The record of construction of these buildings
exists with Military Engineering Services(MES) and is attached as
(Appx. ‘F’). This proves that Adarsh land also existed well before 1941.
(iv) Boundary Pillars in this area have been checked on ground and
photographed. (Appx. ‘D’). The location of Boundary Pillars has been
roughly marked on Google Image (Appx. ‘E’), which indicates that the
subject land along with the adjoining SHO Complex land which has
buildings constructed in1941, is with the Defence.”
16. With regard to their claim on the land under the possession of the Army, the
MoD submitted as under:—
“The subject land has been under the possession of the Army is borne out by
the following:—
(a) A boundary wall existed around the land which was constructed by the
MES. However MES has no record of construction available with them
now.
(b) A letter from Collector Mumbai dated 30 Dec. 1983 stated that the subject
land was required for the widening of the Cuffe Parade Road, however, it
was fenced with barbed wire and in possession of Defence. (Appx. ‘G’).
In reply, vide letter dated 13 Jan. 1984, Station HQ stated that the subject
land was in possession of Defence since long and was Defence Land.
(Appx. ‘H’).
(c) A letter pertaining to allotment of subject land to City Sainik Welfare Board,
dated 12 Dec. 1989 Collector Mumbai stated ‘it has been decided to refer
this matter to the Revenue and Forest Department as the land is in
possession of the Military Department since 1940 and Military area/
jurisdiction begins from this demanded land’. The Collector Mumbai has
himself admitted that the subject land is in possession of the Army since
1940. (Appx. ‘I’). Minutes of the meeting convened by Chief Secretary on
22 Dec. 1989 stated ‘it was clarified that the said land belongs to the State
Government but is in physical possession of Military authorities since
1942’. (Appx. ‘J’). Both these documents of the State Government show

6
that the subject land existed in early 1940s and was in physical possession
of the Military.
(d) It was inaugurated as ‘Eco Park’ by Maj. Gen. B.A. Cariappa in 1996. It was
called ‘Khukri Park’. Photos of Khukri Park taken in 1996 indicate that the
trees on land are at least 25 to 30 years old. It was maintained by the Garrison
Battalions.
(e) Adarsh Society wrote to Chief Minister on 21 Sep. 1999, to Revenue Minister
on 13 Jan. 2000 and again on 07 Feb. 2000 to the Chief Minister for allotment
of the present land. ( Appx. K, L and M  respectively). In all these letters
Adarsh Society repeatedly assert that the land is fully fenced with a
compound wall and is in physical possession of Local Military Authority
(LMA). In yet another letter dated 02 June 2000, addressed to the Chief
Minister the Adarsh Society states that ‘this piece of land’ is already with
Army for the last 25-30 years (Appx. N).
(f) The Revenue Deptt. allotment letter dated 18 Jan. 2003 addressed to Adarsh
Coop. Housing Society (Appx. O) and even No. dated 09 July 2004 addressed
to Collector Mumbai (Appx. P) state that the land is under possession of the
Army.”
17. Regarding the ‘Title of the land’ not being vested with the State Government,
the MoD made the following submission:—
“In mid 1980s, there was a proposal to allot the subject land to Bombay City
Sainik Welfare Office for construction of Rest House for ex-servicemen.
Collector’s office vide letter dated 21 Nov. 1986, enquired from the Deputy
Engineer, South Sub-Division about the ownership of the land. In reply vide his
letter dated 21 Nov. 1986 he informed that information about the ownership of
subject land was not readily available with his office. (Appx. ‘Q’) Supdt. City
Survey and Land Record, also confirmed vide letter dated 11 Dec. 1986 that
there was no information available regarding the ownership of the subject land.
(Appx. ‘R’).
(ii) A letter by Minister of State for General Administration, Law, Judiciary
and Tourism, Govt. of Maharashtra dated 13 Oct. 1988 addressed to
Commander Mumbai Sub Area(MSA) states that the subject land
was military land. The letter by the Minister and reply by Station
Commander are at Appx. ‘S’ and ‘T’ respectively. The letters mentioned
at Para (v)(e) above i.e. Appx. ‘K’ to ‘N’ state that Adarsh had
negotiated with the Local Military Authority, who had given them
‘Go Ahead’ for the project. There was no need for State Govt. to
negotiate with LMA for their own land.
(iii) Collector Mumbai sought NOC from Army in Mar. 2000 (Appx. ‘U’)
which indicates that this was not State Govt. land.
(iv) All State Govt. lands have Survey No.; however the subject land had
no Survey No.. The Revenue Deptt. allotment letter No. dated
18 Jan. 2003 addressed to Adarsh Co-op. Housing Society (Appx. ‘O’)

7
and dated 09 July, 2004 addressed to Collector Mumbai (Appx. ‘P’)
refers to a land measuring about 3758.82 sq. mtrs. near plot No. 87C in
BBR Block 6. It does not give any Survey Number.
(v) The survey Register for the Town and Island of Bombay (Property
Card) and Collector of Mumbai letter dated 09 June, 2009 addressed to
Capt. A. Batra clearly indicate that the subject land was not in the
records of the State Government till 07 July, 2004 when it was shown in
the Revenue records for the first time. Adarsh land was given
CS No. 652 on 22 November, 2004, whereas the land was allotted to
Adarsh Society on 09 July, 2004 and physical possession was handed
over on 04  October, 2004. These facts have come out before the
Commission of Inquiry ordered by the Government of Maharashtra.”
18. Elaborating on this issue, the MoD further stated:—
“The said land has not been mutated in favour of Defence either in Military Land
Records (MLR) or the State Government revenue records as is the case with
other pieces of land including the adjacent SHO complex land in Block VI Colaba.
The land on which Adarsh CHS is located has been in possession of Army since
it was reclaimed between 1917-1929 till it was fraudulently made over to the
Society. Hence it is Defence land as per Government of India Act,1935.
19. During evidence, the Committee sought to know whether the land had been
recorded as State land in the State Government revenue records. In response, MoD
emphatically replied in the negative. The Committee then sought the basis on which
the Defence was claiming that the land belonged to them in the absence of any mention
of the same in the Military land records. In reply, the Secretary, MoD stated :—
“……… if it is not recorded in military land records, that is not a proof that it is not
a Defence land because there are umpteen number of examples where the land,
though transferred to military or Defence, the State Governments have not mutated
in their record as well as it is not entered into our record. So, this is not a conclusive
proof. So, apparently, as far as the possession is concerned, there is no doubt
about it. So, if we are discussing the matter of title, it will be a very legalistic view
which, probably, it is for the Committee to see whether such a legalistic view has to
be taken, whether a title suit is to be decided here because the possession is ours,
and on the basis of the possession we claim ownership also.”
20. On being asked to indicate the legal title holder of the plot of land at Block VI,
Colaba, Mumbai, the MoD replied:—
“As per the details available with Army, it is quite evident, that the documents/CS
No. of Adarsh land were created only after its allotment to Adarsh Society in 2004.
Also the said land was not reclaimed in 1970s by BEST and there was no reclamation
for said land between 1930 and 1970. This only proves that the land existed prior
to 01 April, 1937 and it was in possession of Defence/Army at least since 1941
when SHO Complex buildings were constructed on the adjoining and contiguous
piece of land. Thereafter it is quite evident that the said piece of land (Adarsh) is
Defence land under the provisions of Government of India Act 1937."

8
21. Extending their arguments that Adarsh land was not reclaimed in 1970s by
BEST, the MoD submitted as under :—
“Contrary to the claims by State Government and Adarsh Society, the subject
land was not reclaimed in 1970s or by BEST. This is evident from the following:—
(a) A sketch forwarded by Office of the Executive Engineer Reclamation Project
Division vide letter dated 12 February, 1973 shows the line of filling work
was to be undertaken. Though not to scale, the sketch clearly shows that
the land occupied by Adarsh Society existed prior to reclamation.
(b) In response to HQ MSA letter dated 16 April, 2010 (Appx. ‘V’) BEST vide
letter dated 30 April, 2010 replied that the land occupied by Adarsh Society
does not belong to the undertaking, therefore question of reclamation of
said land by BEST and demanding said land by Municipal Corporation of
Greater Mumbai (MCGM) for road widening does not arise. (Appx. ‘W’).
In a similar reply to an RTI query by Major S.K. Lamba, BEST stated that
the land allotted to Adarsh Society was not reclaimed by BEST and BEST
has not allotted any land to Adarsh Society. (Appx. ‘X’).
(c) Reclamation of land requires substantial expenditure. State Government
has not been able to produce any record regarding expenditure, contract,
tender, etc. in this regard.
(d) The facts brought out above show that the said land existed in 1940s and
it was not reclaimed in 1970s . Since there have been no reclamations in
Block VI of Back Bay after 1929 till 1973 when BEST reclaimed land for
their Bus Depot, it is clear that the subject land was reclaimed as part of
reclamation scheme of 1917-1929. Thus, in terms of Government of India
Act, 1935, subject land is Defence land.”
22. While apprising the Committee about the facts of the case, the Defence
Secretary deposed as under:—
“As to the issue of land, there is no doubt with us that the land was in possession
of Army. The arrangement was being worked out to exchange this land in lieu of
the land which we had given to the State Government for the Western Express
Highway.”
23. Asked to elaborate on the exchange deal of Santa Cruz land, between the
MoD and the State Government, the Ministry stated as under :—
“As per MoD’s letter dated 31 December, 1958 pertaining to exchange of Santa
Cruz Land, 41 Acres and 8 Guntas of Defence Land from Santra Cruz Rifle Range
was transferred to the Government of Bombay for construction of Western
Express Highway, on the condition that State Government in lieu shall give land,
in Block VI, Colaba, Bombay, failing which the State Government shall pay the
market value of the land. The subject land measuring approx. 3837.57 sq.meters
in Block VI, Colaba was part of the land which was under consideration for

9
exchange with State Government in lieu of the aforesaid Santa Cruz land. This
piece of land (which was later transferred by the State Government to the ACHS)
had been under occupation of the Army. The land in Block VI Colaba was not
transferred in favour of MoD. The claim for payment in lieu of defence land
already transferred to State Government has also not been finalized.”
24. On being asked whether the land was originally Defence land, the Secretary,
MoD submitted as under:—
“It was a reclaimed land and the State Government was expected to transfer this
land formally also to the Ministry of Defence in lieu of the land which we had
given for construction of Western Express Highway.”
25. On being asked if the land that had been given for construction of Western
Express Highway was under full occupational possession of the Army, the Defence
Secretary replied:—
“…… I find from the papers that there was an understanding that this land will
be given in lieu of the land which we had given. But we had full occupation/
possession. A boundary wall was there. A park was also made there which was
formally inaugurated by the local Commander there. So, there is no doubt about
this. That land was in occupation and possession of local military authority.”
26. To a specific query as to how long the Defence had this land in their
occupation, the Defence Secretary deposed as under:—
“We are aware that, at least, since 1980s, it was in our possession.”
He further added:—
“…this was to be given to us in lieu of the land which we had already given.”
27. When asked to state categorically if there was any objection or claim from the
Government of Maharashtra or notice to the Ministry of Defence to vacate the land,
the witness replied in the negative. He added:—
“It appears that there have been obvious irregularities and some serious issues
of concern in this regard including issuing of NOC by the Army alienating the
land in its possession in favour of Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society.”
28. On being asked to say in no uncertain terms as to whether the MoD were the
real owners of the land, the witness deposed:—
“We are the owners and the land was in our possession.”
29. Dwelling on the issue of existence and ownership of the land in Colaba
Block VI, the witness submitted that:—
“the first thing that I would like to submit is that in 1958 when the exchange was
agreed to between the State Government and the Ministry of Defence, it was
categorically mentioned that the exchange land would be in Colaba Block-VI,
Specific land was not identified. But it only said Colaba Block-VI. There was a
logic to identifying that land because it was next to the other areas, which were

10
in the possession of Services.  And, whether the land existed or did not exist, I do
not know. But the agreement did say that it would be in Block-VI, Colaba.”
30. When the Committee wanted to know the reasons for not mutating the land
in the name of MoD, the representative of the Ministry of Defence deposing before the
Committee replied:—
“Insofar as, this particular piece of land is concerned, it is not recorded in our
Military Land Register. However, as Defence Secretary has pointed out,
subsequent to the event of Adarsh Housing Society we have taken a number of
remedial steps. First is the computerization of Defence Land records. All Defence
land records in all the offices have been computerized. Secondly, we have started
a project of survey and demarcation of defence land. Survey work has already
started at many places.”
31. Asked to furnish the reasons for not having the title transferred and mutated
in favour of the MoD when the land under reference was in possession of the Army,
the MoD submitted as under:—
“The Defence Estate Office (DEO) and Local Military Authorities (LMAs) have
taken up the matter of transfer of same acreage of State Government land from
Block VI in Colaba, an area adjacent to the site where defence installations are
already there, to the Ministry of Defence (MoD) in lieu of Defence land
admeasuring 40.376 Acres handed over to the State Government at Santa Cruz
for road widening of Western Express Highway with the State Revenue
Authorities from time to time. However, no land from Block VI was transferred by
the State Government. In fact, the Collector, Mumbai had intimated in 1964 that
land from Block VI could not be transferred. Prima facie , there have been
irregularities and some issues of concern in this regard including issue of ‘NOC’
by the Army to inter-alia alienate the land in its possession, in favour of ACHS.
The Government has entrusted enquiry to CBI with a view to get the matter
thoroughly investigated and fix responsibilities.”
32. The Committee then sought to know if it was not a malafide intention and
design on the part of HQ, MG&G Area/DEO Mumbai, is not taking any action to
mutate the land in favour of MoD which had inturn facilitated its transfer to the
Society. To this, the Ministry reiterating the above facts responded by stating that:—
“…..no land from Block VI was transferred by the State Government. In fact, the
Collector, Mumbai had intimated in 1964 that land from Block VI could not be
transferred. Therefore, there was no request made for mutation and hence no
malafide intention and design on the part of DEO Mumbai in this regard can be
attributed.
Prima facie, there have been irregularities and some issues of concern in this
regard including issue of ‘NOC’ by the Army to inter-alia alienate the land in its
possession, in favour of ACHS. The Government has entrusted enquiry to CBI
with a view to get the matter thoroughly investigated and fix responsibilities.”

11
33. When it was enquired whether the MoD had reached any agreement by way
of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the State Government of Maharashtra
for transfer of the land at Block VI, Colaba in their favour, the DGDE replied as under:—
“ The Government of India, Ministry of Defence letter No.10/25/L/L&C/54 dated
31.12.1958 gives the terms and conditions for transfer of defence land from the
Santa Cruz Rifle Range to the Government of Bombay for construction of the
Western Express Highway and for Slum Clearance Scheme as under:—
(i) That the Government of Bombay would in terms of para 7 of the
official letter No.61-DMC/58 dated 21st May, 1958, from the Defence
Minister to the Chief Minister, Bombay agree in advance to accept
the market value fixed by it.
(ii) In case the proposal for exchange of Bombay Government land in
Block-VI Colaba with the Santa Cruz land materializes, the valuation
of the Colaba land would also be made. Difference between the two
valuations would be paid by the Government concerned.
(iii) In case the proposal mentioned in (ii) above does materialize by the
time Committee has reported on the market value, or soon thereafter,
the Government of Bombay pay to the Government of India the market
value fixed by the Committee.
There is no record to substantiate that Memorandum of Understanding has
been signed between the Ministry of Defence and the State Government for
transfer of land at Block VI, Colaba, Mumbai.”
34. Asked to state in detail the procedure followed in the Ministry for record
keeping, mutation and management of Defence land, the Ministry submitted the
following :—
“The Defence Estates Officers maintain Military Land Registers (MLRs) for
Defence lands situated outside notified cantonments and General Land Register
(GLRs) for defence land situated inside notified cantonments. These registers
contain details about the location, survey/khasra numbers, area, classification
etc., of  Defence land. For land placed under management of Cantonment Boards,
records are maintained by them and the Cantonment Boards maintain general
land Register(GLR) for the purpose. Both these registers have now been fully
computerized.
Mutation of land in favour of Ministry of Defence in State Government records
is carried out by the State Government authorities at the request of Defence
Estates Officers.
Management of Defence lands is generally entrusted to the user agencies like
Army, Navy, Air force, DRDO, etc. The users are responsible for planning, usage,
preventions and removal of encroachments for the land placed under their
management. However, if any land-title related dispute arises, it is defended by
the Directorate General of Defence Estates.”

12
35. On being asked if lack of mutation and poor maintenance of records were the
main reasons for mismanagement of Defence land, the Defence Secretary replied as
follows:—
“…Poor record keeping and lack of mutation of the land already in possession of
the armed forces were among the major reasons that contributed to
mismanagement of Defence land. Impetus has been given to the computerization
of Defence land records. We have taken some remedial steps and some have
already been completed.”
36. When asked whether the computerization was being done for the whole
country or only in Maharashtra, the Defence Secretary submitted:—
“This is done for the whole of the estates. There are two registers. One is
Military Land Register and the other is General Land Register. Those registers
have been computerized. Two more projects have been initiated on physical
verification and demarcation of defence land on ground and digitalization,
microfilming of all land records for their preservation. Mutation of Defence land
in civil revenue records has to be carried out by the State Governments and it
has also been pursued with different State Governments.”
V .  ISSUE OF NOC
37. The Committee’s examination of the subject revealed that the City Survey
and Land Records Branch, Collectorate Bombay City and Bombay Suburban District
had vide letter dated 12th December, 1989 addressed Additional Chief Secretary, Revenue
and Forest Department, Government of Maharashtra regarding the proposal for
construction of Rest House for ex-Servicemen. Excerpts from Collector Bombay’s letter
no. cslr/rev-ii /t-2/misc. 1989-90 /3368 dated 12 December, 1989 are:—
“…The land demanded by the City Sainik Board is Government land between
the Back Bay Bus Depot and Prakash Pethe Marg in BBR Block VI. This land
bears no C.S No. and it is reclaimed land.……The land in question is in possession
of the Military Department since 1940 and Military area/ jurisdiction begins from
this demanded land.”
38. The excerpts of the letter dated 7 February, 2000 from Chief Promoter of the
Society to the Chief Minister states:—
“… Presently this land is duly fenced with a compound wall and in physical
possession of the local military authorities... We have negotiated with the local
military authorities who have expressed their willingness to allow the Society to
go-ahead with the project if certain amount of accommodation is also provided
for Army Welfare i.e. for Girls Hostel, who will be female children of Army Officers
serving in the far flung, remote and field areas.”
39. Further, even the site inspection of the Collector on 27 March, 2000 indicated
that the land was in possession of Army. Records revealed that the Collector, Mumbai
City had requested General Officer Commanding (GOC) M&G Area, Mumbai on
29 March, 2000 to confirm that Army had no objection for allotting the said plot to the

13
Chief Promoter of the Society. The Collector’s above said letter revealed that based on
a site inspection on 27 March, 2000 it was found that military department had constructed
the wall to the above plot and hence the Government land was protected from
encroachment.
40. The Collector’s letter was dated 29 March, 2000 and on the very next day the
HQ M&G Area had written to the DEO, Mumbai and HQ Mumbai Sub Area for
confirmation by 01 April, 2000 of the status of land in Plot No.6. Block VI. Further, it was
found that, the DEO too on the same day, i.e. 30 March, 2000 confirmed that the land in
question forming part of Block VI fell outside the Defence Boundary and belonged to
the Government of Maharashtra.
41. Although the said land was in occupation by LMA, the Colonel (Q) signing
the letter for GOC, HQ M&G Area concealed the fact and informed the Collector on
5 April, 2000 that the land “falls outside the Defence Boundary” and exhorted the
Collector to take action as deemed fit for the welfare of Service Personnel/Ex-Servicemen/
their widows.The excerpts from letter of Col(Q) for GOC, HQ M&G Area dated 05 April,
2000 addressed to the Collector, Mumbai City is as under:—
“Subject: Lands—Mumbai City
Please refer to your office letter No. CSLR/ REV/ I/ BBR VI Branch Revenue I
dated 29 March, 2000. The said land falls in Block No. VI of Colaba Division
(Back Bay Reclamation Scheme-VI), which falls outside the Defence Boundary.
Necessary action at your end may be taken as deemed fit for the welfare of
Service personnel/Ex- Servicemen/their widows.”
42. Taking cognizance of all the above cited developments, the Committee desired
to know the basis on which the MoD had issued ‘No Objection Certificate’ for
construction of residential building for a proposed Private Society when the Army was
in physical possession of the land. In reply, the Ministry of Defence stated as under:—
“MoD has not issued any NOC for construction of residential building by a
Private Society as per the available records. The said NOC was issued by LMA
and DEO .’’
43. On being asked to state at which level of authority the decision was taken by
the Army to issue NOC to the Housing Society, it was replied:—
“From the records available on file, it is apparent that the NOC of the Housing
Society was granted at the level of MG&G Area.’’
44. The Committee then sought to know if the issue had been brought to the
notice of higher level functionaries at the Army HQs. In reply, the Ministry stated:—
“The issue was not brought to prior notice of higher level functionaries at Army
HQs for issue of said NOC.’’
45. While examining the witnesses, the Committee asked the Ministry if it was
aware of the purpose, aims and objectives of the Housing Society when they were

14
ready to allot the land to the society. In reply, the representative of the Ministry
submitted:—
“Actually, the NOC was not given by the Ministry. It was given by the local
authority.”
46. The representative of MoD also added:—
“…about the NOC, which was being asked for by the District Collector, the
Defence Estate Department is competent only to say this much that : ‘Yes, in our
records, it is not recorded as the State Government land’. So, whether it is
Maharashtra Government or whether this land should be given to somebody
else or not, is not the purpose of the NOC. The NOC was being asked, as if it is
our possession; may be it is my ownership, we do now know. The reason for
asking the NOC was never explained. It is said that : ‘We need NOC so that we
can give it to somebody else or not’. Our Defence Estate Department has said:
‘This land is not recorded in our name’ That is all.”
47. When the Committee sought to know the action taken on the Officer in the
HQs who had given the NOC citing that the land did not belong to Defence, the
witness submitted that the Defence Estate Officer, who gave the status of land on
30th March had expired.
48. Asked to furnish the name of the DEO who had given the status of land, the
MoD replied that the DEO was Shri M. Guruswami and he had expired on 29.05.2009.
49. On being asked if the nefarious collusion came to an end when the wrongdoers
retired or expired, the representatives of the MoD submitted:—“...there has been
repeated collusion at the local level. It means any subsequent officer who came in
there, they were also offered certain inducements perhaps in terms of flats. So, that is
how this kept on dragging at the local level. It never became a major issue. It became a
major issue only in 2010 when it was suddenly highlighted at the Ministry level through
variety of means. The fact is from the time land was handed over, in the next five to
seven years, there were regular collusions which did not allow the problem to come up
to a bigger level.”
50. To the Committee’s query that the action on the part of Army clearly indicated
that the higher-ups in the Army were in the know of the things that were happening,
the representatives deposed as under:—
“The officers, who were involved at that time, have more or less retired — Army
as well as civilian officers. That is why, this CBI inquiry was ordered and the
MoD is of the view that there is this criminality involved prima facie. So, let this
investigation be complete and action will be taken as per the law.”
51. Asked to spell out the measures taken/proposed to stop recurrence of the
irregularities, the Defence Secretary in his deposition stated:—
“From the point of view of Ministry of Defence, there have been irregularities in
the issue of NOCs and possession of land. On both these counts, guidelines
have been issued as to prevent recurrence of such incidences.”

15
52. When asked to elaborate the penalty provisions in the Army Rules in those
cases where officers had connived in the wrong-doings and retired subsequently, the
Vice Chief of Army Staff (VCOAS) stated:—
“The rules are that even if he is retired and the offence is established, then he
can still be prosecuted against. The old limitation of one or two years, which
used to be there, has been removed wherever there is financial irregularity.
Today, the Army is empowered to take action up to any extent to deal with the six
officers whose names have been enunciated by the CBI. So, the rules very well
enable us to take action, and we will not hesitate to go to any length to prosecute.”
VI.  KHUKRI ECO PARK
53. According to Audit, the site inspection indicated that the land had a boundary
wall put up by the military authorities. On the land in Plot No.6 of Block VI, Army had
created an ‘Ecological Park’ named Khukri Eco Park which was inaugurated in October,
1996 by Major General B.A. Cariappa, the then GOC, M&G Area. This ‘Ecological Park’
was fenced by a boundary wall with a gate constructed by the Military Engineer
Services.
54. When asked to furnish the details of the establishment of the Ecological
Park, the construction of the boundary wall etc. the MoD submitted the following
details:—
“The Eco park was established in 1996 by the Army. The boundary wall was
constructed prior to its inauguration in 1996. The boundary pillars and a fence
were existing prior to construction of boundary wall. The records about the cost
of construction of boundary wall of Eco Park are not available.
As per records available with the Defence Estates Office (DEO), Mumbai the
‘Ecological Park’ was inaugurated on 27 October, 1996. It does not have any
information on the date of construction, cost approval etc. of the boundary wall
and the park.”
55. On being asked about the source of funds for the establishment of the Eco
Park, construction of the boundary wall as well as maintenance of the Park, the Ministry
replied as under:—
“No records are available regarding availability of funds for maintenance of Eco
Park. However, it is quite likely that the maintenance was being carried out from
the Regimental Fund Accounts of Garrison Battalions stationed at Mumbai at
different points of time.
The Defence Estates Office (DEO), Mumbai does not have any information
about expenditure on maintenance of the park.
The Ecological Park was being maintained by LMA. However, no records are
available regarding availability of funds for its maintenance.”
56. The Committee asked whether the existence of the Eco Park and the boundary
wall had been communicated to the State Government, either by the DEO or by the

16
LMA more so when it was apparent at the time of granting NOC to the Society. To this,
the AHQ in response has submitted:—
“As per available records, the matter was not communicated to State Government
by LMA or DEO. It is now apparent that those functionaries responsible for the
said task were the beneficiary and interested party in the case. Their culpability
will be established in due course of law as the matter is being investigated by
CBI and Commission of Inquiry ordered by Government of Maharashtra.”
57. The Committee then desired to know if the Maharashtra Government had, at
any point of time, directly interacted with the DEO on the matter. In reply the DGDE
submitted:—
“The Defence Estates Office(DEO), Mumbai was not asked anything directly by
the State Government hence did not reply to the State Government. In any case
the entire matter has been referred by the Ministry of Defence to the Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for an inquiry.”
VII.  OBJECTIVES OF THE SOCIETY
58. While examining the Subject, the Committee were apprised that the Army
Authorities had given the NOC on the rationale that the Housing Society was meant
for the ‘Welfare of servicemen, ex-servicemen and their widows’. However, later on,
the membership was expanded to accommodate public servants, politicians and their
relatives. When the Committee wanted to know the reasons for not rescinding the
NOC after the change in the membership of the Society was noticed, the DGDE stated:—
“Vide letter No. 250/2/III/14 dated 30.03.2000, DEO, Mumbai issued a letter to
HQrs M&G Area intimating the status of the subject plot of land. Subsequently,
DEO, Mumbai Circle vide another letter dated 16.06.2003 requested the Collector,
Mumbai not to allot the subject land to Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society.
The DEO, Mumbai further wrote to HQ, MG&G Area vide his letter No.BOM/
ADM/CONF/Khukri Park dated 14.07.2003 to withdraw the NOC issued by them
to the State Government.”
59. The DGDE further submitted:—
“The DEO, Mumbai had intimated the factual position about status of the subject
plot of land to the Local Military authorities as per the records available.’’
60. The Committee called for reasons for not withdrawing the NOC even after the
DEO recommended such a measure twice in 2003. In reply, the AHQ submitted:—
“The NOC was not rescinded after change of membership of the society probably
because all the decision making functionaries at HQ MG&G Area, DEO Mumbai
and officers of State Government were beneficiaries. Their exact involvement
and culpability will be established once the investigations are completed.”
61. When asked about the reluctance on the part of the Defence authorities to
press their earlier demand for providing accommodation for the Girls’ Hostel for wards

17
of Army officers posted in far flung areas, welfare of Kargil war heroes, welfare of
widows of servicemen for which the Chief Promoter had initially approached the Chief
Minister for allotment of the land in question, the AHQ has replied as:—
“The Defence Authorities (LMA) did not press their earlier demand for provision
of accommodation for girls hostel because in all probability the decision making
authorities from inception till 2010 were interested parties.”
62. On being asked whether the MoD/LMA had at any point of time insisted that
membership of the Society was to be provided only to those for whom the project was
envisaged to be executed initially, the AHQ replied:—
“There is nothing to suggest that LMA at any point of time insisted that the
membership of the housing society was to be provided to the eligible persons
for whom the project was envisaged.’’
63. Asked to state specifically as to whether there was any conflict of interest
between the LMA and DEO, Mumbai, the Army Head Quarter (AHQ) replied:—
“Prima-facie it appears a clear case of conflict of interest of LMA, DEO Mumbai,
State Government officials and certain other persons as they have placed their
own interest before those of Government Services. Exact culpability will be
established through due process of case once the investigations being
conducted by CBI and Commission of Inquiry ordered by Government of
Maharashtra are facilitated.”
64. When the Committee desired to have the details of the nature of negotiations
between the Chief Promoter of the Society and the LMA, the AHQ responded:—
“There is nothing on record available regarding negotiations conducted by
chief promoter of the society with LMA except the correspondence related to
issue to NOC. However, there may have been verbal/personal communication,
the details of which may come out once the investigations are finalized.”
65. On being asked whether the LMA was aware that the Chief Promoter of the
Society was an employee of the DEO, Mumbai which was against the Service/Conduct
Rules to negotiate the transfer of the Defence land – a Government property which
they were supposed to safeguard, the Army Head Quarter (AHQ) replied:—
“The fact that chief promoter of Adarsh Housing Society was employee of DEO
office would have come to the notice of then LMA i.e. GOC MG&G Area or not,
can only be ascertained from the individual concerned.”
66. Asked to state the action taken/proposed against the officers who colluded
for their personal benefit, by becoming the beneficiaries of the Society, the AHQ in its
reply stated :—
“Stringent actions will be taken against the officers found guilty as per provisions
of law once the investigation is completed.”

18
67. The DGDE supplemented:—
“The matter has been referred by the MoD to the CBI for an inquiry. Further
action will be taken on its completion.”
VIII.  MEMBERSHIP OF THE SOCIETY AND ITS EXPANSION
68. The Adarsh Society was originally formed to help the “Servicemen,
ex-servicemen and their widows”. Its membership was expanded considerably and
questionably to include civilian officers belonging to Indian Administrative Service,
politicians and their relations and other Senior Service Officers. The changing
composition of the list of the members of the Society as on various dates upto the final
list of 102 members is at (Annexure-II).
69. The following table depicts the changing composition of members of the
Society:—
Y ear Defence Other than Defence Total Members
2000 40 0  40
2002 38 33  71
2003 45 50  95
2010 37 65  102
70. The list of the members (Annexure–II) as intimated by the Society to the
Collector, Mumbai City initially on 10 April, 2000 indicated that the Society largely
comprised of members belonging to Defence Services and civilian organisations related
to Defence. Out of the 40 members, then, 30 were serving and retired Service officers,
eight belonged to Defence Estates Organisation, one officer belonged to the Military
Engineer Services (MES) and one was a widow of a retired MES employee. The final
list of 102 members as of 2010 included 37 Defence officers including civilians, 15 retired
Government servants, 8 Members of Parliament or State Legislatures and 42 individuals,
who were mostly relatives of Government officers and politicians.
71. Though letters to the State Government by the Society mentioned welfare
measures like “Girls hostel” and “to reward Kargil heroes”, the membership was
extended from time to time to accommodate more senior officers of Services, State
Government and private individuals.
72. The Committee were informed that the pace with which the case was processed
by HQ M&G Area and the Defence Estates Office was of significance as most of the
initial members were officials from the Local Military Authorities and Defence Estates
Office. The son of the then GOC HQ M&G Area was a member of the Society.
Shri M. Gurusamy, then DEO, Mumbai, who certified that the said land was outside the
Defence area was a member of the Society as per the list of members issued by the said
Society on 23 August, 2002.
73. All Service Officers except one, who held charge as General Officers
Commanding MG&G Area from February, 1998 to July, 2010, became beneficiaries as

19
per the lists of members of the Society given by Collector, Mumbai City. While
Lieutenant A. P. Kumar, a member, was the son of Major General A.R. Kumar, the other
officials were themselves members of the Society. These Officers, and the Defence
Estates Officers, were individually and collectively in their official capacity responsible
for the custody and protection of the said Defence land at different points of time. The
Officers holding the post of the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief Southern
Command from October, 2000 to September, 2001 and from October, 2001 to February,
2004 also became members of the Housing Society.
74. By 2002, Admiral Madhvendra Singh, former Chief of Naval Staff and Lt. Gen.
G.S. Sihota had become members of the Society, apart from many other officers from
Army and Navy. Eventually General N.C. Vij and General Deepak Kapoor, former Chiefs
of Army Staff also became members of the Society.
75. While the membership kept expanding, even junior Service and civilian officers
went out of the Society and many senior Service officers and public servants became
members. Notable among the Service Officers who became members of the Society at
a later date were two former Chiefs of Army Staff, General NC Vij and General Deepak
Kapoor as mentioned above. Both of them were allowed to be members of the Society
as “one time special case” keeping in view their noteworthy Service in Indian Army
and their social status.
76. Audit pointed out that in terms of Collector, Mumbai City letter No. CSLR/
REV-1/ACHS/2011 dated 11.06.2011, General (Retd.) N.C. Vij in his letter dated 30.10.2010
had requested the Honorary Secretary of the Society to communicate the necessary
formalities to enable him to return his flat to the Society. He had also requested that the
returned flat may be allotted to a war widow. But no decision had been taken on the
matter either by the Society or by the Collector’s office.
77. When the Committee called for the list of the members of the ACHS at the
time of Registration of the Society alongwith the details of members and the
subsequent inclusions in the list of members of the Society (including the particulars
of members) till the matter became sub judice, the Ministry vide their communication
dated 18.7.2013 forwarded a copy of the DO letter No. LND 2512/176/C.R.85/J-2
dated nil from Additional Chief Secretary (Revenue), Government of Maharashtra
(Annexure-III).
IX.  CONCESSIONS GRANTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA
78. While examining the issue of ‘Concessions granted by the Government of
Maharashtra’, the Committee wanted to elicit the views of the Maharashtra Government
on the various points that had a bearing on the role and responsibility of the State
Government in the alleged Adarsh Housing Society scam. However, the Government
of Maharashtra refused to submit their responses to the various queries raised by the
Committee on the plea that the enquiry of ACHS, Colaba was entrusted to a Commission
of Inquiry under the Commission of Inquiry Act, 1952. The Commission of Inquiry was
constituted under the Chairmanship of Justice Shri J.A. Patil, Retired High Court Judge
and Shri P. Subrahmanyam, Retired Chief Secretary, Government of Maharashtra. It
was stated that this Commission of Inquiry was constituted vide Notification

20
dated 8.1.2011 and the Commission had started conducting its business from April,
2011. It was also stated that all the concerned departments of the State Government
were directed to submit the original files/papers related to the ACHS before the
Commission of Inquiry and accordingly the related original files/papers were submitted.
It was added that since the matter was before the Commission, it was not possible to
make any comments. Even suggestion of the Committee that the various Departments
would have maintained photocopies before submitting the original files/papers and
copies of those be made available to the Committee, went unheeded. While forwarding
the above reply, the Government of Maharashtra made a suggestion that since the
Ministry of Defence was being represented before the said Commission through their
advocate, the MoD could obtain the affidavits/papers filed by various departments of
the Government of Maharashtra from the Commission through their advocate. However,
when the same was called for in December 2011, the Ministry of Defence failed to
furnish them.
In such a scenario, the Committee examined the issue and drew their conclusions
based on the various findings brought out in the Audit Report and the other material
evidence and documents made available to them by the MoD.
79. Audit scrutiny revealed that almost at every stage, significant concessions
were extended by the Government of Maharashtra in favour of the Society. Many
officers, both civilian and services, who were dealing with the case and were instrumental
in taking those decisions eventually became members of the Society. In some cases,
relatives of these officers became members.
80. The following were the concessions made by the Government of Maharashtra
in respect of the Housing Society:—
(i) Modification of Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development
Authority’s Development Plan for the Area to accommodate the
Society;
(ii) Granting of Additional Floor Space Index;
(iii) Further relaxation to grant additional FSI in lieu of Recreation Ground;
(iv) Allowing height of the building to be raised beyond the approval of
the High Rise Committee; and
(v) Relaxation of eligibility conditions in favour of the members.
X.  MODIFICATION OF THE MMRDA DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR THE AREA TO
ACCOMMODATE THE SOCIETY
81. According to Audit, on 12 May 2000, the Collector, Mumbai City reported to
the Government of Maharashtra, Revenue and Forest Department (RFD) that the land
sought by the Society was reserved for road widening as per Mumbai Metropolitan
Region Development Authority’s (MMRDA) development plan and therefore NOC
from Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) and approval of MMRDA
was to be taken. Further, it was stated that the membership was to be approved by the
Government.

21
82. On 02 June, 2000 the Society addressed another letter to the Minister of
Revenue signed by Shri R. C. Thakur as Chief Promoter and Brigadier (Retd.) MM
Wanchu as Secretary of the Society. The letter referred to a meeting that had taken
place with the Minister on the same day. The Society conveyed in the letter its consent
to accommodate 40 per cent civilian members—19 members against 31 from the Defence
Services as stated in the letter. It stated that they would be willing to leave an area of
10 to 15 feet for further widening of the road, though basically the area falls in the
vicinity of Military area and there appears to be no proposal of widening of road by
Defence Department.
83. The Society in the same letter sought the help of the Minister with the
following reasoning:—
“to accommodate and reward our Heroes of Kargil operation who bravely fought
at Kargil to protect our Motherland.”
84. The Society putforth its request as follows:—
“kindly allot this piece of land which is already in the physical custody of Local
Military Authorities, who have been protecting the land from encroachment
since last 25-30 years.”
85. After calling for objections/suggestions from the public in October 2001, the
Urban Development Department (UDD) approved the modifications to the MMRDA
Development Plan in April 2002 by deleting 60.97 metres wide road leading to South
Colaba Harbour link and changing the width of the Captain Prakash Pethe Marg from
60.97 metres to 18.40 metres and including the deleted area in Residential Zone, Parade
Ground, Helipad, Garden and BEST Depot. Audit observed that the request of the
Bombay City Sainik Welfare Office for allotment of land for construction of a rest
house had been refused in March 1986 and again in December, 1989 by the Collector,
Mumbai City. The Government of Maharashtra had decided against allotment of the
land for genuine welfare of ex-servicemen on the grounds that the land was earmarked
for widening of the very same road. However, later, the Development Plan of the area
was amended and the area reserved for roads was converted into residential area.
XI.  GRANT OF ADDITIONAL FLOOR SPACE INDEX
86. Meanwhile, the membership list of the Society kept on expanding much
beyond the 19 civilian members as earlier agreed, by the Chief Promoter in June, 2000.
On 15 March 2003, the Chief Promoter of the Society had furnished the information
required in the Letter of Intent alongwith a list of 95 members comprising 45 Defence
personnel (including eight Defence Estates Officers and one MES officer) and the
remaining either MLAs/MLCs, or officers of the Government of Maharashtra or their
relations and private persons. In order to accommodate the additional members, the
Society had requested the Urban Development Department (UDD) on 17 March, 2003
for allotment of additional Floor Space Index (FSI) of an adjoining plot of 2669.68 sq.
metres used by BEST as approach road to its depot on payment of reasonable charges.
But, in his letter, the Chief Promoter had termed the use of the land by BEST as
“unauthorized” and also stated that BEST could not use the FSI of this land for

22
expansion of Depot due to CRZ restrictions. The following are the excerpts from the
letter of the Chief Promoter:—
“In view of its unauthorised use by BEST for approach road the said area is not
likely to be used for any Construction/Development activity which will remain
open to sky forever. The BEST cannot use its FSI for expansion of their Depot,
there being restrictions of CRZ in their open plot. We also do not want hindrances
to the BEST for its use as approach road to their depot. While granting the
subject land to our society, the Govt. of Maharashtra has imposed specific
condition that the society will obtain NOC from Department of Environment and
Forest, Govt. of India, since it falls in CRZ-II Zone.”
87. Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani, MLC and a member of the Society also addressed
a letter on 21 March, 2003 to the Chief Minister of Maharashtra enclosing the letter of
the Society and requesting to “adopt a supporting and positive approach to their
request”. He had mentioned in the letter that the Society was “mainly of persons from
the Armed Forces (Army, Air Force, Navy and other Service), who have dedicated their
lives to the safety of our Motherland”. By that time, however, a majority of the members
inducted were civilians.
88. The request for transfer of developmental rights was rejected by the Chief
Minister in November 2003 and Shri Gidwani was informed of the same by Shri Sunil
Tatkare, Minister of State for Urban Development in his letter dated 6 January, 2004.
89. However, the Society had again addressed letters to the Chief Minister and
the Minister of State for Urban Development on 12 July, 2004 requesting allotment of
additional FSI to accommodate the members as per the entitlement. Reiterating its
request for allotment of the FSI of the adjacent land used by BEST as approach road to
the Back Bay Depot, the Society pointed out in its letter that while the proposed action
would benefit BEST as they would continue to use the land as approach road since the
Society had undertaken to keep the land “open and free from any construction”, “at
the same time,” the letter mentioned that “it will benefit some of our members, who are
mostly from the Armed Forces and are serving the Mother Land”.
90. The Minister of State for Urban Development had convened a meeting on
14 July, 2004 for considering the proposal of the Society for allotment of additional FSI.
In the said meeting the Commissioner MMRDA, the Collector Mumbai City,
Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani, Member of the Legislative Council (MLC), Shri Ramanand
Tiwari, Principal Secretary, UDD and the representatives of BEST were present.
Shri Gidwani informed that the Government of Maharashtra had allotted 3758.82 square
metres of land for construction of residential building and as per the directives,
71 members were to be accommodated. Since the FSI was not sufficient, Shri Gidwani
indicated the requirement of additional FSI of adjoining land being used by BEST.
Shri Ramanand Tiwari, Principal Secretary, UDD informed that as the land was reserved
for BEST Depot and was in use as an access to the BEST bus depot, it would not be
feasible to allot the FSI of this reserved land to the Society. He further stated that “in
order to sort out the issue”, the Society would have to approach the Government of
Maharashtra for allotment of the said land by deleting reservation of BEST bus depot
by following the due process of law, which would take at least six months.

23
91. Subsequently, in October, 2004, the UDD called for the specific comments of
BEST to consider the request of the Society for grant of additional FSI. In a meeting
held on 15 December, 2004 at the official residence of Shri Rajesh Tope, Minister of
State (UD) in Nagpur in which S/Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani and RC Thakur were present,
the Assistant General Manager (Civil) of BEST informed that it would not grant NOC
for de-reservation of land as suggested by Shri Ramanand Tiwari, Principal Secretary
UDD in the earlier meeting. He further informed that if the Government of Maharashtra
decided to transfer FSI of this plot to the Society with certain conditions, BEST would
examine the proposal as and when received.
92. In the subsequent meeting convened by the Minister on 05 January, 2005,
Shri Ramanand Tiwari, Principal Secretary (UDD), informed that the land belonged to
the State Government and that BEST would be required to pay the cost of land at the
then market rate if allotted to them. The Minister of State directed BEST to send their
comments to UDD.
93. In response, BEST informed UDD on 12 January, 2005 that it was using the
land as an access to Back Bay Depot since 1976 though the land was not in the
possession of BEST and that the Government may decide on the request of Society.
However, while allowing use of land as per the Society’s request, BEST’s interest
should be fully protected by maintaining the status quo with regard to the access.
Accordingly, the Revenue and Forest Department allowed the additional FSI of the
adjoining land of BEST to the Society on 05 August 2005. While BEST was asked to
pay the cost of the land at the market rate, the Society had paid only ` 6.14 crore.
94. Audit further pointed out the fact that the proposal was once rejected by the
earlier Chief Minister did not figure in any discussions and also did not come across
any correspondence/documents which suggested that Shri Ramanand Tiwari, Principal
Secretary UDD had brought this issue on record. Further, Shri Onkar Tiwari, son of
Shri Ramanand Tiwari eventually became a member of the Society.
XII. FURTHER RELAXATION TO GRANT ADDITIONAL FSI IN LIEU OF
RECREATION GROUND
95. The MMRDA, while approving the plan of the Society building in September,
2005 and January, 2008, had deducted 15 per cent FSI for ‘Recreation Ground’ (RG)
under Regulation 35 of DCR 1991. A proposal to release this FSI to the Society was
earlier rejected by the Government of Maharashtra in June, 2006.
96. The architect of the Society again proposed to MMRDA on 02 January, 2009
to grant additional FSI in lieu of RG area on the grounds that in Back Bay Reclamation
Scheme as blockwise RG was already provided and therefore FSI on account of RG
was not to be deducted from individual plots. Later, on 26 May, 2009, the Society also
forwarded to the Collector eight names “to be accommodated in Adarsh Co-operative
Housing Society if the additional FSI is sanctioned by the Government.”
97. In the same letter, the Society had also intimated the approval of the
membership of Shri Mukundrao Govindrao Mankar and Smt. I. A. Kundan. Smt. Kundan
was as on that date Collector, Mumbai City and was directly dealing with the matters
relating to the Society.

24
98. Meanwhile, Shri Ratnakar Gaikwad, Commissioner MMRDA had addressed
a letter on 24 March, 2009 to Shri T.C. Benjamin Principal Secretary Urban Development
Department enclosing the letter of the architect and conveying that there was no need
for deduction of 15 per cent of FSI towards RG. He had requested for a decision in the
matter.
99. On a note of the Urban Development Department dated 4 April 2009 on the
letter from Commissioner, MMRDA, the Principal Secretary on 8 April, 2009, rejected
the proposal for relaxation of FSI on account of RG. However, in another note dated
2 June, 2009, the same Principal Secretary proposed to the Chief Minister that “if
15 per cent RG area is available in the Scheme, we may agree with the Metropolitan
Commissioner to allow the developer not to exclude 15 per cent RG area from FSI
computation”. The Chief Minister approved the proposal and the Principal Secretary
received the file back on 20 July, 2009. On the same day, approval was communicated
to the Commissioner, MMRDA.
100. A subsequent note of the same Principal Secretary on 15 November, 2010
indicated that:—
“It was expected that while issuing orders, after this note (note dated 2 June,
2009) was approved, required verification about the availability of the 15 per cent
RG area in the Scheme would be done. This does not seem to have been done.
From what I gather, large tracts of land otherwise reserved for RG, is presently
occupied by slums, thereby creating a possibility that RG area may not be to the
extent of 15 per cent. This indeed will vitiate the decision of the Government.”
101. According to Audit, in the note put up to the Chief Minister, there had been
no mention of any verification of availability of RG area on the ground.
XIII.  RAISING THE HEIGHT OF THE BUILDING BEYOND APPROVAL
102. The CRZ Notification of the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Government of India (MoEF) came into effect on 19 February, 1991. As per that
Notification, the plot in question fell in CRZ-II. Buildings permitted in the area were
subject to the existing local Town and Country Planning Regulations. As on that date,
for Back Bay Reclamation Area, the Development Control Rules (DCR), 1967 were
applicable. As per the minutes of the meeting of the Maharashtra Coastal Zone
Management Authority (MCZMA) held on 3-11-2010, Audit pointed out that the site
under reference fell in CRZ-III. As per the clarifications given by MoEF vide letters
dated 8-9-1998 and 18-6-2006 as well as the order of the Supreme Court dated
14-12-2007 in SLP (C) No. 14578 regarding M/s. Suresh Estate v/s Govt. of Maharashtra,
the approved Development Control Rules, 1967 (i.e. the Development Control Rules
under implementation and in force as on 19-2-1991) were applicable for building
construction activities proposed in CRZ-II areas of Mumbai.
103. According to the DCR 1967, no building was to be erected or raised to a
height greater than one-and-a-half times the sum of the width of the streets on which
it abuts and the width of the open space between the street and the building as
measured from the level of the centre of the street in front. The maximum height of the

25
Society building permissible as per the DCR 1967, according to MCZMA was
45.6 metres.
104. The DCR, 1991 had no height restriction but brought down the FSI for BBR
Block VI to 1.33 from 3.5 as per the DCR, 1967. The Society, as also the Government of
Maharashtra, used DCR, 1991 to avoid the applicable height restriction (45.6 metres) of
DCR, 1967. The loss of FSI (from 3.5 to 1.33) was offset by transferring the developmental
rights of the BEST plot and relaxation of 15 per cent on account of RG as and when
required. The Society was thus allowed to circumvent both DCR, 1967 and DCR, 1991.
105. The Government of Maharashtra set up a High Rise Committee chaired by a
retired Chief Justice of Tamil Nadu High Court on 28 July, 2004 to scrutinize the
development proposals of all the buildings with height of more than 70 metres and to
advice the Municipal Commissioner on the feasibility of development proposals. The
proposal of the Society for the construction of the building upto 27 floors (stilt + 2
level podium + 27 upper floors) a height of 97.60 metres was accepted by the High Rise
Committee. This was after MMRDA informed that the marginal open spaces and parking
proposed were in accordance with DCR, 1991 sanctioned by the Government. The
NOC was issued by the Chief Engineer (Development Plan) of MCGM on 01 September,
2007 based on this approval.
106. Audit however pointed out that, against the approval for 27 floors issued by
MCGM, the Society constructed 28 floors. In a meeting held in MCGM on 14 October,
2009 for considering the proposal of the Society for one additional floor which was
already constructed by increasing the height to 100.70 metres (stilt + 2 level podium +
28 upper floors), the Managing Committee members of Adarsh Cooperative Housing
Society and its architect explained that NOC was issued for 97.6 metres on 01 September,
2007. They further stated that at the time the structural design of the building was
submitted, it was for the height of 103.40 metres, thereby the High Rise Committee had
already scrutinized the proposal for the height of the building of 103.40 metres. But as
the Architectural Plans were submitted for the height of building as 97.6 metres, the
NOC dated 01 September, 2007 was accordingly issued. Further as the CFO, NOC and
environmental submission had also been submitted at that time as per the requirements,
the Managing Committee members of the Society requested grant of permission to
regularize the constructed floor without insisting on the clearance from the High Rise
Committee.
107. The Deputy Chief Engineer (BP) City submitted a note on 20-10-2009 to the
Municipal Commissioner (MC) on which the MC ‘ordered’ ‘Yes’. The note read as
follows:—
“This has reference to the discussion with OSD to MC on 20-1-2009. The
information in respect of Adarsh Co-op. Hsg. Society is as follows:— The plans
are approved for stilt +2 level podium +27 upper floors for the said building with
the proposed built up area upto 27th floor is 7692.64 Sq. mt. As per the letter of
MMRDA dated 22-1-2008, the Commencement Certificate (CC) is also granted
for stilt + 2 level podium + 27 upper floors. It may be mentioned that as per the
approved plan, the total floor height of the building is 97.60 mt. and height upto

26
top of lift machine room is 102.80 mt. and upto top of overhead tank is 104.60 mt.
The High Rise Committee u/no. CHE/HRB=57/DPWS dated 1-9-2007 has issued
N.O.C. upto 97.60 mt. upto terrace floor level as per the approved plan and C.C.
As such there is no necessity to obtain fresh N.O.C. from High Rise Committee.”
108. Shri Jairaj Phatak, Municipal Commissioner, MCGM accepted the contention
of the Society on 21 October, 2009 stating that:—
“there is no need to obtain fresh NOC from High Rise Committee. However the
appropriate authority i.e. MMRDA’s approval may be obtained.”
109. The MMRDA then issued the NOC for the 28th floor on 04 August, 2010.
The son of Shri Jairaj Phatak eventually became a member of the Society.
110. The NOC issued upto the 27th floor for the total height of the building
included machine room and overhead water tank and was for 104.45 metres (97.60
meters + 6.85 meters). But after the construction of the 28th floor the total height of the
building increased to 107.55 metres (100.70 meters + 6.85 meters) without prior approval
of MCGM/MMRDA.
XIV .  RELAXATION OF ELIGIBILITY CONDITIONS IN FA VOUR OF THE MEMBERS
111. The conditions envisaged in the Government Resolution (GR) dated
9th July, 1999 included a minimum of 15 years’ domicile in the State of Maharashtra and
stringent income limit. For example, the income limit for a 650 square feet carpet area
was ` 12,500 per month. There was no income limit for carpet area of 1076 square feet.
The Revenue and Forest Department, Government of Maharashtra issued a Letter of
Intent on 18 January, 2003 conveying the intention of the Government to allot the plot
of land to the Society subject to inter alia verification of eligibility of the proposed
members by the Collector in terms of the GR dated 9 July, 1999. The letter enclosed a list
of 71 members to the Collector with the direction to verify the eligibility of the proposed
members in terms of the above-mentioned GR.
112. It is pertinent to mention here that initially, the Society had submitted details
of 41 members, which had been scrutinized by the Collector, Mumbai City with respect
to the criteria of income, domicile and caste. On the basis of such scrutiny, only
30 members were found eligible. This had been communicated by the Collector, Mumbai
City to the RFD on 8 October, 2003.
113. At the instance of the RFD, the Collector re-checked the eligibility after
obtaining additional details from the Society and intimated the RFD on 18 March, 2004
that out of the 41 members, only 19 were eligible, four ineligible and for the remaining
18 members, decisions were required to be taken at Government level. Out of the
18 members, the Government decision regarding cut off length of service in Maharashtra
for domicile certificate was required in the case of 16 members while in two cases,
Government decision was required on both the domicile as well as income criteria as their
income exceeded the prescribed limit of `12,500. On 11 March, 2004, the Society furnished
the details of the balance 30 members which included a proposal to replace 16 members
from the earlier list. It also forwarded another list of 22 members on ‘waiting list’.

27
114. The excerpts from the Collector’s letter dated 18 March, 2004 are as under:—
“1st issue raised by Government was that requirement of domicile in Maharashtra
is not relaxable on blanket basis in respect of serving defence personnel as well
as ex-servicemen. It was mentioned that based on their duration of stay/service
in Maharashtra, if the length of service is less than 15 years then the condition
of domicile in Maharashtra for membership in co-operative housing societies
could be relaxed in case of serving as well as ex-servicemen. Out of 41 members
list given by Society, domicile certificate of Maharashtra is available in case of
18 members while in case of 23 members (1 MLC & 22 serving/ex-servicemen),
domicile certificates of Maharashtra is not available. The duration of service in
Maharashtra in these cases of ex-servicemen as well as serving defence personnel
varies from 2 years 3 months to 21 years but generally it is in the range of
4-8 years. Since the Government Resolution of 9.7.1999 does not prescribe
minimum length of service or minimum duration of residence for relaxation of
domicile requirement, this office is not in a position to take view on eligibility of
such proposed members and State Government would need to decide on some
cut-off duration of service and decide on the eligibility of proposed members
accordingly. Out of these 22 service/ex-servicemen members, one member has
no service in Maharashtra (but was born in Maharashtra and some education is
in Maharashtra), another member is reported to be posted at forward location
and details of service in Maharashtra are not made available by the Society and
the Society Promoter informs that the details could be made available by the end
of this month…”
115. In the mean time, Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani, MLC, approached the Revenue
Minister on 10 May, 2003 to increase the income limit prescribed in the GR of 09 July,
1999 in respect of ex-servicemen beyond the income ceiling of `12,500 as a good
gesture to the brave soldiers who served the Motherland.
116. The Government of Maharashtra on 15 February, 2005 amended the provisions
of the Government Resolution of July, 1999 by raising the income limit of all and
waiving the requirement of domicile in respect of the retired State Government
employees and serving and retired service personnel from Maharashtra.
117. The Government of Maharashtra’s relaxation of domicile requirement and
income limit on 15 February, 2005 enabled many to become the members of the Society.
The relaxation of domicile condition enabled many serving or retired Service Officers
to become members. As illustrated by Audit, in one case of a Lieutenant General, his
serving period at a training centre in Maharashtra from January, 1968 to July, 1971
made him eligible. There were other officers also whose serving periods were for a few
years in Maharashtra in the late sixties and seventies.
118. In July 2004, the RFD (Revenue & Forest Department) Government of
Maharashtra accorded sanction for allotment of 3758.82 square metres of land to the
Society for construction of residential tenements on levying tentative occupancy
charges of `10.19 crore alongwith the approved list of 20 members. On 24 August,
2004, the RFD accorded approval for another 51 members and thus a total number of

28
71 members were approved which included 33 members in the earlier list of 71 in the
LOI of January, 2003.
119. In August, 2004, the RFD informed the Collector that as 71 members were
approved by the Government, there was no objection to hand over the land to the
Society. The RFD issued corrigendum on 21 February, 2005, correcting the area as
3824.43 square metres as per actual measurement. The Society was registered as a
Co-operative Society on 28 September, 2004 before the land was handed over to it on
04 October, 2004. The Society went on adding new members and the final list consisted
of 102 members which included only 37 Defence Personnel, even though its Chief
Promoter had initially approached the Chief Minister for allotment of the land for
residential development for its members belonging to the Defence Services. The Society
also did not provide any accommodation for girls’ hostel or for the children of serving/
retired Defence Personnel as requested by the Defence Authorities while giving the
‘go ahead’ for the project.
XV. ENVIRONMENTAL CLEARANCE UNDER COASTAL REGULATION ZONE
 NOTIFICATION
120. The Committee were informed that the Ministry of Environment and Forests
had constituted the State/Union Territory level Coastal Zone Management Authority
including the Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority for monitoring and
enforcing the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification, 1991 and the CRZ
Notification, 2011. These authorities were delegated the necessary powers under the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for taking punitive action against violations of the
CRZ Notification including those taking place in CRZ-II areas. Further, at the National
level, the National Coastal Zone Management Authority had been constituted. The
State/Union Territory Coastal Zone Management Authorities reported to the National
Coastal Zone Management Authority. The MoEF added that apart from the State/
Union Territory Coastal Zone Management Authorities including the National Coastal
Zone Management Authority, the MoEF had five regional offices of which three namely,
Bhopal, Bengaluru and Bhubaneswar also monitored the projects cleared under the
Coastal Regulation Zone Notifications, 1991 and 2011.
121. The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India had notified
the Coastal Regulation Zone with effect from 19 February, 1991. The land transferred to
the Adarsh Housing Cooperative Society was in the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ)-II.
The Ministry in a notification dated 21 May, 2002 amended the said notification
incorporating a new clause (iii)(a) under Paragraph 3(2) which required environmental
clearance from the Ministry for housing schemes in the CRZ areas as specified in
Paragraph 6(2) of the said notification.
122. In a submission made to the Committee, the MoEF stated as under :—
“The Ministry of Environment and Forests had issued the Coastal Regulation
Zone (CRZ) Notification on 19th February, 1991 under the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986. The CRZ Notification, 1991 regulates the developmental
activities in coastal areas including Housing Projects in the said zone.”

29
123. Audit pointed out that Shri P.V . Deshmukh, Deputy Secretary, Urban
Development Department, Government of Maharashtra and also a Member of the
Society had addressed a letter on 5 October, 2002 to the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, Government of India (MoEF) wherein he had requested for No Objection
Certificate for the development of plot under reference. In this letter, Shri Deshmukh
had also intimated that the State Government had decided to allot plot under reference
to the Adarsh Housing Society for residential development. He referred to the letter of
the Chief Promoter of the Society requesting grant of Government land for construction
of welfare and housing facility to serving and ex-servicemen of Defence Services.
124. According to Audit, the above letter was issued by the Urban Development
Department without the knowledge of the Environment Department and Maharashtra
Coastal Zone Management Authority of the Government of Maharashtra, which were
the nodal departments/agencies for processing the environmental clearances. The
letter also highlighted the fact that the proposal was for the welfare and housing
facility to serving and ex-servicemen of the Defence Services.
125. According to Audit, Shri A. Senthil Vel, Joint Director in the Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Government of India in his letter dated 2 December, 2002
asked for some more documents. The correspondence was receiving attention at the
highest level and the letter by the Joint Director in the Government of India to the
Deputy Secretary, Government of Maharashtra was seen by the Chief Minister and
Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister at the dak stage itself. It was diarised in the
CM’s Secretariat on 7 December, 2002. The documents were handed over personally in
Delhi by Shri Deshmukh on 6 January, 2003.
126. After obtaining the documents, Shri A. Senthil V el in his letter dated
11 March, 2003 to Shri Deshmukh stated as under:
“As per the information provided in the above letter and the revised Coastal
Zone Management Plan of Greater Mumbai, it is noted that the proposed
residential complex falls within the Coastal Regulation Zone-II area. This Ministry
has already delegated the powers to the concerned State Governments for
undertaking development in Coastal Regulation Zone-II. Accordingly, the
proposed construction may be taken up as per the Coastal Regulation Zone
Notification, 1991 (as amended from time to time) and the approved revised
Coastal Zone Management Plan of Greater Mumbai.”
127. In compliance, Shri P.V . Deshmukh in his letter dated 15 March, 2003 to the
Chief Engineer (Development Plan), Brihatmumbai Municipal Corporation inter alia
stated that:—
“The Ministry of Environment and Forests have communicated their no
objection to allow the said residential development since it falls within the
Coastal Regulation Zone-II area which satisfies the norms of Notification
dated 19 February, 1991 and amendments therein made upto 21 May, 2002. Now,
there appears therefore, no objection to allow the residential development to the
Adarsh Co-op. Housing Society on the land included in the residential zone as
per the Notifications sanctioned by the Government.”

30
128. Audit pointed out that as per the laid down procedures, the project proponent
was required to submit the project proposal to the concerned Coastal Zone Management
Authority, which in this case was not done.
129. In March 2003, the Chief Promoter in his letter addressed to the Chief
Minister and separately to the Minister of State for Urban Development wrote that:
“It is submitted that the Department of Environment and Forests, Government of
India have considered our case on priority as a goodwill gesture to serving and
ex-serviceman looking to their service towards the motherland and have accorded
their NOC. They have also directed the Urban Development Department of
Govt. of Maharashtra that such cases of permission for construction in CRZ-II
Zone need not be referred to them and same can be decided by Mantralaya in
Mumbai. Thus it can be seen that our efforts have brought positive result for all
such cases pending in Mantralaya in CRZ-II Zone. In this connection a copy of
letter of Government of India, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Paryavaran
Bhavan, C.G.O. Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi – 110003, No. J. 17011/46/
2002-IA-III dated 11th March, 2003 is enclosed herewith. Based on above
clearance the Urban Development Department of  Government of  Maharashtra
have already directed the Chief Engineer, (Development Plan), Brihanmumbai
Municipal Corporation, Fort, Mumbai, to sanction building construction vide
their letter No. TPB 2099/1095/CR-154/99/UD-12 dated 15th March, 2003.”
130. Taking into account the above-cited developments, the Committee sought
to know from the MoEF the authority under which the powers for undertaking
development in CRZ-II area was delegated to the State Government. In reply, the
MoEF made the following submission:—
“As per the clarification letter of MoEF vide its letter No. J-17011/21/1996-IA-III
dated 27th December, 1996 titled ‘Clarification regarding permission to be given
for construction activities in CRZ-II areas approved in the Coastal Zone
Management Plans of States/UTs’, it was clarified that, ‘The undersigned is
directed to inform that clarification has been sought from this Ministry regarding
Environmental Clearance for construction activities in CRZ-II with investment
cost exceeding `5 crore. In this regard, it is clarified that the concerned authorities
at the State/UT level can accord clearance for construction activities on the
CRZ-II areas approved in the Coastal Zone Management Plans, in accordance
with the provisions under Clause 6(2) of CRZ Notification, 1991, even though
the investment cost exceeds `5 crore’.
Further with regard to a specific query from Municipal Commissioner, Mumbai
Municipal Corporation vide their letter No. MCP/2837, dated 12th March, 1997,
it was clarified once again, ‘The Ministry has already clarified vide letter
No. J-17011/21/98-IA-III, dated 27th December, 1998 that the concerned
authorities at the State level can accord clearance for construction activities in
CRZ-II areas approved in the Coastal Zone Management Plan of Maharashtra
State, in accordance with the provisions under Clause 6(2) of the CRZ
Notification, 1991, even if the investment exceeds `5 crore. The above clarification

31
as notified vide S.O.No. 494(E), dated 9th July, 1997 under which all activities
with investment exceeding `5 crore are to be regulated by the concerned
Authorities at the State/Union Territory level in accordance with the provisions
of paragraph 6, sub-paragraph (2) of Annexure-I of the Notification.”
131. When the Committee asked the MoEF to explain the reasons for it not
having given clear-cut directions in its letter dated 11 March, 2003 to the authorities of
the Government of Maharashtra to abide by the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification,
the Ministry replied that:—
“The Ministry of Environment and Forests had issued the Coastal Regulation
Zone (CRZ) Notification, 1991 under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
The CRZ Notification classifies the coastal stretch into CRZ-I (Ecological
Sensitive areas), CRZ-II(Built up Municipal limits), CRZ-III(Rural Areas),
CRZ-IV(Islands of Andaman & Nicobar). The Notification contains the entire
mechanisms describing the authorities to be approached, submission of
proposals, the documents to be annexed etc. This notification has undergone
about 25 amendments from time to time for further streamlining the process and
to address the local issues in CRZ areas. The Ministry had received a reference
from Urban Development Department (UDD), Government of Maharashtra (GoM)
through Shri P. V . Deshmukh, Deputy Secretary, UDD, GoM dated 5th October,
2002 addressed to Secretary, MoEF seeking NOC for development of land by
reducing the width of the adjoining road from 60.96 meters to 18.40 meters for
residential purpose in BBR Block from III to VI to Adarsh Cooperative Housing
Society (ACHS). As per this letter, the proposed Cooperative Society named
Adarsh was meant for construction of Welfare and Housing Facility to serving
and ex-servicemen of Defence Services. It was further indicated in the letter the
land under reference is in CRZ-II and the development was permissible under
prevailing DCR Rules as on 19th February, 1991.
It may be mentioned that Shri P.V . Deshmukh, Deputy Secretary, UDD, GoM was
aware of the provisions of the CRZ Notification, 1991. It may also be indicated
that the letter referred to the change in land use with respect to some area arising
out of reduction in the road width. The CRZ Notification, however, does not
make any reference to change in land use.
As the information provided by Shri Deshmukh to consider the request was
inadequate, Ministry sought additional clarification on 2nd December, 2002. The
information sought was relating to the approved CZMP Map of the area
superimposed on the proposed layout to ascertain the location of the area in
CRZ-II and is in conformity with the approved CZMP. After receipt of the relevant
documents from the State Government in January, 2003, the response was sent
on 11th March, 2003, which is reproduced below:—
“This has reference to your letter No. TPB 2009/1095/CR-154/99/UD 12,
dated 4th January, 2003 regarding the subject mentioned above. As per the
information provided in the above letter and the revised Coastal Zone
Management Plan of Greater Mumbai, it is noted that the proposed residential

32
complex falls within the Coastal Regulation Zone-II area. This Ministry has
already delegated the powers to the concerned State Government for undertaking
development in Coastal Regulation Zone-II. Accordingly, the proposed
construction may be taken up as per the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification,
1991(as amended from time to time) and the approved revised Coastal Zone
Management Plan of Greater Mumbai.”
It could be seen that the letter of 11th March, 2003 was only a clarificatory
response and in no way it could have been construed as a NOC or a clearance
under CRZ Notification, 1991. Such clarifications are provided by the Ministry
on queries from various Central and State Government Agencies. Even the subject
matter of the letter is the same as was received from the Deputy Secretary, UDD,
Government of Maharashtra. It also need to be mentioned that the MoEF reference
was a correspondence between the Ministry and UDD and not with ACHS. The
Ministry had issued this clarificatory letter to UDD, where officers expected to
be well conversant with the Environmental laws and Regulation including their
appropriate interpretation, keeping in view the main CRZ Notification, 1991, the
amendments made from time to time, conformity with the approved CRZ plan
etc.”
132. On being asked if the MoEF had taken cognizance of the notification dated
21.5.2002 under which environmental clearance of the MoEF was required for housing
schemes in the CRZ Area, in respose the MoEF stated as under:—
“As per paragraph 6, sub-paragraph (2) in clause (i) ‘provided further that the
above restriction on construction, based on existing roads/authorized structures,
roads proposed in the approved Coastal Zone Management Plans, new roads
shall not apply to the housing scheme of State Urban Development Authorities
implemented in phases for which construction activity was commenced prior to
19th February, 1991 in at least one phase and all relevant approvals from State/
local authorities were obtained prior to 19th February, 1991; in all such cases
specific approval of the Ministry of Environment and Forests would be necessary
on a case to case basis’.
This provision does not apply to M/s. ACHS constructions for the following
reasons:—
(a) The Adarsh building was proposed to be located on the landward side of
an authorized road which existed prior to 1991.
(b) The said housing scheme was not undertaken by the State Urban
Development Authority, such as MHADA.
(c) None of the phases of the constructions for the Adarsh Cooperative
Housing Society was commenced prior to 19th February, 1991.
(d) No approvals from State/local authorities were obtained prior to
19th February, 1991 for the Adarsh Cooperative Housing Society.

33
(e) This provision was included as an amendment to the CRZ Notification, 1991
keeping in view the World Bank assisted MHADA Housing Development
Project which was meant for economically weaker section, who were allotted
plots much earlier to 1991, sometime in 1986. The constructions could not be
completed by these sections of people prior to 1991. After the issue of the
CRZ Notification, 1991 such constructions which were falling on the seaward
side of the road were not permissible in CRZ-II area. The MoEF had received
many representations from these poor sections of people and from the
Government of Maharashtra. Hence, this amendment was introduced in the
CRZ Notification, 1991. The Adarsh Housing does not attract the above
amendment in any way.”
133. According to the Press Note issued on 28 October, 2010, by the Ministry of
Environment and Forests, the Ministry had never issued CRZ clearance or NOC. The
Maharashtra Coastal Zone Management Authority, (one of whose functions was to
ensure compliance to all specific conditions that were stipulated and laid down in the
approved Coastal Zone Management Plan of Maharashtra) and also the Environment
Department of Government of Maharashtra confirmed in 2010 that no environment
clearance was obtained.
134. When the MoEF was asked to defend the inference that the letter of 11.03.2003
was a wilful act in view of the fact that the MoEF in their Press Note above cited had
clarified that the CRZ clearance or the NOC had never been issued, the Ministry
submitted as under:—
“The Ministry at that time could only issue the clarificatory letter as no proposal
for CRZ clearance of the proposed ACHS or UDD, Government of Maharashtra
was before it. It is therefore submitted that the letter of 11th March, 2003 was
factually and legally correct and does not amount to any willful act on the part of
the MoEF.”
135. On being asked to confirm whether the land in question was in CRZ-II as per
the MoEF Notification effective from 19 February, 1991, the Ministry replied as
follows:—
“As indicated CRZ Notification was issued by the Ministry on 19th February,
1991. Under the Notification, the States had to prepare the CZMPs. The CZMPs
were approved by the Ministry on 27th September, 1996 with certain specific
conditions and modifications. The GoM submitted the revised CZMPs of Greater
Mumbai, which was approved by the Ministry on 19th January, 2000. As per the
revised CZMPs, the proposed site area at BBR Block III to VI, Colaba, Mumbai
is located in CRZ-II.”

34
136. Further, when asked whether the DCR, 1967 was applicable for land in
Colaba falling under CRZ II area, the MoEF in its reply stated as under:—
“The provisions of clause 6(2) regarding CRZ II stipulates that ‘Buildings
permitted on the landward side of the existing and proposed roads/existing
authorized structures shall be subject to the existing local Town and Country
Planning Regulations including the existing norms of Floor Space Index/Floor
Area Ratio.”
The word existing has been interpreted by the Ministry vide a letter dated
8th September, 1998 addressed to the Chief Secretary, GoM, as prevailed on
19.2.1991.
In view of the above clarifications, the DCR Regulations which was under
implementation on 19.2.1991 i.e. approved DCR of 1967 shall be considered and
not the draft of 1989 which came into force on 20th February, 1991 as it was still
in a draft stage on 19.2.1991.
The above clarification with regard to the applicability of the DCR of 1967 was
issued vide MoEF letter No.11-61/2006-IA-III, dated 18th August, 2006 based on
a clarification sought from Government of Maharashtra.
As per the provisions of the CRZ Notification, 1991 as amended in CRZ-II area,
any construction can be taken up only with the Floor Space Index and Floor
Area Ratio regulations as existed on 19th February, 1991. In Mumbai at the
proposed site of the Society the Floor Space Index as on 19th February, 1991 was
1.33. There were no exceptions and relaxations to this dispensation. These norms
are applicable even today inspite of the CRZ Notification, 1991 having been
superseded and a new CRZ Notification issued on 6th January, 2011.
The additional Floor Space Index, therefore, used by the Society is not in
conformity with the CRZ Notification, 1991. The Ministry therefore had indicated
in its letter of 11th March, 2002 that the proposed construction should be as per
CRZ, 1991 (as amended from time to time) and the approved CZM plan at Greater
Mumbai.”
137. In response to a query as to the maximum permissible height of the building
on the said land as per the DCR, 1967, the MoEF clarified as follows:—
“Construction activities in CRZ-II were governed by CRZ Notification, 1991
MoEF does not regulate height of building under the CRZ Notification, 1991 in
CRZ-II areas. The height of a building in CRZ-II is governed by the Floor Space
Index as applicable under the local town and country planning regulations
applicable as on 19.2.1991. There is no provision in the Notification to stipulate
height of a building in CRZ-II.”
138. The Committee then sought to know the reasons for the failure on the part
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests in preventing a building of such a height
in that area being erected. To this the Ministry of Environment and Forests replied as
under:—
“The Ministry had not received any proposal seeking CRZ clearance from UDD,
Government of Maharashtra for the construction of building of M/s. ACHS.
MoEF was not informed of such construction activity undertaken by ACHS.

35
The MoEF promulgated the CRZ Notification, 1991 to regulate activities in coastal
areas and the coastal area falling in the jurisdiction of Municipal Corporation of
Greater Mumbai (MCGM) mostly fell in CRZ-II category. By the order of
4th January, 2002, MoEF directed all the Coastal States to obtain
recommendations of CZMA before according final permission to the projects in
CRZ areas. Till April, 2003, the housing projects proposed in coastal areas in
Mumbai were to be regulated by concerned authorities at the State ensuring
compliance to CRZ, Notification, 1991.
For the purpose of monitoring and enforcing, the provisions of the CRZ
Notification, 1991, the Ministry has constituted the State/UT level Coastal Zone
Management Authorities including Maharashtra. To identify and to take punitive
action under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, necessary powers have been
delegated to these authorities. Such violations have to be dealt by the MCZMA
under the circumstances, the BMC is the first line of defence to detect such
violations followed by the other local authorities.
In the present case, the matter was never referred to the State Environment
Department or MCZMA for obtaining prior recommendation to the said building.
The Planning Authorities apparently overlooked the fact of ensuring proper
CRZ clearance before issuing commencement certificate and various other
clearances by the Revenue Authorities. The building permissions were given in
different stages by the Planning Authorities but the CRZ clearance was not
verified. The CZMP of Mumbai was available with the Planning Authorities and
it was clear position that the building is in CRZ-II and they should have in the
first place taken appropriate action against the unauthorized structures.
The Regional Office of Ministry of Environment and Forests at Bhopal which
covers the Maharashtra region undertakes monitoring of such projects which
have been accorded environmental and CRZ Clearances by the Ministry or by
the State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authorities constituted under
the provisions of EIA Notification, 2006. The responsibility, therefore, to detect
the construction of 100 mts. high rise building was with the local authorities and
not with MoEF.”
139. The Committee desired to know the rationale behind the letter
dated 11 March, 2003 from Ministry of Environment and Forests to Shri Deshmukh,
DS, UDD, Government of Maharashtra which had stated that:—
“As per the information provided in the above letter and the revised Coastal
Zone Management Plan of Greater Mumbai, it is noted that the proposed
residential complex falls within the Coastal Regulation Zone-II area. This Ministry
has already delegated the powers to the concerned State Governments for
undertaking development in Coastal Regulation Zone-II. Accordingly, the
proposed construction may be taken up as per the Coastal Regulation Zone
Notification, 1991 (as amended from time to time) and the approved revised
Coastal Zone Management Plan of Greater Mumbai.”

36
140. In reply, the MoEF submitted as under:—
“The reference was received in October, 2002 from Shri Deshmukh, DS, UDD,
GOM for seeking NOC for development of plot which would be available due to
reduction in the road width in BBR Block-III to VI for allocating to the proposed
residential development of ACHS. Based on the information, clarification and
keeping in view the conformity to approve CZMP, the response was sent on
11th March, 2003. The response dated 11th March, 2003 from MoEF primarily
covers the reference received from the State Government, the need to comply
with the approved revised CZMP. The reference on delegation of power has
been made in the letter as Ministry vide its notification of 9th July, 1997 had
delegated powers for construction activities in CRZ-II areas with investments
exceeding `5 crore. It was also stressed that the construction may be taken up as
per CRZ Notification, 1991 to convey the requirement of the existing rules,
procedures and clearances, etc.
It is reiterated that the correspondence was between MoEF and the State
Government i.e., Urban Development Department who is expectedly well
conversant with the regulations in vogue.
MoEF in its letter dated 27th December, 1996 had delegated powers to give CRZ
clearances for investment more than `5 crore.”
141. Asked to spell out the exact procedure followed in the Ministry to accord
necessary environment clearance and the circumstances under which the MoEF had
to interact with the State Government Departments, the Ministry replied as under:—
“The environment clearance is accorded under the provision of EIA Notification,
2006 in which the project proponent directly submits the application to the MoEF
if the project is of category-A and in case of category-B projects, the application is
submitted to the State Level Impact Assessment Authority (SL/AA) which is
constituted under EIA Notification, 2006. In case of CRZ clearance, the procedure
is laid down in the CRZ Notification, 1991. This notification contains clear directions
and procedures for undertaking various developmental activities in CRZ area. It is
the responsibility of the project proponent to obtain necessary recommendations
from the respective State Coastal Zone Management Authority constituted by the
MoEF under Section 3(3) of EP Act and send it to MoEF/State Environment
Department with all relevant documents prescribed in the CRZ Notification, 1991
seeking clearance under the Notification. When the CRZ proposal submitted to
the MoEF is inadequate and in case of any lack of information, the Ministry
corresponds with the concerned applicant to seek the necessary information for
its completeness.”
142. The Committee then queried if the Urban Development Department in the
Government of Maharashtra was the designated department to deal with environment
clearance under the CRZ norms. In reply, the MoEF submitted as under:—
“MoEF has not designated any authority to deal with CRZ clearance matters. At
that time the approval Authority was meant to be the State Government.

37
However as per the affidavit filed by MCZMA in the W.P.No. 369 of 2011 in the
Hon’ble High Court of Bombay, in the matter of Adarsh Co-operative Housing
Society Ltd. Vs. UOI & others it was stated:—
I say that between the period 4.1.2002 to 22.4.2003 construction activities in CRZ
area had to be regulated as per 3(2)(iv) read with paragraph (6) of CRZ Notification
by the State level planning authority applicable for the concerned area. However,
this could be done only after the MCZMA gave its recommendation. The
appropriate agency to regulate the activities in CRZ area was at the State level,
this meant that CRZ proposals of the concerned planning authority was to be
placed before the MCZMA through the Urban Development Department of
Government of Maharashtra.’ ”
143. On being asked to explain why Shri Senthil Vel, Joint Director, MoEF entered
into a correspondence on 11th March, 2003 with Shri P.V. Deshmukh, DS, UDD,
Government of Maharashtra when the MCZMA was in existence from 1998, the MoEF
defended its stand as follows:—
“The letter of 5th October, 2002 from Shri P.V . Deshmukh, DS, UDD, GoM was
addressed to Secretary, MoEF was regarding change in land use for the planning
purposes through reduction in the width of the road. The UDD is the nodal
department for planning purposes and since the change in land use has not
been referred in CRZ Notification, 1991, it was indicated that the construction
with regard to the strip of land that gets deleted by reducing the road may be
taken up as per the CRZ Notification, 1991 and approved CZMP. Since, this was
not a proposal for construction of ACHS, as it is reported that the land is allocated
to the ACHS only in 2004. Since, the proposal was not for specific proposal from
UDD, GoM a routine clarification was given to UDD to comply with CRZ
Notification, 1991. Hence, the UDD was required to refer the matter to MCZMA/
State Environment Department for CRZ clearance for ACHS after the allocation
of land.”
144. When asked to explain the circumstances under which Shri Senthil Vel had
conveyed to the Deputy Secretary, UDD, Government of Maharashtra about the
delegation of powers regarding development in CRZ-II instead of directing the
Government of Maharashtra to approach the designated authority i.e. MCZMA for
clearance for development, the MoEF put forth as under:—
“The proposal in 2002 from the UDD, GoM was for change in land use for
planning purposes and was not concerning clearance of a specific project
in which case the correspondence could have been with the project
proponents.”
145. To a pointed query as to whether it would be correct to construe that the
ambiguous communication by Shri Sentil Vel, JD, MoEF stating that the ‘proposed
construction could be taken up as per the CRZ Notification, 1991’ had created adequate
context to allow the Government of Maharashtra to interpret it as a ‘No Objection

38
Certificate’ to the proposed residential development by the Society and requisite
‘environmental clearance’ from the MoEF, the Ministry replied as under:—
“No, there is no ambiguity in MoEFs communication dated 11.3.2003 for
Government of Maharashtra to interpret it as a ‘No Objection’.
This letter dt. 11th March, 2003 of MoEF was a routine clarification and the
sinister use it was put to by Sh. P.V. Deshmukh, DS, GoM couldn’t have been
anticipated. It also needs to be noted that there is no provision at all in the CRZ
Notification, 1991 for issuing any NOC and hence any interpretation of the letter
of the MoEF of March, 2003 as NOC is legally and fundamentally misconceived
and incorrect. Such misinterpretation is inexplicable and strange as the person
construing in that manner Sh. P.V. Deshmukh, was very well aware of the CRZ
Notification, 1991 and the amendments thereof and the procedure required for
CRZ clearances as he as the representative of his Department had himself
attended meetings of NCZMA on behalf of GoM with respect to various CRZ
matters and had also referred to the CRZ Notification, 1991 in his first letter
dt. 5th October, 2002 itself. Thus, the letter of MoEF issued as a clarification to
his query could have neither been interpreted as NOC or CRZ clearance nor
created any context to allow anyone including GoM to interpret it as a No
Objection or misuse the same in any manner.”
146. When asked to state the measures taken/proposed to plug the lacunae in
the existing monitoring mechanism for the environmental clearances, the Ministry
submitted the following:—
“Keeping in view the violations and the non-effectiveness of the Coastal Zone
Management Authorities the Ministry had issued an Office Memorandum on
7th November, 2008. The relevant extract is as follows:—
‘(ii) In case the CZMAs are not in operation due to the Coastal Zone
Management Authority being reconstituted or Chairman/Member
Secretary not having been appointed etc., then it is the responsibility
of the State Department of Environment who is the custodian of the
Coastal Zone Management Plans of respective State/Union Territory
to provide the comments and recommend the projects as per CRZ
Notification to the Ministry of Environment and Forests. This approach
is in accordance with para 3(ii) of the CRZ Notification, 1991.
(iv) For ensuring transparency, it would be essential to post the list of
projects received under CRZ Notification and their status on the website
of both State Environment Department and the State Coastal Zone
Management Authority, which would be updated regularly atleast
weekly. Similarly, the agenda of State Coastal Zone Management
Authority and the minutes shall be put on the website. This is all the
more necessary because the CRZ clearances are already put on the
Ministry of Environment and Forests website. It should also be ensured
that projects are taken up for consideration on the chronological priority.
In case of deviation from this priority, it may be undertaken with adequate
justification and with prior approval of Chairman of State Coastal Zone

39
Management Authority or Secretary of the State Environment
Department. Similar procedure is already adopted in MOEF for projects
considered under EIA Notification of 2006.
(v) The CZMAs main responsibility is to enforce and implement the
Notification, 1991. It is observed that the Authorities are not taking
adequate steps in controlling violations. In several instances, the
Ministry has had to intervene and issue directions to the violators, in
some cases to the State Government, even though the powers under
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 have been delegated to the CZMAs
to take action against the violation. It is also noticed that the Coastal
Zone Management Authorities are not implementing timely and
completely the directions of Ministry of Environment and Forests.
Therefore, high priority will be accorded to enforcing and monitoring
of Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 1991 by all the State/UT
CZMAs’.
Further, in accordance with the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification
of 6th January, 2011, a direction under Section 5 has been issued to all
coastal States and Union territories to,—
(a) ‘identify the violations of the Coastal Regulation Zone
Notification, 1991 and the approved Coastal Zone Management
Plan thereunder within their respective jurisdiction in a period of
four months from the receipt of this directions;
(b) Initiate action under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 upon
the identified violations within four months thereafter;
(c) Upload the relevant details of the identified violations, including
the action taken on the violations, as per para (a) and (b) above
on their respective website, every fortnight.
Further, the NCZMA will review the action taken by the respective
State and UT CZMAs as directed above and apprise the MoEF
periodically’.
The National Coastal Zone Management Authority periodically
monitors the implementation of the directions. All Coastal Zone
Management Authorities have developed their website and are hosting
the violations on the website including the status.”
147. The Ministry further stated as follows:—
“From the above factual matrix, it could be seen that the MoEF has followed the
provisions of CRZ Notification, 1991 and its amendments in advising the UDD,
GoM in the letter dated 11th March, 2003. The correspondence was primarily with
the State UDD, which was fully conversant with the requirements of CRZ
Notification, 1991 and should have complied with the contents of the letter. The
MoEF does not issue NOC under CRZ Notification, 1991 neither it entertains
proposal for change in land use which is in the ambit of the State Government.

40
Further, the first level of monitoring of erection of such illegal buildings lies with
the local planning authorities as per the approved plans and in conformity with
existing legislations. Since, MoEF has not accorded CRZ clearance to ACHS, the
monitoring of the project was not within the purview of MoEF.
As soon as the matter was brought to the notice of the MoEF through media in
October, 2010 appropriate action in terms of Show Cause Notice (SCN) was
immediately issued and necessary and final order directing the State Government
that why the unauthorized structure should not be removed due to violation of
CRZ Notification, 1991.
To minimize the violation of CRZ Notification, 1991 various directions has been
issued from time to time to the State Government and a SCN has also been issued
under Section 5 to all coastal States in February, 2011 and this would be further
streamlined as and when the report will be received from the State Government.
It may also be noted that the matter is under scrutiny by the Hon’ble two-
member Commission of Inquiry set up by the Government of Maharashtra and
the CBI is also inquiring into the matter. Further, the matter regarding final orders
of MoEF is sub-judice in the Hon’ble High Court of Bombay.”
148. Asked to state in no uncertain terms as to whether the construction of
ACHS was in violation of the CZ Regulation, 1991, the Ministry of Environment and
Forests submitted as under:—
“Based on the Reports in media about the construction of a residential building
in violation of CRZ Regulation by the ACHS in Block 6, Back bay reclamation
area adjacent to Bus depot on Captain Prakash Pethe Marg, Colaba, Mumbai
and also the reference from Maharashtra State Coastal Zone Management
Authority where the project was discussed in November, 2010, was clearly
observed by MCZMA the building construction undertaken by ACHS is in
violation of CRZ, Notification, 1991 as no CRZ clearance/permission was obtained
by the Society either from MCZMA or from MoEF. The Report of the MCZMA
was further discussed in the meeting of the National Coastal Zone Management
Authority held on 11th November, 2010 under the chairmanship of Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests. In this meeting, Principal Secretary, UDD,
Government of Maharashtra and Principal Secretary, Revenue Department also
confirmed the violation of CRZ, 1991.’’
149. When asked about the specific action taken by the MoEF against the
Housing Society in view of their own admission that the construction of the ACHS
violated the CRZ, 1991, the representative of MoEF deposed as:—
“Based on the recommendations of the MCZMA, MoEF issued a Show Cause
Notice under Section 5 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. After following
due procedure, a final order was issued on 11th January, 2011 directing ACHS to
remove the unauthorized construction in its entirety and the area be restored to
its original condition.

41
The order of 11th January, 2011 of MoEF has been challenged by ACHS in the
Hon’ble High Court of Bombay and the case is being heard on a regular basis in
the Hon’ble High Court. The matter is sub-judice.”
150. When the MoEF was specifically asked (April, 2013) to furnish the
information as to when the ‘Final order’ of the Ministry regarding demolition of the
building of Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, Mumbai was rendered sub-judice,
the Ministry replied (May, 2013) as:—
“It is informed that the final order for removal of the unauthorized building of
M/s. Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, Mumbai was issued by the Ministry
on 14.01.2011. As per the information available on the website of Hon’ble High
Court of Bombay, M/s.  Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society filed writ Petition
No. 369 of 2011 on 14.02.2011 challenging the above final order.”
Further, a copy of the webpage was also enclosed.
XVI. STA TUS
151. While submitting the latest position of the case, the Ministry of Defence
furnished the following details:—
“On 9.11.2010, Ministry of Defence handed over the case to Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) with a view to get the matter thoroughly investigated and fix
responsibility. During the Preliminary Enquiry (PE), prima facie serious omissions
and commissions on the part of defence officials/State Government officials and
others were detected.
On the basis of PE, a regular case RC 6(A)/2011, was registered by CBI, ACB,
Mumbai on 29.1.2011 against 13 persons including officers from Army, Navy,
DGDE and others. It is alleged in the FIR filed by CBI that Shri R.C. Thakur in
conspiracy with members of Defence Services, officials of Government of
Maharashtra and others got allotted a plot of land in favour of ACHS which was
in the possession of Army since long. The concerned public servants abused
their official position, manipulated and fabricated the records to achieve their
objective of getting plot, which was in possession of Army since long, allotted
in favour of ACHS and also got various clearances from the Municipal authorities
and other State Government authorities in an illegal manner. In lieu of this, they
got allotment of flats for themselves and for their close relations at a very low
cost compared to the market value. It is further alleged in the FIR filed by CBI
that ACHS is located in one of the posh areas of Mumbai and market value of the
flat of the size of 1076 sq. ft. carpet area is to the tune of `8.00 to `10.00 crore
approx.
During course of investigation, the relevant documents from the office of Army,
Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA), Collector,
Urban Development Department (UDD), Bombay Electricity & Suburban
Transport (BEST), Revenue, Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF) have
been collected and scrutinized. Till now 107 witnesses have been examined and

42
recorded their statement. The investigation of this case is nearing completion
and thereafter a report under section 173 Cr. PC shall be filed in the court of law.
The progress of the case is being monitored by the Hon’ble Bombay High court,
Mumbai.”
152. Deposing before the Committee, the Defence Secretary submitted:
“……. a Commission of Enquiry has also been ordered by the Government of
Maharashtra to look into the matter including the title of the land allotted to
Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society. Steps need to be taken to avoid such
incidence in future and culpability fixed on the part of any person or public
servant or authority.”
153. The terms of reference of Commission of Inquiry are as follows:—
(a) Whether land allotted to Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society Ltd., Plot
No. 87-C BBR Block No. 6, Captain Prakash Pethe Marg, Near Backbay
Bus Depot, Colaba, Mumbai (hereinafter referred to as “the Society”)
belonged to the State Government or any other person, or organization.
(b) Whether the land in question or membership of the Society was reserved
for housing defence personnel or Kargil War heroes.
(c) Whether the reduction of the width and the changes of the reservation
from road to residential in respect of Captain Prakash Pethe Marg was in
accordance with law.
(d) Whether the deletion of the reservation of plot reserved for BEST and its
conversion to residential purpose for allotment to the Society was in
accordance with law.
(e) Whether provisions of Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act,
1966 and Development Control Rules and Regulations framed thereunder
have been contravened in utilization of FSI for items like staircase, lift,
lobby etc. and raising the height of the Society’s building.
(f) Whether any person who was not eligible to become member of the Society,
was approved to be made a member of the Society, if so, who.
(g) Whether any public servant had given permissions or clearances as a quid
pro quo  to the Society, or which would attract the provisions of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
(h) Whether the land allotted to the Society, falls under the Coastal Regulation
Zone (CRZ) and, if so, in which category.
(i) Whether requisite environmental permissions and clearances had been
obtained by the Society from the State Government, Central Government or
prescribed authorities under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and Rules
framed under the Act as well as Notifications issued thereunder.

43
(j) Whether public servants, who themselves or their relatives are members of
the Society, have violated any provisions of law including the All India
Service (Conduct) Rules, or Maharashtra Civil Services (Conduct) Rules.
(k) To enquire into any other matter which is connected with or incidental thereto.
(l) To fix the responsibility on any person or public servant or authority and
action to be taken on the basis of inquiry conducted in the matter.
(m) To make suggestions or recommendations to bring in transparency and
eliminate discretion in the matter of allotment of Government land to the
housing societies, as well as admission of members to such societies, and
such remedial measures, as the Commission may deem fit, which the State
Government may follow in future.
154. The representatives of the Ministry of Defence, further apprised as follows:—
“in 2003 and 2004, there are two letters again written by the Defence Estate
Department : ‘While it is correct this land is not recorded in our name but please
allot this land to the Army or the Navy as the case may be for two-three reasons’.
The first reason is that there is a security imperative. We would not like the land
to go to anybody else other than the Services. The second imperative was that
we have shortage of land. There are several projects in progress for which even
today the Services are short of land.
One of the major projects, for example, is for building accommodation. This is the
government’s avowed policy that we must give much higher levels of satisfaction
in terms of accommodation.”
155. When asked if the multi-storied building had any security implication, the
representative of the MoD submitted:—
“Yes, security implications are there.”
156. On being asked to substantiate their claim that the multi-storied building
posed security hazard, the representative of the MoD stated:—
“If you permit me, I can read out the aspect which has been mentioned in the
affidavit filed before the hon. High Court. The location and height of the Adarsh
building makes it a security risk:—
a. The Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society is a private housing society at
the entrance to the Colaba Military Station and is located on the road
leading into the Colaba Military Station.
b. Further, Adarsh building is the tallest building consisting of 31 floors on
the main road and at one of the two entrances to the Colaba Military
Station, which can facilitate observations of military vehicles and personnel
moving into and out of the area.
c. The Adarsh building directly overlooks and is in the immediate proximity
of existing military establishment units. The units are: (i) Headquarters—

44
Maharashtra, Gujarat and Goa areas. Headquarters of Mumbai sub-area
are located in close proximity; (ii) Installations include the EME workshop,
storage and disbursal depot for POL, Army supply depot and Navy supply
depot.
In times of enhanced tension and hostilities, these facilities assume greater
criticality and sensitivity. It may be possible for the residents of this building
to observe the number and type of specialized and general performance
vehicles, that may be parked in the EME workshop from which their availability
and serviceability can be analyzed.
d. Security concerns also arise because the potential residents of the Adarsh
building and their guests, who could be foreign nationals, will not be under
the jurisdiction of the Indian Navy or Indian Army authorities and hence not
amenable to security checks.
These are some of the issues which have been submitted on affidavit to the
Hon. High Court. This affidavit is the latest one filed on 24th January, 2011."
157. When the Ministry was asked to furnish the reasons for their inaction on
the security concerns arising out of the construction of building by ACHS especially
when seven years had passed since the security concerns were brought to the notice
of the State Government by the DEO (in June 2003), the AHQ replied as under:—
“All the decision making functionary at HQ MG&G Area involved in Adarsh
case had vested interests.
It is intimated that issues related to construction of the Adarsh Building at
Mumbai were being addressed by HQ M&G Area and DEO, Mumbai as the
land on which ‘Adarsh Co-operating Housing Society, Mumbai’ stands, is not
under the management of the Navy. However, consequent upon the terrorist
attacks in Mumbai between 26 and 29 November 2008, the security environment
in Mumbai has been irrevocably changed. In recognition of the changed
security situation, the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Western Naval
Command was vested with the added responsibility of ensuring coastal security
on the western seaboard. Towards this end, he was additionally designated
Commander-in-Chief Coastal Defence. As a result, security review of all
structures in the vicinity of Naval establishments/areas was undertaken which
included the Colaba Defence Station, where the Adarsh Building is located.
The following actions were initiated by HQ Western Naval Command (HQWNC)
with regard to Adarsh Building:—
(a) Details of the members of the ‘Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.’
were sought from the Deputy Registrar, ‘A’-Ward, Registrar of Societies,
Mumbai, vide HQWNC letter dated 27 Aug., 09. However, the Deputy
Registrar vide letter dated 02.02.2010 intimated that the information was
not available in the format forwarded by HQWNC and HQWNC was
accordingly requested to approach the ‘Adarsh Co-operative Housing
Society Ltd.’ directly, to obtain the requisite information.

45
(b) Thereafter, HQWNC, vide its letters dated 15.03.2010, 15 Apr. and 14 May,
2010 sought details of members of the ‘Adarsh Co-operative Housing
Society Ltd.’ from the society. However, instead of furnishing the names,
the Society on 25.05.2010, replied to say that the list of members was not
yet complete as some names were still pending approval of the Government
of Maharashtra.
(c) A letter was thereafter addressed to the Chief Secretary, Government of
Maharashtra on 08.06.2010, requesting him to issue necessary instructions
to the Deputy Registrar, ‘A’ Ward, to obtain the list of allottees of the
‘Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.’, as per the specified format,
to be forwarded to HQWNC by 21.06.2010. It was further requested that
under no circumstances should an Occupation Certificate – partial or
otherwise—be issued by the State Government authorities to the society,
pending the issue of a security-clearance from this Headquarters.
(d) The matter was reported to IHQ MoD (Navy) by HQWNC on 05.07.2010. The
issue was forwarded by IHQ MoD (Navy) to ADGLWE/IHQ MoD (Army) for
further necessary action as the issues were being addressed by Army
Headquarters.”
158. Expressing anguish, the Committee asked whether the disregard to the
security concerns did not imply the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry towards
matters of national security. In reply, the AHQ stated as under:—
“The disregard to security concerns has taken place primarily at the level of
LMA. Due cognisance has been taken by MoD now and remedial action is being
undertaken.”
159. Admitting that there had been lapse on the part of the officers, the witness
in his deposition before the Committee stated:—
“The other question is : Is there any fault of officers? I would say that yes, in the
sense that if I have a land in possession with me from 1980 onwards, I am using
it. I have constructed a boundary wall around the plot. I am using it for certain
kind of exercise by the Forces. I am doing all these things. Normally speaking, in
such a situation when I am also trying to get that land from the Maharashtra
Government: I am in possession of that land; I am using that land; even if it is not
recorded as my land, I would generally try to see that I do not voluntarily part
with that land but I will continue my efforts to get the land allotted/recorded in
my name. Now, failure of an officer would be that instead of continuing that
effort, if despite his effort the State Government had given that land, it is a
different matter. But we would expect our own officers to make efforts to ensure
that this land is actually not transferred to someone else.”
160. While replying to an unstarred question in Rajya Sabha as to ‘whether some
important files/documents pertaining to Adarsh Housing Society had gone missing’,
the Defence Minister informed the House as under:—
“During investigation, CBI found that file of Ministry of Environment & Forests
(MoEF) related to grant of clearance is reportedly not traceable. CBI is also

46
investigating the case of missing/stolen documents of file of Department of
Urban Development of the Maharashtra Government related to ACHS.”
161. According to the Report of Commission of Inquiry ADARSH CHS Ltd.,
Colaba, Mumbai on the terms of reference Nos. 1 and 2, the conclusion on the issue of
Title to the land in question was:—
“To conclude the foregoing discussion, it may be said that the MoD have failed
to establish their claim of title to the land in question. However, this is not so
with the claim of GoM. Their claim stands established in view of the provisions
of section 294 of the MLRC, 1966. As pointed out earlier, the MLRC, 1966 came
into force on 15-8-1967 and there is no evidence to show that on that date the
land in question was occupied by anybody. Moreover, the same has been
corroborated by other factors viz. admissions on the part of the MoD, absence
of entry in respect of the land in question in the MLR maintained by the DEO and
the inaction on the part of the Army/MoD to assert their alleged right. The
Commission therefore, holds that the land in question belongs to the GoM and
accordingly records its finding on term No. 1 of the reference.”
162. Term No. 2 of Reference was ‘Whether the land in question or the membership
of the Society was reserved for housing defence personnel or Kargil War Heroes’. To
this, the conclusion drawn was:—
“The LOI Exh. GoM-4-A dated 21.1.2003 as well as the LOA Exh. GoM-5-A
dt. 09.07.2004 contained terms and conditions subject to which the land in
question was proposed to be allotted/allotted to the Adarsh CHS. But they do
not contain any term of condition requiring the said society providing
reservation for housing Defence Personnel or Kargil War heroes. Similarly,
there is no G.R.or notification issued by the GoM providing reservation of the
land in question for the defence personnel or Kargil War heroes. In fact at the
time of the arguments the Id. Counsel for the MoD, GoM or even Adarsh CHS
uniformly submitted that there was no such reservation. In view of this position,
there is no difficulty in recording a negative finding on term No. 2 of the
reference.”
163. When the Ministry was asked about the action taken/proposed to be taken
on the conclusions made by the Commission of Inquiry on the issue of ‘title of the
Adarsh land’ it was submitted that:—
“A mandatory two month Notice under section 80(1) of 1908 of CPC has been
served on both the Government of Maharashtra and Adarsh Cooperative Housing
Society on 28.5.2012 to reconsider their legal position in respect of:
(a) said land (plot);
(b) acknowledge the Title of UoI on the same; and

47
(c) handover possession of the property to the UoI/MoD within two months.
Further, it was also submitted:—
“Further action to file Title Suit before the High Court of Bombay in regard
to ownership of said land (plot) will be taken on expiry of notice period of
2 months.”
164. In their latest submission made to the Committee, the MoD have stated as
under:—
“So far as filing of Title suit in respect of Adarsh Land is concerned, Army HQs
have informed that the Title Suit, duly vetted by MoD, has been filed before
Hon’ble High Court of Bombay, by Headquarter, MG & G Area on 14.12.2012.”
165. A copy of the Title Suit as filed before the Court, was forwarded vide MoD
letter No. C-13019/8/2010/D(vig.) dated 22.04.2013. The points urged are:—
(i)  (a) MoD is the lawful owner of the Suit Property.
(b) Mandatory order and direction to the State Government of Maharashtra
to enter the name of MoD in the Survey Register prepared under Section
282 of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Act 1966.
(c) Delete the name of the State Government of Maharashtra and society
registered under Maharashtra Co-operative Societies Act, 1960 from
the said Survey Register/Revenue Records.
(ii) Direction to demolish or cause to be demolished the Adarsh Building and
all other structures elected on the Suit Property and handover vacant
possession of the Suit Property to the MoD.
166. CBI while furnishing the latest information on the investigation submitted:—
“CBI, ACB, Mumbai registered an offence on 29.01.2011 vide RC. No. 6(A)/2011
against Shri R.C. Thakur (A-1) and other accused persons U/s 120-B, 420, 468,
471 IPC and sec. 13(2)r/w 13(1)(d) of PC Act 1988. Subsequently section 3 of
Benami Transactions Act was also added in the case as per the orders dated
17.02.2011 of Hon’ble Bombay High Court.
On completion of investigation the CBI has filed a Charge Sheet against
Shri R.C. Thakur (A-1), Brig. M.M. Wanchu (A-2), Shri K.L. Gidwani (A-3),
Maj. Gen. A.R. Kumar (A-4), Maj. Gen. T.K. Kaul (A-5), Brig. T.K. Sinha (A-6),
Shri P.V . Deshmukh (A-7), Shri Ramanand Tiwari (A-8), Shri Subhash Lalla (A-9),
Dr. Pradeep Vyas (A-10), Shri Ashok Shankarrao Chavan (A-11), Dr. M. Jairaj
Phatak (A-12), Col. (Retd.) R.K. Bakshi (A-13) and Late M. Gurusamy (A-14) (not
sent for trial) constitute offences U/s 120(B), 420 IPC & Section 13(2) r/w 13 (1)
(d) (iii) of PC Act, 1988 on 04.07.2012.
It is also informed that the investigation with respect to allegations of Benami
Transaction/Benami holding of flats in the Adarsh Society is in progress as
directed by the Hon’ble Bombay High Court. On completion of the same a Final
Report U/Sec.173 Cr. P.C. will be filed before the competent Court.”

PART II
OBSERVATIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
Introductory: The C&AG Report No. 11 of 2011-12 on ‘Adarsh Co-operative
Housing Society (ACHS), Mumbai’ presented to Parliament on 9th August, 2011 was
selected for in-depth examination by the Committee at their sitting held on
23rd August 2011. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) handed over the case to the Central
Bureau of Investigation on 9.11.2010 to get the matter thoroughly investigated and
fix responsibility. The Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) on 11th January,
2011, after following due procedure, issued a final order directing the ACHS to
remove the unauthorized construction in its entirety and restore the area to its
original condition. This order of MoEF on being challenged by ACHS in the High
Court of Bombay rendered the matter sub-judice. The other developments in the case
were that Bombay Electricity Supply and Transport Undertaking i.e. BEST
disconnected the electricity of the ACHS on 2.10.2011 and the Mumbai Municipal
Corporation discontinued the water supply on 3.10.2011. When the names of owners
of the flats of ACHS, along with the relevant details were sought by the Committee,
the Ministry of Defence stated that a site visit of the premises of ACHS, was conducted
on 20.1.2012 by officers from Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority.
Statedly, the Secretary of ACHS and the Manager of the Society were present who
handed over a list of Members mentioning the status of the possession given to the
individual flat owners. A Commission of Enquiry was also constituted by the
Maharashtra Government under the Commission of Enquiry Act, 1952 vide a
Notification dated 8.1.2011 under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Justice
Shri J.A. Patil, Retired High Court Judge and Shri P. Subrahmanyam, Retired Chief
Secretary, Government of Maharashtra. The Commission of Enquiry commenced its
proceedings from April 2011. When the Committee started their examination and
called for information relating to Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society through the
Ministry of Defence, Government of India, the Government of Maharashtra submitted
that all the concerned departments of the State Government were directed to submit
the original files/papers relating to ACHS before the Commission of Enquiry. The
Government of Maharashtra also submitted that the Ministry of Defence was
represented before the said Commission through their advocate and therefore,
Ministry of Defence (MoD) could obtain the papers filed by various departments of
Government of Maharashtra from the Commission through their advocate. Further,
the Committee in December 2011, had asked the MoD to obtain photocopies of all the
relevant documents from the State Government of Maharashtra. However, the MoD
could not furnish the said documents to the Committee.
2. Various Irregularities committed: Audit scrutiny revealed how a group of
select officials holding key posts subverted rules and regulations, suppressed facts
and took the ruse of welfare of servicemen and war widows and children. The
Committee’s scrutiny corroborated the irregularities in the entire process right
from allocation of land to the Society, obtaining ‘No Objection’ from the Army, extension
48

49
of various concessions by Government of Maharashtra, getting ‘No Objection
Certificate (NOC)’ from BEST for transfer of developmental rights of the adjoining
land, obtaining clearance for residential development in Coastal Regulation Zone by
certain officials who abused their official position for personal gain. Asked how the
NOC was given to the Society, the MoD stated that the NOC was issued by the local
Defence authorities because of mismanagement of Defence land, poor record keeping
and lack of mutation of land already in possession of the Armed Forces. Further, the
multiplicity of agencies managing Defence land had contributed to the
maladministration with no centralised information being available on land holdings.
With the lines of responsibility and consequently of accountability being blurred, no
agency has accepted responsibility on many aspects of land management. The
Committee consider this a monumental failure at all levels of governance. Apparently,
the Public Servants entrusted with the responsibilities of safeguarding the Public
trust brazenly betrayed the fiduciary trust by acting against all norms of Public
interest and probity.
3. Non-cooperation with Audit: The Committee are deeply concerned to note the
fact that the Audit officials who sought records relating to the case of issue of ‘No
Objection Certificate’ in favour of Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, were initially
denied the same by the Headquarters, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Goa Area (HQ MG&G)
and Headquarters Southern Command, Pune in April-May 2010 and subsequently
given access in September-October 2010. Asked to explain such an attitude of non-
cooperation with the Audit, the Ministry of Defence submitted that Army being a
hierarchical organisation, the visits/inspection by outside Government agencies are
co-ordinated at appropriate level. The Committee deplore the attitude of dilly-dallying
and non-cooperation with the Audit with a view to blocking Parliamentary scrutiny.
The Committee need to be explained such an attitude of non-cooperation and the
measures taken to prevent such recurrences.
4. Lack of proper mechanism to secure ownership of properties: According to
the Agreement in 1958, between Ministry of Defence and the then Government of
Bombay, 41 Acres and 8 Guntas of Defence Land from Santacruz Rifle Range was
transferred to the Government of Bombay for construction of Western Express
Highway on the condition that the State Government in lieu shall give land, in Block
VI, Colaba, Bombay failing which the State Government was to pay the market value
of the land. Out of this, a piece of land measuring 3854 square metres in Block VI,
Colaba was under consideration for exchange with State Government in lieu of the
aforesaid Santacruz land. Though this land had been under the occupation of the
Army, its ownership was not transferred in favour of Ministry of Defence. Further,
the claim for payment in lieu of Defence land already transferred to State Government
was also not finalised. This clearly indicated that the Ministry of Defence did not have
a proper mechanism to secure ownership of its properties. Obviously, the Ministry of
Defence failed to get the land transferred from the State Government when it had
surrendered its land for the construction of Western Express Highway. It is also not
clear as to why the Ministry did not seek the market value of the land which it had
surrendered. The Committee seek reasons from the MoD for the same within
3 months of the presentation of this Report.

50
5. Inadequate management of Defence Estates: The Committee are shocked to
note the laggardly approach of the Ministry of Defence (MoD) to manage its Estates.
When asked if MoD had reached any agreement with the State Government by way of
Memorandum of Understanding for transferring the land at Block VI, Colaba in their
favour, the Ministry submitted that Government of India, MoD letter dated 31.12.1958
had brought out the terms and conditions for transfer of Defence land from the Santa
Cruz Rifle Range to Government of Bombay for construction of the Western Express
Highway and for Slum Clearance Scheme. According to the agreement, once the
proposal for exchange materialized, the Colaba land was to be valued and the difference
between the valuation of Santa Cruz land and Colaba land was to be paid by the
concerned Government. The Committee find that the MoD failed to pursue the matter
to its logical end once they had transferred the land for construction of the Western
Express Highway. Though the findings of the investigation by the CBI in the matter
are awaited, the Committee recommend that MoD initiate urgent measures for efficient
management of the Defence Lands and keep the Committee apprised, as recommended
by them in their report on management of defence estates.
6. The Committee were apprised that the land in question which was under the
possession of the Army had a boundary wall constructed by the MES though MES had
no records available to show about the said construction. The Collector, City of Bombay
in his letter dated 11 December, 1989, while addressing the issue of ‘Grant of Land
admeasuring 1000.00 sq. metre between Back Bay BEST Bus Depot and Prakash
Pethe Marg at Cuffe Parade, Colaba’ for the construction of Rest House for
Ex-Servicemen had stated that ‘the land in question falls in the Block VI, B.B.R.
Estate’. The letter also stated that after the issue was discussed in the meetings held
by the Minister of State for General Administration and Metropolitan Commissioner,
BMRDA with the top officials, it was decided that the matter be referred to the Revenue
and Forests Department as the ‘land in question is in possession of the Military
Department since 1940 and Military area/jurisdiction begins from this demanded
land’. The Ministry also submitted that the subject land was inaugurated as ‘Eco
Park’ by Major General B.A. Cariappa in 1996 and was called as ‘Khukri Park’.
It was also submitted that this Park was maintained by the Garrison Battalions.
The Committee are appalled to note that this very land in possession of the Military
Authorities was handed over to the Society by issuing a ‘No Objection Certificate’
stating “the said land falls in Block No. VI of Colaba Division (Backbay Reclamation
Scheme-VI) which falls outside the Defence Boundary. Necessary action at your end
may be taken as deemed fit for the welfare of service personnel/Ex-servicemen/their
widows”. Furthermore, the Committee found that the ostensibly pious intention of the
Society to look into the ‘Welfare of service personnel/ex-servicemen/their widows’
was lost sight of, as seen from the membership of the Society which kept expanding to
accommodate senior Service Officers, senior civilian public servants and private
individuals, most of whom were relatives of politicians and public servants.
The Committee would like the CBI to expedite its investigation so that the law takes
its course expeditiously and the guilty are brought to justice.
7. Non-mutation of land: The Committee find that the said particular piece of
land was not recorded in Military Land Register. Asked to explain the reason for the

51
land not being mutated in the name of MoD, it was submitted that the Collector,
Mumbai had intimated in 1964 that land from Block VI could not be transferred.
Admitting before the Committee, the Secretary stated ‘poor record keeping and lack
of mutation of the land already in possession of the Armed Forces’ were among the
major reasons that contributed to mismanagement of Defence Land. He added that an
impetus had been given to the computerisation of Defence Land records. It was also
added that subsequent to the event of Adarsh Housing Society a number of remedial
steps have been taken by the Ministry. These included computerisation of all Defence
Land records and a project of survey and demarcation of Defence Land. The Committee
were also informed that computerisation was being done for the whole country and as
on date two registers namely Military Land Register and General Land Register
were being computerised. In addition, two more projects had been initiated for physical
verification and demarcation of Defence Land on ground and digitalisation and also
microfilming of all land records for their preservation. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the outcome of such initiatives within three months of the presentation
of this report.
8. NOC issued by LMA : It is intriguing as to how the MoD issued a
‘No Objection’ for construction of residential building for the proposed private Society
when the Army was in physical possession of the land. On being enquired, the
Committee were apprised that MoD had not issued any NOC for construction of
residential building by a private Society but it was issued by Local Military Authority
(LMA) and Defence Estates Office (DEO) as though these entities were outside the
central command. On being probed further, the Ministry submitted that the Officers
involved at that time, Army as well as civilian officers, more or less have retired.
The Ministry however conceded that prima facie it was a case involving criminality,
and therefore the Government had ordered CBI inquiry. The Committee therefore
expect that the CBI would complete their investigation at the earliest in order to
ensure that officers responsible for their questionable acts of omission and
commission are brought to justice without further delay.
9. Violation of the terms of NOC : The Committee note that the Army Authorities
issued NOC to the Housing Society for the ‘Welfare of servicemen, ex-servicemen
and their widows’. The Committee find that the membership of the Society continued
to expand to accommodate public servants, politicians and their relatives. Asked as to
why NOC was not rescinded once the change in membership of the Society was
noticed by the MoD, it was tacitly admitted that ‘probably because all the decision
making functionaries at HQ MG&G Area, Defence Estates Office (DEO) Mumbai
and Officers of State government were beneficiaries’. It was further submitted that,
DEO Mumbai Circle vide letter dated 16.06.2003 had requested the Collector, Mumbai
not to allot the subject land to Adarsh Cooperative Housing Society (ACHS) and DEO
Mumbai had written to HQ, MG&G Area vide letter dated 14.7.2003 to withdraw the
NOC issued by them to the State Government. However, to the dismay of the Committee,
no action was taken by the concerned authorities. Furthermore, the Committee found
that the Defence authorities did not press their earlier demand of providing
accommodation for the Girls’ Hostel for wards of Army Officers posted in far flung
areas, welfare of Kargil war heroes, welfare of widows of Servicemen for which the

52
Chief Promoter had initially approached the Chief Minister for allotment of land in
question. The Ministry submitted that ‘the Defence Authorities did not press their
earlier demand because in all probability the decision making authorities from
inception till 2010 were interested parties’. The Committee are appalled by the
temerity with which the ruse of welfare of servicemen and ex-servicemen was used by
the select elite belonging to the Services and civilian administration, politicians and
well-heeled individuals connected with them for private profit. Since the Government
have ordered investigation in the matter, the Committee hope the CBI would spill the
beans and help fix individual responsibility with respect to individual cases referred
to in this Audit report who are found to have prevaricated in the matter. The Committee
should like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter in due course.
10. Expansion in membership of the Adarsh Society: The Committee are
distressed to note that the much acclaimed pious avowal of — ‘Welfare of service
personnel, ex-servicemen and their widows’ was used as a smoke screen to corner
prime piece of land by Senior Service Officers, Senior Civilian public servants and
private individuals, most of whom were relatives of politicians and public servants.
The Committee note that the initial list of 40 members of the Society submitted to the
Collector, Mumbai City, largely comprised of individuals belonging to Defence services
and Civilian organisations related to Defence. However, as the case moved in the
corridors of the Mantralaya seeking odd clearances and no objections from various
authorities, the list of membership swelled from time to time as more senior officers
of Services, State Government and private individuals were accommodated. The MoD
however failed to furnish the names of add-on membership in chronological order and
the dates on which successive clearances and objections were taken. The Committee
would like the list of membership on the indicated lines to be prepared and furnished
to the Committee in due course.
11. Modification of MMRDA development plan: The Committee find that flouting
of norms in the case was not restricted only to wrongful appropriation of Government
land to benefit some influential members of the Armed Forces and Civilian officers,
politicians and their relatives. When the Committee sought information from the
Government of Maharashtra, they submitted that a Commission of Enquiry has been
ordered by them to look into the matter holistically including the title of the land
allotted to Adarsh Cooperative Housing Society (ACHS). The Ministry of Defence
while submitting the replies to the Committee stated that the replies to questions
concerning Government of Maharashtra are awaited as the State Government has
said (i) the original files/papers related to ACHS matter have been submitted to the
Commission of Enquiry, (ii) the terms of reference provided to the Commission cover
almost all the questions referred to them, and (iii) the Commission will be submitting
its report to the State Government after recording the evidence of all the concerned
parties. It also stated that it would not be possible to make any comments at this stage.
A perusal of records made available to the Committee reveals that amongst the various
concessions made by the Government of Maharashtra was the modification of Mumbai
Metropolitan Region Development Authority’s Development Plan for the Area to
accommodate the Society. Since the land sought by the Society was reserved for road
widening as per Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority’s (MMRDA)

53
development plan, the Collector, Mumbai City had reported to Revenue and Forest
Department, Government of Maharashtra that NOC from Municipal Corporation of
Greater Mumbai and approval of MMRDA were to be taken. Further, the membership
was to be approved by the Government. The Committee find that the Society while
consenting to accommodate 40 per cent civilian members had given their willingness
to leave an area of 10 to 15 feet for further widening of the road. In this very letter, the
Society had also requested the Revenue Minister to allot land, which was in the
physical custody of Military Authority (MA) ‘to accommodate and reward the Heroes
of Kargil operation who had bravely fought at Kargil to protect our Motherland’.
Notably, an earlier request of Bombay City Sainik Welfare Office for allotment of
land for construction of a rest house had been refused in March 1986 and again in
December 1989 on the ground that the land was earmarked for widening of the road.
Surprisingly, later, i.e. in April, 2002, the Urban Development Department considering
the Society’s request for allotment of land, approved the modifications to the MMRDA
Development Plan. The modifications were deletion of 60.97 metres wide road leading
to South Colaba Harbour link and changing width of Captain Prakash Pethe Marg
from 60.97 metres to 18.40 metres and inclusion of the deleted area in Residential
Zone, Parade Ground, Helipad, Garden and BEST Depot. Thus the area reserved for
roads were converted into residential area paving the way for allotment of the land to
the Society. The Committee hope that appropriate action would be taken by the State
Government of Maharashtra on the report of the Enquiry instituted by them. The
Committee further recommend that Ministry of Defence may keep the Committee
apprised in the matter.
12. Relaxation w.r.t. DCR 1967 and DCR 1991: The Committee observe that
the Society was allowed to circumvent both the Development Control Rules (DCR)
1967 and the DCR 1991. In accordance with DCR 1967, no building could be erected
or raised to a height greater than one and a half times the sum of the width of the
streets on which it abuts and the width of the open space between the street and the
building as measured from the level of the centre of the street in front. Thus, the
maximum height of the Society building permissible as per DCR 1967 was
45.6 metres. The DCR 1991 had no height restriction but brought down the Floor
Space Index (FSI) for Back Bay Reclamation Scheme (BBR) Block VI to 1.33 from
3.5 as per the DCR 1967. The plot in question was categorised as Coastal Regulation
Zone (CRZ) II and for the buildings permitted in that Area, DCR 1967 were applicable.
Though DCR 1967 were to be adhered to for building construction activities proposed
in CRZ II areas of Mumbai, the Society was allowed to apply DCR 1991 in this aspect
as height restriction was not stipulated by DCR 1991. Further, loss of FSI was offset
by transferring the developmental rights of the BEST plot and relaxation of 15 per
cent on account of RG as and when required. Further, against the approval for
27 floors, the Society constructed 28 floors which raised the height to 100.70 metres.
The Municipal Commissioner accepting (21 October 2009) the contention of the
Society that there was no need to obtain fresh NOC from High Rise Committee stated
that Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority’s (MMRDA) approval may
be obtained. The NoC for 28th Floor was issued on 4 August, 2010 when the son of the
Municipal Commissioner became a member of the Society. Also, many relaxations

54
were made in grant of membership and environmental clearances for ineligible
persons, obviously under a certain quid-pro-quo. The Committee do not wish to make
any comment at this stage as the Government of Maharashtra have set up an Enquiry
Commission, to enquire into all specified, connected and individual issues, fix
responsibility on public servants for the lapses on the basis of enquiry conducted and
make recommendation for transparency in Government in land allotment and to
eliminate unwarranted discretion. The Committee would like the Ministry of Defence
to apprise the Committee about the final outcome of the Enquiry Report in due course.
13. Violation of height restriction: The Committee find that the DCR 1967 and
1991 were applied selectively and the Society allowed to construct the building beyond
the permissible height. The maximum height of the Society building permissible as
per DCR 1967 was 45.6 metres and DCR 1991 had no height restriction for buildings
in CRZ-II. The Committee find that the MoEF had failed to prevent construction of a
building of such a height coming up in that area. When the Ministry was asked to
explain their failure, their reply was that no proposal was received from UDD,
Government of Maharashtra seeking CRZ clearance for the construction of building
of M/s ACHS. This is far from convincing and not acceptable to the Committee. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken by the MoEF against those
officials in MCZMA who failed to detect grave environmental violations in their
jurisdiction. The Committee would also like to be apprised about how the MoEF
envisages to ensure that the delegated authorities carried out their duties
conscientiously, without any fear or favour.
14. Lacunae in Acts/Rules/Notifications for environmental protection: The
Committee were apprised by the Ministry of Environment & Forests that detection of
violation of the provisions of the CRZ Notification 1991, is the first duty of the ‘BMC
and the other local authorities’. Notably, in the event of local authorities conniving
with vested interests, as happened in the instant case, the MoEF has no other means
of detecting the violations and taking action against the law violators. The MoEF also
stated that the Regional office of MoEF at Bhopal monitors projects in Maharashtra
region which have been accorded environmental and CRZ clearances by the Ministry
or by the State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authorities. Obviously, in
cases of projects undertaken without environmental clearance, the regional office at
Bhopal had no mechanism to know of such projects much less of taking action against
such projects. The Committee are perturbed to note that the Regional offices so
created across the Country have no proactive role to play and that they act only after
the local authorities detect violation or in cases where project proposals are submitted
to them for necessary environmental clearances. The Committee therefore recommend
that the MoEF plug loopholes in the Acts/Rules/Notification for ensuring proper
forest conservation and environmental protection. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the measures contemplated by the Ministry in this behalf.
15. Tardy pace of CBI investigation: The Preliminary Enquiry conducted by
CBI had detected prima facie serious omissions and commissions on the part of
Defence Officials/State Government officials and based on this a case was registered
by CBI, ACB, Mumbai on 29.1.2011 against 13 persons including officers from

55
Army, Navy, DGDE and others. Further, on completion of investigation the CBI has
filed a chargesheet against the 13 persons on 4.7.2012. CBI has submitted that
investigation with respect to allegations of Benami Transaction/Benami holding of
flats in the Adarsh Society was in progress and on completion the Final Report under
Section 173 Cr. PC will be filed before the Competent Court. The Committee deplore
the tardy pace of investigation. Considering the fact that glaring irregularities were
committed by men in governance, the Committee exhort CBI to expedite its
investigation. The Committee are appalled to note that the Defence Minister while
replying to a Parliamentary question stated that ‘during investigation CBI found that
the file of MoEF relating to grant of clearance is reportedly not traceable’. It was also
added that CBI is also investigating the case of missing/stolen documents/files of the
Department of UDD of the Maharashtra Government related to ACHS. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the files/documents reported missing/untraceable, the
particulars of the Department(s) from where the documents were required to be kept
in safe custody and the efforts made to retrieve the missing documents.
16. Security concerns ignored: In the course of examination, the MoD pleaded
before the Committee that though the land was not recorded in their name, it be
allotted to the Services. Justifying the plea, the Ministry stated that ‘there is a security
imperative’. The Ministry admitted that ‘Adarsh Building is the tallest building
consisting of 31 floors and facilitated observations of military vehicles and personnel
moving into and out of the Colaba Military Station. The building directly overlooked
and was in the immediate proximity of existing military establishment units’. The
apprehension expressed was that in times of enhanced tension and hostilities, it
enabled the residents to observe the number and type of specialized and general
performance vehicles, that are parked in Electronics and Mechanical Engineers
(EME) workshop from which their availability and serviceability could be analysed.
The security concerns arose also because the potential residents of the Adarsh building
could be foreign nationals who would not be under the jurisdiction of the Indian Navy
or Indian Army authorities and thus not amenable to security checks. The
representative of the Ministry conceded before the Committee the security risk
involved in view of the location and the height of the Adarsh building. Surprisingly,
the Ministry of Defence/Military authorities chose to ignore these aspects when the
building was coming up. On being asked as to why the Ministry had not taken seriously
the security concerns arising out of the construction of building by ACHS, the
Ministry of Defence replied that consequent to terrorist attacks in Mumbai between
26 and 29 November, 2008, the security environment in Mumbai had irrevocably
changed. In the changed scenario, the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief, Western
Naval Command was vested with the responsibility of ensuring Coastal security on
the Western Seaboard and was also designated Commander-in-Chief Coastal Defence.
On their part, the HQ WNC had made several attempts from 27 August 2009 to get
the details of the members of the ‘ACHS Ltd.’ which had gone in vain and finally on
5.7.2010 the issue was forwarded to MoD (Army) for further necessary action. The
Committee deplore the cavaliar manner in which a serious issue of security was
overlooked to the detriment of security installation.

56
17. Conclusion: Thus, in conclusion, the Committee find that a group of select
officials holding key posts had subverted rules and regulations, suppressed facts and
took the ruse of welfare of servicemen and war widows and children in cornering the
prime piece of public land in Mumbai. Irregularities were committed in the entire
process right from allocation of land to the Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society,
obtaining ‘No Objection’ from the Army, extension of various concessions by
Government of Maharashtra, procuring ‘No Objection Certificate (NOC)’ from BEST
for transfer of developmental rights of the adjoining land and obtaining clearance for
residential development in Coastal Regulation Zone by certain officials who abused
their official position for personal gains. The Committee hope the Government would
take appropriate remedial action to ward off such incidents in the light of their
recommendation in the preceding paragraphs. The Committee refrain from making
further comments as the matter is still sub judice with respect to the title of the land
and other allied/connected issues.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
4 November, 2013 Chairman,
13 Kartika, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE  I
CHRONOLOGY  OF  EVENTS
Date Event
12
7 February Society submits proposal to the Chief Minister of Maharashtra for
2000 allotment of 3854 square metres of land in Block VI Back Bay
Reclamation for construction of residential building.
19 February Chief Minister marked the Society's proposal to Principal Secretary
2000 (Revenue), Revenue and  Forest Department (RFD), Government of
Maharashtra with instructions to call for the proposal and put up.
06 March RFD, Government of Maharashtra forwarded the Society's proposal
2000 to the Collector, Mumbai City for self-explanatory report.
27 March Site inspection by Collector indicated that the land was enclosed by
2000 a boundary wall constructed by the 'Military Department'.
29 March Collector approached the HQ M&G Area for NOC.
2000
05 April HQ M&G Area informed the Collector that the land fell "outside the
2000 Defence boundary". It was further requested that "necessary action
at your end may be taken as deemed fit for the welfare of Service
personnel/ex-Servicemen/their widows".
12 May 2000 Collector informed RFD that
* the land is reserved for road widening as per MMRDA's 4
development plan, therefore NOC from MCGM5 and approval of
MMRDA should be taken;
* membership should be approved by the Government; and
* Occupancy charges at 20 per cent of market rate as on 1st January
of the year in which the allotment is made is leviable.
02 June 2000 Society in its letter dated 2 June, 2000 accepts in writing to
accommodate 40 per cent civilians as discussed in a meeting on the
same day with Shri Ashok Chavan, Revenue Minister. The Society
requested his help to reward and accommodate the Kargil heroes.
The Minister marked the Society's request to Secretary RFD.
10 April Urban Development Department (UDD) approved modifications by
2002 deletion of 60.97 metres wide road leading to South Colaba Harbour
link and changing width of Captain Prakash Pethe Marg from
60.97 metres to 18.40 metres.
4 Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority.
5 Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai.
57

58
18 January Reve nue and Forest Department Government of Maharashtra
issued 'Letter of Intent' to the Society regarding allotment of the plot
of land.
17 March The Society wrote to Shri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of State for
Urban Development, Government of Maharashtra for allotment of
additional FSI of the adjoining plot used by Brilian-Mumbai Electric
Supply and Transport Undertaking (BEST) as approach road, as it
was finding it difficult to accommodate all the 71 members already
approved by the Government.
10 May Shri Kanhaiyalal Gidwani MLC and a member of the Society
2003 approached Shri Shivajirao Nilangekar, Revenue Minister
Government of Maharashtra for exemption of the income level
beyond Rs. 12,500 in the case of ex-servicemen as a 'good gesture to
our brave soldiers'.
16 June Shri Saurav Ray, Defence Estate Officer's letter to District Collector,
2003 Mumbai conveying certain facts against the proposal to allot land
for ACHS for construction of multi storeyed residential building at
Block VI/VII in Colaba adjacent to the Backbay. Bus Stand/Army
POL Depot.
08 October Out of the 71 members, the Collector scrutinized the eligibility of
2003 41 members with reference to income, domicile in Maharashtra and
caste category and only 30 were found eligible.
09 July Government of Maharashtra accorded sanction for allotment of land
2004 to the Society levying occupancy charges of  Rs. 10.19 crore. List of
20  members approved by the Government was also enclosed with
the sanction.
12 July The Society wrote to Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, Chief Minister of
2004 Maharashtra and Shri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of State for Urban
Development for additional FSI of the adjacent plot used by BEST
as approach road to Backbay Reclamation Depot.
14 July Meeting held by Shri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of State for Urban
2004 Development for discussing the request of the Society for additional
FSI in which Shri Ramanand Tiwari, Pricipal Secretary UDD stated
that the land was reserved for BEST bus depot and was being used
by BEST as access to the Depot, so it was not possible to allot the
FSI of the reserved plot to the Society. The Society was therefore
asked to approach the Government to de-reserve the plot by following
the normal procedure which would take at least six months.
12
2003
2003

59
28 September Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society was formally registered.
2004
04 October The plot was handed over to the Society.
2004
30 October UDD called for the comments of BEST on the Society's request for
2004 allotment of additional FSI of the adjacent plot.
07 December Assistant General Manager (Civil) and Additional GM of BEST
2004 opined that the land should be out of purview of any allotment/
reservation and should be retained as access to the BEST Depot.
15 December In a meeting held by Shri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of State for Urban
2004 Development at Nagpur, representative of  BEST indicated that BEST
would not give NOC as requested by the Principal Secretary
(Revenue) for de-reservation of the land.
05 January In a meeting held in the Chamber of Shri Sunil Tatkare, Minister of
2005 State of  Urban Development, Shri Ramanand Tiwari Pricipal
Secretary UDD stated that the land belonged to the State
Government and if it is to be allotted to BEST, it would be required to
bear the cost of land at the current market rate.
11 January BEST decided to leave the decision to the State Government
2005 regarding the issue of allotment of the FSI of the plot but requested
that the interest of BEST be protected by maintaining present status
of access without any encroachment on the plot.
15 February The State Government amended the GR of 9.7.1999 raising the
2005 income limit for eligibility to all and waiving the requirement of
domicile in respect of serving Defence Personnel and ex-servicemen
belonging to Maharashtra, retired State Government employees and
officers appointed to the Government of Maharashtra.
05 August Government of Maharashtra allowed the additional FSI of the
2005 adjoining land used by BEST to the Society.
Environment clearance and CRZ Violations
11 March In response to a reference by the Urban Develpment Department of
2003 Government of Maharashtra for grant of 'Development Permission'
to the Society, the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Government of India (MoEF) informed UDD that the proposed
residential complex falls in CRZ II and MoEF had already delegated
powers to the concerned State Governments for undertaking
developments in CRZ II. The construction may be taken up as per
the CRZ notification and approved revised Coastal Zone
Management Plan of Mumbai.
12

60
15 March Interpreting this as a 'No Objection Certificate’, Shri P.V . Deshmukh,
2003 Deputy Secretary, UDD informed MCGM that MoEF had
communicated 'No Objection' to residential development in the
CRZ-II by the Society.
28 July The State Government set up 'High Rise Committee' to scrutinize
2004 development proposals of all buildings having height more than
70 metres.
06 September MMRDA deducted 15 per cent FSI for Recreation Ground while
2005 approving the building plan of the Society.
06 September MMRDA issued Commencement Certificate for the building up to
2005 plinth level.
11 June MMRDA forwarded Commencement Certificate to MCGM up to
2007 four floors.
01 September High Rise Committee issued NOC for 3rd to 27th upper floors with a
2007 height of 97.60 metres up to terrace floor level (Stilt+2 level podium
+1st and 2nd floor for commercial use+3rd to 27th upper residential
floors).
22 January MMRDA forwarded Commencement Certificate to MCGM from
2008 5th to 27th Floor.
2 January The Society approached MMRDA to grant FSI in lieu of 15 per cent
2009 FSI for Recreation Ground deducted by MMRDA.
24 March MMRDA took up the case with UDD for approval to exclude the
2009 15 per cent deduction on account of Recreation Ground.
20 July UDD approved the proposal to exclude the 15 per cent deduction
2009 on account of Recreation Ground.
14 October Meeting in MCGM to consider the proposal of the Society to
2009 regularize the 28th floor constructed by the Society without insisting
on clerance from the High Rise Committee.
21 October Shri Jairaj Phatak, Commissioner MCGM accepted the proposal of
2009 the Society to regularize the 28th floor without clearance from the
High Rise Committee and to obtain the approval of MMRDA.
09 November MCGM informed the Society to obtain the approval of MMRDA for
2009 regularization of the additional 28th floor.
04 August Commencement Certificate for 28th floor issued by MMRDA
2010 directly to the Society.
16 September MMRDA approved issuance of occupancy certificate for stilt +
2010 2 level podium + 28 upper floors.
12

61
30 October Occupancy certificate was cancelled by MMRDA.
2010
15 November Principal Secretary, UDD observed that orders for exclusion of the
2010 15 per cent FSI for Recreation Ground were issued without
verification about the availability of 15 per cent Recreation Ground
in the BBR scheme as large tracts of land otherwise served as
Recreation Ground were occupied by slums.
12

62
ANNEXURE II
LIST OF MEMBERS OF THE SOCIETY ON V ARIOUS DATES
Sl. List of 40 List of 31 List of 20 List of 51 List of 71 List of 103
No. Members as Members as on Members Members Members Approved
on 10.04.2000 02.06.2000 Dated Dated Dated Members of
09.07.2004 (M) 24.08.2004 (M) 29.09.2004 ACHS
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Brig. M.M. Wanchu, Brig. M.M. Wanchu, Shri R.C. Thakur, K. Ashish Tondon Shri Ramchandra R.C.Thakur
Secretary Secretary Chief Promoter Sonelal Thakur
2. Shri R.C. Thakur, Shri R.C. Thakur, Chief Brig. M.M. Wanchu, Lt. A. Pooran Brig. Madanmohan Brig. M.M. W anchu
Chief Promoter Promoter Secretary Kumar Jagdish Prasad Wanchu
3. Col. K.J.S. Khurana Col. K.J.S. Khurana Cdr. Rajiv Pilo Major General Capt. Ashish Cdr. Rajiv Pilo
Virender Singh Soamidayal
Yadav T andon
4. Cdr. S.P. Singh Major R.K. Singh Capt. A.S. Major General Cdr. Rajiv Pilo Cdr . A.S.
Balakrishnan Pitambar Kishor Balakrishnan
Rampal
5. Major R.K. Singh Major M.D. Singh Lt. Col. P.S. Tampi Col. Amarjeet Lt. Arigapudi Surg. Capt. P .S.
Singh Puran Kumar Thampi
6. Major M.D. Singh Col. R.K. Bakshi Shri P.K. Hinduja Lt. Col. P.H. Ram Maj. Gen. Parmanand
V arinder Singh Hinduja
7. Col. R.K. Bakshi Col. S.D. Tandon Shri Sudhakar Brig. Avinash Maj. Gen. Sudhakar Laxman
Laxman Madke Chandra Chopra Pitambar Kishor Madke
8. Col. S.D. Tandon Lt. A. Puran Kumar Smt. Sushila Major R.K. Singh Col. Amarjeet Smt. Sushila
Shaligram Singh Shaligram
9. Lt. A. Puran Kumar Brig A.C. Chopra Admiral Lt. Cdr. John Lt. Col. P.H. Ram Admiral
Madhvendra Singh Mathew Madhvendra Singh

63
10. Brig. A.C. Chopra Ltd. Gen. I.K. V arma Shri J.M. Rear Admiral R.P. Brig Abhinash Shri J.M.
Abhayankar Sutan Chander Hansraj Abhayankar
Chopra
11. Brig. H.H. Israni Smt. Sushila Shaligram Shri V.B. Major General Tej Cdr . Alampallam Shri P.V.
Deshmukh Krishan Kaul Swetaranyam Deshmukh
Balakrishana
12. Lt. Gen. I.K. V arma Cdr. Rajiv Pilo Shri Gajanan Lt. General Major Rajeev Gajanan Sadashiv
Sadashiv Koli Gurubaksh Singh Kumar Hitnarain Koli
Sihota Singh
13. Brig. T.K. Kaul Capt. K.H. Chaoji Shri Sanjay Ruke Major M.D. Singh Lt. Cdr. John Amol Vithoba
Mathews Kharbhar
14. Smt. Sushila Shri R. Srinivasan Shri Amol Vithoba Capt. Gopal Cdr. Kiran Bhadange
Shaligram Karbhari Bharati Parmeswaran
Shyamsunder Tampi
15. Cdr. Rajiv Pilo Shri K. Subramanian Shri Kiran Shri Romesh Rear Admiral R. Kanhaiyalal Gidvani
Bhadange Chandra Sharma P . Suthan
16. Capt. K.H. Chaoji Shri D.K. Reddy Kum. Hrusha M. Lt. Gen. Shantnu Parmanand Kailash K. Gidvani
Havnoor Chaudhray Kishanchand Hinduja
17. Shri R. Srinivasan Shri M. Gurusamy Shri Kanhaiyalal V . V . Adm. Madanjit Shri Sudhakar Amit K. Gidvani
Gidvani Singh Laxaman Madke
18. Shri K. Shri P .K. Hinduja Shri Kailash K. Col. Tarakant Smt. Sushila Shri Arun P. Pawar
Subramanian Gidvani Sinha Shaligram
19. Shri Aditya Kumar Col. Amarjit Singh Shri Amit K. Gidvani Col. A.P. Singh Maj. Gen. Tej Kishen Maj. Ashish Tan
Kaul
20. Shri D.K. Reddy Lt. Col. P.H. Ram Shri Arun Shri L.K. Admiral Lt. Cdr. A. Puran
Pandurang Pawar Chunnilal Madhvendra Kumar
Singh

64
21. Shri M. Gurusamy Brig. R.C. Sharma Smt. Suljata Lt. Gen. G.S. Maj. Gen. V .S.
Nanasaheb Mane Sihota Yadav
22. Shri P.K. Hinduja Lt. Cdr. G.S. Garewal Shri Rajesh Maj. M.D. Singh Lt. Gen. P.K.
Shantilal Bora Rampa
23. Col. Amarjit Singh Capt. Pravin Kumar Shri Arun V . Shri J.M. C ol. Amarjeet Singh
Davale Abhayankar
24. Lt. Col. P.H. Ram Lt. Cdr. J.E. Mathew Shri Sampat R. Capt. Gopal Bharti Lt. Col. P.H. Ram
Khidse
25. Lt Col. R.M. Jain Cdr. A.S. Balakrishna Shri Anand S. Shri P.V. Brig. A.C. Chopra
Bharose Deshmukh
26. Brig R.C. Sharma Rear Admiral R.P Smt. Seema V yas Shri Gajanan Lt. Col. R.K. Singh
Sutan Sadashiv Koli
27. Lt. Cdr. G. S. Shri R.P. Singh Shri Kanishka Shri Sanjay Commander John
Garewal Jairaj Pathak Raghunath Ruke Mathew
28. Capt. Pravin Kumar Maj. Ajay S. Kapoor Smt. Supriya V . Shri Amol Maj. Gen. Tej
Mahske V othoba Karbhari Kishen Kaul
29. Lt. Cdr. J.E. Brig. P.K. Rampal Shrinivas Shri Kiran Lt. Gen. G.S. Shihota
Mathew Dadasahib Patil V amanrao
Bhadange
30. Cdr. A.S. Brig. H.H. Israni Shri Eknath Miss Harusha M. Brig. M.D. Singh
Balakrishna Da mu Rathod Havnur
31. Lt. Col. H.S. Sub. R.N. Thakur Shri Shivjirao C. Shri Kanhaiyalal Cmdr. Gopal Bharti
Garewal Deshmukh Gidwani
32. Rear Admiral R.P. Shri Shah Dhaval Shri Kailash K. Brig.
Sutan Rajesh Gidwani Romeshchander Sharma
33. Surgeon Cdr. P .S. Mrs. Kavita Shri Amit K. Lt. Gen. Shanta
Tambi Shyam Godbole Gidwani Choudhry
12 3 4 5 6 7

65
34. Shri R.P. Singh Shri Harbhajan Shri Arun P. Pawar V . Adm. Madajijit
Singh Singh
35. Maj. Ajay S. Kapoor Shri Malav Brig. Romesh Brig. T ara Kant
Jayanta Shah Chandra Shrama Sinha
36. Col. S.K. Jain Shri Rajesh Lt. Gen. Shantonu Capt. A.P . Singh
Kumar Das Chudhary
37. Lt. Col. H.S, Puri Shri Aditya V ice Admiral Lt. Cdr. Chunnilal
Bhagat Patil Madanjit Singh
38. Maj. Ramesh Smt. Sumeela Col. Tara Kant Shri Rajesh
Bakshi Sethi Sinha Shantilal Bora
39. Brig. P.K. Rampal Shri Capt. A.P . Singh Dr. Arun V. Dawle
Chandrashekhar
Ramrao Gaikwad
40. Sub. R.N. Thakur Shri Shivaji Lt. Cdr. Chunnilal Sampat R. Khidse
Shankar Kale
41. Shri Krishnarao Smt. Suljata Anand S. Bharose
Dhondiba Nanasaheb Mane
Bhegade
42. Dr. Sanjay Shri Rajesh Seema V yas
Radkar Shantial Bora
43. Shri Arun Sopan Shri Arun V . Davale Kanishka J. Pathak
Adale
44. Shri Jitendra Shri Sampat R. Supriya V . Maske
Satish Awhad Khidse
45. Ms. Soniya Shri Anand S. Shriniwas D. Patil
Suresh Kolhapure Bharose
46. Shri Vishwas Smt. Seema V yas Shivajirao C. Deshmukh
Bapu Chougale

66
47. Shri Raghunath Shri Kanishka Shah Dhaval
Maruti Bhosale Jairaj Pathak Rajesh
48. Shri Suresh Smt. Supriya V . Kavita S. Godbole
Prabhakar Maske
Prabhu
49. Shri Uttam Shri Shrinivas Cdr. Harbhajan
Ramkrishna Dadasahib Patil Singh (Retd.)
Ghakare
50. Major N.W. Shri Eknath Damu Malav J. Shah
Khankhoje Rathod
51. Shri Nivruti Shri Shivjirao C. Rajesh Kumar Das
Ganpati Bhosale Deshmukh
52. Shri Shah Dhaval Aditya B. Patil
Rajesh
53. Ms. Kavita Shyam Sumeela Sethi
Godbole
54. Cdr. Harbhajan Chendrashekar R.
Singh Gaikwad
55. Shri Malav J. Shivajirao Shankar
Shah Kale
56. Shri Rajeesh Krishnarao D.
Kumar Das Bhegade
57. Shri Aditya Bhagat Dr. Sanjay Radkar
Patil
58. Smt. Sumeela Arun S. Adate
Sethi
59. Shri Jitendra S. A whad
Chandrashekhar
Ramrao Gaikawad
12 3 4 5 6 7

67
60. Shri Shivaji Soniya S.
Shankar Kale Kolapure
61. Shri Krishnarao V ishwas B.
Dhondiba Chougale
Bhegade
62. Dr. Sanjay Raghunath M.
Rajaram Radkar Bhosale
63. Shri Arun Sopan Suresh Prabhu
Adate
64. Shri Jitendra Uttam Ghakare
Satish Awhad
65. Ms. Soniya Maj.  N.W.
Suresh Kolhapure Khankhoje
66. Shri Vishwas Nivruti G. Bhosale
Bapu Chougale
67. Shri Raghunath Amar Singh
Maruti Bhosale W aghmare
68. Shri Suresh Lt. Gen. Tejinder
Prabhakar Prabhu Singh, VSM (Ex.)
69. Shri Uttam Babasaheb
Ghakare Kuperkar
70. Major N.W. Ranjit Chintaman
Khankhoje Sangitrao
71. Shri Nivruti Devyani
Ganpati Bhosale Khobragade
72. Lt. Cdr. Gurumukh
S. Grewal
73. Seema Vinod
Sharma

68
74. Jagdish Ambika
Prasad Sharma
75. Sajjan Singh Yadav
76. Kedari Vishal
Kishore
77. Gen. Nirmal
Chander  Vij
78. Gen. Deepak
Kapoor
79. Idezes Angmo
Kundan
80. Onkar Tiwari
81. Balasahib
Yeshwantrao
Sawant
82. Sadusingh Pulsingh
Rajput
83. Mukundrao
Govindrao Mankar
84. Sanjoy Shankara
85. Paramveer Abha
Sancheti
86. Suresh Gulabrao
Atram
87. Sheetal Vinod
Ganju
12 3 4 5 6 7

69
88. Anil Kumar Thakaru
89. Bhavesh Amabalal
Patel
90. Bhagwati
Manoharlal Sharma
91. Madanlal Milkiram
Sharma
92. Satyasandha
Vinayak Barve
93. Maj. Gen. Ram
Kanwar Hooda
94. Dhondiram Ganpati
Waghmare
95. Col K.J.S. Khurana
96. Raorane Rupali
Harishchandra
97. Siddhartha Sonu
Gamre
98. Girish
Pravinchandra
Mehta
99. Manilal K. Thakur
100. Sushil Chand
Sharma
101. S.B. Chavan
102. Capt. Praveen
Kumar
103. Dr. Archana Tiwari

ANNEXURE III
Revenue & Forest Department
D.O. No. LND 2512/176/C.R.85/J-2. 32nd floor, Centre-1 Bldg.,
World Trade Centre Complex, Cuffe Parade,
Mumbai-400 005.
Tel.: 022-27869567
S.S. Kshatriya, IAS
Additional Chief Secretary (Revenue)
Date:
Dear Shankar Aggarwal,
Please refer to your demi official letter No. C-13019/8/2010/D(Vig. III) dated
26.09.2012 and subsequent reminders dated 6.03.2012 and 11.03.2013 from the MoD.
With reference to your above mentioned correspondence, it is stated that this
government had sought a report from the Collector, Mumbai City, which he has
submitted vide his letter No. CSLR/REV1/T-1/BBR Block-6/ACHS/2012/6036, dated
3.12.2012. A translated copy of the said letter is being enclosed herewith for your ready
reference.
Regards,
Sd/-
S.S. Kshatriya
Encl. As above.
Shri Shankar Aggarwal,
Additional Secretary,
 Government of India,
Ministry of Defence,
Department of Defence,
New Delhi-110 011.
70

71
(Translated copy)
Collector and District Magistrate,
Collector Office, Mumbai, Mumbai City
Old Custom House, Shahid Bhagat Singh Road, Fort, Mumbai-400 001.
Fax. 22661239, Tel. 22665233, Email: collector_mumbaicity@maharashtra.gov.in
(Revenue Branch)
No. CS LR/REV .1/T-1 BBR Block-6/ACHS/2010 Dtd. 3rd December, 2012
To,
Hon. Addl. Chief Secretary,
Revenue & Forest Department,
32nd Flr. World Trade Centre,
Cuffe Parade, Colaba,
Mumbai-400 005.
Subject : Seeking additional information about members of Adarsh C.H.S.
Reference: Govt. Revenue & Forest Department's letter No. Land 2512/R. No. 176/J-2,
dtd. 16.11.2012
With the above cited letter, a letter from Hon.  Addl. Secretary, Government of
India, Ministry of Defence, No. 13019/8/2010/D (Vig. III) has been sent and it is directed
to furnish  additional information about the members of Adarsh C.H.S. to the
government.
Vide the paragraph numbers 3 & 4 of the said letter following information is
sought.
3. As regards information in respect of (ii) above, information provided by the
State Govt. of Maharashtra is the final list of 102 members of the society as against
71 members which were registered initially. It was observed from this list that out of the
71 members, the names of 7 originally registered members have been deleted and
38 new names have been added at subsequent stages.
4. PAC has specifically asked for subsequent inclusions in the list of members of
the Society (including the particulars of the members) till the matter became  sub-
judice, the information given by the State Govt. does not  divulge (i)  various dates
when names of 7 originally registered members were deleted, and (ii) various dates
when 38 new members were added to the original list including  reasons for such
inclusion/deletion.
In this connection following information is being submitted.
2. In the  paragraph 3 above it is mentioned that, from the 71 members approved
by the Government 7 initial members have been excluded and an approval/sanction

72
has been accorded to 38 new members. However it is confirmed from the files of this
office that from the initial 71 members, 5 members have been excluded and an approval
to 36 new members has been accorded by the collector office. While giving final
approval to 36 members, 2 new members have been included in place of 2 initial members.
It means that 5  members from the Government approved list have been excluded and
new members have been included by replacing 5 members from the collector approved
list. In addition to this 2 members from the collector approved list have been replaced.
3. Particulars of names of 5 members excluded from the list of initial 71 members,
approved names of members to be included in this place, date of approval etc., are  as
below:—
Sl. Name of the Orignal Name of the new Member Date of Approval to
No. Member included in vice of Old New Member ( i.e., this
Members is also the date of
deletion of Old Members)
1. Shri Sanjay Rukhe Shri Siddharth Sonu Gamre 05.05.2010 I
2. Miss Harusha M. Havnur Shri Grish Pravinchandra 05.05.2010 II
Mehta
3. R. Adm. Raman Prem Suthan Shri Jagdish Ambika Prasad 10.11.2008 III
Sharma
4. Smt. Sujata Nanasaheb Mane Shri Amarsingh W aghmare 08.02.2008 IV
5. Shri Eknath Damu Rathod Dr. S.B. Chavan 25.08.2010 V
i.e. 64 Original Members
4. Particulars of names of 36 new members approved by the collector and dates
of approval are as below. It is inclusive of names of 5 New Members:—
Sl. The Name of New Members Date of Approval The Name of New
No. given by the Member is included in
Collector place of the Following
Member
12 3 4
1. Shri Amarsingh W aghmare 08.02.2008 Smt. Sujata N. Mane (IV
Govt. List)
2. Shri Sushil Kumar Sharma 08.02.2008 Major R .S. Randhawa
(Collector List)
3. Shri Krishnajirao Rakhmajirao 05.05.2010
Desai C/o Babasaheb Kupekar
4. Shri Onkar Tiwari 05.05.2010
5. Shri Ranjeet C. Sangitrao 05.05.2010
6. Shri Balasaheb Y . Sawant 05.05.2010
7. Smt. Devyani Khobragade 05.05.2010
8. Shri Dhondiram G . Waghmare 05.05.2010
9. Lt. Commander 10.11.2008
Gurumukhasingh Grewal

73
10. Smt. Seema Vinod Sharma 10.11.2008
11. Shri Jagdish Ambikaprasad 10.11.2008 R.Adm. Raman Prem Suthan
Sharma (III Govt. List)
12. Shri Sajansingh Y adav 10.11.2008
13. Shri Kedar Vishal Kishore 10.11.2008
14. Shri Sandusingh Fulsingh 15.04.2009
Rajput
15. Shri Mukundrao Govindrao 15.04.2009
Mankar
16. Shri Sanjoy Shankaran 15.04.2009
17. Smt. Idzes A. Kundan 18.04.2009
18. Shri Paramveer Abhay Sancheti 31.07.2009
19. Shri Gulabrao Govind Atram 31.07.2009
20. Gen. Nirmal Chandar Veej 06.2009
21. Shri Gen. Deepak Kapur 06.2009
22. Smt. Sheetal Vinod Gajnju 20.08.2009
23. Shri Anilkumar Thakur 20.08.2009
24. Shri Bhavesh Ambalal Patel 20.08.2009
25. Smt. Bhagvati Manoharlal 20.08.2009
Sharma
26. Shri Madanlal Mildhiram 20.08.2009
Sharma
27. Prof. Satyasandha Vinayak 20.08.2009
Barve
28. Major Gen. Ram Genral Huda 20.08.2009
29. Miss Rupali Harishchandra 05.05.2010 Shri Dilip V alse Patil
Raorane (Collector List)
30. Colonel D.J. Khurana 22.03.2010
31. Shri Siddarth Sonu Gamre 05.05.2010 Shri Sanjay R. Rukhe
(I. Govt. List)
32. Shri Grish Praveenchandra 05.05.2010 Miss Harusha M. Havnur
Mehta (II. Govt. List)
33. Shri Manilal K. Thakur 05.05.2010
34. Shri S.B. Chavan 25.08.2010 Shri Eknath D. Rathod
(V. Govt. List)
35. Captain Praveen Kumar 25.08.2010
36. Dr. Archana Tiwari 03.09.2010
Information as above is being submitted and it is requested to take further
necessary action.
Collector, Mumbai City
12 3 4

74
APPENDIX  A
20. The Governor in Council is pleased to declare the whole of the
Island of Colaba, excluding Old Women’s Island, to be a Military
Cantonment, and subject to the Regulation of 1793*, which are to be
strictly enforced.
————
Receipt and Issue of Barrack Stores
21. The duty of the Receipt and Delivery of all Barrack Stores, shall
belong to the Department of Barrack Master.
22. Whenever a Corps arrives at the Presidency or other Station, the
Barrack Master, or Officer appointed to execute the duties of that Office,
shall deliver to the Quarter Master of the Corps complete Barrack Furniture
of every kind, according to the actual strength of the Regiment or Battalion,
taking the Quarter Master's Receipt for the same in duplicate†.
23. Whenever a Corps moves to take the Field, or to proceed to
another Station, every Article of Barrack Furniture and Stores shall be
delivered over by the Quarter Master of the Corps, to the Barrack Master,
or Officer appointed to execute the duties of that Office, who must grant a
Receipt for the same in duplicate†.
24. Previous to the Issue of Store Furniture by the Barrack Master,
or the return of them by the Quarter Master of Corps, a survey by a
Committee of Officers shall take place on the same Stores, if time will
permit; and, if not, the Receipts shall specify as nearly as possible, the
state and condition of the Articles received and delivered.
25. The Reports of the Committee of Officers, and the duplicate of
the Receipts passed by the Barrack Master and Quarter Masters of Corps,
shall be transmitted to the Quarter Master General.
*See Art. 19. † See Art. 6.
74
C.G.O. 25th
Aug., 1821.
C.G.O. 26th
April, 1795.

(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
75

(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
76

77
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
APPENDIX B

APPENDIX C
78
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.

(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
APPENDIX C 1
79

(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
APPENDIX D
80

(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
APPENDIX  D1
81

(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
APPENDIX E
82

APPENDIX  F
2032/Land/154/E-2 Garrison Engineer (West)
Colaba, Mumbai-05
20th Dec., 2008
HQ Mumbai Sub Area
(Stn. Cell)
Colaba, Mumbai
STATUS OF BLDGS. IN OLD SHO COMPLEX
1. Ref. your letter No. 4274/7/Wks./(W)/23 dt. 23 Dec., 2008.
2. Details asked for are furnished as under:—
Sl. Bldg. Y ear of Purpose/Occupn. Spl. Repair/ Remarks
No. No. Constr . Description of addn./altn. carried out Incl.
bldg. cost incurred (in Rs.)
(a) T-1/1 28-2-66 Office (C.I.C.A) * Cost of Constr.: 16640.06 Ref. Appx.'A'
SHO/GE's Office * Repairs :               625.22 Page No.-4
           1650.84
         17228.24
Total Cost :         36144.36
(b) T-1 1940/41 Office (IWT 6 * Cost of Constr.: 13942.96 Ref. Appx.'A'
Docks)/AWWA pet *Repairs :              1650.84 Page No.-5
Clinic                             10800.00
* Total Cost :       26393.80
(c) T-3 1940/41 Store Room (used * Cost of Constr.:    8654.96 Ref. Appx.'A'
at GE's Office) * Repairs :              6071.00 Page No.-5
* Total Cost:        14725.96
(d) T-3/J 1965/66 Fencing with gate Cost Included in Ser No. 2(c). Ref. Appx.'A'
285 RM Page No.-5
(e) T-4 1940/41 Store Room (used * Cost of Constr.:  12520.00 Ref. Appx.'A'
at GE's Office) * Repairs : Page No.-5
* Total Cost :       12520.00
(f) T-1/J Not Perimeter wall * Cost of Constr.:  -Not Known Ref. Appx.'A'
Known along Ganesh * Spl. Repairs :  1000399.00 Page No.-6&7
Murthy Nagar    T otal Cost :   1000399.00
(g) T-88 1940/41 Barrack office (6 * Cost of Constr.:    2226.00 Ref. Appx.'A'
Dock I.W.T.) * Spl. Repairs :        1650.84 Page No.-8
                               5955.50
* Total Cost :          9832.34
(h) T-106 2-1-71 Cycle Shed * Cost of Constr.:     1431.78 Ref. Appx.'A'
* Spl. Repairs: Page No.-9
* Total Cost :          1431.78
(i) T-2 1942 POL Depot office * Cost of Constr.:     1790.00 Ref. Appx.'B'
* Spl. Repairs: Page No.-4
* Total Cost :          1790.00
3. For info. and necessary action please.
Sd/-
(A. Handique)
Lt. Col. Garrison Engineer (West)
Encls. (As Above)
Copy to:—
HQ MG & G Area (Q/L)
HQ MSA (Q/L)
83
Server 3\e\REPORT 2014\4622LS\4622LS1 (83-113) FINAL

84
Sheet No...... REGISTER OF
No. of Description Periodical Completion No. and Date of W ater W F R Length  Breadth  Plinth Capital Corts
Building (if double storeyed Services Drawings type of erection laid on in Mtrs. in Mtrs.    area excluding site
insert D.S. in bracket) Measurement accomoda- or (W) sq. mtrs. and electrical
Book tion Purchase Sewerage Installations
existing Installation
fitted (S)
1              2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
RTMB-1 (TRANSIT CAMP) 18916.12
1650.04
17265.28
T/1/1 OFFICE (C.I..C-A.) 28.2.66 (w) & (s) A J T 119.50 16 640.06
SHO 625.22
Compound wall around SHO office
T -2 CENTRY BOX 7.4.75 W ooden 1.20 1.20 1.44 1474.08
PF PLATFORM 20.6.88 1.80 2.05 2605.00
T/1 BC LATRINE BLOCK 10.11.67 A J Z 1.17 1.50 1.75 2212.00
410.00
2622.00
T/2 BC LATRINE BLOCK WITH 400 GLS A J Z 2.60 2.05 5.33 1502.34
WA TER TANK
T -3 R AND O HUT 17.12.73 7.50 9.35 70.12 2000.00
T -4 R AND O HUT 17.12.73 7.50 9.35 70.12 2000.00
T -5 POL STORE 30.3.74 A J T 3.50 3.40 11.90 3328.33
T -6 GATE OFFICE 30.3.74 A J T 3.00 3.00 9.00 3328.33
T -7 PAINT STORE 30.3.74 A J T 3.30 3.10 10.23 3328.33
T -8 INDIAN TYPE WC 30.3.76
T-7/ BITUMINIOUS HARD STANDING 26.07.06 - - - - H 5-9.7 3.06 29.10 492106.00
HS AND PARTITION WALL AT PARKING PW-21.30 2.20 46.86RM
AREA
Nature of Walls, Floor
and RoofReference to External Dimensions

85
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.

86
TRANSIT CAMP COLABA
T/1 OFFICE (IWT 6 DOCKS) 1940-41 C J A 27.60 8.07 223.43 26 393.80
(AWWA PET CLINIC)
T/2 GUARD ROOM 1940-41 (W) C J A 58.28 8.07 470.90 38 143.14
T/3 STORE ROOM (USED AS GE's OFFICE) 1940-41 W C J A 48.98 8.47 414.90 8654.96
T/3-J FENCING WITH GATES 1955-56 - - - - 285.0RM
RM
T/4 STORE ROOM (USED AS GE's OFFICE) 1940-41 - C J A 8.07 249.30 12 520.00
T/5 STORE ROOM (USED AS GE's OFFICE) 1940-41 - C J A 24.76 8.07 200.01 4608.00
T/6 OFFICER'S MESS (JCO'S MESS) 1940-41 - C J A 31.76 16.10 501.90 24 699.00
T/6 LATRINE & URINAL 1940-41 - C J A 3.35 2.59 8.69 584.00
T/6 B-A OFFICERS COOK HOUSE 1940-41 (WJCS) C J A 15.69 8.15
T/7-J C J S 9.14 6.09 183.66 3252.48
SF SECURITY FENCING 31.3.85 - 1.5 high 160 RM 7031.46
T/7 SINGLE OFFICER QRS 7 C TYPE 31.1.69 (W) (S) A M A 28.73 7.76 37 317.05
(Single JCO's Qrs) Qrs 3/4.33 2.66 263.50
T/8 SINGLE OFFICER QRS 7C Type 31.1.69 (W) (S) A M A 28.73 7.76
(Single JCO's Qrs) Qrs 3/4.33 2.66 263.50 37217.03
1/2.66 2.66
T/9 Institute (Single JCO's Qrs) 1940-41 (W) (S) C J A 85.91 15.32 1312.93 41863.60
T/9 A COOK HOUSE 1940-41 (W) (S) C J K 18.51 8.07 1149.54 2112.00
T/9-D URINAL BLOCK 1940-41 (W) (S) C J S 6.78 2.89 19.60 285.00
T/1-J PERIMETER W ALL ALONG MURTHY ND 600RM
Sheet No. 2 REGISTER OF
No. of Description Periodical Completion No. and Date of W ater W F R Length  Breadth  Plinth Capital Cost
Building (if double storeyed Services Drawings type of erection laid on in Mtrs. in Mtrs.    area excluding site
insert D.S. in bracket) Measurement accommo- or (W) sq. m trs. and electrical
Book dation Purchase Sewerage Installations
existing Installation
fitted (S)
12 3 4 5 67 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
Nature of  Walls, Floor
and RoofReference to External Dimensions

87
(i) No. appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.

88
Sheet No. 7 REGISTER OF
No. of Description Periodical Completion No. and Date of W ater W F R Length  Breadth  Plinth Capital Cost
Building (if double storeyed Services Drawings type of erection laid on in Mtrs. in Mtrs.    area excluding site
insert D.S. in bracket) Measurement accommo- or (W) sq. mts. and electrical
Book dation Purchase Sewerage Installations
existing Installation
fitted (S)
  1               2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 1 1 2 13 14
Nature of  Walls, Floor
and RoofReference to External Dimensions
TRANSIT CAMP COLABA (Contd.)
T/87 Single officers Qrs. near 6 Docks 4 Qrs ‘6’ 1940-41 A J S 27.45 8.07 221.56 18.254
-do- A J S 12.80 8.07 103.39 2226.00
T/88 Barrack Office 6 Dock  I.W.T. 3876.84
T/89 SUB STN: No. 5 Near Ors. Qrs. Building No. 12 NR A J Z 4.57 4.57 20.90 450.00
T/90 Pump House No. 12 A J K 3.50 2.97 10.40 224.00
T/91 SUMP 22500 gal Capacity A J K 10.21 4.72 48.21 1038.00
T/92 -do- A J K 10.21 4.72 48.21 1038.00
T/90-91 Compound Wall 1940-41 A 2/18.59 2/15.88 89/46 1926.00
-92/J 0.45 2.28 RM 1926.00
T/95 Substn No-4 1955 A J Z 5.25 5.25 27.63 2790.00
T/96(PT) Reservoir (Near GE's Office) 2 lakh gls -do- W B T Z 23.15 13.16 314.46 87933.45
T/97 (PT) -do- Pump House -do- W A J Z 6.24 5.16 32.42 6474.53
T/97-1 Pump House 2 pumps Sets 1956 A J Z 5.26 6.29 33.25
T/99 Sentry Box For 752 in of TPT Platform 5-3.62 wooden 328.98

89
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.

90
Sheet No. 9 REGISTER OF
No. of Description Periodical Completion No. and Date of W ater W F R Length  Breadth  Plinth Capital Cost
Building (if double storeyed Services Drawings type of erection laid on in Mtrs. in Mtrs.    area excluding site
insert D.S. in bracket) Measurement accomoda- or (W) Sq.    and electrical
Book tion Purchase Sewerage Mtrs. Installations
existing Installation
fitted (S)
  1                2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 1 1 2 1 3 14
MISCELLANEOUS
Sewage Line for T/3, T/4, T/5 1115.00
Transit Camp and T/I 500 Store
T/PF Platform 20.5.66 C J 2600.00
9/HSTD Hard Standing A 750.00
T/106 Cycle Shed 2.1.71 U 6.20 4.57 28.33 1431.28
T/107 Provn of 10 Deep Trench NA
460.00
Latrines in 3 Blocks
Incinirator 8.3.75 460.00
7/115 Sump (Near T -96)
T/116 J Compound Wall 15.11.85 224.50 2M C ommon 49 105.45
65.50 3.65M
Apor 17700
T/117 Approach Road (For approach road) 166805.46
MISCELLANEOUS
Diversion of Sewage Line 14.11.86 84113.00
of Transit Camp Area At Colaba 14.11.86
Nature of  Walls, Floor
and RoofReference to External Dimensions

91
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.

APPENDIX  G
Copy of Collector Office letter No. 8/SS/LND Misc. dated 30 Dec., 1983
Subject: Lands Bombay
Strip of land adjoining Cuffe Parade and near BEST Bus Deptt. to hand over
the BMC.
Sir,
The land stated  above is required to be hand over to BMC authority for road
widening. At the time of site inspection it was Noticed that the part of said land is
fenced with barbed wire by you.
After enquiry with you, its learnt that said land is in your possession. Y ou are
therefore requested to produce documentary evidence in this office within 7 (seven)
from the date of receipt of this letter to you in order to proceed further in the matter.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
For Collector of  Bombay.
92

APPENDIX  H
2273/Land/BMC Station Headquarters
Collector's Office Colaba, Bombay-6
Old Custom House Date : 13 Jan., 1984
Bombay - 400 023
Lands: Bombay
Sir,
1. Reference your letter No. 8/SS/LND/Misc. dated 30 Dec., 1983.
2. The land on either side adjoining the BEST Bus Depot is Defence Land and is
in  occupation by the Army since long. Since it is being used as training area it has
been kept vacant. However, part of this land was occupied by civilian employees.
Since they had a tendency to further encroach on this land, the area has been fenced
by us to prevent this. Similarly, on the under side of the Bus Depot, the Dhobis started
using this land and they constructed some huts. To prevent further encroachment,
this area has also been fenced. Since this is our land we have taken timely appropriate
measures.
3. The land is in our occupation since long and it is Defence land.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(S.R. Biekikar)
Lt. Col.
Adm. Comdt.
For Stn. Cdr.
93

APPENDIX  J
OFFICE  OF  COLLECTOR
(City Survey & Land Records Branch)
Old Custom House, Shahid Bhagat Singh Marg, Bombay-400 023
No. CSLR/REV-II/T-2/Misc. 1989-90, 3368
Date: 10.12.1989
To
The Additional Chief Secretary
to Government (Revenue)
Revenue and Forests Department,
Mantralaya, Bombay-400 052.
Subject:Lands Bombay
Grant of land admeasuring 1000.00 sq. mtrs.  between Back Bay BEST
Bus Depot and Prakash Pethe Marg at Cuffe Parade, Colaba for the
construction of Rest House for Ex. Servicemen.
Sir,
The Secretary, Bombay City Sainik Welfare Board had applied to this office vide
his application No. 1040/ BCSWO dated 14th Nov., 1985 (Copy enclosed) with a request
to grant a land admeasuring about 1000.00 sq. mtrs. for construction of a Rest House
for the Ex-Servicemen between Back Bay BEST Bus Depot and Prakash Pethe Marg
Cuffe Parade, Colaba.
The land demanded by the City Sainik Board is Government Land between the
Back Bay BEST Bus Depot and Prakash Pethe Marg in B.B.R. Block-VI. This land bears
no C.S. No. and it is reclaimed land. This land entirely covers the area of widening of
200.00” wide Prakash Pethe Marg.
Since the land in question falls in the Block-VI. B.B.R. Estate, the matter was
referred to the Metropolitan Commissioner, B.M.R.D.A. and City Engineer (Development
Plan), Bombay Municipal Corporation for their remarks as the revised development
plan is being finalised for B.B.R. Block-III to VI by B.M.R.D.A. in consultation with
B.M.C. and Urban Development. In reply the Chief Town and Country Division of
B.M.R.D.A. has not recommended the proposal as the land under demand affected the
proposed widening of Prakash Pethe Marg (Cuffe Parade Road). As per the revised
development plan prepared and published by the Bombay Municipal Corporation
there is no possibility of making any changes in the development plan which is being
prepared and published by the B.M.R.D.A. vide letter No. TCP(P-1)BBRS/Block-VI/
127 dated 13th Feb., 1986 (copy enclosed). Similarly the B.M.C. has also offered its
remarks on the same line vide its letter No. CE/8523/DPC dated 23.7.86 (Copy enclosed).
94

95
In view of the remarks offered by the B.M.R.D.A. and B.M.C. the request of the
Bombay City Sainik Welfare Board has been rejected by this office vide letter dt. 4.3.86
(Copy enclosed). These facts were also brought to the Notice of the Additional Chief
Secretary, G .A.D. vide this office letter dated 5.3.87 (Copy enclosed).
Now this matter has been again taken up with the Hon’ble Minister of State for
General Administration by Brig., A.S. Surra vide his Confidential letter No. 2255/4/G
dated 30th June, 1989 (Copy enclosed). This issue has been discussed in the meetings
held by the Hon. Minister of State for General Administration and Metropolitan
Commissioner, B.M.R.D.A. with the top officials and it has been decided to refer this
matter to the Revenue and Forests Department as the land in question is in possession
of the Military Department since 1940 and Military area/Jurisdiction  begins from this
demanded land. It is therefore suggested by the Military Authorities that since the
land demanded  is adjacent to Military area, they do not need the proposed road with
200' widening and if the land is granted to them it will fulfil their long standing demand.
The Plan showing the land in question is enclosed herewith for ready reference.
If Government principally accepts this land grant proposal of the City Sainik
Board to construct the Rest House for Ex-Servicemen/Servicemen, then detail proposal
will be submitted to the Government.
It is therefore, kindly requested that appropriate Government orders/inst. may
be issued in the matter at an early date.
Yours faithfully,
Encl.: As Above.
Sd/-
Collector, City of Bombay,
Bombay Suburban District.
Copy forwarded with compliments to the Chief Town and Country Planning Division,
Bombay Metropolitan Region Development Authority, Plot Nos. C-1 and
C-15, Bandra-Kurla Complex, Near Drive-in-Theatre, Bandra (East) Bombay- 400 051
with reference to his letter No. TCR (P-1) DP-BBRS/Block-VI/18/370/89 dated 7.8.1989.
Sd/-
Collector, City of Bombay,
Bombay Suburban District.
CERTIFIED TRUE  COPY
Sd/-
Deputy Collector,
(Land Acquisition)
Bombay City.

96
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
APPENDIX  L

97
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
APPENDIX  M

Typed copy of Annexure M
/611 101 Inf dn (TA) MARATHA
C/U56 APU
Station Cell, Date: 27 May, 2002
HQ Mumbai, Sub Area,
Colaba, Mumbai-6
Responsibility of Kukari Park Near
Back-Bay, Colaba, Mumbai
1. Ref. your HQ letter No. 3271/13/Geeta Nagar/Q dt. 01 May, 2002 and verbal
conversation between Adm. Comdt. Your HQ and CO this Unit on 22 May, 2002.
2. The responsibility of  Kukari park has been taken over by this Unit and cleaning/
maintenance of the same is under progress. The grills on surrounding wall is broken at
various places and require to be repaired/replaced. White washing of the wall is also
required to be carried out.
3. In view of the above, you are requested to issue necessary instructions to
concerned on duty for installation of grills and white washing of walls of Kukari Park
at the earliest.
Sd/-
(G.S. Magial)
Maj., QM
For CU
98

APPENDIX N
ADARSH  CO-OPERATIVE  HOUSING  SOCIETY
(PROPOSED)
Pilot Bunder Road, Colaba, Mumbai -400 005
Date: 21Sep., 1999
The Hon'ble Chief Minister of Maharashtra,
5th Floor, Mantralaya,
Mumbai-400 032
Subject: Allotment of the Government Land to Adarsh Co-op. Housing Society Ltd.
for the welfare of the Serving and retired personnel of Defence Services.
Respected Sir,
At the onset, we are extremely grateful to you, for having given us an opportunity
to place our view-point before your goodself and as a result of which the Government
of Maharashtra have kindly considered our proposal for allotment of about 10,000 Sq.
Metres of Government land adjacent to “Oyster” and “Dolphin” Buildings of the Pilot
Bunder Co-op. Housing Society, under C.S. No. 4/600 of Colaba Division and have
recommended strongly to the Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests,
New Delhi, vide Urban Development's letter No. TPB 2099/1095/CR 154/UD-12 dated
19 August,1999.
We had an opportunity to discuss this case personally with the Secretary, Ministry
of Environment & Forests, New Delhi, on 1st September, 1999 and the project was
objected-to as the same is falling under CRZ-I. The Secretary advised us to approach
the Government of  Maharashtra for change of classification of  the proposed plot from
Zone-I to Zone-II. Accordingly, we have moved the Hon'ble Principal Secretary to the
Government of Maharashtra for such a change as envisaged in the letter dated
September 9, 1999 of Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests, New Delhi
(copy enclosed).
While the changing of Zones may take some time and formalities may delay the
project, we have an alternate proposal for allotment of a  small plot, admeasuring only
3854 Sq. Metres of land out of Block 6 of Backbay Reclamation Scheme. Presently, this
land is duly fenced with a compound wall and in the physical possession of the local
military authorities. The present adjoining land has already been heavily encroached
upon and there is a slum known as "Geeta Nagari" existing thereon. We have negotiated
99

100
with the local Military authorities, who have expressed their willingness to allow the
society to go-ahead with the project. If certain amount of accommodation is also
provided for Army Welfare i.e. for Girls Hostel, who will be female children of Army
Officers serving in the far, flung-remote & field areas. We have agreed to consider and
accommodate this request, as a result of which, it is likely that about 45 members of the
Society can be accommodated in this plot as the first Phase, pending clearance and
changing of zoning on First Site proposal. Further while going into the details of the
record of the MMRDA at Bandra, we have come across certain difficulties in the
proposed site which are as under.
That about 15 years back, the Government of Maharashtra proposed widening,
of Cuffe Parade Road, and joining the same to a 60 Metre wide road known as Colaba-
Urban Road. However, after this proposal the Government banned the reclamation of
sea and then proposal came to be left on the back burner. In fact, two 12-Storeyed
Buildings have already come up on the proposed road, constructed by Indian Navy
duly approved by BMC, which are known as “Bhagirathi”and “Gangotri”. These
buildings have been constructed as late as in the year 1991-92, on the land through
which the proposed Urban road would have passed after leaving the sea, and as
reclamation has been banned, this proposed road appears to be no more feasible.
In view of the above, it is submitted that there is no need now to widen the Cuffe
Parade road beyond BEST Depot in the back way as Military area starts from that
point. In any case, the proposal was to terminate the said widening at the junction of
Plot VI and VII of the Colaba Division. Our proposed plot is exactly located at that very
junction where Military area begins and there is no proposal of any such widening in
the Military area and therefore with little changes in the Development Plan which is
still pending for approval with the Ministry of Urban Development, our project can be
cleared and your lordship could be kind enough to allot the same to us which is free
from encroachment and is presently with the local Army Authorities for construction
of houses.
Thanking you,
Yours faithfully,
For Adarsh Co-op. Housing Society,
Sd/-
Chief Promoter
Encl: a/a
The Principal Secretary of the Government of Maharashtra,
Urban Development Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai-400 032.

APPENDIX  O
ADARSH  CO-OPERATIVE  HOUSING  SOCIETY
(PROPOSED)
Pilot Bunder Road, Colaba, Mumbai-400 005
Date: 3 Jan., 2000
Shri Ashok S. Chavan,
Hon'ble Minister of Revenue & Protocol,
Room No. 428, 4th Floor,
Mantralaya,
Mumbai-400 032.
Subject: Allotment of the Government Land to Adarsh Co-op. Housing Society Ltd.
for the Welfare of the serving and retired personnel of Defence Services.
Respected Sir,
At the onset, we are extremely grateful to you, for having given us an opportunity
to place our view point before your goodself and as a result of which the Government
of Maharashtra have kindly considered our proposal for allotment of about 10,000 Sq.
Metres of Government land adjacent to “Oyster” and  “Dolphin” Buildings of the
Pilot Bunder Co-op. Housing Society, under C.S. No.. 4/600 of Colaba Division and
have recommended strongly to the Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests,
New Delhi, vide Urban Development’s letter No. TPB 2099/1095/CR 154/UD-12 dated
19 August, 1999.
We had an opportunity to discuss this case personally with the Secretary, Ministry
of Environment & Forests, New Delhi, on 1st September, 1999 and the project was
objected to as the same is falling under CRZ-I. The Secretary advised us to approach the
Government of Maharashtra for change of classification of the proposed plot from
Zone-I to Zone-II. Accordingly, we have moved the Hon'ble Principal Secretary to the
Government of Maharashtra for such a change as envisaged in the letter dated September
9, 1999 of Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, New Delhi (copy enclosed).
While the changing of Zones may take some time and formalities may delay the
project, we have an alternate proposal for allotment of a small plot, re-measuring only
3,854 Sq. Metres of land out of Block 6 of Backbay Reclamation Scheme. Presently, this
land is duly fenced with a compound wall and in physical possession of the local
military authorities. The present adjoining land has already been heavily encroached
101

102
upon and there is a slum known as "Geeta Nagari" existing thereon. We have negotiated
with the local Military authorities, who have expressed their willingness to allow the
Society to go-ahead with the project of certain amount of accommodation is also
provided for Army welfare i.e. for Girls Hostel, who will be female children of Army
Officers serving in the far-flung, remote & field areas. We have agreed to consider and
accommodate this request, as a result of which, it is likely that about 45 Members of the
Society can be accommodated in this plot as the First Phase, pending clearance and
changing of zoning on First Site proposal. Further, while going into the details of the
record of the MMRDA at Bandra, we have come across certain difficulties in the
proposed site, which are as under.
That about 15 years back, the Government of Maharashtra proposed widening
of Cuffe Parade Road, and joining the same to a 60 Metre wide road kNo.wn as Colaba-
Urban Road. However, after this proposal, the Government banned the reclamation of
sea and the proposal came to be left on the back burner. In fact, two 12-Storeyed
Buildings have already come up on the proposed road, constructed by Indian Navy
duly approved by BMC, which are known as “Bhagirathi”and “Gangotri”. These
buildings have been constructed as late as in the year 1991-92, on the land through
which the proposed Urban road would have passed after leaving the sea, and as
reclamation has been banned this proposed road appears to be no. more feasible.
In view of the above, it is submitted that there is no need now to widen the Cuffe
Parade road beyond BEST Depot in the back-way as Military area starts from that
point in any case, the proposal was to terminate the said widening at the junction of
Plot-VI and VII of the Colaba Division. Our proposed plot is exactly located at that very
junction where Military area begins and there is no proposal of any such widening in
the Military area and therefore with little changes in the Development Plan, which is
still pending for approval with the Ministry of Urban Development, our project can be
cleared and your lordship could be kind enough to allot the same to us which is free
from encroachment and is presently with the local Army Authorities for construction
of houses.
Thanking you,
Yours faithfully,
For Adarsh Co-op. Housing Society,
Sd/-
Chief Promoter
Encl.: a/a
The Principal Secretary of the Government of Maharashtra,
Urban Development Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai-400 032.

103
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
APPENDIX  P

APPENDIX  Q
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
104

APPENDIX Q
ADARSH  CO-OPERATIVE  HOUSING  SOCIETY
(PROPOSED)
Pilot Bunder Road, Colaba, Mumbai-400 005
Ref. No. ACS/1006/2000 Date: 2.6.2000
To,
The Hon'ble Chief Minister of Maharashtra
Mantralaya,
Mumbai
Subject: Allotment of Government Land in Block VI of Colaba Division for Adarsh
Co-op. Housing Society for Welfare of Serving & Retired persons from Defence
Services.
Respected Sir,
Please refer to our letter dated 7.2.2000 wherein a request was made for allotment
of approx. 3758 sq. mtrs. of Government land forming part of Block VI of Colaba
Division.
We are still awaiting your favourable order in this regard. We again wish to bring
to your kind Notice that this allotment will be a kind gesture towards serving & retired
officers of  Defence Services more particularly to our Heroes who bravely & successfully
participated in Kargil Operation. That we had an opportunity to meet Hon'ble Revenue
Minister on 2.6.2000 wherein we have clarified the following points:—
1. That we are agreeable to accommodate civilian members to the extent of
about 40%.
2. That CRZ provision will not be applicable to the land in question because
of massive BEST Depot Construction towards sea ward side of the Plot.
3. That we are ready to leave 10-15 land for future road widening, if required.
As earlier submitted that the physical possession of this piece of land is already
105

106
with Army for the last 25-30 years who have already issued their willingness in favour
of the Society to the Collector, Mumbai. Your order in the matter may please be expedited
at the earliest.
Thanking you,
Yours faithfully
For Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society
Sd/- Sd/-
Secretary Chief Promotor

APPENDIX  R
No. LBR/25-2000 Pr. No. 912/1
Revenue and Forest Department,
Mantralaya, Mumbai-400 032
Date: 18.1.2003
To,
Shri R.C. Thakur, Chief Promoter,
Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society (Proposed)
Pilot Bunder Road, Colaba,
Mumbai-400 005.
Subject: Land-Mumbai City District
Matter of approving to Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society
(Proposed) land of 3758.82 Sq. Mtr. near Plot No. 87C in B.B.R. Block 6.
Sir,
On the above subject, in connection with the application submitted by you on
2.6.2000 to the Government. I am instructed to inform you that the Government wishes
to approve to give Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, the land, under possession
of the Defence Department, of area of about 3758.22 sq. mtrs. near plot No. 87-C in
BBR Block-6, on rent or by assessing the value of right of ownership, on condition of
fulfilling the terms stated hereunder and similarly the conditions to be stated by the
Government from time to time, for construction of flats for the members as per the
enclosed list.
(1) The detailed information and Affidavits of the members of the society
should be submitted within two months from the date of receiving this
letter to the Collector, Mumbai City District.
(2) As per paragraph 3 of the Government decision dated 9.7.1999, the members
of the society will be eligible to receive a flat of carpet area on the basis of
their monthly family income and the amount of value will be assessed as
shown therein.
(3) 20% of the members of the society must be from the scheduled castes/
tribes or liberated and wondering tribes.
(4) The conditions regarding the eligibility of the members of the society are
shown in the Appendix (A) and (B). The said terms will be binding to the
societies.
(5) The society must submit to the Collector, Mumbai City District, and
necessary certificates of the monthly family income of the members. It will
be necessary for the members of the society to submit certificates of the
employer for their monthly income.
107

108
(6) The societies must submit to the Collector, City District the rent receipts of
the societies or owners of the place of present residence of the members of
the society and the proofs/certificates etc. about their living in Maharashtra
since 15 years.
(7) As the said land is included in the CRZ-II classification, it will be necessary
to get permission of the Environment and Forest Department of the Central
Government.
The societies must submit within two months from the receipt of the said letter,
the above stated full information and affidavits of all the members of the societies to
the Collector, Mumbai City District. Otherwise this proposal letter will automatically
get cancelled. The Collector, Mumbai City will verify the information about necessity
sent by the societies by investigation by going to residence/office or place of service
of each member and submit the proposal about the same to the Government and
thereafter the Government will issue order about the approval of the land.
This letter is issued with the approval of Urban Development Department and
Finance Department.
Yours
Sd/- 
20/1/03  (J.K. Dhanat)
Under Secretary,
Revenue and Forest Department.
Copy sent for information and immediate necessary action to:—
(1) Collector , Mumbai City District, Old Custom House, Mumbai-400 001.
(2) Commissioner, Konkan Division, Konkan Bhavan, New Mumbai.
(3) District Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Mumbai.
After making available the information about the members, the Collector, Mumbai
City District should, as per order under the letter No. LCS 1095/Pr. No. 37/J-1
dated 9 July, 1999 of the Revenue and Forest Department, about the government
decision and according to necessity for information, personally go to the residential
address and personally check and investigate the eligibility of the members and send
the necessary proposal to the government within one month.
Yours
Sd/-
20/1/03 (J.K. Dhanat)
Under Secretary,
Revenue and Forest Department.
Enclosed:  (1) List of members
 (2) Appendix “A” and “B”
Copy sent for information to: (1) Finance Department, Mantralaya, (Vyaya-9)
 (2) Urban Development, Mantralaya, Navi-12

APPENDIX  S
No. LBR/25-2000 Pr. No. 912/1
Revenue and Forest Department,
Mantralaya, Mumbai-400 032
Date: 9 July, 2004
Subject: Land—Mumbai City District
Matter of giving approval to Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society
(Proposed) for  land of 3758.82 Sq. Mtrs. near Plot No. 87-C in B.B.R.
Block 6.
Refer: Government letter No. LBR 25-2000/Pr. No. 912/J-2 Dt. 18.1.2003
MEMORANDUM
I have been requestfully instructed to inform the Collector, Mumbai City by
referring to letter No. CASLR/IV-1/LAND/BBR-VI/Adarsh Co. Hsg. Soc./1712 dated
8.10.2003 and Letter No. Sa.Ma 2004/717 dt. 18/3/2004 that approval is given to
give on ownership basis, the land admeasuring about 3758.82 sq. mtrs. near Plot No.
87C in BBR Block 6, which is at present in possession of Defence Department, to the
Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society for the members as per enclosed list and also
for the members to be admitted in future, for construction of residential flats of
sanctioned carpet area on terms and conditions of letter No. LES-1095/Pr. No. 37/95
dated 9/7/99 of the Revenue and Forest Department and also as per the provisions of
the said decision, for the value of the land which is assessed as per the ready reckoner
for Rs. 10,19,19,652/- (Rupees ten crores nineteen lakhs nineteen thousand six hundred
fifty-two only) on the special terms stated hereunder:—
TERMS:
(1) The members to be admitted in the society in future must take permission
from the Government.
(2) As the land is included in CRZ classification, before doing construction
on the said land, permission must be taken from the Environment and
Forest Department and permission is also to be taken from the specially
nominated authority MMRDA and from the Municipal Corporation.
(3) The final valuation of the land must be got decided by the Valuation
Director, Town Planning and 20% of the value so decided for the
ownership rights along with interest thereon at the prescribed rates from
the date of informing final valuation should be collected.
109

110
(4) Possession of the land should be given only after investigating the eligibility
of minimum 71 members of the society and only after issue of Government
approval to them.
(5) It is binding on the society to admit 20% of the members from the scheduled
castes.
(6) The terms and conditions mentioned in the Government decision dated 9.7.99
and Government supplementary letter No. LCS 1015/Pr. No. 37/95-J-1 dated
8 January, 2001 and of the same number dated 10.2.2001 and also Government
letter No. LCS 10/2002/Pr. No. 344/J-1 dated 23.10.08 and Government circular
of same number dated 3 July, 2003 and other incidental terms and conditions
shall be binding on the society.
(7) Other terms and conditions, if considered necessary by the Collector, may
be included.
This order is issued under consent of the Urban Development Department and
Finance Department vide the informal reference No. 579/04/Vyaya, dated 21.6.2004 of
the said department.
Enclosed: (1) Schedule 'A' (List of approved members)
(2) Documents submitted by the members.
By the order and in the name of the Governor of Maharashtra.
Sd/-
(J.K. Dhanat)
Under Secretary,
Revenue and Forest Department.
To,
The Collector, Mumbai,
Old Custom House, Mumbai-1.
Copy To:
Commissioner, Konkan Division, Konkan Bhavan, Mumbai.
Registrar, Co-operative Societies, State of Maharashtra, Pune.
Assistant Director, Town Planning and Assessment, Mumbai.
Superintendent Engineer, District of City Division, Mumbai.
District Sub-Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Mumbai.
Accountant General, State of Maharashtra, (Estimation and Admissibility), Mumbai/
Nagpur.
Accountant General, State of Maharasthra, (Audit), Mumbai/Nagpur.
Urban Development Department, (Navi-11), Mantralaya, Mumbai-32.
Government Architect, Mumbai-01.
Finance Department, Vyaya-9, Mantralaya, Mumbai-32.
Nivadnasti, J-2 Karyasa, Revenue and Forest Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai-32.

APPENDIX  T
No. 8/88/BBR/Misc.86.
Collector's Office
(Survey Branch),
Old Custom House,
Fort, Bombay-400 023.
Date: 21 Nov., 1986
To
The Dy. Engineer, South Sub-Divn.,
P.W. Department, Opp. C.T.O.
Bombay-400 032.
Subject: Lands: Bombay.
Ownership regarding strip of land near, B.E.S.T. Depot, B.B.R.VI.
Sir,
This office plan enclosed herewith showing the strip of land coloured matched
green. It is requested to state the detail information regarding the ownership of the
above strip of land i.e. whether it is with P.W. Department or Military Department or
otherwise. The information is urgently required by Government hence this may please
be handed over to Shri Paratap a bearer of this letter today.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
for Collector of Bombay.
111

APPENDIX  U
M.K. Ankallkar
Superintendant
Survey Land Record.
D.O. No. S/PA/LND/Misc.
Collector's Office,
(Survey Branch),
Old Custom House,
Fort, Bombay- 400 023
Date: 11th December, 1980
Subject: Land : Bombay.
Request for allotment of Government land from Block No. VI BBR
Estate—near to BEST Bus Depot for construction of Rest House for
ex-serviceman.
Dear
The Deputy Engineer, South Sub-division was requested under this office letter
of even number dated 21.11.1986 to furnish this office the detailed information of the
above land such as ownership, reservation etc. as this information is urgently required
by Government. The Deputy Engineer, South Sub-Division under this letter
No.  S/BBR/3960 dt. 21.11.1986 informed this office that the information of the ownership
of the land in question is not readily available with that department and the same will
be furnish after confirming the same from other department. A zerox copies of both this
office letter and Deputy Engineer's letter both dated 21.11.1986 are enclosed herewith
along with a copy of the plan showing thereon the land in question in hatch blue. But
so far no information has been received by this office. This office representative was
also again personally deputed to the Dy. Engineer two/three times but the Deputy
Engineer could not supply the required information. In the meanwhile this office has
received two demi-official letters from the Dy. Secretary to Government G.A.D. for
supply of required information urgently.
I, therefore, request you to please look into the matter personally and arrange to
send the required information by return of post.
Yours
Sd/-
(M.K. Ankallkar)
112

113
Encl.: 3
To
Shri G.S. Shinde,
Executive Engineer,
Presidency Division,
Old P.W.D. Bldg., 1st Floor,
Bombay-400 032.
Copy submitted for favour of information to the Dy. Secretary to Government,
General Administration Department, Mantralaya, Bombay-400 032 with reference to
his D.O. letter No. SSB/1085/950/28 dt. 21.11.1986 addressed to the Collector of Bombay.
The required information will be submitted to Government on receipt of the same
from P.W. Department.
Sd/-
Superintendent,
AAR/9.12 Bombay City Survey and Land Record.

APPENDIX  W
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.
114

Typed copy of Annexure W
Telephone: 6951701/1417 S tation Headquarters Colaba, Bombay.
2271/13/Q November, 1988
M&G Area Pro Unit
Construction of Boundary Wall and Boundary
1. A wall has been constructed in the Ganesh Murti Nagar opposite your unit
lines. Certain Defence land has been left out, where the wall could not be constructed
due to lay of ground which is low lying and broken. Boundary pillars are being
constructed by GE (West). Area between wall and boundary, pillars are being developed
into a park as acceptable by Honourable Minister Shri Marazban Patrawala, Minister
of State for General Administration (including Protocol), Law and Judiciary and Tourism,
Government of Maharashtra.
2. The nil area left on other side of wall from which encroachment has been now
removed will be kept free from encroachment by constant vigilance by pre para and
under no circumstances any hut or other structure will be allowed to come up in this
area.
3. Responsibility in this respect will entirely devolve on CO Pro Unit. At the time
of change of comd. of Unit, temp. or permt., the land will be reflected in the handing/
taking over. This letter will also be handed over on relief.
4. A copy of DO letter from Shri Marazban Patrawala, Minister of State for General
Administration (including Protocol), Law and Judiciary and Tourism, Government of
Maharashtra is enclosed.
Encls.: One
Sd/-
(A. S. Sumra)
Brig.-Stn. cdr.
Copy to:—
HQ Bombay Sub-Area (Q) For info. alongwith a copy of DO letter Quoted in para 3
above.
GE (West) Bombay Please construct boundary pillars as directed. A copy of
the DO letter quoted above is enclosed herewith for info.
and records.
NOO
Internal
A Branch For info. alongwith a copy of DO letter quoted in Para 3GBranch above.WLT Section
}
115

APPENDIX  X
ftykf/kdkjh dk;kZy;] eqacbZ 'kgj
COLLECTOR OFFICE, MUMBAI CITY
vksYM dLVe gkml] 'kghn Hkxr flag ekxZ] QksVZ] eqacbZ&400 001
Old Custom House, Shahid Bhagat Singh Marg, Fort, Mumbai-400 001
Branch-Revenue-1
No. CSLR/REV-I/BBR-VI
Date: 29th March, 2000
To,
The General Officer Commanding,
Head Quarters,
Maharashtra and Gujarat Area,
Colaba,
Mumbai-400 005
Subject: Lands—Mumbai City.
Request for Adarsh Co-op. Hsg. Socy. (proposed) for allotment of
land situated near Plot No. 6, Block-VI.
Sir,
The Chief Promotor of the Adarsh Co-op. Housing Society (proposed) has
requested to the Government for allotting the Government land for residents of the
Staff members of Defence Service Personnel.
On 27th March, 2000 at the time of side inspection it is revealed that the military
department has constructed the wall to the above plot and hence the Government land
protected from encroachment. The same land applied by the above proposed Society.
You are therefore, requested to confirm that there is no objection to allot the land
to the proposed society of the service personnel by the Government of Maharashtra.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/- 
for Collector of Mumbai City.
116

117
APPENDIX ‘Y’
SURVEY  REGISTER  FOR  THE  TOWN  AND ISLAND OF  BOMBAY
(Prepared under Section 282 of the Maharashtra Land Revenue Act, 1966)
CAPTAIN PRAKASH
PLIRE MARG G
E.R.YL, NEAR PLOT
NO. 87-C
Division COLABA
Register No. 10A
Page No. 33
1. Sheet No. 2. Name of Street
or Locality
3. Street No. 4. Cadastral
Survey No.
5. Tenure 6. Area in Sq.
Yds./Mts.
7. Laughtons Survey No.
Government Land
Given on
Occupancy Price
vide col. 17
652
{Rectaugural [ ] Brackets shows entry deleted}
Note: This is true copy of the extract of CS Register which forms part of this office record and the area of the property referred to  therein
is 3824.45 sq. mts.
(Three Thousand Eight Hundred Twenty Four point Forty Three sq. mts. only) which has been verified with the original record and found
correct.
Sd./
Superintendent
Mumbai City Survey and Land Records
SQ.METERS
(3758.82) 3824.43
9. Ground Rent due to
Govt.
Name Applicant: S.K. Lamba
Date of Application: 09.04.2010
Fee Recovered : Rs. xxxxx100.00
Reference of Issue: 909204620104
Date of Issue: 27 April, 2010
10. Name of Person in Beneficial Onwership 11. Mode of Acquisition by Present Owner
(A) - X Governor of Maharashtra
(B) - A  Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society Ltd.
(b) The Govt. in Rn F.D. vide this
Memorandum No. LBL-25200/c-R-912/J-2
dated 9.7.2004 accorded sanction to grant
the land admeasuring 3758.82 sq. mtrs.
(approx) to ‘A’ in col. 10 on occupancy price
and terms and conditions mentioned therein.
The possession of the land handled over on
27.10.2004 vide supdt. memorandum
No. CSLR/Rev. 1/LND-2832/187/D-04 dated
30.09.2004 vide Memorandum No. 99/2004.
13. Original Grant from Government, if any
Nil
14. Lease from Public Body or Fazindar
Nil
15. Ground Rent due to
Public Body of Faziadar
Nil
17. Remarks
L&D-7832
AS PER CORRIGENDUM NO. LBL 252000/CX-912/J-2/01.21.2-2005 OF REVENUE
FOREST DEPARTMENT MANTRALAYA MUMBAI AREA OF THIS PROPERTY CORRECTED AS 3874.43 SQ. MTRS.
YIDE M.R. NO. 145/05
SD/-17.03.05  N.S. COLABA, SD/-17.03.05, SD, 17.03.05 SUPDTD.
 Nil
12. Devolution of Title
Fed by:
V alidated by : Shri D.K. SURVE
8. Collectors New No.
(Collectors Rent Roll No.)
16. Superintendents Initial
(A, B)-50/-22-1,50/-22.11.4 Supoi.M.C.S.I.L.R.

APPENDIX Z
ftykf/kdkjh] eqacbZ 'kgj ;kps dk;kZy;
OFFICE OF THE COLLECTOR, MUMBAI CITY
vksYM dLVe gkml] 'kghn Hkxrflag ekxZ] QksVZ] eqacbZ&400 001
OLD CUSTOM HOUSE, SHAHID BHAGAT SINGH MARG, FORT, MUMBAI-400 001
Øekad@No. lh,l,yvkj@,lvWUM,yvkj&1@Vsek v
118


APPENDIX 'AA'
No. RPD/PB-I/23-E/405/of 1973
Office of Executive Engineer
Reclamation Project Division
New India Assurance Building,
6th floor, M.G. Road, Fort, Bombay
Dated: 12/2/1973
To,
The Military Estate Officer,
Colaba, Bombay-5.
Subject: Back Bay Reclamation Scheme—Land in Block No.VI.
Sir,
This is to bring to your notice that some offices are erected on the South-east
corner of Block No.VI of Back Bay Reclamation Scheme by the military authorities. The
names of the offices situated in Block No.VI are given below and these are shown as
plan enclosed herewith:—
(1) Senior Inspector of Armaments, Ministry of Defence (DGI), Colaba,
Bombay-5.
(2) Office of the Officer Commanding, 53, Coy ASC (Sup.), Type 'D' Colaba,
Bombay-5.
The above, case was referred to you in the past by the office and which was
ultimately taken up with the Deputy Dir. of Military Lands and Cantonments, HQ,
Southern Command, who  have informed (vide his  letter No. 10963/MLC, dated 6.8.1971
add to the Under Secretary, Buildings and Communications Department Government
of Maharashtra and copy to you with reference to your discussion of the case with the
Deputy Director on 2.8.1971) that the above offices are neither military buildings nor
the local Military authorities have allowed to erect the said offices.
However, it is noticed that the offices situated in the south corner in Block No. VI
are none other than military offices which supposedly have been allowed by the
Military authorities by the temporary permission from Collector of Bombay or the land
is  used unauthorisedly by way of encroachment.
119

120
Since the land in question belongs to State Government where reclamation work
is being taken up shortly, it is requested whether necessary permission is taken by the
Military authority from the concerned authorities of State Government for using the
land, so, copy of permission obtained may please be furnished.
An early reply in the matter will be highly appreciated.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(B.G . Muktewar)
Executive Engineer,
Reclamation Proj. Division,
Bombay-1.
Copy submitted to the Superintending Engineer Bombay (B&C) Circle, Bombay for
information.

121
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.

122
(i) Not appended to the Report.
(ii) Refer to authenticated copies in Parliament Library.

APPENDIX ‘BB’
Headquarters,
Mumbai Sub Area (Q),
25, Assay Building,
Colaba, Mumbai-5
Dated: 16 Apr., 2010
Request For Providing Details for Reclamation of Back Bay Bus Depot.
You are requested to provide details as given below:—
(a) When did the process for reclamation for Back Bay Depot commence and
when was it completed?
(b) Was the adjoining land towards Cuffe Parade road occupied by Adarsh
Society now reclaimed by BEST?
(c) If yes, why was this land not occupied by BEST?
(d) When did the project for construction of bus depot commence and when
was it completed?
(e) This reclamation and construction of bus depot was carried out as per
ddlp/bbl/4/1973. You are requested to provide a copy of the development
plan No. ddlp/bbl/4/1973.
(f) Was this piece of land (now with Adarsh Housing Society), asked by the
BMC for widening of the Prakash Pethe Marg?
You are requested to provide the above details and copy of the plan at the
earliest.
Thanking you sir,
Sd/-
Colonel,
SO Land and Accn.
For Cdr.
123

APPENDIX 'CC'
BEST Bhavan,
BEST Marg,
Post Box No. 192,
Mumbai—400 001
Dated: 30 Apr., 2010
CEC/EMI/2010
Shri R.S. Chib (Colonel)
Head Quarters
Mumbai Sub Area (Q)
25, Assay Building,
Colaba,
Mumbai-400 001
Subject:Request for providing details for Reclamation of BEST Undertaking's Back
Bay Depot.
Ref: Your letter No. 1210/5/AHS/Q3H dtd. 16.04.2010
Dear Sir,
With reference to your above referred letter, it is to inform as under:—
Reg.(a):— The process for reclamation of Back Bay Bus Depot was commenced
on 12.11.1973 and completed on 30.11.1974.
Reg.(b), (c) & (f): The land which has been occupied by the Adarsh Society is
not belonging to the undertaking, therefore, question of reclamation of the said land
by the BEST Undertaking and demanding said land by the MCGM for road widening
does not arise.
Reg.(d): The required structures in the said depot have been constructed within
the period of 31.03.1975 & 18.09.1976.
Reg.(e): The Back Bay Bus Depot land has been situated in the Back Bay
Reclamation Scheme for which the Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development
Authority (MMRDA) is the Special Planning Authority which is appointed by the
Government of Maharashtra. The copy of Development Plan of the said area is not
available with this office, but you may obtain the same from the MMRDA's Town &
Country Planning Division, which is situated at MMRDA Building, 7th floor, Bandra-
Kurla Complex, Bandra (East), Mumbai - 400 051. However, we are enclosing herewith
a copy of Drawing No. 48-28097 of our Back Bay Bus Depot, which can serve your
purpose.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(S.A. Nene)
Estate Manager
Encl. As above
124

APPENDIX  ‘DD’
The Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply & Transport Undertaking
(Office of the Brihan Mumbai Mahanagarpalika)
Telephone :  (022) 22856262 BEST Bhavan,
Fax : (022) 22851244 BEST Marg,
Telex : 1185755 BEST IN Post Box No. 192,
Telegram : BEST, MUMBAI-400 001 Mumbai-400 001
Address all communication by Title
Not by Name
Under Certificate of Posting
Dated: 4 Feb, 2011
Our Ref. CEC/F-373/6072/2011
Major S.K. Lamba,
P-11, Patro Polis,
Colaba Road,
Mumbai - 400 001.
Subject:Application under 'Right to Information Act — 2005' seeking information in
respect of Reclamation of land for BEST Depot, Capt. Prakash Pethe Marg.
Sir,
Refer your application dated 10.01.2011 under 'Right to Information Act—2005'.
In this regards, the needful information is as under:—
Reg. (a): Plot No. 87-C in Colaba Division, Block VI allotted to Adarsh Society
was not reclaimed by the BEST Undertaking.
Reg.(b) & (c) : The Undertaking has been allotted 5.22 Acres of land and it is in
physical possession of BEST Undertaking and Undertaking has constructed  Back
Bay Depot thereat. The said plot has been reclaimed by the BEST Undertaking after
taking over its possession in the year 1973.
Reg. (d) : The BEST Undertaking is no way concerned about reclaimed land
No. 652.
Reg. (e) : The BEST Undertaking has not allotted its any land to Adarsh Society.
125

126
If you desire to make an appeal, you may approach, Chief Engineer (Civil) an
appellate Authority within time framed under sub-section (1) of Section 19 under 'Right
to Information Act, 2005' on the following address:
Civil Engineering Department
1st floor, Electric House,
BEST Undertaking,
Colaba, Mumbai-400 001
Tel. No. 22799465, 22840873
Sd/-
Dy. Chief Engineer (Civil)
&
Public Information Officer

APPENDIX  ‘EE’
Most Immediate
No. 10/25/L/L & C/54
Government of India,
Ministry of Defence,
New Delhi the 31st December, 1958.
To,
The Secretary to the Govt. of Bombay,
Public Works Department BOMBAY
Subject:Transfer of surplus Ministry of Defence Land at Santacruz to Govt. of Bombay
and acquisition of Government of Bombay Land Block VI, Colaba for Defence
Purposes.
Sir,
I am directed to refer to the demi official letter No. CMS-EP-1/63/170/38 dated
10th June, 1958 from the Chief Minister, Bombay to the Defence Minister and also to
the correspondence resting with the Governmet of Bombay, Public Works Department
letter No. SBR 1058-II-C, dated 28 Oct. 1958 on the above subject and to say that this
Ministry have considered the suggestion for the transfer of the santacruz land to the
Government of Bombay free of cost. They have been advised that the position in the
pre 1935 period was that all Government land in India vested in the Crown and as such
the question of the Bombay Government making over this land to the Defence
Department free of cost did not arise. It was for the first time after the passing of the
Government of India Act, 1935, that a distinction was made and certain Government
land came to be vested in His Majesty for the purpose of the Government of India, the
rest vesting in His Majesty for the purpose of the Provincial Government as provided
in S 142 of the Government of India Act, Government lands in province which were at
the time under purpose of the Federal Government of lands and buildings formally
used for residential purposes or intended or formally intended to be so used and
certified as provided in S. 172I (i) (a) shall vest in His Majesty for the purpose of the
Federal Government as the Santacruz Rifle Range was in active occupation of the
Defence Department on that date this property vested in His Majesty for the purpose
of the Government of India. The present position is that under Article 294 of the
Constitution, such properties which immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution were vested in His Majesty for the purpose of the Government
consequently the Government of India as the absolute owner of the land were justified
in asking for the market value in terms of Government of India Education, Health and
Lands Deptt. Letter No. 172-2/35-LLO dated 18/11/1935 as published in Government of
Bombay, revenue and forest Department Resolution No. 66633 dated 17th October,
1939. It is also noticed that Bombay Government themselves have accepted this position
127

128
and asked for the transfer of this land on payment of full market value vide their letter
No. LFD 2245/1438-36-B dated 4/2/1956.
In this connection, I am also to refer to the discussion which the Chief Minister,
Bombay had with the Defence Minister suggested that the Government of Bombay
would take over the area required from the Santacruz Rifle Range and in exchange make
available to the Ministry of Defence approximately the same deleage of Bombay
Government land from Block VI in Colaba, an area adjacent to the site where Defence
installation are already situated. This was also fully explained by Shri S.D. Nargolwalla,
Joint Secretary, Ministry of Defence to Shri Barve, Secretary, Public Works Deparatment
Government of Bombay during their discussion at Bombay is that in a recent
Communication Chief Minister Bombay has asked the Defence Minister to intimate
Defence Minister Official to contract the Secretaries, Revenue and Public Works.
This Ministry have considered the urgent request of the Government of Bombay
to arrange for the transfer of the land on Santacruz pending finalization of the terms of
transfer. In view urgent need of the Bombay Government, Ministry of Defence are
agreeable to transfer 41 acres and 8 gunthas of land from the Santacruz Rifle Range to
the Government of Bombay for construction of the Western Express Highway and for
the Slum Clearance Scheme provided:—
(i) That the Government of Bombay would in terms of para 7 of the official letter
No. 61-DM (C)/58 dated 21st May, 1958, from the Defence Minister to the
Chief Minister, Bombay agree to the constitution of a committee of valuation
and agree in advance to accept the market value fixed by it.
(ii) In case the proposal for exchange of Bombay Government land in Block-VI
Colaba with the Santacruz land materialises, the valuation of the Colaba land
would also be made difference between the two valuations would be paid to
the Government concerned.
(iii) In case the proposal mentioned in (ii) above does materialize by the time
Committee has reported on the market value, or soon thereafter, the
Government of Bombay pay to the Government of India the market value
fixed by the Committee.
If the arrangement outlined in para 3 above is acceptable to the Government of
Bombay, they may for the purpose of taking over possession kindly contact
Shri R.K. Chaturvedi our MEO, Bombay Circle, Poona to whom necessary instructions
are being given.
Yours faithfully,
Sd./-
(S.D. NARGOLW ALA)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12) HELD ON 10th OCTOBER, 2011
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Monday, the 10th October, 2011 from
1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Tariq Anwar
11. Shri Naresh Gujral
12. Shri Prakash Javadekar
13. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
14. Shri Jesudasu Seelam
15. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1.  Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India
1.  Shri Vinod Rai — C&AG
2.  Ms. Rekha Gupta — Deputy C&AG (RC)
3.  Shri Gautam Guha — Director General
(Defence Services)
4.  Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director
129

130
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
  1.  Shri S.K. Sharma — Defence Secretary
  2.  Lt. Gen. A.S. Lamba — VCOAS
  3.  V . Adm. R.K. Dhowan — VCNS
  4.  Shri Ashok Kumar Harnal — DG  DE
  5.  Shri R.K. Mathur — Spl. Secretary (M)
  6.  Shri A.K. Gupta — Joint Secretary
  7.  Shri Jojneswar Sharma — Addl. DG DE
  8.  Maj. Gen. Sanjiv Talwar — ADG L WE
  9.  R. Adm. A.K. Chawla — ACNS (P&P)
10.  Cmde. A.K. Chhabra — PDW
11.  Shri P.K. Gupta — Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1.  Dr. Nalini Bhat — Adviser
2.  Shri E. Thirunavukkarasu — Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the C&AG and other
Audit Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised the
Members that the meeting was convened to have a briefing by the representatives of
the Ministry of Defence on the subject 'Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, Mumbai'.
3. Before the witnesses could be called in one of the Members raised objection,
with the permission of the Chairman, to the examination of the subject on the ground
that since the land on which the 'Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, Mumbai' had
constructed the building, belonged to the State Government of Maharashtra, it would
be appropriate if the PAC of that State Assembly examined the matter. He was, therefore,
of the view that there was no need for the Committee to proceed with the examination
of the subject. The Chairman clarified that since the subject/issue has figured in the
Central Audit Report and the Audit has made observation to the effect that the land in
question is owned by the Ministry of Defence, it was well within the purview of the
Committee to examine the subject. He also observed that the PAC have the powers to
call the representatives of the State Government, wherever considered necessary in
connection with the examination of a subject, following the prescribed procedure. He,
therefore, said that the representatives of the Ministry of Defence should be heard.
The Members concurred with the decision of the Chairman.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence were called in and
the Chairman welcomed them to the sitting. The Defence Secretary briefed the
Committee of the Ministry's position on the Audit findings and the follow up action
taken by them thereon. The Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry replied
to the various queries of the Members. As some queries required detailed replies

131
including certain information pertaining to State Government of Maharashtra, the
Chairman, directed the Secretary to furnish the same expeditiously.
5. Some Members suggested that the information to be furnished by the Ministry
of Defence should be scrutinized/examined by the Committee internally before deciding
whether further evidence on the subject is required or not, to which the Committee
agreed.
6. The Chairman then, thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Defence
for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the available information on the
subject. The Chairman also thanked the Members for their active participation in the
discussion on the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX  II
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTNG OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2013-14) HELD ON 17th OCTOBER, 2013
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 17th October, 2013 from 1130 hrs. to
1235 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Ramen Deka
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
7. Dr. Baliram
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Shri N.K. Singh
10. Smt.  Ambika Soni
SECRETARIA T
1.  Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
3.  Smt.  A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
4.  Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
5.  Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India
1.  Shri Venkatesh Mohan — Director General of Audit
(Defence)
2.  Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director of Audit (RC)
3.  Shri Purushotam Tiwary — Principal Director of Audit (PAC)
4.  Shri Deepak Kapoor — Director of Audit (Defence)
5.*** *** ***
132

133
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the Committee. The Chairman then apprised the
Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt three Draft
Reports.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Report on "Adarsh Co-operative Housing Society, Mumbai"
(Ministry of Defence) based on C&AG Report No.11 of 2011-12.
4. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above Draft Reports with
some modifications/amendments. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to
finalise the three Reports adopted by them, in light of their suggestions and the factual
verifications received from the Audit and present the same to the House on a date
convenient to him.
5. The Chairman then thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on
the consideration of the Draft Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*** Matters not related with this report.
GMGIPMRND—4622LS—19.06.2014.