81
FERTILIZER SUBSIDY
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
FERTILIZER SUBSIDY
MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2013
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/V aisakha, 1935 (Saka)

PAC No. 2008
Price:  ` 75.00
© 2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-2013).................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012).................... (v)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (vii)
REPORT
PART  I
I. Introductory ............................................................................... 1
II. Response of the Department to the Au dit Report ...................... 6
III. Assessment of Fertilizer Requirement........................................ 8
IV . New Pricing Scheme (NPS)......................................................... 11
V. Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy (NBS) ........................................ 23
VI. Non-availability/Shortage of Fertilizers...................................... 30
VII. Payment of Subsidy Claims ........................................................ 33
VIII. Subsidy on Imports .................................................................... 40
IX. Subsidised Fertilisers consumed by Mixing Units ..................... 41
X. Quality Control ........................................................................... 44
XI. Monitoring Mechanism .............................................................. 49
PART II
Observations/Recommendations .............................................. 54
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the Second sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2012-13) held  on 1 1.06.2012 ................................................. 65
II. Minutes of the Twenty-ninth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2012-13) held on 29.04.2013 ................................................. 68

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected  w.e.f . 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(iii)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Shankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
* Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Eighty-first  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Fertilizer
Subsidy” based on C&AG Report No. 8 of 2011-12 (Performance Audit) Union
Government (Civil) relating to the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Fertilizers).
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the Table
of the House on 5th August, 2011.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report and procured written information from the Ministry of
Chemicals and Fertilizers. As the examination of the  subject could not be completed
due to paucity of time, the Public Accounts Committee (2012-13) re-selected the
subject for examination. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) and the Department
of Agriculture and Co-operation on the  subject at their sitting held on 11th June,
2012. The Committee adopted this Report at their sitting held on 29th April, 2013.
The Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form
Part-II of the Report.
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee for the work done on the
subject.
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Department of Fertilizers (DoF), Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers and
the Department of Agriculture and Co-operation for tendering evidence before the
Committee and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection
with the  examination of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
29 April, 2013 Chairman,
9 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(vii)

REPORT
PART  I
I. INTRODUCTORY
The fertilizer subsidy/concessions regime in India has had a long and chequered
history dating back to 1957. Currently, urea is the only controlled fertilizer, which is
subject to price distribution and movement control under the Fertilizer Control Order
and Fertilizer Movement Control Order to the extent of 50 per cent of production.
Other fertilizers like Di-Ammonium Phosphate (DAP), Mono-Ammonium Phosphate
(MAP), Single Super Phosphate (SSP), Triple Super Phosphate (TSP), Muriate of
Potash (MOP) and Nitrogen-Phosphate-Potassium (NPK), complexes are
decontrolled fertilizers, whose use for agricultural purposes is subsidised. However,
in practice, fertilizers, where controlled or decontrolled, which are subsidised for
agricultural consumption are, in effect, subject to explicit/implicit control by the
Government of India (GoI), either through formal  allocation orders or through supply
plans and the State Governments, primarily to ensure proper targeting of fertiliser
subsidy and minimise diversion of subsidised fertiliser for non-agricultural purposes.
Also, 'farm-gate' prices of all major fertilisers subject to subsidy are controlled by
the Government to ensure a uniform sale price throughout the Country, which is
substantially lower than the cost of production/import.
2. A brief evolution of the fertilizer subsidy/concession regime over the year
is as under:—
Year Event
12
1957 Fixing of Maximum Retail Prices (MRP) of urea through Fertilizers
Control Order, 1957
1973 Fertilizer (Movement) Control Order issued for Government control
of fertilizer distribution and its inter-state movement
November 1977 Retention Price Scheme (RPS) for nitorgenous fertilizers introduced
February 1979 RPS for complex fertilizers introduced
May 1982 Single Super Phosphate (SSP) brought under RPS
August 1992 Phosphatic (P) and Potassic (K) fertilizers decontrolled, based on
the recommendations of JPC
October 1992 Concession on decontrolled P and K fertilizers introduced
April 2003 Replacement of RPS by single wise New Pricing Scheme
(Stage I)
April 2004 NPS Stage II-1.04.2001 to 30.09.2006
1

2
October 2006 NPS Stage III-01.10.2006 onwards
April 2010 Nutrient Based Subsidy (NBS) for decontrolled fertilizers in
replacement of existing concession scheme
3. The vast majority of India's population is still dependent on agriculture for
their livelihood. Increased agricultural productivity is essential not only for ensuring
and maintaining food security, but also for ensuring equitable and high rates of income
growth for all sections of society. A kep component of the strategy for increased
agricultural production is the optimal use of chemical fertilizers for increased yields,
while maintaining soil fertility and avoiding adverse impact on soil and water. In
spite of massive amounts of expenditure by GoI on fertilizer subsidy/concession,
annual production of fertilizers increased only marginally from 284 Lakh MT in
2003-04 to 298 Lakh MT in 2008-09. Changes in the subsidy regime, have failed to
incentivize significant increase in domestic production of fertilizer. Overall, the
increased consumption of fertilizer is, thus, largely met through increased fertilizer
import.
4. The nodal Ministry in the Government of India (GoI) for fertilizer susbisy
is the Department of Fertilizers under the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. At
the Central level, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation through Seasonal
Zonal Meetings of State Directorates of Agriculture along with the Department of
Fertilizers which involves the Fertilizer Industry Coordination Commiottee (FICC)
for urea subsidy, broadly form the organizational set up whereas at the State level,
the Director of Agriculture, District Level Agricultural Officer and Block Level
Agricultural Officer are involved.
5. The C&AG carried out a Performance Audit covering the fertilizer subsidy
payments for the period from 2006-07 to 2008-09 (3 years) involving scrutiny of
979 claims amounting to Rs. 54,358 crore, as well as imports at one port (Kandla).
Further, verification of the distribution of fertilizers convering the period from May,
2008 to December, 2008 was conducted in 24 States, covering 94 districts and 188
blocks . In addition, records of 44 fertilizer quality control laboratories were
scrutinised, and surveys of 5498 farmers and 1092 dealers in 24 States were
conducted.
6. Audit criteria of the evaluation of performance were derived from instruction/
circulars/orders issued by DoF/FICC governing the grant of subsidy/concession;
supply plants and ECA allocations issued by DoF; and sanctions for payment of subsidy
concession. The performance audit commenced with a presentation at an entry
conference held with the Department of Fertilizers in April 2009, wherein the audit
methodology, scope, objectives and criteria were explained. Field audit, including
scrutiny of records and surveys was conducted between June 2009 and March 2010.
In addition, a meeting with the Fertilizer Association of India was also held in January
2010. The Audit Report was laid in Parliament on 5th August, 2011.
12

3
7. The Main findings of the Audit Report are as under:—
(i)  Assessment of Fertilizer Requirement
• The process of detailed assessment of fertilizer requirements was flawed.
• No minutes of the deliberations of the seasonal Agriculture Zonal Input
Conferences were maintained by the Department of Agricultural and
Co-operation, in the absence of which the justification for the State-wise
and month-wise requirement of major fertilizers could not be ascertained.
• Requirements of fertilizers were generally projected by an increase of 5 to 10
per cent over the previous season's/year's requirements, indicating that no
scientific method was followed for assessing the requirement.
• In most States, the requirement of various types of fertilizers were projected
at the level of the State Directorate of Agriculture only (without input from
the District and lower levels) and not based on the availability of irrigation
facilities, soil health and other local factors.
• Further, in most States, testing of soil health, which would facilitate
determination of the Correct dosage of fertilizer nutrients, covered only a
fractions of the agricultural land holdings.
(ii)  Fertilizer Production, Import and Consumption
• The assessed requirement of fertilizers went up  by more than 70 per cent
during the 11 year period from 1998-99 to 2008-09, total production went
up by just 11 per cent, while imports went up by nearly, 236 per cent.
• Despite the huge amount of subsidy (increasing from Rs. 11,387 crore in
1998-99 to Rs. 96,603 crore in 2008-09), the production of fertilizers
increased only marginally from 269 lakh MT to 298 lakh MT.
• Changes in the subsidy, regime, including Stages I to III of the New Pricing
Scheme (NPS), have failed to incentivize increase in domestic production
of fertilizer, leaving the country dependent on imports, whose pricing is
volatile. The subsidy/concession on imported fertilizers over 1998-99 to
2008-09 increased from 3 per cent to 47 per cent of the total subsidy.
• The production of urea during the 11 year period from 1998-99 to 2008-09 registered
a negligible increase of just 3 per cent and the shift in urea subsidy policy from
individual unit-based pricing under the Retention Price Scheme (RPS) to group
based pricing under the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) did not result in a sigificant
increase in either capacity or production of urea, as a result of which increased
consumption of urea was met primarily through imports.
• As regards phosphatic fertilizers, although the capacity nearly doubled from
1998-99 to 2008-09, actual production of DAP and NPK complexes
increased by only 30 per cent. In fact, the production of DAP came down
substantially and the increase in consumption of DAP/MAP/NPK complexes
was met primarily through imports at very high prices, which led to multi-
fold increase in the subsidy burden.

4
• As regards potassic fertilizers, the Country's requirement is met fully through
imports and instead of curbing further imports and drawing down on available
stock as of March 2008, the Ministry imported an additional 57 lakh MT of
MOP (43 lakh MT as per expenditue figures), with an avoidable additional to
the subsidy burden of about Rs. 10,000 crore.
•  On the consumption front, while there was a consistent gap between
consumption and assessed requirements, the consumption figures broadly
tracked the total availablity of fertilizers (production + import), indicating
that whatever fertilizer was availabile was readily consumed. While this is
most likely on account of the highly subsidized price, this also confirms
the lack of assessment of requirement on a scientific basis.
• While fertilizer consumption increased by 46 per cent from 2003-04 to
2008-09, the major components of agricultural production (foodgrains,
oilseeds and sugarcane) increased by just 16 per cent over the same period,
indicating a relatively week correlation.
• The pattern of fertilizer consumption across different States was highly skewed,
with States like Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana and Bihar having high
consumption rates while Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Assam and Jharkhand
had very low consumption rates. There was a fairly high degree of correlation
between the consumption rates and the proportion of irrigated area; the
higher the proportion of irrigated area, the higher the rate of consumption
of fertilizers. For example, Punjab with 98 per cent irrigated area consumed
221 kg/ha in 2008-09, while Jharkhand with 10 per cent irrigated area
consumed only 56 kg/ha.
• Data on fertilizer consumption is based only on first point sales at the district
levels and does not take note of actual consumption (let alone purchases)
by individual farmers for agricultural purpose; to that extent, the fertiliser
consumption data is unreliable.
• Despite huge amounts of subsidy/concession, numerious instances of non-
avilability/shortage of fertilizers as well as instances of overstocking/excess
availability of fertilizers, confirming a mismatch between supply and
requirement at the grassroot level was detected.
• Several instances of diversion of fertilizers for non-agricultural purposes, as
well as smuggling of fertilizers in border districts in the Eastern/North-eastern
States were also pointed out.
(iii)  Payment of Subsidy Claims
• Fertilizer units/importers are eligible for subsidy payments when fertilizers
are despatched to the first stocking points in the district, and details of
despatch are uploaded onto the web-based Fertilizer Management System
(FMS). However, there is no mechanism for reconciliation of unit-wise
and district-wise despatch data with corresponding data on receipts at the
first stocking point in the districts.

5
• Scrutiny of limited sample for 2008-09 (Apil 2008 to December 2008) revealed
that 48624 MT of fertilizers valuing Rs. 83 crore stated to have been
despatched by the manufacturing units were not recorded as received at the
1st stocking points in various States.
• Linking certification in Proforma 'B' by the State Governments of sales of
decontrolled fertilizers for agricultural purposes (notwithstanding the
inadequacies in the certification process), the only major control  over
end-use of fertilizers, with release of balance payment of 10/15 per cent
(with the penal clause providing for bank guarantee for 100 per cent of
unadjusted concession) provided clear incentives/disincentives for ensuirng
timely submission of Proforma 'B'. The removal of such a linkage from
June 2007, resulted in accumulation of outstanding Proforma 'B' for the
year 2007-08 to 2009-10 amounting to Rs. 50,587 crore.
• In most of the States, verification of sales for agricultural purposes (which
would provide assurance of proper, end-use of subsidy) was non-existent
or inadequate, as it did not involve physical veritification of stocks or sales
beyond the 1st period sales, and in many cases not even verification of
receipts, invoices etc. Further, although the subsidy was released on the
basis of the receipt of fertilizers at district level and the freight subsidy was
paid upto block level, there was no State level mechanism for physical
verification of the confirmation of receipt at district, block and consumer
levels. Deficiencies in licensing and other arrangements for sale of fertilizers
were also detected.
• Recrods relating to the import of urea on Government account for the period
2005-06 to 2008-09 from the Department of Fertilizers and import of DAP
by IPL on Government instructions during 2007-08 from IPL were not
provided to Audit. Based on the records relating to fertilizer imports provided
to them. certain irregularities in import of DAP by IPL, as well as certain
discrepancies between imports and corresponding supply of DAP by IPL
were detected.
• A disturbing trend of increasing consumption  of subsidized fertilizers (urea,
DAP, MOP etc.) by mixing units in several States resulting in breaking of
the subsidy chain, was also at the expense of the ordinary farmer. Control
over quality of fertilizer mixtures was also minimal, exposing unsuspecting
farmers to the risk of substandard quality mixtures.
(iv)  Quality Control
• Fertilizer quality testing infrastructure in the country was grossly inadequate.
The annual capacity of the existing quality control laboratories was only
25 per cent of the required capacity for testing of samples from all sales
outlets twice a year ( i.e. once each for Rabi and Kharif). Further, many of
the laboratories were deficient in terms of both physical and human
infrastructure. Consequently, there was a significant shortfall in the actual
number of samples tested vis-a-vis both the target as well as the capacity of
the laboratories.

6
• The stipulated time limits for sending of samples to the quality control
laboratories, sending of analysis reports by the laboratories to the concerned
authorities and corrective action thereon were not adhered to in most. States,
with huge delays. As a result, even when sub-standard quality fertilizer was
detected, by the time the analysis reports reached the concerned authorities
and action was initiated, the balance stock of the fertilizer lot (pertaining to
the sub-standard sample) had already been sold to unsuspecting farmers,
who unknowingly used such sub-standard fertilizers.
(v)  Results of Surveys of Farmers and Dealers
• The survey of 1092 fertilizer dealers revealed several significant findings. 57
per cent of the dealers indicated that they were not getting the required
quantity and type of fertilizers in time. 37 per cent indicated that they were
facing problems in transportation in lifting their requirement. Only 51 per cent
indicated that they were able to supply fertilizers as per demand to the farmers
in time. As many as 40 per cent of the dealers indicated that sample had not
been selected in any of the last three years from their stock for fertilizer
quality testing.
• The survey of 5498 farmers also threw up important findings, 45 per cent of
the surveyed farmers indicated that they had bought fertilizers at prices higher
than the MRPs, while 56 per cent indicated that they did not know the MRPs
for fertilizers fixed by the Government. 59 per cent of the farmers faced problems
for getting their full requirement of fertilizers in a timely fashion. 55 per cent of
the surveyed farmers expressed their need for fertilizers in small quantity
bags (contrarily, only 40 per cent of the surveyed dealers indicated that
farmers were demanding small quantity bags); 51 per cent indicated that they
did not have enough money to buy their full requirement of fertilizers. 76 per
cent of the surveyed farmers had not got their soil tested for sicentifically
ascertaining the requirement of fertilizers.
8.  Against the above backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) selected
the subject for detailed examination and report. However, as the subject could not be
examined due to paucity of time, it was carried forward and again taken up for examination
during the year 2012-13. The Committee obtained Background material and detailed
Advance Information from the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers (Department of
Fertilizers) and took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Chemicals
and Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) and Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) on 11th June, 2012. Post Evidence Replies were also
obtained from them. Based on these written and oral depositions, the Committee
examined the subject in detail and discussed some very important issues enumerated
in the succeeding paragraphs.
II.  RESPONSE OF THE DEPARTMENT TO THE AUDIT REPORT
9. Audit in the preface to their Report pointed out that in the course of conduct
of the Performance Audit, while the Principal Director of Audit forwarded the draft
Report to the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers on 1.12.2010 seeking his comments

7
and also seeking an Exit Conference, the letter was not replied to. Subsequently, the
Principal Director of Audit addressed the Secretary, Department of Fertilizer again
on 25.2.2011, stating that the comments of Department were still awaited. He also
reminded the Secretary to indicate a convenient date for the Exit Conference.
Unfortunately, even this letter went unheeded. They have further drawn the attention
of the Parliament and the Public Accounts Committee to judge whether Governmet
Departments should continue to display such low priority to Audit Reports.
10. Audit Report also pointed out instances where records were not made
available inspite of requests made on this behalf. Audit Para 6.6.5 reveals that records
relating to the import of urea of 193.71 Lakh MT on Government account for the
period 2005-06 to 2008-09 were called for from the Department of Fetilizers but
were not provided to Audit. Similarly, records relating to import of 40.70 lakh MT
of urea by IPL during 2007-08 and 2008-09 on Government account was not provided.
Details relating to import of 17.58 Lakh MT of DAP on Government instructions
during 2007-08 were also not provided by IPL.
11. In the above context, on being asked to state the reasons for non-provision
of the aforesaid records to Audit, the Department of Fertilizers clarified that on
1st July 2011, Audit was informed that all records relating to the imports of Urea/DAP
were available with Fertilizer Accounts (FA) Wing of the DoF located in Udyog Bhawan
and the Audit party might check the relevant records in FA Wing. It was further
informed that in case of any additional query of requirement of any other document,
they might contact Director (Movement) in DoF. The Audit Party was stationed in
Udyog Bhawan and was checking the relevant records in FA Wing. No further query
was made by them in this matter. The DoF never denied any records relating to the
imports of urea/DAP made by IPL during 2005—09 or any other document asked by
the Audit Party.
12. As regards the non-response of the Secretary, DoF/Department till July, 2011
to the Audit letters of December 2010 and February 2011 seeking his comments on the
draft Audit Report and an Exit Conference, the Committee asked the Secretary, DoF in
evidence to explain the reasons therefor. In reply, the Secretary, DoF submitted as
under:—
"..........I am not personally aware of the circumstances of the case because
I was not there. I am only going by what is there on record...."
He further submitted:—
"Sir, I should not take names but I was not the Secretary."
13. The Committee pointed out even if he was not the Secretary at that point of
time, there must be some institutional mechanism to attend to the Audit Comments.
In response, the Secretary, DoF stated:
"Sir, that is certainly taken note of and henceforth, very strict instructions
have gone that this should not and can not happen in future....."

8
14.  The Committee then asked whether such mistakes should be taken cognizance
of only after the Committee's intervention. In reply, the Secretary, DoF submitted:—
"....I must place on record my deep and unqualified apology for whatever has
happened and it is clearly not a thing which should have happened and we
will certainly ensure that it does not happen in future. I have no explanation
for it. It is clear that we have to accept that this is failure."
III. ASSESSMENT OF FERTILIZER REQUIREMENT
15. Audit scrutiny revealed that the assessment of fertilizer requirement was
not carried out by following proper scientific methods and was generally projected
to an increase by 5 to10 percent over the previous season's/year's consumption.
Further, no minutes of the deliberations of the seasonal Zonal Conferences were
maintained by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), in the absence
of which the basis and detailed justification for the State-wise and month-wise
requirement of major fertilizers could not be ascertained.
16. In the above context, the Committee were informed that the Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) finalize the requirement of fertilizers for all
the States for each cropping season viz. Kharif and Rabi well before the start of the
season after detailed deliberation in consultation with the representatives of the
State Governments, Department of Fertilizers, Lead Fertilizer Suppliers, Fertilizers
Association of India (FAI) and ICAR, etc. After finalizing requirement of different
fertilizers for all States, statement indicating month-wise and fertilizer-wise
requirement was prepared and circulated to the States as well as Department of
Fertilizers (DoF). This enabled DoF to make month-wise supply plan for States.
With effect from Rabi 2011-12, DAC had also started recording minutes of
deliberations of Zonal Conference which had been circulated to all stakeholders.
The Committee were further informed that the State Governments followed the
procedure set by DAC before finalization of requirement and assessments were made
under the assumption of normal season with initial projection of requirement of
fertilizers for a specific cropping season on the basis of intensive study of cropping
pattern, consumption pattern, cropped area, irrigated area, previous year consumption,
NPK consumption ratio and per hectare consumption of fertilizer, requirement of
nutrient in the soil in different parts of the State, etc.
17. Not satisfied with the reply of the Department, the Committee sought to
know specifically as to whether there was any monitoring mechanism put in place to
ensure that the assessment of requirement of fertilizers was done by the States on a
scientific method. The Secretary, Department of Fertilizers submitted during the
evidence as under:
"...............C&AG has made a comment about the assessment process in the
sense that we are not keeping Minutes of the Zonal Conferences and that
our method of assessment is not right. Subsequent to that we have tried to
improve the method of assessment."

9
18. Asked to state categorically whether demand and availability/supply of
fertilizers were in sync, the Secretary, DoF submitted:—
"..................In some years it is unfortunately true that there has been a shortage
compared to the demand for fertilizers. Availability has been less compared to
the demand. So, as I said, our prime task in the DoF is to make fertilizer
available adequately on demand.  Sometimes it has not happened. Whatever
visibility or transparency you may have, the fertilizer physically has to be
there. I would like to assure the Hon'ble Member that the fertilizer availability
position at present is quite comfortable and there is no problem in this
regard. We have tied up adequate fertilizers for the Kharif season. In the
past it has happened and we have learnt lessons from that."
19. In response to a related specific query, the Secretary, DoF further stated:—
".....The fertilizer movement to any district or to any place is on the basis of
the projection of requirement given by the State Governments."
20. The Committee then desired to know about the existing mechanism to
ensure that the statistics of the requirement of fertilizers as projected by the State
Governments were real statistics. In response, the Secretary, DoF submitted:
"Sir, I will only say that there are two exercises that we do, one is projection
and the other is actual supply."
He added:
".....Sir, we have the Zonal conferences. We have regular video conferences
to see that the demand of the farmers as projected by them, State
Governments and the Department of Agriculture is met. Sir we do not do
the assessment."
21. When the Committee desired to hear the view of the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation on the same issue, a representative of that Department
submitted in evidence:—
"Sir, definitely there is a lot of scope for improvement on this aspect. The
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has been trying to do some
improvement in this. We do Zonal Conferences to assess the requirements
of fertilizers. For that we send a detailed proforma to each State requesting
them, apart from historical fertilizers consumption, to give other data also,
like the gross cropped area, what is the percentage of irrigation, what is the
irrigated area etc. After this audit report we have issued instructions and
requested the State Governments."
22. When asked to provide the last five years figures of the assessment of the
actual need of fertilisers projected compared with the actual consumption and supply

10
of  fertilisers in those years in all the States, the DoF furnished the following
statement:—
Statement indicating assessed Requirement, Consumption of Urea, DAP,
MOP and Complex Fertilizers
(In lakh tonnes )
Kharif+Ravi Urea DAP MOP Complex
Year Require- Consum- Supply Require- Consum- Supply Require- Consum- Supply Require- Consum-Supply
ment ption (A vail- ment tion (A vail- ment ption (A vail- ment ption (A vail-
ability) ability) ability)              ability)
2007-08 271.71 259.63 274.26 89.21 74.97 83.40 36.13 28.80 29.28 87.40 65.70 66.59
2008-09 281.34 266.49 270.88 94.83 92.31 99.78 37.86 40.78 43.34 92.32 68.05 72.26
2009-10 281.90 266.73 265.97 106.98 104.92 104.09 43.85 46.34 47.60 87.73 80.25 83.38
2010-11 290.79 281.12 284.62 120.92 108.70 113.09 47.80 39.31 39.83 92.00 97.64 104.39
2011-12 305.16 295.46 298.65 126.16 96.16 117.44 48.28 30.41 31.64 107.36 102.61124.27
23. The Committee desired to know about the existing level of capacity for
collection of reliable, relevant and accurate collection of statistical data for correct
estimation of the need for fertiliser requirements in terms of infrastructure as well as
manpower needs. In reply, the DoF submitted that the fertilizer requirement was
assessed during the zonal conference of Kharif and Rabi. The State Governments
were required to assess their requirement on the basis of the gross cropped area,
irregation area, dosage and increase or decrease in gross cropped area incomparison
to the last three years seasons. The actual consumption during the last three years
season was also taken into consideration while finalizing the requirement of the
States. It was also stated that the State Governments perhaps assessed their
requirement on the basis of collection of data regarding requirement of fertilizers at
the District level. The State Governments at the District level had the manpower for
carrying out such activities.
24. Further asked to state whether there was any consideration for augmentation
of this very important aspect of collection of satistical data, the DoF submitted that
the Ministry was examining the issue of assessing the demand of each State by
requisite augmentation.
25. The Committee then desired to know whether the skewed distribution of
fertilisers appeared to indicate that the statistical data used for need assessment did
not bear any semblance with the ground reality and whether there was any possibility
of collaborating with the Ministry of Satistics for collection of a more informed and
accurate statistical data. In reply, the DoF stated that the projection of requirement
of fertilizers for specific cropping season was made by the State Governments on the
basis of intensive study of cropping pattern, consumption pattern, cropped area,
irrigated area, previous years' consumption, NPK consumption ratio and per hectare
consumption of fertilizers, requirement of nutrient in soil in different parts of the
States etc., which was then finalized in the Zonal Conference in consultation with

11
DoF, ICAR and representatives of  the States. As regards the possibility of collaboration
with the Ministry of Statistics, the Committee were apprised that the Ministry was
examining the issue.
26. Asked to stated the steps initiated to correlate the need assessment of
fertilizers by farmers on a scientific basis to the actual delivery mechanism proposed,
the DoF submitted that for making fertilizer available, the assessment of fertilizer by
Department of Agriculture & Co-operation (DAC) was being done in the presence of
officials of the State Government, Lead Fertilizer Suppliers (LFS) and the Fertilizer
Association of India (FAI). In addition, District wise assessment of Fertilizers, was
done scientifically before every cropping season and review of availability of Fertilizers
and regular supply line was conducted by the District Agriculture Officer in co-
ordination with the Block Agriculture Officer for Block Level Agriculture requirement,
according to the proposed cropped area for the season as per recommended dose of
NPK to ensure balanced use of fertilizers.
27. The Committee then asked whether consumption pattern of the previous
seasons could be considered a scientific method for assessing the requirement of
fertilizers without taking into consideration the soil, health irrigation facilities etc. In
reply, the DoF stated that the consumption of previous seasons was taken into
consideration as one of the inputs but was not the sole criteria for fertilizer requirement
assessment. The processes of plot assessment of soil health and irrigation facilities
was, however, not practicable. However, partial usage of futuristic technology like
remote sensing and satellite imagery was being used at some places to overcome plot
to plot assessment.
28. Asked to state in no uncertain terms the specific measures contemplated to
make the assessment of fertilizers requirement more scientific and realistic, especially
after the C&AG findings, the DoF submitted that an attempt was being made to modify
the proforma used to assess the requirement of fertilizers after incorporating the
recommendations of the C&AG which would ensure a more scientific, realistic and
rational assessment of fertilizers. It was further stated that the requirement was being
assessed at block level taking into account the soil health reports, cropping patterns etc.
as indicated in the recommendations of the C&AG Report.
IV . NEW PRICING SCHEME (NPS)
29. Audit scrutiny revealed that changes in the subsidy regime, including
New Pricing Scheme (NPS) Stages I to III, have failed to incentivize increase in the
domestic production of fertilizer, leaving the Country dependent on imports as can be
gauged from the increase of the subsidy on imported fertilizers from 3 per cent to 47 per
cent of the total subsidy over the years from 1998-99 to 2008-09.
30. In the above context, the Committee sought details of the reasons which
necessitated the replacement of the Retention Price Scheme (RPS) with the New
 Pricing Scheme (NPS) and whether the desired objectives in terms of boosting
production, encourage internationally competitive norms and parameters for the urea
industry and reduction of urea subsidy had been acheved. In reply, the DoF stated

12
that the RPS was criticized for being cost plus in nature and not encouraging efficiency.
The Government considered to replace the Scheme by a new Pricing Policy. The
matter was referred to a High Powered Fertilizer Pricing Policy Review Committee
(HPC) headed by Prof. C.H. Hanumantha Rao and Expenditure Reforms Commission
(ERC) headed by Shri K.P. Geethakrishnan. The HPC had recommended (April 1998)
for introduction of a uniform Normative Referral Price (NRP) for existing gas based
urea units with provision of Feedstock Differential Cost Reimbursement (FDCR) for
naphtha, FO/LSHS based units. The ERC recommended (September 2000), inter
alia, replacement of RPS by uniform rates of concession after dividing urea units
into five groups based upon feedstock and vintage and a phased decontrol of urea.
The Finance Minister in his Budget Speech for 2001-02 announced that the ERC
recommendations would be implemented and in the first phase commencing 1.4.2001,
the unit specific RPS would be replaced by a Group Concession Scheme.
31. With a view to formulate a new pricing policy for urea units for replacing
the existing Retention Price Scheme. The new pricing scheme for urea units was
notified on 30.1.2003 which came into existence w.e.f. 1.4.2003 replacing RPS and was
being implemented in stages. Stage-I was of one year duration, from 1.4.2003 to
31.3.2004. Stage-II was commenced from 1.4.2004 for two years duration i.e. from,
1.4.2004 to 30.09.2006. The modalities of  Stage-III would be decided by the
Department of Fertilizers after review of the implementation of Stage-I and
Stage-II. The DoF further stated that the new scheme aimed at greater transparency,
uniformity and efficiency in subsidy disbursements to urea units and at inducing the
urea manufacturing units to take cost reduction measures and be competitive. The
Department of Fertilizers had fixed normatively determined pre-set energy levels per
tonne of urea and these norms were comparable with the best in the world and were
effective from 1.4.2004. Reduction in rates of concession during Stage-II of NPS on
account of reduction in capital related charges had also been announced effective
from 1.4.2004.
32. As regards the achievement of the objectives of the NPS, the DoF submitted
that the objectives of cost cutting and consequent reduction in subsidy had been
achieved as the reduction in subsidy due to application of lower of group weighted
average RP or units' own RP had accrued to the Government on recurring basis.
Further, under NPS, the lower of group weighted average energy figure or individual
units own energy figure in the previous pricing was adopted as per set energy norm.
This has resulted in reduction in energy cost of permanent nature thereby further
reducing the subsidy. Capacity addition or increase in production was not aimed at
while changing the policy from RPS to NPS.
33. As regards the negligible increase of 7 per cent urea production during the
NPS period and the substantial increase in group wise weighted average cost of
production of urea by 81 per cent to 120 per cent, the DoF clarified that the Cost of
production including manufacturer's profit margin in the NPS policy had two
components, namely, (i) Variable cost comprising of cost of energy, bags, water and
electricity, and (ii) Fixed cost comprising of conversion cost, employee cost,
administration & marketing cost and profit margin of the manufacturers. In order to
contain the cost of production and price of urea within a reasonable limit, the NPS

13
had frozen the fixed cost element at the level 2002-03. No increase in fixed cost had
been allowed in the determination of cost of production of urea and subsidy had
frozen the fixed cost element at the level of 2002-03. No increase in fixed cost had
been allowed in the determination of cost of production of urea and subsidy thereon
to the urea manufacturers over almost a decade. The increase in cost of production
of urea was, therefore, attributable to increase in cost of energy input which was
beyond the control of NPS implementing authorities.
34. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Secretary, DoF on the
matter, he deposed in evidence:—
"The NPS-1 to NPS-3, as we changed from retention price scheme, the idea
was to incentivize efficiency. Earlier it was a cost-plus approach. Now we
are sort of specifying some energy norms. Any saving is really a saving by
the company. But we are also incentivizing in the sense that we have given
him some price incentive for production above 100 per cent. As a result
there has been a marginal increase in production. But the production increase
really has to be seen in the context of another thing. In 2008 there was an
investment policy which was announced. After that there has been an increase
of production of about 1.5 million to two million tonnes of urea. Of course
we have scope of becoming more self-sufficient in urea and for that the
Department is looking at tweaking the investment policy. But that is under
examination and I would not like to comment on it at this stage."
35. The Secretary, DoF further clarified:—
".........The Retention Price Scheme was cost plus approach which did not incentivize
efficiency. The NPS basically was trying to group fertilizer plants and give them
energy consumption norms and give them the price based on those energy
consumption norms. Now, if they save on energy, that benefit would accrue to the
concerned fertilizer company. It is true that there is no direct benefit to the
Government from the subsidy point of view. But there is an energy efficiency
gain, which is a national gain. The other point which we need to focus on is that the
NPS has allowed for production beyond 100 per cent capacity and we allowed
them higher price for urea for production beyond 100 per cent. To that extent
there is an incentivisation of higher production. The NPS has actually incentivized
efficient working of existing plants. So, the hon. Member will appreciate that the
gains in production to tweaking of efficiency of existing plans is possible only to
some extent and beyond that new capacity has to be set up. So, I think, as far as
saving of subsidy is concerned, NPS actually said it incentivizes the energy usage;
it incentivises for production beyond 100 per cent. To that extent there is an
incentivisation of higher production. The NPS has actually incentivized efficient
working of existing plants."
36. On a specific query regarding the yardsticks to judge the effectiveness of
the NPS Policy as neither production nor capacity showed any augmentation, the
representative of the Department of Fertilisers stated during evidence as under:—
"Sir, the NPS had this element that till 2002-03 we had what is called 'the
Retention Price Scheme' (RPS) and from 2003-04, we moved on the new

14
pricing scheme-I, then II and then III. Under the new pricing scheme, the urea
production units were grouped based on two things—one is feedstock and
the second is vintage. That is why you had pre-92 gas and post-92 gas which
is based on vintage. Similarly, P-92 naptha and post-92 naptha. The idea was
to group units based on these two yardsticks-feedstock and technology/
vintage and see that they should be comparable. So, once having grouped
them, whosoever is more energy-efficient in that particular group should gain
vis-a-vis others. Therefore, after this grouping, there was an incentive provided
to make energy efficiency improvements and gain from that. Now, what did
the Government gain from that? The fixed cost as of 2002-03 was frozen.
Subsequent to 2002-03, there was no increase in fixed cost. So, therefore,
fixed costs were frozen. They were not allowed to go up whereas the units
within the same comparable group were made to compete. The point that
Secretary made beyond 100 per cent—now beyond 100 per cent, there was a
gain-sharing formula. So, the IPP minus variable cost of the unit was shared
between the Government and the unit in the ratio of 65:35. So, units which
produced more than hundred per cent, there was gain to the units as well as
to the Government. So, both benefited. Therefore, the policy encouraged
production beyond 100 per cent. But there is an absolute limitation. You
cannot go from 100 per cent to 200 per cent with a given technology and
capacity. Therefore, the scope for improvement which you mentioned is
limited."
37. When the Committee asked whether the overall capacity was below 100 per
cent, the representative of DoF submitted as under:—
"It is slightly below the capacity, but it is not grossly under-utilized or so. But
what was needed was that you needed to bring in a new investment policy. In
2008, we brought in a new investment policy which did not bring in new
production capacity but units went in for modernisation and revamp. That is
what which brought in additional two million tonnes. So, post-2008 new
investment policy, there was an enhancement in capacity and additional
production which came about. The additional production which came about
was incentivised with respect to IPP. So, units which produced beyond a cut
off level were given the benefit of 85 per cent of the IPP . So, if the
Government had imported, it would have paid 100 per cent of IPP. But by
encouraging these units to undertake revamped modernisation, the
Government saved 15 per cent of the IPP and the units also gained. So,
therefore, to that extent, this policy was beneficial."
38. Audit findings revealed that Urea production in the Country has virtually
remained stagnant during the last 11 years and DAP & NPK complexes have increased
by only 30%. During the last 11 years (1998-99 to 2008-09) imports went up by
236%. In this context, the Committee desired to know the reasons for the stagnation
in urea production and measures taken to attrack investment in this sector. In reply, the
DoF stated that various reasons led to the stagnation in production of urea during the
last 11 years and also no investment in urea sector. A pricing policy was announced on
29.1.2004 for setting up new urea projects and expansion of existing urea projects for

15
augmenting the domestic prodution capacity of urea to meet the growing demand for
enhancing the agricultural production in the Country. The policy notified on 29.1.2004
was not successful in attracting investment in this sector. The DoF further stated that
the non-availability of natural gas, which was the critical feedstock for production of
urea, was one of the major constraints in further addition of indigenous capacity for
production of urea. Subsequently, the Government announced on 4th September 2008,
a new investment policy for urea sector to attract the much required investment in this
sector. The policy was based on IPP benchmark and finalized in consultation with the
industry. The New Investment Policy of 2008 aimed at revamp, expansion, revival of
existing urea units and setting up of Greenfield/Brownfield projects. The policy
notificaiton of 2008 resulted in fructification of a few Revamp projects with an increase
in Urea production of about two million tonnes per annum. However due to lack of
commitment on availability of domestic natural gas by the Government at a pre-
determined price formula, no Expansion/Brownfield plants could fructify. Apart from
difficulty in allocation of gas at pre-determined price, the Greenfield units were
supposed to go through a bidding route for determination of Urea price from these
units. It was felt that to encourage investment in Greenfield urea projects; they should
be given a despensation similar to that of Brownfield/Expansion units and have to be
brought under the ambit of the IPP regime. The companies interested in new investments
in Urea sector had been regularly requesting the Government for either firm allocation
of gas at predetermined fixed prices from domestic gas sources or to protect the
industry from any additional liability arising due to increase in the delivered price of
gas by correspondingly providing adequate protection at the floor prices. In view of
the above reasons, a strong need was felt to revise existing policy addressing various
concerns of potential investors in Urea sector and to attract new Investments in Urea
sector. The DoF was considering formulation of New Investment Policy 2012 for
which a draft CCEA Note had been prepared and circulated by the Department of
Fertilizers on 26th June 2012 for inter-ministerial consultation and comments. The
MoP&NG and the Department of  of Agriculture had submitted their comments and
the comments from other Ministries were awaited.
39. Audit findings revealed that even after conversion of Naptha units to gas,
the cost of production and subsidy burden went up. On being asked to furnish the
reasons for the same, the DoF in their written reply submitted as under:—
"The Cost of production of urea is represented by Fixed Cost represented
by depreciation, interest, employee cost, administrative overhead etc. and
variable cost represented energy cost (natural gas, naphtha, FO/LSHS etc.),
water, purchased power, bags etc.
In the variable cost, about 97% is accounted for by energy cost. Further,
energy cost is constituted by various gases and fuel in the following ratio:—
Sl. Energy Resource % of  energy Name of the
No. consumption supplier
12 3 4
1. APM Gases 32% ONGC, GAIL, OIL

16
12 3 4
2. RIL KG D-6 Gas 28% RIL
3. RLNG, Spot RLNG , Non- 28% GAIL, IOCL, BPCL,
APM Gases, coal CIL
4. Naphtha/FO/LSHS 12% IOCL, BPCL, HPCL
Total 100%
Billing of above input items (excluding coal) are linked to the Rupee-Dollar
exchange rate. Falling rupee value has adversely affected the cost of above
inputs and resultantly increased the energy cost of urea. This factor was
beyond the control of the DoF.
Further, under NPS, Fixed cost element having been frozen at 2002-2003 level,
the increase in the subsidy payment is solely attributable to variable cost of
urea production".
40. The DoF further stated that increase in energy cost resulted in increase in
subsidy burden of the GOI. The pricing of APM and KG D-6 gas which combinedly
constitute 60% of energy cost has been determined by the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas i.e. 32% of increased energy cost was attributable to GAIL/ONGC/OIL for
APM supplies and 28% was attributable to RIL for KG D-6 gas. Naphtha, FO, HSD and
LSHS having been supplied mostly by the national oil companies like IOCL, BPCL and
HPCL, the increase in prices of these fuels/feedstocks were attributable to these
companies and indirectly to the policy of the MoP&NG. As regards the remaining 28%
of energy cost which was represented mostly by RLNG, non-APM gas, the supplies
were made by GAIL or national oil companies like IOCL and BPCL and coal by Coal
India Limited. The pricing of such energy resources were directly or indirectly governed
by the policy of the MoP&NG for RLNG/spot gas and Ministry of Coal for coal.
41. The DoF was thus of the view that the increase in the subsidy to the domestic
producers of urea was mostly attributable to the pricing of gas and other petroleum
products by the PSUs under the administrative control of the Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas and partly attributable to RIL and Coal India Limited. The amount of
urea-subsidy basically was the reimbursement of payments which the urea units have
already made to the PSUs under the MoP&NG (GAIL, OIL, IOCL, BPCL etc. for gas,
naphtha, F.O. etc), RIL (for gas) and Coal India Ltd. (for coal). The urea units were
not even allowed the whole amount of exprenses incurred by them towards these
energy resources. A lot of deductions were made from the urea units while computing
the energy cost as per NPS of urea subsidy.
42. As regards reduction in subsidy burden, the DoF stated that the pricing
policies of the NPS could contain the urea subsidy to the extent of fixed cost only.
The energy cost being a matter beyond the  control of the urea units as well as of the
DoF, NPS for urea could not ensure reduction of subsidy for urea production.
IIIustrating the matter, the DoF submitted that during the year 2010-11, there was an
increase in energy cost of the domestic urea manufacturing unit by Rs 4010 crore as

17
compared with 2009-10. Out of this about Rs. 978 crore was attributable to GAIL
(for APM), Rs. 421 crore to RIL (for KG D-6 Gas), Rs 1527 crore to Oil PSUs ( for
Naphtha, FO, LSHS, HSD) and Rs. 175 crore to Sales tax. The increase in energy
cost in  2011-12 (provisional) as compared to 2009-10 was Rs. 9127 crore of which
about  Rs. 1600 crore was accounted for by GAIL (for APM), Rs. 967 crore by RIL
(for KG D-6 Gas), Rs. 3684 crore by Oil PSUs (for Naphtha, FO, LSHS, HSD) and
Rs. 421 crore to Sales tax. NPS-III has no control over these suppliers of energy
resources, hence could not achieve the goal of reduction in subsidy burden caused
by increase in energy cost.
43. The Committee asked the measures sought to be taken to ensure reduction in
the subsidy burden for domestic urea. In reply, the DoF stated that if reduction in the
subsidy burden in respect of domestic urea was intended to be ensured, the MoP&NG
should impress upon the pricing policy of the gas and oil companies in both government
and private sectors in respect of gas, F.O., Naphtha, LSHS. They  should also ensure
supply of rquired quantities of gas to the urea units so that high cost fuels/feeds could
be replaced by gas and thus result in lower subsidy burden to the Government.
44. Elaborating the matter, the DoF further stated that the in crease in the cost
of production of urea was due to the rampant increase in price of gas, Naphtha, F.O.,
HSD, LSHS etc. by GAIL, RIL and other national oil marketing companies (OIL,
IOCL, BPCL, HPCL)  and depreciation of rupee against US dollar. The pricing of the
energy resources required for urea production by the companies under the MoP&NG
had negated the hope for cost cutting. If the MoP&NG did not prevail upon these
comapanies and stopped frequent and rampant increase in the price of energy
resources, cost cutting in the production of urea might not be possible in the
foreseable period of time.
45. The Committee then desired to know whether the DoF had taken up the matter
with the MoP&NG and Ministry of Coal at any point of time and the response thereto. In
reply, the DoF stated that the matter was under consideration of the Department of
Fertilizers in consultation with the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas.
46. The Committee were then informed that the Urea (N) was the only fertilizer,
the requirement of which was largely (around 75 percent) met through indigenous
production which could be increased by setting up expansion units within the existing
campus of the urea units, setting up of Greenfield urea units, revival of closed urea
units of Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd. (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation
Ltd. (HFCL).
47. Asked to specify the measures taken to augment indigenous production
of Urea (N), the DoF stated that pursuant to the decision taken by the Government
on 12.4.2007, the feasibility of reviving the various closed units of FCIL and HFCL
was examined by the Government, subject to the confirmed availability of gas.
After due examination based on technical and economic feasibility, the Government
decided on 30th October, 2008, to constitute an Empowered Committee of Secretaries
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Fertilizers) and Secretaries of the Department
of Expenditure, Department of disinvestment, Planning Commission, Department
of Public Enterprises and Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas as Members to look

18
into all possible financial models for revival of each of the closed units. The Empowred
Committee was also required to look into various linkages including gas for facilitating
revival of these units and submit its recommendations including the model for revival
of each of the closed units to the Government.
48. The ECOS held a series of meetings and submitted its recommendations for
revival of the closed units of FCIL and HFCL. Based on the recommendations of ECOS,
a note for consideration of CCEA was forwarded to Cabinet Secretariat for placing it
before the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs. The revival proposal envisaged
the revival of three units of FCIL namely Talchar, Sindri, Ramagundam through
nomination basis to the consortium of PSUs i.e. RCF, CIL, GAIL/NFL, SAIL and NFL,EIL
respectively. The remaining five units Gorakhpur, Korba of FCIL and Haldia, Barauni,
Durgapur of HFCL would be revived through bidding process. The CCEA approved
the proposal in its meeting held on 4th August 2011 with the stipulation that Board for
Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) proceedings be expedited and thereafter,
the matter including changes, if any, required in bid parameters, be placed before the
Committee for a final decision.
49. The DoF further stated that the BIFR had takan up the proposal on priority
basis and held hearings on 18.8.2011, 15.11.2011, 10.1.2012, 1.3.2012 and
29.3.2012. The BIFR considered the Draft Rehabilitations Schemes (DRSs) of FCIL
and HFCL and appointed State Bank of India as Operating Agency to examine the
DRSs.
50. The Government also accorded in principle approval for considering the
write off of Government of India loans and interest liabilities of FCIL and HFCL
subject to submission of fully tied up proposals.
51. Drawing the attention of the Secretary, DoF to the President's Address in the
year 2012 wherein it was stated that the Government had decided to revive 8 urea units
of Fertilizer Corporation of India and Hindustan Fertilizer Corporation to create an
extra installed capcity of 9 million tonnes of urea, the Committee desired to know the
action taken in this regard. In reply, the Secretary, DoF submitted in evidence:—
"The first question relates to the revival of 8 closed units of FCI and HFC.
The Cabinet, last year, decided to revive these units and it was committed in
Parliament also. As per the  decision, 3 units would be revived on the
nomination route, through the PSU route and other units would be done on
a bidding basis. But before any specific action could be initiated for revival
of all these 3 units, BIFR's final hearing has to be completed and its report
has to come. We are awaiting that and we are trying to get it expedited.
Otherwise, all preliminary action is being undertaken. That is the stage as
far as these closed units are concerned."
52. The Committee then asked about the quantum of offtake of urea from joint
ventures abroad and the progress made since 2008 in terms of Indian entrepreneurs
going abrad and setting up factories there. In reply, the DoF stated that a number of
Indian Companies were putting efforts to establish Joint Ventures (JVs) abroad in
the fertilizer sector, the detials of which were as under:—
(i) M/s. IFFCO is trying to establish its presence in Canada and Australia. The
society has also signed an agreement with JPMC for setting up of a Joint

19
Venture Project namely Jordan-IFFCO Company (JIFCO), for production of
phosphoric acid and sulphuric acid. The project is likely to be completed by
the year 2013. IFFCO has also taken stake in the rock mines in Anne Basin in
Australia and has entered into a 'Principles of Off-take Agreement' with
Legend International Holdings of Australia to undetake joint mining of rock
phosphate along with an assured three million MT annual off-take. However,
it would take few years to start production from the project. IFFCO has also
entered into a joint venture with M/s Grow Max Agri. Crop, Canada for
potesh exploitation in Peru.
(ii)  M/s Nagarjuna Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. has entered into an agreement
with the Government of Nigeria for setting up of a Gas based Ammonia -
Urea fertilizer plant in Nigeria. The company is also trying to establish a
joint venture fertilizer project in Yemen.
(iii)  M/s Tata Chemicals Ltd. is in process of acquiring equity stake in a Urea
Fertilizer Plant in Gabon.
(iv) Syria: The MOU has been signed between the GECOPHAM and the DoF
in May, 2009 for carrying out a Consultancy Study for assessing feasibility
of upgradation in infrastructure and mining sector for production of rock
phosphate and setting up of facilities for production of phosphate fertilizers
in Syria. In pursuance of this MOU, a consortium of Indian entities viz.
M/s. MECON, RITES and PDIL have carried out the said consultancy
studies and submitted the report to GECOPHAM. But due to political un-
stability in Syria the matter is still pending.
(v) Ghana: An MoU was signed on 6th July, 2010 between the Government
of the Republic  of India and the Government of the Republic of Ghana for
exploring the feasibility of setting up of Gas based Ammonia - Urea
Fertilizer Project in Ghana. In pursuance of the MOU, the matter has
progressed a lot. The Ghanian Government has approved formation of
Ghana - India Joint Venture Fertilizer Company. The work of 'Site Related
Studies' and 'Topographical Studies' has been awarded to the selected firm
after completing due process.
(vi) Indonesia: MOU between India and Indonesia for setting up a Coal
Gasification based Ammonia-Urea Joint V enture Fertilizer Plant in Indonesia
and agreement for off-take of surplus urea produced in the plant, and the
draft terms of agreement for off-take of surplus urea from Indonesia to
India were signed between India and Indonesia on 25th January, 2011.
Department of Fertilizers has nominated RCF to pursue with concerned
entities/authorities of Indonesia in the matter. Matter regarding availability/
supply of Coal for the project is under negotiation between M/s RCF and
M/s MEK of Indonesia".
53. On a specific query as to whether the State Governments were consulted
and taken into confidence while adopting and implementing the Investment Policy
of 2008, the DoF replied in the negative.

20
54. The Committee then desired to know the status of the technology
upgradation and other proposals of the Government to address the existing
constraints being faced for the achievement of uniform energy norms across all
units in a group within a set timeline for production of urea unde the NPS regime. In
reply, the DoF stated that technology upgradation at par with international standards
was one of the objectives of the proposed New Investment Policy of 2012 which was
under consideration. The New Policy aimed to imporve the efficiency of urea plants
in energy consumption via expansion, revival/Brown man field and setting up new
Greenfield urea plants. It was further submitted that the Government was considering
to notify the new urea pricing policy viz. New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for urea
manufacturing units beyond Stage-III, besides the New Investment Policy 2012, to
create conducive and incentive based environment for new investment in urea sector
and to bring uniform energy norms by conversion of all the non-gas based units to
gas based.
55. As per the DoF Guidelines all the 12 existing Naptha/FO/LSHS based plants
were to be converted to gas based units. But Audit pointed out that as of May 2010,
only 4 units has been converted to gas. In that context, the Committee queired about
the reasons for not covering all the existing Naptha/FO/LSHS based plants to gas
based units and measures taken to do the needful. In reply, the DoF stated that the
units in Southern India viz. Madras Fertilizers Limited, Chennai; Mangalore Chemicals
and Fertilizers Limited, Mangalore; Zurai Industries Limited, Goa and FACT, Cochin
were waiting for gas pipeline connectivity.
56. The DoF also stated that Zurai Holdings Limited (ZHL) has already been
in its manufacturing processes to Gas for both its Feed and its Fuel requirements
from March, 2011. ZHL has signed the agreement with GAIL (India) Limited for
purchase of LNG to be supplied from 1st January, 2012. The Department of Fertilizers
had intimated to the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas regarding location of
plants for pipeline connectivity and MoP&NG was taking action in consultation with
GAIL/RGTIL.
57. The Committee then desired to know the requirement of gas for fertilizer
sector and measures taken to meet the additional requirement of 34 million tonne of
urea by the end of the 12th Plan period. In reply, the DoF stated that the requirement
of gas for existing gas based urea units was 46.5 MMSCMD. Approximate supply of
natural gas in MMSCMD from various sources was as under:—
ONGS Joint Imported RIL Others T otal
V enture LNG (KG-D6) +Spot
(PMT &
Ravaa)
14 2.3 9 15 2.2 42.5
58. The DoF further stated that the supplies varied due to variation in the supply
of APM gas and condition of various plants on day to day basis. Gas from ONGC and
Joint Venture was supplied through GAIL. Imported LNG was marketed by M/s GAIL,
IOC, BPCL and gas from KG-D6 was marketed by RIL as per allocation.

21
59. As regards the estimation of the additional requirement of Natural Gas, the
DoF apprised that the Fertilizers Association of India has estimated the additional
requirement of natural gas and intimated that the production of urea from existing gas
and non gas plants was likely to be 22 million tonnes. In order to ensure 34 million
tonnes of urea production based entirely on gas by the end of 12th Plan period, the
additional requirement of domestic gas (excluding the present requirement) was about
45.44 MMSCMD as per the break up given below:—
(All figures in MMSCMD)
1. Present allocation/requirement of gas excluding imported LNG 37.50
2. Additional Requirement
(i) Gas requirement to make up supply in existing plants 1.18
(ii) Gas requirement for feed stock change in 9 plants from Fuel 11.26
Oil to gas
T (iii) Gas requirement for replacement of expensive LNG with 9.00
h domestic gas
e (iv) Gas requirement for new capacity of 12 million tonnes of 24.00
T urea through Brown/Green fields plants
T3 Total additional requirement [2(i)+(ii)+(iii)+(iv)] 45.44
h4. Total Gas Requirement at the end of 12th plant (1+3) 82.94
60. The Committee were also apprised that the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas had intimated to the Department of Fertilizers that considering the fact
that there was no likelihood of any substantial increase in domestic production of
natural gas, the additional demand of natural gas would have to be met through
imported LNG.
61. Audit findings revealved that while the MRP of Urea remained stagnant at
` 4830/- per MT, the average subsidy per MT more than doubled from ` 4305/- in
2003-04 to Rs. 8880 in 2007-08. The Urea MRP and the average subsidy per MT of
urea from 2003-04 to 2009-10 were as under:—
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Urea MRP 4830 4830 4830 4830 4830 4830 4830
Avg.
Subsidy 4305 5196 5331 6543 8880 1 1651 8317
per MT
62. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the reasons for huge
difference in the average subsidy on imported urea vis-a-vis indigenous urea. In
reply, the Secretary, DoF explained in evidence as under:
"......since 2002-08, the subsidy of urea per tonne has gone up because
MRP has not changed and the cost of production has gone up. As I had

22
pointed out in general terms when the Chairman made his Opening Remarks
that on subsidy, we are aware that MRP of urea at present is ` 5,310 per tonne.
Now, the average cost of production for gas-based urea is ` 12,000 to ` 14,000
per tonne. These are approximate figures. The cost of import varies from time
to time depending on the international dollar price as well as the rupee-dollar
parity. It varies between ` 20,000 to ` 26,000 per tonne. So, the cost of imported
urea at any given point of time is approximately ` 25,000 per tonne and then
the MRP is ` 5,310. So, the subsidy per tonne would be ` 20,000 per tonne.
The cost of indigenous urea which is produced with indigenous gas would
be about ` 7,000 to ` 8,000 per tonne. These are indicative figures and these
would vary depending on the cost of inputs. That is why, as has been pointed
out, it is necessary to see that indigenous production of urea be increased.
However, for increading indigenous urea, I will just give one perspective that
the cost of production of urea from indigenous APM gas is about 4.2 dollars
per MMBTU. The imported gas cost anywhere from 14 to 20 dollars per
MMBTU. To that extent the cost can vary even from indigenous production.
Of course, we can start Naptha gas in production. We are trying to bring
down or convert Naptha to gas. That is the thing. So, the cost of subsidy for
imported urea is much higher than the subsidy for indigenous urea."
63. When the Committee pointed out that whether continued dependence on
imports created a distortion in subsidy as well as in the fertiliser pricing policy, the
Secretary, DoF submitted in evidence as under:—
"Very valid point, Sir. But as I said, we have possibilities of becoming self-
sufficient only in the urea sector. You are right that we have a shortfall of six
to eight million tonnes of urea to be made up. As I said, the investment policy
which we are processing would hopefully create..."
64. The Committee then asked about the difference between the international
price of urea and the price of urea produced in the factories in the Country. In reply, the
Secretary, DoF deposed:—
"Sir, International price varies. But let met just make an off the cuff comparison.
International price would be anywhere near ` 20,000/- per tonne. And any gas
based production, gas based using indigenous gas, would be about ` 12,000
to ` 14,000 per tonne. But the gas is indigenous gas; if it is imported gas, it
would be higher."
65. Asked to state categorically whether there was any scope for becoming more
self-sufficient in urea, the Secretary, DoF submitted:—
"...In 2008, there was an investment policy which was announced. After that
there has been an increase of production of about 1.5 million tonnes of urea.
Of course we have scope for becoming more self-sufficient in urea and for
that the Department is looking at tweaking the investment policy..."

23
V . NUTRIENT BASED SUBSIDY POLICY (NBS)
66. The Committee were informed that the Government of India has introduced
Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy (NBS) w.e.f. 1.4.2010 replacing the erstwhile concession
scheme for decontrolled P&K fertilizers. Under the NBS Policy, the MRPs of the P&K
fertilizers had been left open to be fixed by the manufacturers/importers and the amount
of subsidy was fixed in terms of the nutrients of Nitrogen 'N', Phosphate "P", Potash
'KL' and Sulphur 'S' on annual basis. Accordingly, any increase/decrease in the price of
P&K fertilizers and its raw materials in the international market had a direct bearing on
the MRPs of P&K fertilizers.
67. In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the views of the
Secretary, DoF, he submitted in evidence as under:
"Hon. Member raised an issue relating to nutrient based subsidy and the
issue of improved choice. It is an indisputable fact that after the introduction
of nutrient based subsidy, new fertilizers have come into the market. Earlier,
we said we would give subsidy only for DAP, etc. now, we are saying we
would give subsidy of so much for potash and phosphate, etc. So, any fertilizer
which provides for nutrient is eligible for subsidy. So, more NPK fertilizers
have come into the market and farmers have a larger choice. We have also
under the NBS provided for subsidy for micro nutrient such as zinc, etc. It
was not there earlier and which is necessary in the interest of improved and
balanced fertilization."
68. The Committee then asked whether any assessment of the NBS policy in
terms of bringing about a more balanced use of fertilizers at the ground level has
been done. In reply, the representative of the Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation stated as under:—
".......The Department of Agriculture has been emphasizing on balanced use
of fertilisers. We have come up with customised fertiliser use where we
have requested the fertiliser companies to come out with specific
recommendations for districts and similarly for fortified fertilisers because
micro nutrients has been one of the major causes of this. So we are
introducing fortified fertilisers.
69. On further being asked whether the DAC followed a uniform formula for
the entire agro climatic zone or recommended different sets of fertilizer
combinations for different agro climatic zones, the representative of the DAC
submitted that they had made different recommendations depending on different
agro climatic conditions.
70. Audit findings revealved that payments on account of fertiliser subsidy
increased more than eight fold from 2003-04 to 2008-09, before coming down a
little in 2009-10. Decontrolled fertilizers were the primary factor on this account,
with a tonne of decontrolled fertilizers was ` 2242.00 during 2003-04 which went upto

24
` 14895.00 during 2009-10 through  the MRP per MT increased substantially during
this period. The details are as under:—
Product Subsidy (Rs. in Crore)
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
Urea 8509 10737 11887 15924 23056* 31,048* 22184
Decontrolled 3326 5142 6596 10298 16934* 65,555* 39452
Fertilizers
(range)
Total 11835 15879 18483 26222 39990 96,603 61636
* Includes payment of subsidy through issue of fertilizer bonds. These bonds are issued to the
fertilizer units for outstanding subsidy claims, typically with maturity periods of 15 years of more,
thus, enabling Gol to defer cash payments correspondingly.
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10
MRP per 3400 to 3400 to 3400
Mt 9350* 10350 10350
Avg. subsidy 2242 3044 3691 5234 8735 27842 14895
Per MT
(`)
* till 17.06.2008
71. The Committee sought to know the reasons for such steep rise in subsidy
towards decontrolled fertilizers. In reply, the DoF stated that when there was increase
in the cost of raw material and fluctuation in the Indian curency, the delivered cost of
these fertilizers was also increased. Since the MRP of these fertilizers remained
unchanged from February, 2002 to March, 2010, there was increase in the subsidy
amount during this period due to continued increase in the delivered cost of the
fertilizers. Increase in consumption of these fertilizers has also contributed to the
increase of subsidy amount during these years. The DoF further stated that after
introduction of NBS Policy w.e.f. 1.4.2010 there had been no rise in the subsidy amount
on P&K fertilizers.
72. Asked to state the total subsidy outgo in the P&K sector after the introduction
of the NBS policy, the DoF furnished the following information:—
Y ear Total subsidy outgo ( ` in Crore) in P&K sector
2010-11 41500.00
2011-12 36107.94
2012-13 (BE) 28576.12

25
73. The Committee then asked about the rationale of subsidizing a
decontrolled item. In reply, the DoF submitted that the P&K fertilizers were once
decontrolled with effect from 25.8.1992. Due to decontrol of P&K fertilizers, the
prices of P&K fertilizers became open and subsidy had been lifted putting these
fertilizers under Open General Licence. This had resulted in increase in the MRP of
fertilizers and the marginal and small farmers, who constitute major chunk of farming
community in the country, could not afford to buy fertilizers. This adversely affected
the consumption of these fertilizers, leading to imbalance in the usage of NPK
nutrients in the soil as  Urea remained under subsidy regime. Therefore, in order to
protect the marginal and small farmers, the Government had to roll back the decision
and to maintain nutrient balance of soil the Government of India [Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC)] introduced the ad hoc Concession Scheme
for decontrolled P&K fertilizers from Rabi 1992. The Concession Scheme for
decontrolled P&K fertilziers was allowed to continue upto 31.3.2010 with changed
parameters/amendments therein from time to time. With the  implementation of
NBS Policy w.e.f. 1.4.2010, MRP of P&K fertilizers again became decontrolled. The
DoF further stated that the Government was providing subsidy (NBS) on these
fertilizers so that it might reach the  farmars at affordable prices. In the absence of
subsidy, the prices of fertilizers would be at international prices which would be
very high.
74. The Committee then desired to know whether there was any correlation
between increasing consumption of fertilizers and increase in agricultural productivity
after the NBS Policy was introduced. In reply, the DoF submitted that under the
erstwhile concession scheme, it was observed in the last few years that the marginal
response of agricultural productivity to additional fertilizer usage in the Country
had fallen sharply, leading to near stagnation in agricultural productivity and
consequently agricultural production. The disproportionate NPK application, rising
multi-nutrient deficiency and lack  of application of organic manures leading  to
reduction in carbon content of the soil, was attributed to the stagnating agricultural
productivity. Accordingly, in order to increase the agricultural productivity in terms
of usage of fertilizers, balanced fertilization and growth of indigenous fertilizers
industry, competitiveness amongst the fertilizer companies and to overcome the
deficiency of concession scheme, the Government introduced Nutrient Based Subsidy
(NBS) Policy for P&K fertilizers w.e.f. 1.4.2010.
75. On the same issue the Secretary/DoF submitted in evidence:—
"..........As far as co-relation between fertilizer usage and agricultural
productivity, it is a complex question which I will partly answer during
the discussions and as you yourself have raised about balanced fertilizers,
by merely increasing the use of one fertilizer may not have that much
impact on productivity compared to a balanced increase in fertilizers,
which is our attempt and which is primarily the Department of
Agriculture's attempt. As far as otherwise correlation is concerned,
maybe hon. Chairman has answered that question are we reaching the
point of diminishing returns? I wouldn't know. I would request my
colleague to answer. You had raised in this connection a very valid issue

26
on the programme to improve or increase agricultural production in
terms of right to food and other programmes of the Government and
the likely surge in fertilizer demand which is likely to happen in the
medium term.
As I have pointed out that it is the remit of the Fertilizers Department to meet
available fertilizers. So, to the maximum extent possible, by indigenous production,
and if it is not possible, we shall import. There will be its repercussion on the
import, but that cannot be avoided but we will make adequate arrangements for
fertilizer availability in the coming years also as demand grows. There should be
no problem on that."
76. When the Committee asked whether the statement of the Secretary DoF
could be taken as an assurance, he submitted:
"Certainly. How can I say that the Department of Fertilizers is doing its job
when we are not making fertilizers available in the macro sense. As the
same time the increased requirement of subsidy has to be provided in the
budget. We get constrained  by the budget at times."
77. Asked to state whether the issue of budgetary constraint would still
be relevant in the Stage IV of NPS Scheme which would more towards a
beneficiary oriented fertilizer distribution pattern, the Secretary, DoF submitted
as under:—
"That is not the issue, Sir. There is a direct correlation between total fertilizer
usage and total amount of subsidy. So, the moment fertilizer usage  goes up,
fertilizer subsidy would go up we request and we need that additional
budgetary allocation be made available for provision of subsidy. Otherwise,
if it is not there, then, there could be a real problem with that proviso, I can
certainly say that we will make all out efforts to see that fertilizer availability
is ensured, whatever may be the demand."
78. Asked to state categorically whether any study had been conducted to gauge
the effectiveness of the NBS Policy, the DoF stated that as the NBS policy had
completed only two years of its working, no formal study had yet been conducted
about the effectiveness of the policy. However, in view of the aforesaid reasons the
DoF felt that the NBS policy, once stabilized would be able to meet its desired
objective.
79. Audit pointed out that although the capacity for phosphatic fertilizers
nearly doubled from 1998-99 to 2008-09, actual production increased by only
30 per cent. The production of DAP actually came down substantially. The increase
in consumption of DAP/MAP/NPK complexes over this period was met primarily
through imports at very high prices,which led to multi-fold increases in the subsidy
burden.
80. In the above context, when the  Committee desired to be apprised of the
annual installed capacity and annual production of Di-Ammonium Phosphate (DAP)

27
along with percentage growth of annual production of DAP since 1998-99, the following
information was furnished by the DoF:—
Installed Capacity and Production of DAP
(Fig. in '000MT)
Y ear Installed capacity Production %age Growth over the
previous year
1998-99 2870 3867.5 -
1999-2000 3419 3863.0 -0.13
2000-01 4046 4888.9 26.56
2001-02 6720 5094.6 4.19
2002-03 6982 5235.5 2.77
2003.04 7199 4733.5 -9.59
2004-05 7199 5185.1 9.53
2005-06 7299 4628.3 -10.73
2006-07 7299 4852.1 4.84
2007-08 7299 4211.6 -13.19
2008-09 7299 2993.0 -28.94
2009-10 6520 4246 41.86
2010-11 6520 3537 -16.69
2011-12 6520 3963 12.04
81. It may be observed from above that there appears to be increasing negative
growth in the production of DAP, falling far short of the installed capacity especially
in the years 2005-06, 2007-08 and 2008-09. It is also evident that though the installed
capacity of the units were increased from 2870 in 1998-99 to 7299 (154 per cent)
in 2008-09, the production did not increase much, In fact it decreased from
3867.5 M T in 1998-99 to 2993 MT in 2008-09 (-22 per cent).
82. Asked to furnish the reasons for law production of DAP , the Secretary,
DoF explained the position in evidence as under:
"...........Rock phosphate is the basic raw material. That is imported. The
intermediate product which is phosphoric acide that is also imported. The
finished product which is di-ammonium phosphate, it is also imported. So,
the total requirements of phosphate which is about 90 per cent  is import
dependence. So, we may say that DAP is being produced indigenously but
the raw material is being imported. In some form or the other, we are
dependant for 90 per cent on the imports. The other  major fertilizer that is
potash, for that we have no resources. And for that, we are hundred per cent
dependent. So, as a result, to sum up 75 per cent urea production is
indigenous, 90 per cent of our phospatic requirements are dependent on
import, and for potash, we are dependent 100 per cent. So, as a result, DAP
or SSP which are the phospatic fertilizers are either intermediate-wise or
raw material-wise of finished product-wise dependent on import. The potash
which is MoP or which is used for the complex fertilizers i.e. NPK is
completely dependent on import. So, sir, the increase in production which

28
can and should happen is really in the realm of urea   but because of all these
reasons, we have had only  a marginal increase in urea production and the
DAP capacity etc. has gone up but still the import dependant continues. Sir,
the other fact which we have to remember at all times is that fertilizers
consumption is growing and if we see our average fertilizer consumption in
the Country, it is about 150 kg. per hectare which is much lower than
international norms in fact lower than some of our neighbour like Pakistan
and Sri Lanka also. So, our fertilizer consumption is growing. We have limited
indigenous resources either to increase production indigenously using
imported feedstock or increase import but the main work of the Department
of Fertilizer, if may say so, is to make fertilizer available. Sir, all the things
flow from that and that we are making all efforts to see  fertilizer is available
preferably by indigenous production otherwise by import so that we have to
ensure that fertilizer is available on demand by any farmer at any part of the
Country. That is our endeavour at any time.”
83. As regards the low installed capacity of DAP, the Secretary, DoF further
submitted during oral evidence that:—
"....As I had pointed out earlier, whatever DAP capacity is installed, depending
on the nature of the factory, either rock phosphate or phosphoric acid or
import from abroad is done. At any time, imports would be in three forms—
rock phosphate, phosphoric acid or DAP in any particular year, depending
on the relative prices of this. Let us say importing DAP worked out-cost of
production-wise — to be  less expensive than producing DAP , then it is
done, because the basic raw material is not from India. This fluctuation
happens, the capacity utilization has been fluctuating in DAP where we have
raw material in urea,  you will see that there is no increase but it is steady;
this is the reaons."
84. On being asked to elaborate the specific steps taken/contemplated to make
the Country self sufficient in DAP production so as to reduce the burden of imports,
the DoF stated that more than 90% raw materials for production of DAP and other
Phosphatic fertilizers were met through imports. The data regarding production,
import and consumption of DAP during the last 6 years were stated to be as under:
(Fig. in LMT)
DAP
Y ear Production Import Consumption
2006-07 48.52 28.76 69.24
2007-08 42.12 29.73 75.55
2008-09 29.93 66.31 99.04
2009-10 42.46 59.75 103.92
2010-11 35.37 74.09 112.46
2011-12 39.63 68.97 111.9

29
85. The DoF further stated that though the anual installed capacity of DAP was
73 LMT, the Country had not been utilizing 100% capacity utilization due to shortage/
higher prices of phosphatic raw material. India has very limited amount of rock
phosphate that too of very poor quality which  could only be utilized for production of
SSP. This indigenous availability of 'P' was grossly in-sufficient to meet the requirement
of SSP industry. That is why, India was importing DAP in order to meet domestic
requirement.
86. Asked to state categorically the initiatives taken to make the Country self
sufficient in DAP production, the  DoF replied that the Department had been exploring
possibility of augmenting/acquiring fertilizer resources from both indigenous and
foreign sources. Accordingly, the Department was encouraging Indian public sector
as well as the private sector fertilizer companies and mining companies to explore
possibility of indigenous production of rock & potash and enter into long term joint
venture cooperation in fertilizer resource rich countries for acquiring fertilizers and
fertilizer inputs on long term basis. The State Governments of Rajasthan and
Madhya Pradesh as well as the Ministry of Mines, Govt. of India had been requested
by the Development of Fertilizers to take steps to augment production of indigenous
rock phosphate and carry out exploration/surveys for locating fresh deposits of rock
as well as deposits of potash. Further, the Department of Fertilizers was promoting
the usage of SSP (0-16-011) which was used as substitute of DAP.
87. In view of the fact that the DoF needed to import 100 per cent of potash
and 90 per cent of the DAP,  the Committee asked whether there was any policy
initiative that could be taken to alter the mix of fertilizer use in the country  to
increase the use of urea and lessen the dependence on other kinds of fertilizers. In
reply, the Secretary, DoF submitted in evidence  as under:
".........the first question was if we are deficient in potash and phosphates can
we reduce the use of this and increase the use of urea for which we are having
a reasonable amount of capcity. The answer is 'No'. It is because these are
required by the biological process. In fact, the position is that we already
have a situation where nitrogen is being overused compared to the ideal
situation of balance usage. So, that is not a feasible situation."
88. The Committee then asked to know whether the non corelation between
the fertilizer usage and agricultural productivity was due to decrease in the carbon
content in the soil. In reply, the DoF stated that fertilizer usage had direct co-relation
with foodgrain prodution. However, inadequate and imbalanced fertilizer use coupled
with neglect of organic manures had led to multi-nutrient deficiencies and soil quality
deterioration in many areas. The limiting nutrients did not allow the full expression
of other nutrients, thereby, lowering the  fertilizer responses and crop productivity,
necessitating more inputs to obtain similar crop yields. Accordingly, if soil organic
carbon became low, it would definitely affect the fertilizer response vis-a-vis crop
productivity. The DoF further stated that the Government was recommending Integrated
Nutrient Management encompassing conjunctive use of chemical fertilizers and
organic manures to maintain  soil organic carbon for higher fertilizer response
vis-a-vis crop productivity. Customised fertilizers fortified with needed micronutrients

30
specific to a particular district's requirement were being introduced. Different
recommendations for different agro-climatic conditions had also been prescribed.
89. Under the Food Security Bill, 2011 which was under consideration of
Parliament, agricultural production would be required to increase by a quantum jump
entailing corresponding quantum jump in the fertilizer requirements. In this regard, the
Committee enquired whether the Department had done any planning for meeting the
gap of huge requirement of fertilizers to boost agriculture production in terms of the
requirement of the proposed food security legislation vis-a-vis the huge dependence
on imports. In reply, the DoF stated that as the National Food Security Bill, 2011 was
under consideration of Parliament and yet to be passed by the Parliament, the Department
of Fertilizers would examine the above points when the National Food Security Bill,
2011 became and Act.
VI. NON-A V AILABILITY/SHORTAGE  OF  FERTILIZERS
90. Audit findings revealed that despite huge amounts of subsidy/concession
on controlled and de-controlled fertilizers, there were numerous instances of
non-availability/shortage of fertilizers. The State-wise summary of findings tabulated
in the Audit Report revealed many areas of concern which inter-alia included delays
in supply of adequate quantities of fertilizers leading to farmers agitations; inequitable
distribution of fertilizers forcing farmers to rush to Mandal Headquarters for
intervention, incurring additional expenditure on travel and transportation of
fertilizers; absence of norms to regulate sale of fertilizers; absence of a rationing
system for sale of fertilizers resulting in excess/short supply as against the targets;
variation between the assessed requirement and actual supply; skewed distribution
i.e. lesser supply in distant and disjointed districts having no rake points in comparison
to requirement; and in sharp contrast, higher supply in districts having better
accessibility; etc.
91. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the corrective/punitive
action taken by the DoF to make adequate fertilizers available on time to the farmers
in various States. In reply, the DoF stated that the following steps were being taken
to make adequate availability of fertilizers in the Country:
(i) The movement of all major subsidized fertilizers is being monitored
throughout the Country by an on-line web based monitoring system
(www.urvarak.co.in) also called as Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS);
(ii) The gap between requirement and indigenous availability of Urea is met
through imports;
(iii) The State Governments were advised to instruct the State Institutional
agencies to coordinate with manufacturers and importers of fertilizers
for streamlining the supplies;
(iv) Department of Fertilizers and Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
are jointly reviewing fertilizer availability with State Agriculture
Department through Video Conferences every week. The corrective
actions, if required, are taken immediately to avoid any hardships to
farmers;

31
(v) Department of Fertilisers is having constant interaction with Ministry of
Petroleum & Natural Gas, GAIL and other prospective suppliers of NG/LNG
so that gas requirement of the fertilizers industry is met;
(vi) Government is always encouraging production of urea in the country to
achieve self-sufficiency. The Government has announced a new policy on
4th September, 2008 to attract new investments. The policy is based on
Import Parity Price (IPP) benchmark with suitable floor and ceiling prices
aiming to revamp, expansion, revival of existing urea units and setting up of
Greenfield projects. The country is largely dependent on imports to meet
the requirements of Phosphatic and Potassic (P&K) fertilizers. Government
has taken initiatives to encourage indigenous production in P&K sector by
allowing import parity price to the indigenous manufacturers of DAP.
Government has also reduced the custom duty on phosphoric acid from 5%
to 2% to enable indigenous manufacturers of P&K fertilizers to acquire this
important input at reasonable price. Government is also encouraging private
sector and public sector companies to explore the possibilities for joint
ventures abroad to ensure uninterrupted supply of fertilizer inputs to P&K
sector; and
(vii) All possible steps are taken by the Department of Fertilizers to match the
availability of fertilizers with the assessed requirement.
92. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Secretary, DoF on the
matter, he submitted in evidence:
".......while fertiliser availability overall in the macro sense may be fine, some
pockets of scarcity still arise as has been pointed out in the Audit report with
the photographs, etc. Sir, as far as availability is concerned, I am also saying
that our focus is much higher during the agricultural season. We are very
much geared up to see that in agricultural season times it is there. Other times,
let us say non-agricultural period like February-March, there could be these
type of things that there is excess stock in one place and less stock in other
places. Even in agricultural period there could be problems. But our endeavour
is like that. And as a result of the inputs from the reports, we are taking action
on that and you see that this type of thing is minimised."
93. The Secretary, DoF further stated:—
"....... I would like to assure the hon. Member that the fertiliser availability
position at present is quite comfortable and there is no problem in this regard.
We have tied up adequate fertilisers for the kharif season. In the past it has
happened and we have learnt lessons from that."
94. On a specific query of shortage of fertilisers in West Bengal, the Secretary,
DoF clarified as under:—
"......The hon. Member had raised an issue about shortage of fertilizer
specifically in West Bengal which has been brought in the CAG Report.
There have been years specifically during the period of peak season

32
requirement, again one thing which needs to be seen sometimes is that there
are movement constraints. That is why the CAG has raised an issue of buffer
stock which we have taken note of. So there have been times where there
have been local shortages of fertilizer specifically in urea during the peak
demand season; sometimes due to constraints on account of Railway
movement and similar issues. I can only say that in past it has happened
sometimes. We want to take learning from the past and to see that this does
not happen. I can only say that the fertilizer situation in the current kharif is
quite comfortable and if there are problems it will be only localised logistic
issue problems which we will continuously monitor to see that they are not
there. We have already started this weekly video conference with the States
and whenever there is a problem we try to sort it out. In the overall, there is no
shortage of fertilizer."
95. Audit pointed out that with a view to maintain stocks of urea in case of a
shortfall in production due to disruption is supplies of feedstock or delay/disruption
in imports and to tide over the sudden spurt in demand/shortages in any part of the
country, the DoF was required to operate buffer stock through the State Institutional
Agencies/Fertilizer Companies in major agricultural States up to a limit of 5% of their
seasonal requirement. Further, in case of DAP and MoP, the DoF was required to
maintain the buffer stock through IPL. Audit findings revealed that in ten States there
were deficiencies in maintenance of buffer stock. In the light of this Audit revelation,
the Committee asked whether any steps had been taken to ensure that the prescribed
limit of Buffer stock of fertilisers was maintained. The DoF, in their written reply submitted
as follows:—
"Buffer stocks of fertilizers are created during lean season to ensure availability
and adequate supply of fertilizers during the peak agronomic season. During,
2006-09, DoF was required to operate and maintain buffer stocks of 5% of the
seasonal requirement through State Institutional Agencies/Fertilizer
Companies in major agriculture States with meticulous planning, taking into
consideration availability of fertilizers and price volatility in the International
Market; tie up with the Global suppliers for supply of finished fertilizers at the
most economic rates and logistic advantage; tie up with Global suppliers for
smooth and regular supply of raw materials and intermediates for fertilizer
plants; anticipated congestion at Indian ports for accommodating fertilizer
shipments; apprehension of sudden increase in demand of fertilizers in the
States etc.
The requirement of fertilizer is seasonal and its demand is based on good
rainfall and frequent seasonal variations. Besides this, timely availability of
the materials is the essence of agronomic requirement. Timely supply and
movement of fertilizers to the fertilizer consuming areas depends upon the
availability of Railway rakes, labour force at the various ports and plants as
well as speedy evacuation in loading, unloading of the rakes at origin and
destination, occasional effects of natural calamities in movement of fertilizers
etc. Thus, the above factors affect the demand and supply of the fertilizers. It

33
is pertinent to mention that whenever the supply of fertilizers is less than the
demand, whatever fertilizer is made available, it goes for direct sale since
during that period, there is always demand of fertilizers by the States. Moreover,
whenever the companies are able to sell fertilizers to the wholesalers and
retailers during off seasons, the question of maintaining buffer stocks does
not arise as the supply meets the current demand."
VII.  PAYMENT OF SUBSIDY CLAIMS
96. Audit pointed out that the requirement for certification in Proforma 'B' by the
State Governments for sale of decontrolled fertilisers for agricultural purposes was the
only major control over end-use of fertilisers and with the removal of such a linkage
from June 2007, adequate incentive to ensure certification by the competent authorities
(viz. the State Governments) of end-use of decontrolled fertilisers for agricultural
purposes no longer existed. Audit further pointed out that the outstanding Proforma
'B' for the years 2003-04 to 2006-07 amounted to ` 111 crore only, while the outstanding
amounts for the year 2007-08 to 2009-10 stood at ` 50587 crore.
97. In the above context, on being asked to explain the corrective action initiated
to reconcile sales figures of the outstanding Proforma 'B', the DoF stated that State
Governments were supposed to submit sales certification on Proforma 'B' in a time
bound manner. The DoF further stated that Proforma 'B' for only ` 2447.08 crore were
outstanding as on 14.12.2011, for the period from 2003 to 2010. Pendency of Proforma
'B' was taken up with the State Governments to ensure that the Proforma 'B' were given
in time.
98. The DoF also stated that they had initiated an IT enabled project for tracking
the information on receipts of fertilizers at the last point of sale to the farmer. The
existing web-enabled Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) was being extended to track
the receipt of fertilizers at the retail point. This would assure the DoF about the receipt
of fertilizers at the retail point. With this, the DoF expected that the non-reconciliation
of sales figures would be resolved since real time availability of fertilizers at the retain
point  would be available and any person/public authority would be able to see the
date w.r.t. availability of fertilizers.
99. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Secretary, DoF on the
above aspect, he submitted in evidence:—
"You have also pointed out another point on reconciliation of subsidy. The
figure which you have pointed out is what has been pointed out in the audit
report; it is about the pendency of Proforma ‘B’ report. I would like to take the
hon. Member through the process of reconciliation. We have a system of
payment of subsidy; we make our payment based on FMS data. This is online
and available for everyone to see. But as I pointed out initially, this gives the
movement up to the district level. Below the district level, it does not. So, we
have another instrument in our hand, which is Proforma ‘B’ which is given to
us by the State Governments which is a certificate that fertilizer was sold to
the farmers and it was of adequate quality, etc. during the time of audit report,
about Rs. 50,000 crore work of Proforma ‘B’ was pending from various State

34
Governments. That is, the fertilizer has been sold and Rs. 50,000 crore worth
of Proforma ‘B’ was not furnished by the State Governments. After the audit
objection or comments were received, we have taken a drive. At this moment
the pendency is of `1947 crore."
100. Audit suggested that notwithstanding possible inconvenience to fertilizer
manufactures, the earlier system of retaining 10-15 per cent of the subsidy till receipt of
certification in Proforma 'B' of agricultural sales of decontrolled fertilizers by the State
Governments should be considered for re-introduction. Asked to respond to the
aforesaid suggestion of the C&AG , the Secretary, DoF submitted in evidence as under:—
"CAG has raised this issue till the receipt of Proforma ‘B’. There is a major
practical issue in this as has been pointed out in the CAG's report at that time
about `50,000 crore worth of Proforma ‘B’ was pending because of this a
substantial amount of fertilizer company subsidy gets held up. There are two
facets to this issue. One is if we are to insist on this, then, there has to be
some sort of a time bound limitation, otherwise, we should be ready to provide
for further cost of capital, that is, the interest charge beyond a reasonable
point. I will submit that the issue of Proforma ‘B’ is becoming perhaps less
relevant as times goes on because of two or three things. I would not say
about FMS which was there even then but I am only saying that we are
moving on the mobile MFMS which will take us or let us know on a daily
basis the fertilizer receipt and sales at the retailer level in the first stage. And
this will be available on the internet and which will be available for everyone
concerned that a particular retailer has so much of stock of urea, DAP, as on
this date and apart from verification issues, it will be a disincentive against
black marketing and hoarding because it will be available and once this system
stabilises within this financial year, we would be making subsidy payment
based on the MFMS. So, that will largely obviate the need for that. But,
however, we continue to have the Proforma ‘B’ system and my only submission
and which we have submitted during the audit also that Proforma ‘B’ we
would continue to have and this 15 per cent insistent on payment may not be
insisted upon is our contention.”
101. Audit scrutiny further revealed that in most of the States, verification of
sales for agricultural purposes (which would provide assurance of proper end-use of
subsidy) was non-existent or inadequate, as it did not involve physical vertification of
stocks or sales beyond the first point sales, and in many cases not even certifications
of receipts, invoices, etc. The State-wise findings on non-certification of fertiliser
sales/stocks as brought out by Audit revealed non-conduct of verification of sales
and physical verification of stock; non-adherence to the stipulated procedure for
verification of sales beyond the 1st stock point; mere signing of statement received
from the manufacture with no verification of sales invoices, delivery challan, etc; no
procedure for verification of sales beyond the first stocking point sale upto the end
users; no periodical checking of stocks due to shortage of technical field staff; no
system of physical verification of stocks at any level etc.

35
102. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the mechanism put in
place to confirm that fertilizers were sold to the genuine farmers. In reply, the DoF
stated that they covered the vertification of sales upto the first point through
certification as per Proforma 'B' verified by the State Governments and beyond the first
point sales, the State Governments conducted verification to ascertain that the fertilizers
were sold to the genuine farmers.
103. Asked to state categorically the specific measures taken to ensure that the
farmer received the intended benefit of subsidy and the mechanism evolved for
verification of stocks/sales/receipts/invoices, etc., the DoF submitted that the statutory
auditor of the fertilizer company verified various documents (e.g. Delivery Challan,
Railway Receipts, State Transfer Notes and other books) maintained by the respective
fertilizer company. The subsidy was paid to the Fertilizers Companies only after this
verification and certification by their respective statutory auditor. Also Proforma B
from the States was an assurance to DoF, since Proforma ‘B’ was issued by the States
after due physical verification with respect to the quantity and quality of fertilizer
received  in the districts for agricultural purpose.
104. When asked to spell out the measures taken to reconcile unit-wise and
district-wise despatch data with corresponding data on receipts at the first stocking
point in the district, the DoF stated that in Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS), for
'Dispatch upload' and 'Show Receipts', a generic format had been devised so that data
across the Unit could be captured. Further, it was mandatory to have despatch entry in
the FMS in order to show receipt otherwise against nil despatch, the system did not
accept receipt data.
105. On being asked to elaborate the system developed in various States for
verifications of sales and stocks of fertiliser beyond  the District level, the DoF stated
that the Department of Fertilizers (DoF), monitored the first point sale of fertilizer by
the companies and the secondary sales and the consumption (the fertilizer going to
the soil) etc. was monitored by the State Agriculture Department. As of now, there was
not mechanism of verification of sale and stock beyond district level. However, the
DoF was implementing the Mobile Fertilizers Monitoring Systems (MFMS) in order to
capture the sale of the fertilizers to the farmer's level. The implementation of the project
was reportedly in an advance stage and would be rolled out during the year 2012-13.
106. When asked as to whether any detailed assessment of the adequacy of the
existing mechanism at the ground level especially in the face of a number of alleged
diversion of subsidised fertilisers had ever been made, the DoF submitted that there
were reported diversions of fertilizer meant for agriculture purpose for non-agriculture
use. The Department of Fertilizers had been sensitizing the State Governments for
taking steps to prevent the diversion of  fertilizer for non-agriculture use. A letter at
Secretary(F)'s level had gone to all the Chief Secretaries of the State Governments and
Secretary (Agriculture) for taking all possible steps to prevent the misuse of subsidized
fertilizer. The DoF had also written to State Governments to make assessment to the
extent of alleged diversion of fertilizer and make a full proof effort to prevent misuse of
subsidized fertilizer.

36
107. On a pointed query as to whether any punitive action was taken against the
defaulters or any initiative taken to bring forth any special rules/regulation/orders to
curb the menace, the DoF replied that the State Governments under Fertilizer Control
Order (FCO), 1985 were adequately empowered to take punitive/preventive action for
curbing the menace of diversion of fertilizer. The Department of Fertilizers had from
time to time issued instructions to various State Governments for taking all necessary
actions under their jurisdiction in order to curb the menace of diversion of subsidised
fertilisers.
108. The Committee then desired to hear the views of the Secretary, DoF on the
issue of diversion of subsidised fertilisers and measures taken to foster a clean and
transparent subsidy administration. In response, he submitted in evidence:—
"......We are ensuring by the present system that fertilizer is made available
upto the District level. Beyond that, the moment the responsibility is of the
State Governments Agricultural Department and its other machinery to see
that the distribution goes smoothly, and improper diversion of fertilizer for
non-farming, non-agricultural purposes is not  there. For this of course we
have this Proforma ‘B’ system which we are following .......we would like to
also inform that Hon'ble Committee that we are in the process of further
reforming this process and going on to a system of tracking  fertilizer movement
up to the dealer level and at a perspective plan ......... we have a pilot plan to
have this subsidy transfer linked to the dealer level movement and later on to
the farmer level also."
109. The Secretary, DoF further submitted:—
"Additionally, we are also sensitising the State Governments to see that
fertiliser diversion, specifically urea diversion, because of the large differential
between the MRP and the open market price, is minimised for non-agricultural
purposes. We are continuously taking this up with the State Governments
....... I cannot at any time claim that these things are zero but we do make all
efforts to see that it is minimised."
110. On the issue of subsidy payment to the retailer level and the level of
consultations/coordination with the State Governments, the Secretary, DoF deposed:—
".......hon. Member has raised an issue of this subsidy payment to the retailer
level and what is the level of consultations that we have done. Before this is
operationalised or while this is being operationalised we have involved the
State Government at evey level. The State Government Directors, the State
Government level machinery have been involved at every level. In fact, the
State level trainings are on and we have taken inputs from the State level
official machinery about the implementation of this. We cannot implement
this without the full and total involvement of the State Government and there
is no question of taking a unilateral decision in this regard. They are very
much on board in this regard and anything further which we do. In this regard
will be after taking into account the field conditions which we will come to
know after consultations with the State Government machinery."

37
111. As regards the subsidy administration in a clean and transparent manner,
the Secretary, DoF submitted:—
"....as far as subsidy administration in a clean, and transparent manner, we
have this portal of Fertilizer Management System, which is here online,
www.fert.com which gives the fertilizer movement. A huge amount of subsidy
which is being paid in a proper manner. There have been no major issues in
the mode of payment or the subsidy has reached where it was meant to reach.
So, our main thing is that ` 80,000 crore worth of taxpayers' money in that
particular year is being utilized in a proper manner. We take proper care to see
that it happens; we will take proper care to see that it is done in a proper way
in the future also."
112. The Committee then sought details of the intended reforms of the present
tracking system for accurate and timely monitoring so as to enable positive intervention
whenever needed and also to specified the level of hierarchy and nature of
responsibilities  of officers monitoring the online tracking system. In reply, the DoF
stated as under:—
"In order to facilitate the vision of transferring the subsidy directly to the
intended beneficiaries, the Union Government had set up a Task Force on
direct subsidy in the case of Fertilizers, LPG & Kerosene in the month of
February, 2011, under the Chairmanship of Shri Nandan Nilekani, Chairman,
Unique Identity Authority of India (UIDAI). The interim report submitted by
the task force in June, 2011, recommended a phased approach for direct
disbursement of fertilizer subsidy to the intended beneficiaries.
The Department of Fertilizers is following a phased approach to achieve
direct transfer of fertilizer subsidy. The first phase of the project focuses on
the information visibility of fertilizer availability at the last point of sale. The
existing Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS-www.urvarak.co.in) that tracks
availability at the district level is being extended, through the mobile Fertilizer
Monitoring System (m-FMS-www.mfms.nic.in) to the last point of the retailer
to track the movement and availability. With this, all stakeholders across
fertilizer supply chain shall report daily despatch, receipts and stock updates.
This will increase transparency across the supply chain. The implementation
of Phase 1 has already started and is expected to be completed in 2012. In the
subsequent phases of the project, the mechanism to transfer subsidy directly
to the intended beneficiaries (farmers) will be formulated and implementation
of Phase 1 is stabilized."
113. On being specifically asked to respond to the reported farmers' protests for
non-avilability  of fertilisers in spite of the reported transparent online tracking system,
the DoF replied that the Department of Fertilisers was monitoring the availability of
fertilizer at State level and the distribution within the State was the responsibility of the
respective State Government. In addition, DoF also conducted weekly Video Conference
along with Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) with the officials of the
State Governments and take corrective action in case of any shortages. In spite of
sufficient availability at State level, there could be a pocket of shortages within the

38
Stage because of reasons such as logistic constraints, shortage in warehousing facility,
non-availability of the rake points and other distribution problems. However, the DoF
tried to ensure the fertilizer was supplied in case of any shortages.
114. As regards unauthorized outlets selling subsidized fertilizers, it was submitted
by DoF that as per the extent State Government policy, once dealer had applied for
licence, they were allowed to sell so as to minimize delays in disbursements and the
approval came later. The DoF further stated that it would be brought to the notice of
the State Government to minimise the number of unlicensed/unauthorised sales outlets.
115. Audit scrutiny also revealed several deficiencies in the licences and other
arrangements for sale of fetilizers which inter alia  included retail dealers carrying out
fertilizer business without valid licence from the State Agriculture Department or without
any certificate of registration from the appropriate authority which was against the
provisions of FCO; non-maintenance of stock registers by the dealers; engagement in
sale of fertilisers without any FCO Registration Certificate but on the basis of cooperative
licence for pesticide sale; report of illegal cross border transportation of fertiliser to
other States; reported instances of smuggling of fertilisers to neighbouring countries;
no monitoring mechanism over the performances of dealers in border areas to prevent
smuggling of fertilisers across the border, etc.
116. In the above context, the Committee enquired about the steps taken by the
DoF to rectify the deficiencies in the licenses and other arrangements for sale of
fertilisers as pointed out by Audit. In reply, the DoF stated as under:—
"The State Governments are responsible to issue licenses to dealers carrying
wholesale/retail business of fertilizers in their States. In response to the
observation of Audit that some of the States, cooperative societies etc. are
carrying business without a valid licence, the State Governments have stated
that they are issuing licenses for carrying the business of fertilizers strictly as
per the provisions of the FCO. It is pertinent to mention that Clause (4) of the
FCO provides that "Where the application for renewal of certificate of
registration is made within the time specified in sub-clause (1) to
sub-clause (3), the applicant shall be deemed to have held a valid certificate
of registration until such date as the controller passes orders on the application
for renewal." it is clear from the provisions of FCO that once dealer applies for
renewal of licence, he can continue to carry business. Some of the State
Governments are issuing necessary instructions to the district licensing
authorities to ensure  timely renewal of the licenses."
117. On being asked as to whether there was any proposal to amend/revoke the
provision in the FCO which permitted sale of fertilisers before the approval of the
licence which was applied for, the DoF replied in the negative.
118. The Committee then desired to know the average time lag between the
submission of application for the licence and actual grant of approval and whether
there was any consideration to minimise this time lag. In reply, the DoF stated that prior
to January 2003 it was mandatory under the Fertilizer Control Order for the dealer to
possess the certificate of registration for carying out the business of selling of fertilizers.

39
Later, the Ministry vide notification S.O. No.49 (E) dated 16th January, 2003 dispensed
with registration certificate of dealers and it was replaced wtih the simple system of
memorandum of intimation and its acknowledgement. The DoF further stated that the
acknowledgement of the Memorandum of Intimation was the deemed authorization
letter. In clause 8 of FCO, every person intending to sell or offer for sale or carrying the
business of selling of fertilizers shall make Memorandum of Intimation to the notified
authority in from A1 and on receipt of such Memorandum of Intimation complete in all
respects the notified authority shall issue an acknowledgement of receipt in Form A2
and it shall be deemed as authorization letter. The DoF reasoned that if the Memorandum
of Intimation was complete in all respect, the notified authority was required to
acknowledge  the receipt of MOI immediately. The authorization letter issued by notified
authority would be valid for a period of 3 years from the date of its issue.
119. The Committee then desired to know the procedure followed for approval of
licence and in case of disapproval, steps taken to ensure that the dealers did not
continue the sale of fertilisers. In reply, the DoF submitted that under the Fertilizer
Control Order, 1985 the person desirous to obtain the authorization letter for carrying
on the business of selling of fertilizers was required to submit the Memorandum of
Intimation in form A1 to the notified authority alongwith a fee and the certificate of
source in form O. Besides various terms and conditions prescribed in form A1, it was
also required to confirm that the previous certificate of registration/authorization was
not under suspension or cancellation or debarred from selling of fertilizers. Under
clause 31 of FCO on cancelling or debarring a person from carrying on the business of
selling of fertilizers, the dealer might be allowed for a period of 30 days to dispose of
the balanced stock of fertilizers held by him and in case it was found that the stock of
fertilizers lying  with the dealer  after the expiry of 30 days, the same shall be confiscated.
120. When the Committee asked the Secretary, DoF to comment on the alleged
smuggling of fertilisers to the neighbouring countries, he deposed in evidence:—
"......This fact has also come up because there is a big differential between
open market and subsidized one. It goes wherever there is an alternate use or
non-agriculture use of it ......It will not go to neighbouring States; it will go to
neighbouring countries. It goes for industrial uses also ..... That is why, Sir, it
is a continuing struggle. We have to take it up with the State Governments."
121. Asked to explain the specific measure taken/contemplated to curb the menace
of fertilisers black-marketing the Secretary, DoF submitted:—
"......As far as black-marketing is concerned. We depend on the State
Government machinery completely. It is a fact that because of specially urea
being heavily subsidized, the difference between the open market and this
price is so much. There are industrial usage for urea. We take up with the
State Governments. Specially, where there are industrial units, like Haryana,
Gujarat and some other States, we keep on sensitizing the State Governments
that 'this possibility is there; please take care'. This time also we have written
to the State Governments. But that possibility is always there. We have to
make constant efforts".

40
VIII. SUBSIDY ON IMPORTS
122. Audit scrutiny revealed irregularities in import of DAP by IPL during
2007-08; excess payment on import of urea by IPL during 2008-09 and 2009-10; erroneous
fixing of rates of concession of imported DAP and MOP; absence of supply plan for
urea imported by IPL, etc.
123. In the above context, the Committee sought to know the reasons for the
discrepancy in quantity of DAP received in various States as claimed by IPL in
2008-09 and as indicated in FMS data and whether the DoF proposed to effect recovery
of payment of concession for the unexplained shortfall. In reply, the DoF stated that
the FMS records of receipt during the year 2008-09 included receipts from 1.4.2008 to
30.11.2008. However, a quantity of 1.63 LMT was the closing stock (unsold quantities)
as on 31.3.2008. This closing stock got sold in the month of April, 2008 and May 2008.
Till November 2008, the subsidy payment was on the basis of first point sale. Therefore,
the subsidy payment till 30.11.2008 would not have tallied with the receipt in FMS.
From 01.12.2008, the payment procedure was switched over to payment of "On Account
Subsidy" on the basis of receipt of fertilizers in the districts. The leftover quantity of
0.01 LMT of the closing stock as on 30.11.2008 was taken as receipt in the month of
December  2008 and the subsidy paid accordingly. The DoF thus reasoned that there
had been no discrepancy in the quantity on which subsidy was claimed and actual
receipt as the closing stock (unsold quantities) as on 31.3.2008 also needed to be
included as part of the receipt of 2008-09.
124. The DoF further stated that the total quantity of DAP for which subsidy
was paid in 2008-09 was 30.41 LMT and was paid as per the  policy in vogue in the
particular month. Since there was no discrepancy and subsidy was paid for correct
quantity, so there is no case of recovery of subsidy.
125. Asked to State whether IPL had submitted the monthly sales amounts of
imported DAP of 17.58 lakh MT during the period June 2007 to February 2008, the DoF
stated that M/s. IPL had submitted the details of monthly sales account. On the basis
of the quantity sold by them vessel-wise, a due drawn statement for calculation of the
amount of interest was prepared. The amount of interest calculated was Rs. 128.56
crore and had already been recovered from M/s. IPL from their July 2011 'On Account'
claim.
126. Asked to State categorically as to whether IPL sold the fertilisers out of
stock imported on specific instructions or on its own, the DoF replied that in the FMS,
all import consignments were entered by the companies. IPL imported DAP as per the
DoF's instructions vide letter dt. 13.6.2007 and also imported some quantity of its own.
All these quantities were sold by IPL and subsidy was paid accordingly on the quantity
sold. The DoF further stated that the interest portion on the advance paid was recovered
after IPL had given the details of the vessel-wise quantities  that were imported on
Government instruction and sold by them. The quantity imported by the IPL other
than this quantity of its own was paid subsidy in the ‘On Account’ bills in  each month
as per the existing procedure.

41
127. The Committee then desired to be apprised of the steps taken to notify the
prices of certain mixtures manufactured by the mixing units which were produced from
the subsidised fertiliser i.e. urea, DAP, MOP and MAP (as per its nutrient value). In
reply, the DoF, stated that under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO), 1985 manufacture
and sale of mixture fertilizers was permitted and governed by the stipulations contained
under clauses 12 to 18 and 38(5) of the FCO as amended from time to time. The NPK
mixture fertilizer were manufactured by mixing together the above said and straight
fertilizers in various ratios approved by the State Government. The respective State
Governments regulated the manufacturing technical specifications as well as pricing
of mixture fertilizers.
IX. SUBSIDISED FERTILISERS CONSUMED BY MIXING UNITS
128. In the context of Audit revelation that the subsidized fertilizers were being
consumed by the mixing units the preparation of mixed fertilizers thereby breaking the
subsidy chain, the Committee asked whether the DoF was aware of the position and
whether they had made any analysis of the quantum of subsidy being diverted in  such
manner. The Committee also desired to know whether any remedial measures had been
taken by the DoF to regulate the sale of mixed fertilizers manufactured by the mixing
units by using the subsidized fertilizers at State level so as to pass on the benefit of
subsidized fertilizers to the farmers. In response, the DoF stated that the work relating
to the administration of the concession scheme was transferred from Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation to the Department of Fertlizers w.e.f. October 2000. Prior
to the transfer of the work, the payment of subsidy was released to the manufacturers/
importers based on the first point sale to the approved dealers as well as the State
Government agencies. The Department of Fertilizers issued guidelines dated 5.8.2002
effective from 1.8.2002, whereby the payment of subsidy was also released to the
manufacturers/importers for those quantities of SSP, which were sold by them as first
point sale to the NPK mixture manufacturers duly registered with the State Government
under the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO). The production and sale of NPK mixtures was
as such allowed under the FCO.
129. The DoF further stated that NBS guidelines No. 23011/11/2010-MPR dated
4.3.2010 also provided that the manufacturers to customized fertilizers and mixture
fertilizers were eligible to source subsidized fertilizers from the manufacturers/importers
(after their receipt in the districts) as imputs for manufacturing customized fertilizers
and mixture fertilizers for agricultural purpose. There was no separate subsidy on sale
of customized fertilizers and mixture fertilizers.  It was expected that the MRPs of
mixture fertilizers would be kept by the mixture manufacturers keeping in view that they
were sourcing subsidized imports. Accordingly, the use of the subsidized fertilizers for
manufacturing NPK mixture fertilizers was as such, allowed under the erstwhile
concession scheme and the present Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy for decontrolled
phosphatic and potassic fertilizers. The DoF also stated that some of the fertilizer
companies, had their own NPK mixture plants also. Accordingly, they were also allowed
to use subsidized fertilizers for manufacturing NPK mixtures.
130. On the issue of mixing units in the States being permitted to use subsidised
fertilisers, the DoF submitted that the mixing  units remained very much an unorganised

42
sector and there was need for better control and they would try to evolve some
mechanism in consultation with the State Governments. The Committee were further
informed that a tighter set of guidelines for quality checking of mixed fertilisers would
be prescribed.
131. Asked categorically to State whether any mechanism had been put in place/
envisaged for ensuing better quality control of mixing units, the Secretary, DoF state in
evidence as under:
"For fertiliser in general when we are getting the Proforma B from the State
Government, they are also certifying the quality. But about the mixtures
specifically, there needs to be a further tightening of the situation as far as
quality checking, etc. is concerned."
132. The Committee asked whether the quality checking of the mixed fertilizers
should be done right at the exit point from the factory. In response the Secretary, DoF
submitted:—
"Sir these are very small scale units....These mixtures are granted registration
by the State Governments and the functioning of quality checking is done by
the State Government."
133. Not satisfied, when the Committee pointed out that only a few people from
the Agriculture Department and ICAR could easily carry out the quality checking in
the Central soil testing laboratories, the Secretary, DoF submitted:—
"Sir, that point is taken. We will prescribe a higher set of Guidelines for
mixtures."
134. Regarding the justification for allowing the mixing/mixture units to use
subsidized fertilizers, the Secretary, DoF submitted:—
"....Hon. Member had raised an issue about mixing units or mixture units. As
my colleague from the Department of Agriculture had pointed out that these
mixing units or the issue of customised fertilizer has been permitted by the
Department of Agriculture. Mixture units have been permitted because of the
specific requirements and the localised areas and while permitting them we
had said that they can use subsidized inputs because there is no subsidy
separately on the output which is marketed by them. That was the philosophy.
Now, at one stage these units were lifting their requirements from various
levels including wholesalers, manufacturers and so forth. We are now in the
process of clarifying that their inputs that is the subsidized urea or whatever
should be lifted from the manufacturers so that we will have a better control."
135. In view  of the fact that the mixture units were an unorganised sector, the
Committee asked whether the DoF should have a better feedback of these units to
exercise greater control/oversight. In response, the Secretary, DoF candidly admitted:—
 "...We must have a greater oversight because the fact remains that the mixture
units are very much an unorganised sector and we need to have a better
control."

43
136. Asked to state the specific measures taken/contemplated to have a better
control/oversight of the mixing units, the DoF stated that the respective State
Governments  were regulating/monitoring the manufacturers of mixture and customized
fertilizers in terms of prices and quality of mixture fertilizers. The mixture and customized
fertilizer plants were using subsidized Urea and P&K fertilizers as raw material to
manufacture mixture/customized fertilizers.
137. The Committee then desired to know the role and responsibility of the
Ministry in this regard. In reply, the DoF stated that in order to regulate/monitor/
control of the usage of subsidized fertilizers by mixing units, the following decisions
have been taken in consultation with the State Governments:—
(i) Mixture/customized fertilizer manufacturers shall be allowed to source the
subsidized P&K fertilizers and Urea directly from the manufacturers/importers
instead of from dealers/retailers, only after they are received in the districts.
In no case the mixture/customized fertilizer manufacturers shall be allowed
to source subsidized fertilizers from dealers/retailers.
(ii) The Department of Fertilizers will register all mixture/customized fertilizer
manufacturers in web based Fertilizer Monitoring System (FMS) as it is one
in case of dealers in a time-bound manner.
(iii) Mixture/customized fertilizer manufacturers will have to send the report of
receipt of subsidized fertilizers through mobile FMS (mFMS). After receipt
of information from mixture/customized fertilizer manufacturers, the balance
payment of subsidy shall be released to the manufacturers/importers.
138. As in the absence of any control over the prices of these mixed fertilizers, it
would not be clear whether these mixing units were leveraging the subsidy into a
concession to the output price to the farmer, the Committee desired to know the
impediments in giving subsidy directly to the final product. In reply the DoF stated
that as the prices of P&K fertilizers were open and the manufacturers of Mixture/
customized fertilizers were using subsidized fertilizers it was expected that the prices of
these mixture/customized fertilizers would remain at reasonable level. Accordingly, the
Department of Fertilizer did not regulate the prices of mixture/customized fertilizers
fixed by the companies. However, the Department has recently decided to monitor the
sourcing of subsidized fertilizers by the mixture/customized units making it compulsory
for the mixture/customized units to source subsidized urea and P&K fertilizers from the
manufacturers directly after receipt at District level and to upload data in the FMS web
based monitoring system of the  Department.
139. The Committee then enquired about the concrete measures taken/
contemplated by the Department to curb/prevent the incidence of alleged selling of
subsidized fertilizers by the unauthorized outlets. In response, the Secretary, DoF
submitted in evidence:—
"...Another point was raised in the report that unauthorized outlets are selling
fertilizers. There is one point which needs to be kept in mind and that as, as
per the Fertilizer Control Order, which is administered by the Department of

44
Agriculture, there is a provision that once you apply for retailing licence you
are allowed to sell fertilizer and the approval may come later. So, in the interim
period he may not be able to show that but this is to minimize the  harassment
or the issues relating to delays in processing. However, this point is taken
note of and we shall try to  see that these Unlicensed or unauthorized sales
outlets are minimized. We will be writing to the State Government in this
regard."
X.  QUALITY CONTROL
140. Audit pointed out that the fertilizer quality testing infrastructure in the
country was grossly inadequate. The annual capacity of the existing quality control
laboratories was only 25 per cent of the required capacity for testing of samples from
all sales outlets twice a year. Further, many of the laboratories were deficient in terms of
both physical and human infrastructure. Consequently, there was a significant shortfall
in the actual number of samples tested vis-a-vis both the target as well as the capacity
of the laboratories.
141. In the above context, when the Committee desired to know whether the
DAC had taken any steps to improve the facilities for testing of fertilizers and to
augment the physical and human infrastructure so as to optimally utilize atleast existing
testing facilities, the DoF stated as under:—
"State Governments are primarily responsible for establishment of Fertilizer
Testing Laboratories as per their requirement and notify under clause 29 of
Fertilizer (Control) Order.  At present there are 74 Fertilizer Testing Laboratories
in the country with annual analyzing capacity of 1.29 lakh samples. With a
view to make optimal use of available analyzing capacity, the States have
been asked to give specific attention to those fertilizers which are prone to
adulteration. DAC has already requested all the State Governments to review
the quality control of fertilizers in their States."
142. As regards steps taken to deal with the deficiencies in terms of both physical
and human infrastructure in many of the laboratories, a representative of the DAC
apprised the Committee in evidence as under:—
"You raised the point about the physical and human infrastructure. We are
taking care of the physical infrastructure through the Central Government
schemes. But about the human infrastructure, we are requesting the State
Governments to create sufficient posts. In fact, sometimes, posts are there
but they are not filled up. There is a soil testing lab analyst and the field level
worker. There can be interchanging of the post. But I am told that the workers
do not want to get posted in the soil testing labs. Our own Agriculture Minister
has also taken up this issue with the Chief Ministers of the States requesting
them to post sufficient staff; we will take care of the funding for training of the
staff. We have been funding organization of training programmes for them."
143. The Committee were then informed that the Government of India was
promoting soil test based balanced and judicious use of chemical fertilizers, bio-fertilizers

45
and locally available organic manures like Farm Yard Manure (FYM), compost,
vermicompost and green manure to maintain soil health and its productivity and the
matter had been taken up by the Union Agriculture Minister with Chief  Ministers of all
States. The Committee were also informed that the number of soil testing labs in the
country had increased to 1,049 with annual analyzing capacity of 10.7 million samples
as on 31.03.2011.
144. When the Committee desired to know the measures initiated to promote use
of bio-fertilizers and organic manures, the representative of the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) submitted in evidence as under:—
"This is very important that we should go for organic fertilizers, manure
compost, etc. The first step in that is we have the Essential Commodities Act.
We have the Fertilizers Control Order. Under the Fertilizers Control Order, we
have issued notifications where we have said the city compost, vermicompost,
enriched organic manure be declared as under the Fertilizers Control Order.
So, ultimately they may become eligible for some, sort of subsidy. In the
11th Plan, the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has been running
a national  project on organic farming. One major subsidy scheme was
backended subsidy scheme through the NABARD where we use to fund
production of manure, apart from bio-fertilizers also. We have National Centre
on Organic Farming in Ghaziabad with many centres. We have been training
farmers. In the 12th Plan, we are bringing this Scheme. We are formulating this
scheme in a more enhanced manner, in a big way. So, the Department of
Agriculture is definitely trying to do something on this."
145. When the attention of the representative of Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation (DAC) was drawn to the correlation between soil testing laboratory results
and customized fertilizer use, he stated as under:—
"At the stage, it has not been correlated, we have increased the soil testing
laboratories. We are trying to issue Soil Health Cards to farmers now."
146. Asked to state the number of soil testing laboratories in the country and
whether the same were adequate to test the quality of fertilizers, the representatives of
the DoAC, stated as under:—
"We have 1,049 Soil Testing Laboratories in our country and during the
11th Plan, we have added 118 labs more and we have 145 mobile soil testing
laboratories also."
147. The Committee then pointed out that the number of soil testing laboratories
were too small and there was no proper coordination mechanism for testing the quality
of fertilizers as could be corroborated from the fact that by the time the quality testing
report came, the harvest season was over. In response, the representative of the DAC
submitted.
"The Indian Institute of Soil Science is trying to achieve that in the next
Plan."

46
148. On the issue of non-adherence to the time limit prescribed for analysis and
communication of results of fertilizer quality testing, the Committee were informed that
the provision in clause 30 of Fertilizer Control Order which stipulated the time for
analysis and communication of results had been reduced to 52 days.
149. The Committee enquired about the compliance level of the provision in the
Order. In reply, the DoF submitted that it was mandatory under the FCO to strictly
comply with the time limit stipulated for analysis and communication of results.
150. The Committee then desired to know the specific deterrent action taken in
cases of non-adherence to the time limit. In reply, the DoF stated that the official who
violated the provision of clause 30 of FCO was liable for administrative action.
151. When asked to specify the administrative and punitive measures taken in
case fertilizers were found to be sub-standard, the DoF stated that the violation of any
of the provision of the Fertilizer Control Order would lead to both administrative and
penal action. Under the Fertilizer Control Order there was a provision of stop sale,
cancellation, suspension of authorization letter etc. It was further stated that the violation
of the provision of FCO imposed penalty under Section 7 of the Essential Commodities
Act, 1958 for a term of three months to seven years imprisonment. Apart from that, the
DOF forfeited the subsidy amount of manufacturers on non-standard fertilizers.
152. As regards lodging of complaints by the farmers against sub-standard
fertilizers, the DoF stated that the farmer might report the matter of sub-standard
fertilizers to the District Agriculture Officer of the State.
153. In the light of reports of alleged spurious fertilizers being marketed, the
Committee asked whether quality testing of fertilisers was actually being carried out,
the locations of such quality testing centres and the authority that was monitoring
these quality testing centres. In reply, the DoF stated that under clause 29 of the FCO,
the fertilizer sample shall be analysed by the Central Fertilizer Quality Control and
Training Institutes or its regional centres at Mumbai, Chennai or Kalyani or the notified
State laboratories. The fertilizer testing laboratories were stated to be under the
administrative control of the State Agriculture Department.
154. When asked to state whether any awareness campaign was being organised
to promote mandatory quality testing of fertilisers amongst the farmers, the DoF
submitted as under:
"DOF issues certain advertisements directly and as well as through Fertilizer
Association of India etc.
Government of India has declared fertilizer as an essential commodity under
the Essential Commodities Act, 1995 and has notified Fertilizer Control Order,
1985(FCO) under this Act. Under the FCO the responsibility of ensuring the
quality of fertilizers supplied by manufacturers/import is the responsibility of
the State Governments.
For testing of quality of fertilizers various State Governments and India have
set up 71 laboratories at various places including at Faridabad, Kalyani,

47
Mumbai and Chennai with an annual analyzing capacity of 1.34 lakh samples.
As per the provision of the FCO, the fertilizers, which meet the quality
standards laid down in the order, are to be sold to the farmers.
The quality of the fertilizers imported in the country is invariably checked by
the fertilizer quality control laboratories in India. The State Governments are
adequately empowered to draw samples of the fertilizers anywhere in the
country and take appropriate action against the seller of Non-standard
fertilizers.
The penal provisions under ECA, 1955 include prosecution of offenders and
sentence if convicted up to seven years imprisonment besides cancellation
of authorization certificate and other administrative action. The fertilizers
declared non-standard by the State Government are not eligible for subsidy
under NBS Policy."
155. In evidence, the Committee asked whether it would be better if the quality
testing complaint by the farmers could be lodged through the District Agriculture
Officer or through the District Magistrate. The Committee further asked whether the
representatives of the people could be provided with the list of the location of the
Quality Testing Centres in the respective States. In reply, the Secretary, DoF submitted:
"Sir, we take note of that and we will see that this will be made more publicly
available."
156. In the light of increasing cost of production of urea which remained the main
source of nitrogenous fertilizers, the Committee enquired whether indigenous alternate
natural sources of nitrogen such as microbes and legumes present in the soil should
be given serious consideration. In reply, the representative of the Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC) submitted in evidence as under:—
"I have read some reports where they have said that microbes, legumes can
fix even ninety per cent of the nitrogen requirement in some of the cases, not
all."
157. The Committee desired to know the current status of research on this aspect
and asked whether any effort had been made to correlate the research findings to the
enhancement of the National Project on Organic farming. In reply, the DoF stated as
under:
"ICAR and RCOF are taking up research and development of various bio-
fertilizers and organic manure. The following developments have been placed
during the past three years:—
(a) Potash mobilizing bio-fertilizers developed by NCOF is being used by bio-
fertilisers industries on very large scale. For quality evaluation, the same
has been proposed for inclusion in Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985.
(b) Technology of zinc solubilising bio-fertilizers developed by ICAR has been
transferred to NCOF and NCOF has already commercialized the same through
bio-fertilizer industry. For quality evaluation, the same has been proposed
for inclusion in Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985.

48
(c) ICAR has developed technology for production of phosphate organic
enriched manures nitro-Sulpho-phospho compost, phospho-potashic
compost and enriched organic manure. NCOF has already commercialized
these technologies and various industries are in the process to start their
production. The technology and quality control parameters for phosphate
enriched organic manures has been standardized by NCOF and proposed
for inclusion in Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985.
(d) Studies have been done at NCOF for quality standardization of other organic
inputs such as liquid organic concentrates and plant derived protein
hydrolysates (such as seaweed extract and soymeal extracts). These
standards are under the process of consultation and will be submitted for
inclusion in Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985 in next 2-3 months time.
(e) Mycorrhizal bio-fertilizers and Castor deoiled cake have been included in
Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985 and are being promoted for use by farmers."
158. In the above context, the Committee asked whether any systematic publicity
compaign had been launched for increasing awareness among the farmers for increasing
use of bio fertilisers. In reply, the DoF stated that funds were being provided to the
State Governments through various schemes of DAC like Macro Management of
Agriculture (MMA), Rashtriya Krishi Vikash Yojana (RKVY) and National Project on
Management of Soil Health and Fertility (NPMSF) for taking up all the activities for
popularization of organic and biological nutrients. Publicity through newspapers, TV
and Radio programmes was also being taken up by NCOF.
159. To a specific query as to whether the DOF had given any serious
consideration of any roadmap for exports, it was stated that Indian soil was poor in
organic carbon content and require organic manures to cope up with the grim problem
of improving soil health and productivity and hence, at this stage roadmap for their
exports was not supported.
160. Pointing out that Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh were  reportedly doing
very well in terms of increased productivity by maximum use of organic manure, the
Committee asked whether any steps were being taken by the DoF/DAC to encourage
other States to emulate Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. In reply the DoF stated that all
the States were being regularly advised to intensively work towards the promotion of
organic manures.
161. The Committee desired to be apprised of the steps initiated for promotion of
balanced use of fertilizers and to create awareness amongst the farmers in this regard.
In response, the representative of the DAC elaborated during the evidence as follows:—
"Sir, to promote the balanced use of fertilizers, the Department of Agriculture
is doing three-four things. First is the NPK ratio, which ideally should be
4:2:1. And, because of subsidy on urea, it is heavily biased in favour of urea.
We have soil testing labs. We are promoting a national project on soil health
and fertility, under which we are sanctioning more number of soil health
testing labs-static and mobile. We are strengthening the existing labs. We

49
have done 145 new static labs and 118 new mobile labs. Today, we have
strengthened about 300 to 400 such labs. Today, we have more than 1,000 soil
testing labs with a capacity of one crore sample testing every year. The usage
varies from 80 per cent to 90 per cent of capacity utilization. We have been
requesting the State Governments to distribute soil health cards to farmers so
that there is awareness among the farmers as to what type of nutrients are
required in a particular field. We have been organising training of farmers and
field demonstrations to the farmers under this programme. I have the data as
to how much we have organised in the 11th Plan. We are continuing with this
scheme in the 12th plan also.
Apart from this, as I told earlier also, we have a national project on organic
farming because that is also a very important component. One of the problems
with our soil health is the organic health of the soil. That is being integrated.
So, we are running a project on that. There are customised fertilisers and
fortified fertilisers depending on the district-wise requirements. We are doing
all these things."
162. The Committee then desired to know the current position of staff strength
and asked whether any assessment had been made of the requirements of funds as
well as staff in the Soil Testing Laboratories. In reply, the DoF stated that as the Soil
Testing Laboratories (STLs) were maintained and operated by State Governments, the
current position of staff strength in State Governments Soil Testing Laboratories (STLs)
was not available with the DoF. The Department further stated that the  State
Governments were required to assess the requirements of funds as well as staff and
they had been advised by the DoF to create and fill up posts in the STLs. However,
Government of India under National Project on Management of Soil Health & Fertility
(NPMSH&F), provide financial assistance to the tune of Rs. 20.00 lakh and Rs. 3.50
lakh on assistance for manpower under the component setting up of Static Soil Testing
Laboratories and Mobile Soil Testing Laboratories respectively.
163. Asked to state whether any proposal had been made to outsource work of
quality testing of soil to accredited private laboratories, the DoF submitted as under :—
"There is a provision under National Project on Management of Soil Health
and Fertility for setting up of Soil T esting Laboratories  under PPP Mode
through Agriclinics/Fertilizer Industry/NGOs/Cooperatives/Private
entrepreneurs etc. So far 10  Soil Testing Laboratories  under Fertilizer
companies and 24  Soil Testing Laboratories  through State Governments
have been sanctioned under the project for implementation under PPP Mode."
164.  In response to a query of the Committee as to whether the National Project
on Management of Soil Health and Fertility addressed the issue of contaminated water
used by the farmers, the DoF replied in the negative.
XI.  MONITORING MECHANISM
165. On the issue of monitoring mechanism to verify whether the subsidy has
benefitted the targeted beneficiaries as revealed in the Audit findings through the

50
survey of farmers, the Committee were informed that to address the extant challenges
in the subsidy framework,it was proposed that a phased approach to reform the subsidy
disbursement mechanism be adopted. Presently, simplistically put, the fertiliser subsidy
was given by the Government to the Manufacturers/Importers directly. In the Interim
proposed framework, the subsidy is planned to be provided to the retailers and ultimately
to the intended beneficiaries (farmers). The detailed written reply furnished by DoF in
this regard is reproduced below:—
(i) "At present, the MRP of fertlizer is fixed by manufacturers and importers for
all de-controlled fertilizers except urea. The MRP and subsidy is printed on
the bag, therefore, if there is any specific complaint against dealers action is
initiated under FCO, 1985 and ECA, 1955 by State Government.
(ii) Due to logistic problem, sometimes there is delay in supply of fertilizers in
the States Districts & leading to temporary shortage. However, it is the
responsibility of State Government to take utmost care to avoid such
situation.
(iii) The manufacturer/importers are presently supplying fertilizers in 50 k.g.
bags, however it is the endeavour of the State Government to arrange small
bags of fertilizer available with the dealer for the convenience of the farmers
of the districts/block in the State.
(iv) Soil testing is done on the basis of crop wise area covered, soil fertility
Status and crop requirement as recommended by ICAR. The scientific
recommendation given by ICAR is adopted by the State Governments.
However plot to plot soil testing is not possible in the absence of modernized
technology in most of the States.
(v) The manufacturers and importers of subsidized fertilizers are repeatedly
instructed in meetings at different form to stop the practice of tagging of
non-subsidized products with subsidized fertilizers and instructions have
been given by the State Government in this regard to all Suppliers of
Fertilizers.”
166. The Department further stated that the reform of the subsidy disbursement
mechanism was proposed to be carried out in the following three phases:—
Phase I: Information Visibility till the Retailer
The objective of this Phase is to create information visibility of the movement of
fertilizers along the supply chain from the manufacturer till the retailer. After Phase I is
implemented, it is envisaged that upto date information will be available, in the public
domain, about the availability of fertilizers at the retailer level (last point of sale to the
farmer). This would, in itself enhance transparency of fertilizer flow across the supply
chain and would facilitate better delivery of the fertilizers to the end user.
The technology solution will comprise of mapping the functionality/information
flow right from manufacturing/production process (manufacture) till the last point sale
(2.3 lakh retailers). The technology proposed will be web, mobile and Interactive Voice
Response System (IVRS).

51
Phase II: Subsidy Payment to Retailer
In the interim stage, it is envisaged that the subsidy will be released to the
retailer when he receives the fertilizer. This will involve transfer of subsidy directly to
the retailer's bank account on receipt of fertilizer from the wholesaler. The advantage of
this Interim stage was extensively discussed in the Task Force. It was recognized that
the phase would have the advantage of the fertilizer moving at the full value across the
supply chain upto the retailer.
Phase III: Subsidy Payment to Farmers
In the long run, once the coverage of Aadhaar is extensive throughout the
Country, and Aadhaar enabled payments are operational, it is envisaged that the
subsidy disbursement to the farmer can be done directly into the bank accounts of the
intended beneficiary. However, this phase would also require that the eligibility of who
is an intended beneficiary is clearly mandated by the Government. It is proposed to be
done in two phases:
(i) Information flow on sales to individual farmers.
(ii) Transfar of subsidy to farmers (intended beneficiary).
167. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Secretary, DoF on the
monitoring mechanism evolved on the above issues, he submitted in evidence.
"We are ensuring by the present system that fertilizer is made available up to
the District level. Beyond that, at the moment the responsibility is of the State
Government's Agricultural Departments and its other machinery to see that
the distribution goes smoothly, and improper diversion of fertilizer for non-
farming, non-agricultural purposes is not there. For this of course we have
this proforma B system which we are following .........we would like to also
inform the hon. Committee that we are in the process of further reforming this
process and going onto a system of tracking fertiliser movement up to the
dealer level and at a perspective plan.
We have a pilot plan to have this subsidy transfer linked to the dealer level
movement and later on to the farmer level sales. .......... This system would
become  partially functional within this financial year. We are committed to
that. This would mean that the fertilizer movement is more closely tracked and
diversion is minimised."
168. The Committee desired to know the current level of preparedness of the
States in terms of having an institutional mechanism for direct transfer of subsidy to
beneficiaries as envisaged. In reply, the DoF stated that all the States were required to
use a standardised FMS application developed to achieve information visibility in the
movement of fertilizers till retailers in Phase I. All the dealers in the States were required
to provide information about stock position, sales, and receipt of  fertilizer till last retail
point using the FMS application. The DoF further stated that all State Governemnts
would be consulted before moving on to the phase of transfer of subsidy directly to
the beneficiary.

52
169. Asked to state the timeframe for putting in place the proposed reform measures
in the fertilizer subsidy disbursements, the DoF submitted as under.
"The current phase of the FMS project is in the process of stabilization post
which Department of Fertilizers plans to move towards implementing direct
transfer of fertilizer subsidy to the farmers in the following three sub-phases:
• State A— Part subsidy to manufacturers basis information of retail sales
of fertilizer
• State B— Subsidy to retail customer basis fertilizer sales made to him/her
• State C- Subsidy to farmer* basis details of sales made of him/her
A detailed project report for the implementation of Stage A is being prepared
parallel to the implementation of Phase I. In addition, national level
consultations will take place to define the timeframe for implementing the
proposed reform measures in the fertilizer subsidy disbursement process."
170. When asked to state whether any sort of quantum restrictions either by way
of ceiling on amount of subsidy or amount of fertilizers was sought to be brought in
the proposed new system, the DoF replied as under.—
"Presently, there are no quantum restrictions either by way of ceiling on
amount of subsidy or amount of fertilizers in the proposed system. However,
a reasoned out decision on the same may be taken by the all stakeholders as
and when the national consultations take place."
171. In response to a pointed query regarding the basis for deciding the segments
of beneficiaries for fertilizer subsidies in the proposed new regime, the DoF stated that
the Department of Fertilizers was focusing on capturing the information visibility of
fertilizer movement up to the retailer's level and transferring the fertilizer subsidy to the
manufacturers. The Current Phase however, did not frame any criteria for deciding the
segments of eligible beneficiaries for transfer of fertilizer subsidies. A decision will be
taken on the same in the subsequent phases post national level consultations with the
State Governments.
172. The Committee then desired to know the current status of the three phases
which envisaged subsidy payment to the farmers directly in order to improve the
delivery mechanism. In reply, the DoF stated as under.—
"Currenty, Phase I implementation is in progress and the following activities
have been recently carried out or planned for the same:
(i) A User Acceptance Test (UAT) test group was formed in April 2012
constituting members from the fertilizer industry who tested the
functionalities of the FMS mobile and web application at the ground level
and approved the same on May, 25th 2012. The revised mobile and web
application was thereby ready to use.
*Criteria for identification of a farmer will be established in subsequent phases.

53
(ii) Notionwide refresher trainings were planned by the DoF for all the
stakeholders post the User Acceptance Test (UAT). The Master Trainer's
refresher workshops were conducted on 28th May 2012 and 6th to 8th
June 2012 which are being followed by nationwide refresher trainings. The
Training rollout is being closely monitored by Department of Fertilizers.
(iii) Subsequently, Phase I is planned to be rolled out across the Country
where subsidy will be disbursed to the manufacturers on the basis of
retailer acknowledgements in the FMS system."
173. When asked to elaborate whether infrastructural or technological bottlenecks
were being taken care for the move towards enhancing a more transparent fertilizer
flow across the supply chain and facilitating better delivery to the end users, the DoF
stated that some of the infrastructural/technological bottlenecks faced during Phase I
implementation were as follows:—
(i) Some of the dealers are not comfortable with using the mFMS mobile
application. In order to overcome this challenge, a User Acceptance Test
(UAT) was  conducted to standarize and improvise the mFMS mobile and
web application.  Additionally, refresher trainings are being provided to all
the dealers for a better understanding of the application modalities.
(ii) Specific states or remote areas face some connectivity issues such as lack
of internet connection, inability to send SMS's which may make it difficult
for users in these areas to access the application and report data. To address
these challenges, the following three alternative means of reporting data
through the mFMS application have been provided to the users;
(a) Through Web
(b) Through Mobile
(c) Through Interactive V oice Response System (IVRS)
(iii) Some of the dealers may face problem in mobile application deployment as
their mobile phones may not support the mFMS application. Therefore, a
list of mobile handsets has been provided on the mFMS transparency portal
(www.mfms.nic.in) which support mFMS application.
174. The Committee were apprised that the Department of Fertilizers were
addressing the challenges as listed above to ensure an enhanced transparent fertilizer
flow across the supply chain and facilitate a better delivery to the end users.

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS
The fertilizer subsidy regime in India has had a long and chequered history
dating back to 1957. Currently, while urea is the only controlled fertilizer, which is
subject to price distribution and movement control under the Fertilizer Control
Order and Fertilizer Movement Control Order to the extent of 50 percent of
production, other fertilizers like DAP, MAP, SSP, TSP, MOP and NPK complexes
are decontrolled fertilizers, whose use for agricultural purposes is subsidized. In
actual practice, however, fertilizer, whether controlled or decontrolled which are
subsidized for agricultural consumption are, in effect, subject to explicit/implicit
control by the Government of India (GOI) to ensure a uniform sale price throughout
the country, which is substantially lower than the cost of production/import and also
to ensure proper targeting of fertilizer subsidy. The Committee's examination of the
subject in light of the Audit observations has revealed that despite huge amount of
expenditure incurred by GOI on fertilizer subsidy, annual production of fertilizers
increased only marginally. Even the changes in the subsidy regime from the Retention
Price Scheme (RPS) to the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) have failed to incentivize
increase in domestic production of fertilizer, leaving the Country dependent on
imports, whose pricing is volatile. The subsidy on imported fertilizers during the
years 1998-99 to 2008-09 increased from 3 per cent to 47 percent of the total
subsidy. The quantum of expenditure on fertilizer subsidy touched Rs. 96,603 crore
in 2008-09 before coming down to Rs. 61,636 crore in 2009-10. While the assessed
requirement of fertilizers went up by more than 70 percent during the eleven years
period from 1998-99 to 2008-09, the total production went up by just 11 per cent
leading to increase in the imports by nearly 236 per cent. The Committee also find
lack of assessment of fertilizer requirement on a scientific basis and relatively
weak correlation between fertilizer consumption, which increased by 46 per cent
from 2003-04 to 2008-09, and agricultural production, the major components of
which increased by just 16 per cent over the same period. The Committee further
observe numerous instances of non-availability/shortage as well as diversion of
fertilizers for non-agricultural purposes despite huge amounts of subsidy disbursed.
In short, the Committee's examination of the subject has revealed certain very
disquieting aspects which inter alia include deficient assessment of fertilizer
requirement; huge gap between the demand and supply of fertilizers; lack of scientific
and realistic assessment of the fertilizer requirement; failure to incentivize increase
in the domestic production of fertilizer even after effecting changes in the subsidy
regime; virtual stagnation in the production of Urea during the last five years;
numerous instances of non-availability/shortage of fertilizers; absence of physical
verification of stocks and sale of fertilizers beyond the first stock point; selling of
subsidized fertilizers by unauthorized outlets; irregularities in and excess payment
on import of urea; diversion of subsidized fertilizers to the mixing units; inadequacy
in the fertilizer quality testing infrastructure; deficient monitoring mechanism etc.
54

55
The Committee have accordingly given their observations/recommendations in the
succeeding paragraphs.
2. The Committee note with serious concern the non-cooperation and stubborn
definance on the part of the Department of Fertilisers in not providing the requisite
records nor responding to the letters sent by Audit seeking comments on the draft
Audit Report as well as in the Exit Conference which resulted in unwarranted delay in
the finalization of the Audit Report. It is really disturbing that the Principal Director,
Audit's letter addressed to the Secretary, DoF reminding him to indicate a convenient
date for the Exit Conference also went unheeded. Notably, the concept of Entry and Exit
conferences with audited entities is intended to fine tune audit methodology so that the
Audit Report thus prepared is objective, transparent and balanced and it is indeed
helpful to the PAC in exercising parliamentary financial Oversight function. The
Committee deplore the callous attitude of the Department intended to thwart proper
scrutiny by the PAC. However, in view of the unconditional apologies tendered by the
representative of the Department during evidence for the lapses and his assurance that
such things would not recur, the Committee fervently hope that the Department would
extend full cooperation to Audit in discharge of its Constitutional mandate.
3. The Committee deprecate that the assessment of fertilizer requirement was
not done in a scientific manner, but in a pedestrian manner by enhancing the
requirement generally by 5 to 10 per cent over the previous season's/year's
consumption. The last five years data furnished to the Committee reveal that while
the actual consumption figures of major fertilizers are considerably less than the
requirements projected, the availability has been more than the assessed requirement
in almost all the cases. Admittedly, the assessments are currently based on figures of
actual fertilizer consumption pattern during the last three years and attempts are
now reportedly being made to revise the proforma used for collection of requisite data
from the field pertaining to soil health reports, cropping pattern, level of irrigation of
the area, etc. to ensure a more scientific, realistic and assessment of fertilizers. The
issue of assessment fertilizer demand of each State by augmentation of the collection
of a more relevant, accurate and informed statistical data bearing semblance to the
ground realities in collaboration with the Ministry of Statistics is also reportedly
under the examination of the Department of Fertilisers. Subsequent to the Audit
observation, the Department of Agriculture (DAC) has also started recording minutes
of deliberations of zonal conferences w.e.f. Rabi 2011-12. The Committee desire that
since the zonal meetings deliberate crucial issues like intensive study of the cropping
and consumption pattern, cropped and irrigated area, per hectare consumption of
fertilizers, requirement nutrient in soil in different parts of the States etc., it is all
the more important that detailed minutes of such meetings are meticulously
maintained so as to keep track of things and take corrective measures, wherever
warranted. Moreover, the criticality of the need for appropriate and accurate demand
assessment for each type of fertilizer for all districts of the Country as input for a
diligent planning at the commencement of the year and the respective seasons to
make available the requirement quantity of fertilizer at the right time, deserves due
attention. Needless to say, the consequential arrangements for required storage,
transport, staffing, credit, financial and foreign exchange are vastly dependent on

56
such assessed demands, the lack of which may lead to severe financial implications
and affect the agronomic productivity and related fallouts. The Committee, therefore,
urge that the overall assessment process be comprehensively reviewed for moving
towards a more scientific approach based on realistic and accurate statistical data
obtained from the fields and also taking resort to more cost effective futuristic
technology applications like remote sensing and satellite imagery for plot assessment
so that fertilizer requirement movement and distribution are done in a prudent and
effective manner.
4. The Committee observe that the New Pricing Scheme (NPS) for Urea units
which was notified on 30th January, 2003 and came into existence w.e.f. 1st April,
2003 was being implemented in three stages. Stage-I was of one year duration from
Ist April 2003 to 31st March 2004; Stage-II was of  two years duration from 1st April,
2006 to 30th September, 2006; and stage-III, the modalities of which would be decided
by the Department after review of the implementation of the first two stages. The NPS
aimed at greater transparency, uniformity and efficiency in subsidy disbursements
to Urea units and inducing the Urea manufacturing units to take cost reduction
measures and be competitive. But the Committee find that the change in Urea subsidy
policy regime from individual unit based pricing i.e. Retention Pricing Scheme (RPS)
to group based pricing i.e. New Pricing Scheme (NPS) did not result in any significant
increase in either capacity or production of urea. Rather, the production of urea
during the 11 years period from 1998-99 to 2008-09 registered a negligible increase
of 3.5 per cent, with a marginal decrease of three per cent during the RPS period
from 1998-99 to 2002-03 and an increase of just seven per cent thereafter till 2008-
09 during the NPS regime. Moreover, the groupwise weighted average cost of
production of urea also increased substantially by 83 per cent to 120 per cent during
the NPS period. While the Country's requirement of potassic fertilizers were met
fully through imports, the actual production of DAP and NPK complexes increased by
only 30 per cent although the capacity for production of phosphatic fertilizers nearly
doubled from 1998-99 to 2008-09. The increase in cost of production of urea has been
attributed by the Department to increase in cost of energy input which was beyond the
control of the NPS implementing authorities. The DoF have further submitted that
though there was no direct benefit to the Government from the subsidy point of view,
there was an energy efficiency gain which was purportedly a national gain and to that
extent the NPS has incentivised efficient working of the existing plants. The Committee
also find that after the announcement of New Investment Policy in 2008, there has
been an increase of production of about  1.5 million to two million tones of Urea.
Taking into consideration admission of the representative of DoF that there is a lot of
scope in becoming more self-sufficient in Urea, the Committee urge the Ministry to
step up the initiatives in the right earnest so as to address the concerns of the
potential investors and also to create a conducive incentive based environment for
attracting new investments in the Urea sector by suitably tweaking the investment
policy.
5.  The Committee are deeply concerned to find the high increase in the energy
cost of the domestic urea manufacturing unit amounting to Rs. 4010 crore during
2010-11 and Rs 9127 crore during 2011-12.  According to the Department, the

57
pricing of APM and KG D-6 gas combinedly constitute 60 per cent of the increased
energy cost i.e. 32 per cent attributable to GAIL/ONGC/OIL for APM supplies and 28
per cent attributable to RIL for KG D-6 gas. As the pricing of such energy resources
are directly or indirectly governed by the policies adopted by the Ministry of Petroleum
& Natural Gas for gas and the Ministry of Coal for coal, the Urea units or the
Department of Fertilisers have no control over it. In this context, the Committee find
that the campanies interested in new investments in Urea sector have been regularly
requesting the Government for either firm allocation of gas at pre-determined fixed
prices from domestic gas sources or to protect the industry from any additional
liability arising due to increase in the delivered price of gas by correspondingly
providing adequate protection of the floor prices. But due to lack of commitment by
the Government on availability of domestic natural gas at a pre-determined price
formula, the objectives to revamp, expand and revive the existing Urea units besides
setting up of Brownfield/Greenfield projects, as enunciated in the New Investment
Policy, 2008 have not been fructified. The DoF have therefore felt a strong need to
revise the existing policy addressing various concerns of the potential investors and
to attract new investment in the Urea sector. Accordingly, a draft CCEA note has been
prepared and circulated by the DoF on 26th June, 2012 seeking inter-ministerial
consultation and comments on the formulation of the New Investment Policy, 2012.
While the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and the Department of Agriculture
submitted their comments, the views of the other Ministries were still awaited. In
view of the imperatives involved and increase in the subsidy burden on the Government
of India due to increase in the energy cost, the Committee impress upon the DoF and
the DAC to take up the matter with utmost urgency at the appropriate fora to find
workable and sustainable solutions to the extent policies governing allocation of gas
and coal so that new investments are attracted, the existing Urea units are revamped,
expanded and revived and the Brownfield/Greenfield Projects are set up, as envisaged.
The Committee further desire that the Ministry should strengthen and intensify the
R&D activities towards exploring possibility of alternative cheaper feedstock options
and adapting successful time tested options being practiced in other Countries to
boost indigenous urea production.
6. Accordingly to the Department, Urea (N) is the only fertilizer, the requirement
of which is largely (around 75 per cent) met through indigenous production which
can inter alia be enhanced by the revival of the closed Urea units of the Fertiliser
Corporation of India Ltd. (FCIL) and Hindustan Fertiliser Corporation Ltd. (HFCL).
But, the Committee are perturbed to find that the process of revival of various closed
units of FCIL and HFCL initiated by the Government in the year 2007 is still under
examination of the Board for Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR) even
after the recommendations made by the Empowered Committee of Secretaries (ECOS)
to revive the closed units. Surprisingly, the State Governments were neither consulted
nor taken into confidence in the implementation process while adopting the New
Investment Policy, 2008 under which the revamp/revival process was to be effected.
Disappointingly, even the various initiatives for joint ventures abroad in various
countries like Canada, Australia, Yemen, Ghana, Syria and Indonesia under this New
Policy are mostly at the negotiation stage and still to go a long way for fructification.
The Committee are also distressed to find that the additional demand of natural gas

58
has to be met through imports for meeting the estimated requirement of 34 million
tonnes of urea production based entirely on gas by the end of 12th Plan period vis-a-
vis the expected production of urea from existing gas and non-gas plants working out
to only 22 million tonnes. With the cost of subsidy for imported urea obviously much
higher than that for indigenous urea, the Committee feel that the continued dependence
on imports creates a distortion in subsidy as well as in the fertilizer pricing policy. In
view of the fact that the Government have accorded in principle approval for considering
the write off of Government of India loans and interest liabilities of FCIL and HFCL
subject to submission of fully tied up proposals, the Committee exhort the DoF to take
requisite urgent measures for the revival of the closed fertilizer units of FCIL and
HFCL so that indigenous production of Urea is enhanced to a large extent. The
Committee further desire that the New Investment Policy, 2012 which is in the offing
and would facilitate strategic investments by Indian entities in resource rich countries
abroad having comparatively cheaper feedstock/energy options, be expedited for
implementation so that the joint ventures abroad already negotiated/initiated are
fructified to enable the country to gain significant foothold in the international fertiliser
sector.
7. The Committee note with profound concern that payments on account of
fertilizer subsidy increase more than eight fold from ` 11835 crore in 2003-04 to
` 96,603 crore in 2008-09 before coming down ` 61,636 crore in 2009-10. The
Committee also note that decontrolled fertilizers were the primary factor on high
subsidy payments with an increase of almost 20 times from  ` 3,326 crore in 2003-04
to  ` 65,555 crore in 2008-09. According to the Department, the increase in subsidy
amount was due to the cost of import of raw material for production of  P&K fertilizers,
fluctuation in the Indian Currency and the increased consumption leading to continued
increase in the delivered cost of the fertilizers as the MRP remained unchanged from
February, 2002 to March, 2010. The Committee are also concerned to note that
although the capacity for phosphatic fertilizers doubled from 1998-99 to 2008-09,
actual production increased by only 30 per cent. As the increase in consumptions of
DAP/MAP/NPK complexes over this period was met primarily through imports at
very high prices, there were multi-fold increases in the subsidy burden. The
Committee find that while the installed capacity of DAP units increased from
28,70,000 MT in 1998-99 to 72,99,000 MT (amounting to 154 per cent) in 2008-09,
the production registered a negative growth of 22 per cent as it decreased from
38,67,000 MT to 29,93,000 MT during the same period. Intriguingly, though the
production of DAP increased considerable during the subsequent years touching
more than 84 per cent capacity utilization in the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 and
80.8 per cent in 2011-12, the dependence on imports for finished phosphatic fertilisers
or phosphatic raw materials/intermediaries for indigeneous production of phosphatic
fertilisers stands at 90 per cent as the Country's endowments of rock phosphate are
minimal and of poor quality. Worse, the dependence on imports for potassic fertilizers
for agricultural usage is 100 per cent.  The Department of Fertilisers are reportedly
encouraging exploration/surveys for locating fresh deposits of rock phosphate and
potash. The Committee, however, desire that in addition to the steps initiated for
further exploration of raw material for P&K fertilizers, the Department should also
initiate adequate steps to secure long term supplies of not only finished fertilizers

59
but also for new raw materials through strategic investments and tie ups with fertilizer
resource rich countries especially for those sectors which are substantially import
dependent.
8. With the introduction of the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy w.e.f. 01.04.2010,
no further rise in the subsidy amount on P&K fertilizers has been observed and in
fact, the total subsidy outgo in P&K sector saw a decline i.e. ` 36,107 crore for the
year 2011-12 and  ` 28,576.12 crore for the years 2012-13 (BE). On the rationale of
subsidizing a decontrolled item, the Committee are informed that the decontrol of
P&K fertilizers w.e.f. 25.08.1992 adversely affected the consumption of these
fertilizers as subsidy was lifted affecting the small and marginal farmers and
ultimately led to imbalance in the usage of NPK nutrients. The Committee find that
while fertilizer consumption increased by 46 per cent from 2003-04 to 2008-09, the
major components of agricultural production (foodgrains oilseeds and sugarcane)
increased by just 16 per cent over the same period,indicating a relatively weak
correlation. Mindful of the fact that imbalanced use of chemical fertilizers and neglect
of organic manure results in low yields causing stagnation in agricultural productivity;
low fertilizer use efficiency with consequent low farmer profit and further depletion
of the most deficient nutrients in the soil, the Committee impress upon the Department
to accord due importance to the Integrated Nutrient Management as contemplated,
encompassing conjunctive use of Chemical fertilizers and organic manures so as to
maintain soil organic carbon for higher fertilizer response vis-a-vis crop productivity.
Further, as increasing fertilizer use efficiency undoubtedly has a high potential of
saving a huge quantity of fertilizers without affecting the crop yield, it is of utmost
importance that equal emphasis is also paid to the adoption of better agronomic
practices and use of better quality fertilizers including organic and bio-fertilizers
for sustainable agriculture. The Committee, therefore, desire the Department to
address the balanced fertilization need of the nation as a dynamic concept with
appropriate linkages and necessary inputs so that the intended goals of NBS policy
are achieved within a targeted time frame.
9. In the above context, the Committee find that the Government of India are
promoting soil test based balanced and judicious use of chemical fertilizers, bio
fertilizers and locally available organic manures, like Farm Yard Manure (FYM),
compost, vermicompost and green manure to maintain soil health and its productivity.
The Committee also find that funds are being provided to the State Governments
through various schemes of the DAC like Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA),
Rashtriya Krish Vikas Y ojana (RKVY) and National Project on Management of Soil
Health and Fertility (NPMSF) for taking up all the activities for popularization of
organic and biological nutrients. Publicity through newspaper, TV and Radio
programmes is also being taken up. Further, the Union Agriculture Minister has
taken up the matter with the Chief Ministers. While taking due note of the various
initiatives taken up by the Government of India to promote organic and biological
nutrients, the Committee desire that a centralized monitoring command be established
to oversee strict enforcement of the measures initiated/contemplated so as to ensure
educating the farmers on the benefits of balanced use of fertilizers for efficiency and
protecting the soil health. In view of the reportedly good performance of some States

60
like Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka in ensuring increased productivity by maximum
use of organic manure, the Committee further desire that the DoF and DAC convince
and prevail upon other State Governments to emulate Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka
so that there is increased productivity across the Country.
10. The Committee are perturbed to note numerous instances of non-availability/
shortage of fertilizers despite huge amounts of subsidy doled out. The Committee
also observe with concern the scarcity of fertilizers; cases of delays in supply of
adequate quantities of fertilizers leading to farmers agitations; inequitable
distribution; absence of norms to regulate sale; skewed distribution with higher
supply to districts with better accessibility and lesser supply to distant and disjointed
districts; etc. The Committee are informed that timely supply and movement of
fertilizers to the fertilizer consuming areas depends upon the availability of Railway
rakes, labour force at the various ports and plants as well as speedy evacuation in
loading, unloading of the rakes at origin and destination, effects of natural calamities,
etc. On being queried about the manures being taken to make adequate fertilizers
available on time to the farmers in various States, the DoF have submitted that they
are taking up a number of measures which inter alia include monitoring of the
movement of all major subsidized fertilizers throughout the Country by an on-line
web based system; meeting through imports the gap between the requirement and
indigenous availability of Urea; advising the State Governments to instruct the State
Institutional agencies to coordinate with manufactures and importers of fertilizers
for streamlining the supplies; joint review by the DoF and DAC of the fertilizer
availability with the State Agriculture Departments through weekly video conferences;
encouraging private sector and Public Sector Companies to explore the possibilities
for joint ventures abroad to ensure uninterrupted supply of fertilizer inputs to the
P&K sector etc. Mindful of the fact that timely availability of fertilizers is the essence
of agronomic requirement having serious ramifications on the crop yield and
consequent effects on the overall food security and taking into consideration the
Secretary DoF's assurance that the fertilizer availability position is comfortable at
present and adequate arrangements would be made for fertilizer availability in the
coming years also as demand grows, the Committee recommend that the Department
should intensify the measures initiated, strengthen the existing mechanisms and
constantly endeavour towards equitable and timely distribution of requisite and
appropriate types of fertilizers to all the needy farmers of the Country with special
attention towards far flung and inaccessible districts.
11. The Committee note that the requirement for certification in Proforma 'B'
by the State Governments for sale of decontrolled fertilizers for agricultural purposes
is the only major control over end use of fertilizers, but with the removal of such
linkage since June, 2007, adequate incentive to ensure certification by the competent
authorities (viz. the State Governments) of end use of decontrolled fertilizers for
agricultural purposes no longer exists. As a result, there was a steep increase in the
amount of unreconciled sales figures which stood at ` 50,587 crore for the years
2007-08 to 2009-10 as compared to only ` 111 crore for the years 2003-04 to
2006-07. The Department have clarified that the outstanding amount as on 14.12.2011
for the period 2003 to 2010 stood at ` 2,447.08 crore and the latest pendency figure

61
was ` 1947 crore subsequent to a drive undertaken by the Department based on the
Audit findings as submitted by the Secretary, DoF in evidence. On the audit
recommendation for re-introduction of the earlier system of relating 10-15 per cent
of subsidy till receipt of certification in Proforma 'B', the DoF have contended that the
Proforma 'B' was getting less relevant as the Department is gearing up for the
mobile Fertiliser Monitoring System (FMS) which will record on a daily basis, the
fertilizer receipt and sales at the retailer level in the first stage. According to the
Department, such information would be available online and once the system stabilizes
within the financial year 2012-13, subsidy payment would be made based on the
mobile FMS, which would not only obviate the need for reconciliation of sales figures
but also act as an effective disincentive against black marketing and hoarding. Taking
into consideration the Department's own admission that there is no existing
mechanism of verification of sales and stocks beyond the district level and secondary
sales and consumption patterns are being monitored by the State Agricultural
Departments, the Committee are of the considered opinion that the DoF's role should
not be limited to merely sensitizing the State Governments in light of various reported
instances of diversion of subsidized fertilizer for non-agricultural use. Further, in
view of the magnitude of the problem and the underlying consequences on the subsidy
burden due to the malpractices, it is imperative that a strict verification regime with
stringent enforcement of deterrent punitive/financial penalties based on real time
information/data be put in place. As assured by the Secretary, DoF in evidence that the
Department is developing a pilot plan to track the fertilizer movement upto the farmer
level, the Committee desire that the DoF should urgently come out with a more robust
monitoring mechanism and inspection regime with foolproof procedure for verification
of stocks/sales so as to curb the menace of pilferage, diversion and leakages of
subsidized fertilizers.
12. The Committee note that prior to January, 2003, it was mandatory under
the Fertilizer Control Order (FCO) for the dealer to possess the certificate of
registration for carrying out the business of selling of fertilizers. Later on, w.e.f.
16th January, 2003, the Ministry dispensed with the registration certificate of dealers
and replaced it with the system of Memorandum of Intimation i.e. every person intending
to sell or offer for sale or carrying the business of selling fertilizers shall make
memorandum of Intimation to the notified authority and the acknowledgment of the
Intimation would constitute the authoriation letter which would be valid for a period of
three years from the date of issue. The Committee are also informed that the State
Governments are responsible to issue licences to the dealers for carrying out
wholesale/retail business of fertilizers as well as for the timely renewal of the licences.
But, the efficacy of the system put in place can be well gauged from several deficiencies
that has come to the notice of the Committee like dealers carrying out fertilizer
business without either valid licence from the State Agriculture Department or any
certificate of registration from the appropriate authority; non-maintenance of the
stock registers by the dealers; black marketing of the fertilizers etc. The Secretary,
DoF was candid enough to admit before the Committee that there have been instances
of smuggling of fertilizers not only to neighbouring States but to even neighbouring
Countries also. In view of the alarming situation, it becomes imperative on the part of
the Department to revisit the extant licensing/Memorandum of Intimation mechanism

62
and take requisite but urgent corrective measures to plug the loopholes so that
unscrupulous dealers are unable to take undue advantage of the lucanae and
unauthorized sale, black marketing and smuggling of fertilizers are stopped.
Acknowledging the Fertiliser Secretary's assurance that the Department have to
make constant efforts in the direction, the Committee stress that vigorous and
concerted efforts are required to make the subsidy administration clean, transparent
and foolproof so that every penny [out of ` 80,000 crore (approx.)] of the tax payers'
money utilized towards fertilizer subsidy is accounted for and the intended benefits
accrue to the farmers.
13. The Committee's attention has been drawn to the irregularities in the
import of DAP by IPL during 2007-08; excess payment on import of urea by IPL
during 2008-09 and 2009-10; erroneous fixing of rates of concession of imported
DAP and MOP; absence of supply plan for urea imported by IPL, etc. The DoF have
clarified that the apparent discrepancy arose due to the switch of the payment
procedure to 'On Account Subsidy' w.e.f. 01.12.2008 and adjustment of left over
quantity of 0.01 LMT of the closing stock as on 30.11.08 which was carried forward
as receipt in the month of December, 2008. The Department have further submitted
that the interest amounting to ` 128.56 crore was recovered from IPL from July,
2011 'On Account' claim for the irregularities in import of DAP by IPL during 2007-
08. Though corrective measures have been taken by the DoF subsequent to the Audit
findings, the Committee nevertheless feel that such irregularities reveal systemic
deficiencies in the import process of fertilizers and therefore warrant a stricter
regulation to avoid mismatches and creeping infirmities considering the growing
volume of import of fertilizers and the concomitant subsidy burden to the exchequer.
14. The Committee are perturbed to note that subsidized fertilizers are being
consumed for preparation of mixed fertilizers by mixing units thereby breaking the
subsidy chain and at the cost of the beneficiaries/farmers. The Department have
clarified that the mixing units in the States have been permitted to use subsidized
fertilizers due to the specific requirements as no subsidy is available separately on
the sale of customized fertilizers and mixture fertilizers. Accordingly, the use of
subsidized fertilizers for manufacturing NPK mixture fertilizers was as such allowed
under the erstwhile concession scheme and the Nutrient Based Subsidy Policy for
decontrolled phosphatic and potassic fertilizers. The Committee find that the
Department have recently decided to monitor the sourcing of subsidized fertilizers
by the mixture/customized units making it compulsory for them to source subsidized
Urea and P&K fertilizers from the manufacturers directly after receipt at the District
level, instead of from dealers/retailers, and to upload the data in the FMS web based
monitoring system. The Department have also decided to release the balance payment
of subsidy to the manufacturers/importers only after receipt of complete information
through the mobile FMS. The Committee feel that these are measures in right direction
and urge the Department to further intensify their efforts in properly monitoring the
sourcing of subsidized fertilizers by the mixture/customized units, so that the subsidy
chain is not broken and the beneficiaries are not affected. In view of the unorganised
character of the mixed units and mindful of the Fertiliser Secretary's candid
confession of the need for a better oversight control over these units, the Committee
impress upon the Department to initiate urgent requisite measures, including

63
prescription of a tighter set of Guidelines, to have a better feedback, enabling exercise
of greater control/oversight over the sourcing and quality of subsidized fertilizers
used by the mixed units.
15. The Committee note with profound concern several deficiencies and
inadequacies that plague the quality testing of fertilizers. Such areas of concern
inter alia include grossly inadequate annual capacity of the existing quality control
laboratories vis-a-vis the required capacity for testing samples from all sales outlets;
deficient physical and human infrastructure in many of the laboratories; significant
shortfalls in the actual number of samples tested, etc. What concerns the Committee
more is the non-adherence to the time limit prescribed for analysis and communication
of results of fertilizer quality testing. Though the Department is reportedly taking a
number of measures which inter alia include strengthening of 39 existing FQCLs;
sanctioning 15 new FQCLs; increasing the number of soil testing laboratories to
1049 with analyzing capacity of 10.7 million samples as on 31.03.2012; planning to
add another 180 static and 145 mobile soil testing laboratories etc.; the Committee
are still worried over the reported existing bottlenecks in proper quality checking of
fertilizers and use of sub-standard fertilizers. The problem is compounded with the
FCO provisions under which the responsibility of ensuring the quality of fertilizers
is solely left to the State Governments, though the Central Government provide
financial assistance to the State Governments under the National Project on
Management of Soil Health and Fertility (NPMSH&F). The Committee therefore
impress upon both the Departments (Fertilizers and Agriculture) to seriously consider
the imperatives involved in the quality testing of fertilizers and constantly endeavour
towards augmenting and strengthening both physical and human infrastructure of
the quality testing and soil testing laboratories so that possibilities of supplying sub-
standard fertilizers to the farmers are completely eliminated. The Committee believe
that working in tandem with the State Governments and involving Research Institutes
like Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and Indian Institute of Soil
Science (IISS), the Departments will certainly be able to bring in noticeable
improvements in the quality testing of fertilizers.
16. Taking note of the adverse implications of the delay in communicating
results of the fertilizer quality testing within the stipulated time period of 52 days,
the Committee export the Departments to prevail upon the State Governments to take
stringent action against the officials for violation of clause 30 of the FCO which
provides for strict compliance with the time limit stipulated for analysis and
communication of the quality testing results. The Committee further recommend
that the penal provisions under the Essential Commodity Act (ECA), which prescribe
prosecution of offenders and sentence, if convicted, upto seven years of imprisonment
besides cancellation of the authorization certificate and other administrative action,
be invoked against the offenders/defaulters to deter sale/supply of sub-standard
fertilizers.
17. Taking note of the admission of the representative of the DoF about complaints
of supply of sub-standard fertilizers, the Committee recommend that the farmers'
complaint lodging mechanism for sub-standard quality of fertilizers be streamlined
and they be allowed to lodge their complaints with the District Magistrate/District
Agriculture officer for expeditious and appropriate action. It is also equally important

64
that the MPs, MLAs and other representatives of the people and also the NGOs be
provided with the list of the exact location of the Fertilizer Quality Testing Centres in
the respective States so as to enable them to take necessary action, whenever warranted.
The Committee further desire that requisite measures be taken by the Departments
so that the National Project on Management of Soil Health and Fertility addresses the
issue of contaminated water used by the farmers while harvesting.
18. The Committee note that at present fertilizer subsidy is given by the
Government to the manufactures/Importers directly. In order to address the challenges
in the fertilizer subsidy framework, the DoF propose to adopt a three phased approach
to reform the subsidy disbursement mechanism through which it is envisaged to
provide subsidy to the retailers and ultimately to the intended beneficiaries i.e. farmers.
In short, Phase-I involves creation of information visibility of the movement of fertilizers
along the supply chain from the manufacture till the retailer; Phase-II envisages
release of subsidy to retailer upon the receipt of fertilizer; and Phase-III proposes
subsidy disbursement directly into the bank accounts of the farmers through Aadhar
enabled payment system.While acknowledging the initiatives taken/contemplated
by the DoF to reform the subsidy disbursement mechanism, the Committee desire
that wider national level consultations, especially involving the State Governments be
held to so as to reforms the system for efficient service delivery. The Committee also
recommend that the monitoring mechanism be further strengthend in unison with
the State Governments to address the challenges for ensuring an enhanced
transparent fertilizer flow across the supply chain and better delivery to the end
users for a more sustainable subsidy burden.
19. To sum up, the Committee find that several key issues merit urgent attention
which inter alia include overall review of the assessment of fertilizer demand/
requirement through relevant and accurate compilation of data; capacity/production
augmentation of various kinds of fertilizers; creation of a conducive environment for
the investors; expansion/revival of the closed Urea units; curtailment of dependence
of import of fertilizers; due importance to Integrated Nutrient Management
encompassing conjunctive use of chemical fertilizers and organic manure; timely
availability/supply of fertilizers; curbing the menace of pilferage, diversion and
leakage of subsidized fertilizers; need for a better oversight/control over the mixed
units using subsidized fertilizers; augmentation in the physical and human
infrastructure of the Quality Testing and Soil Testing Laboratories; putting in place
a clean and transparent subsidy administration regime and strengthening the
monitoring mechanism in tandem with the State Governments. The Committee impress
upon both the Departments i.e. Fertilisers and Agriculture to take speedy action on
their suggestions/recommendations and apprise them in due course.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
29 April, 2013 Chairman,
9 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13) HELD ON 11TH JUNE, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Monday, the 11th June, 2012 from
1100 hrs. to 1350 hrs. in Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi —   Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
8. Shri Ashok Tanwar
9. Dr. Shashi Tharoor
10. Dr. Girija V yas
11. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Prakash Javadekar
14. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
15. Shri N.K. Singh
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
2. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
65

66
Representatives of The Office of The Comptroller And Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — C&AG
2. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Deputy C&AG
3. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General
4. Ms. Revathi lyer — Director General
5. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director
Representatives of The Department of Fertilizers (DoF), Ministry of
Chemicals and Fertilizers
1. Shri Ajay Bhattacharya — Secretary (F)
2. Dr. V . Rajagopalan — SS&FA
3. Shri Satish Chandra — Joint Secretary (P&A)
4. Shri Sham Lal Goyal — Joint Secretary (F&M)
5. Shri Suresh Chandra Gupta — Joint Secretary (P&P)
Representative of the Department of Agriculture and Co-operation
Shri Narender Bhushan — JS (INM), DAC
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. Apprising that the meeting had
been convened to have a briefing on the subject 'Performance Audit of Fertilizer Subsidy'
based on the C&AG Report No. 8 of 2011-12, the Chairman drew the attention of the
Members to the failure of the Department of Fertilizers to respond to the letters written
by the Principal Director of Audit seeking an exit conference and also his comments on
the draft Audit Report, as pointed out in the preface to the Audit Report.
3. On being asked to respond, the Secretary, Department of Fertilizers tendered
his deep and unqualified apology for not responding to Audit letters and assured the
Committee that corrective steps would be taken to ensure that such a lapse does not
recur in future. Thereafter, he apprised the Committee about the efforts made to make
fertilizer available preferably indigenous production otherwise through import; verify
sales of fertilizer movement upto the District level through the online Fertilizer Monitoring
System; sensitize the State Governments to minimize fertilizer diversion especially urea
for non-agricultural purposes etc. He also responded to various queries raised by the
Members.
4. The Members focused on the need for encouraging use of organic manures,
balanced use of fertilizers, different co-relation between customized fertilizer and results
of soil testing laboratory analysis, fertilizer quality testing to check use of substandard
fertilizers, etc. The representative further apprised the Committee that under the National
Project on Soil Health and Fertility, more number of laboratories, both static and mobile
are being sanctioned to strengthen the system, farmers were being trained and field
demonstrations conducted on the usage of different types of nutrients and under the

67
National Project on Organic farming etc. He also submitted that the need for customized
fortified fertilizers depending on district-wise requirements was being addressed. The
Committee desired both the Ministries to furnish written replies to the queries which
the representatives could not give satisfactory replies and also furnish the data to be
collected from State Governements.
5. The Committee also pointed out that certain recent researches had shown that
the microbes present in soil fix nitrogen more efficiently than urea. The Committee
suggested that in-depth study on this aspect should be undertaken. The Committee
also directed the Ministry to take effective steps to address the issue of pilferage and
diversion of subsidized fertilizers.
6. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministries for deposing
before the Committee and also the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India
for providing assistance to the Committee in the examination of the subject.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 29TH APRIL, 2013
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th April, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs in
Room No. '51', (Chairman's Chamber) Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi   —   Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
9. Shri J.D. Seelam
10. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secreatry
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda lngudam — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
1. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General
68

69
2. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director
3. Ms. Athoorva Sinha — Director
4. Shri Likhariya — Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the last sitting of the Committee (2012-13). Giving
an overview of the performance of the Committee in the year 2012-13 as well as in the
15th Lok Sabha, the Chairman observed that the years have been very productive due
to the hard work of the C&AG and his team, the PAC Secretariat led by the Joint
Secretary and above all the cooperation and active participation of the Members in the
deliberations. The Committee unanimously endorsed the views of the Chairman.
3. The Chairman, then, apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider
the following Draft Reports of the Committee:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) ' Fertilizer Subsidy ' based on C&AG Report No. 8 of 2011-12, Union
Government (Civil);
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
(vii) *** *** ***
4. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/suggestions
of the Members.
5. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports in the
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to Parliament
on a convenient date.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Draft Report. The Members also conveyed their
thanks to the Chair for his able leadership in conducting the meetings of the Committee
in a probing and educative manner.
The Committee then adjourned.
GMGIPMRND—744LS—29-05-2013.