63
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL
POOL OF RESOURCES
(NLCPR) SCHEME
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of  the Committee contained in their
Thirty-eighth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF
NORTH-EASTERN REGION (DoNER)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2012-2013
SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
NON-LAPSABLE CENTRAL POOL OF
RESOURCES (NLCPR) SCHEME
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Thirty-eighth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF DEVELOPMENT OF
NORTH-EASTERN REGION (DoNER)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30 August, 2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 August, 2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1979
Price:  ` 28.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIA T
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2012-13)......................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have
been accepted by Government ................................................. 7
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of  the replies received from
Government ............................................................................. 15
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which replies
of Government  have  not  been  accepted  by  the  Committee
and which require reiteration .................................................... 17
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in respect  of  which
the Government have furnished interim replies ........................ 19
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Tenth sitting of  Public  Accounts Committee
 (2012-13) held on 23rd   August,  2012.....................................   20
 II. Analysis of  the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee   contained   in   their   Thirty-eighth   Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha).............................................................. 22

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
11. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
13. Dr. Shashi Tharoor
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri  J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Sixty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Thirty-eighth  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on  ‘Non-Lapsable
Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) Scheme’ relating to the Ministry of Development
of North-Eastern Region (DoNER).
2. The Thirty-eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
11th August, 2011. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 15th March, 2012. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 23rd August,
2012.  Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
28 August, 2012 Chairman,
6 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the action taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Thirty-eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Non-Lapsable Central Pool
of Resource (NLCPR) Scheme' based on C&AG Report No. 5 of 2010-11
(Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil) relating to the Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region (DoNER).
2. The Thirty-eight Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 11th August, 2011. It contained 8 Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Development of North-
Eastern Region (DoNER) and categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 & 8
Total: 06
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. 1
Total: 01
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para No. 5
Total: 01
Chapter-IV
(iv) Obs ervations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
Total: NIL
Chapter-V
3. The Thirty-eighth Report of the Committee was based on the Audit review
of the 'Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) Scheme' which is to be
funded from the unspent amount out of the stipulated ten percent of Gross

2
Budgetary Support (GBS) for the year with the objective of the Infrastructural
Development of North-Eastern Region for the economic and social upliftment of
North-Eastern States.
4. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee have revealed
serious shortcomings/lapses on the part of the Ministry of Development of North-
Eastern Region (Ministry of DoNER) which inter-alia included delay in the creation
of the reserve fund in the Public Account; cost and time overrun in the execution
of the projects; weak and ineffective monitoring and follow up by the Ministry as
well as by the States; diversion and irregular utilization of funds by the State
Government and/or implementing agencies; poor project planning as evident in
the case of 'Thermal Power Plant at Dimapur; inadequate staff, etc. The Committee
had accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in their Thirty-eighth
Report.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of DoNER to each of the
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee contained in their Thirty-eighth
Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. the Committee
will not deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their
Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.
A. Inordinate Delays in the Completion of NLCPR Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
6. In their Thirty-eighth Report, the Committee had observed that out of the 32
projects (14 bridges, 17 roads and one porter track) that were taken up for Audit
scrutiny out of the total 22 Road Projects that were sanctioned during the period
2002-03 to 2007-08, only 11 projects had been completed. The Committee expressed
their displeasure to observe that in most of the remaining 21 projects, the progress
of execution was very slow and the projects were inordinately deplayed for a
period ranging from one to five years or more. Observing several other irregularities
in the execution of Road and Bridge projects in the North-Eastern Region such as
diversion of funds, cost overrun, undue benefit to contractor, idling of material,
improper planning, change in specifications delay in finalization of tenders,
contractors' lackadaisical attitude, law and order problems, etc. the Committe had
recommended the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring mechanism to remove
the infirmities especially diversion or irregular utilization of NLCPR funds by the
State Governments and/or implementing agencies and time and cost overrun in
the execution of the projects.
7. In their Action Taken Note, the Minister of DoNER have stated as under:—
"Under NLCPR Scheme the cost overrun due to time overrun is normally
not being considered to discourage the delay in project implementation.
To avoid delay in transfer of funds by State Government to the
implementing agencies, NLCPR Scheme guidelines have been amended
and time limit of 15 days has been fixed for transfer of funds by the State
Governments to implementing agencies. Also State Government has to

3
appoint Nodal Officer for each project, who is responsible for submission
of quarterly progress reports to the Ministry. To strengthen the monitoring
of projects, apart from the area officer designated for the various States,
inspections are also being conducted by the officers of Technical Wing
of the Ministry.
To further strengthen the monitoring mechanism the projects monitoring
through independent agencies, in line the JNNURM Scheme, have been
introduced since 13.07.2011. Wherein, projects will be inspected by the
independent agency during construction and post construction stages
for which funds will be provided by the Ministry of DoNER. Ministry
has already short listed the projects for independent monitoring for current
financial year and sent it to the State Governments, for appointment of
independent agencies and monitoring on 08.09.2011. Under the mechanism
the State Governments are also free to take up the projects for
independent monitoring in addition to list provided by the Ministry. The
Chief Secretaries of North-Eastern States have been advised again to
review the NLCPR Projects regularly on quarterly basis to avoid delay in
implementation of projects and other issues like time and cost overrun
etc. They have also been advised to conduct the regular audit of NLCPR
scheme to ensure proper utilization of funds."
8. The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation to strengthen
the monitoring mechanism for ensuring proper utilization of funds and timely
completion of projects under the NLCPR Scheme, the Ministry have initiated a
number of measures which inter-alia include amendments in the guidelines,
obtaining quarterly progress reports from the State Nodal Officers, conducting
inspections through the Technical Wing of the Ministry, advising the Chief
Secretaries of the North-Eastern States to review the NLCPR Projects regularly
on quarterly basis etc. The Committee feel that these are steps in right direction
to avoid delay and time and cost overrun in the implementation of NLCPR Projects
and they desire that the momentum should continue unabated. The Committee
also recommend that in addition to the measures already undertaken to ensure
timely completion of projects, the Ministry should further intensify their
monitoring mechanism to also ensure that under no circumstances there is
diversion of fund meant for projects under the NLCPR Scheme.
B. Poor Project Planning of Dimapur Thermal Power Project, Nagaland
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
9. In their Thirty-eighth Report, the Committee had observed serious lapses on
the part of the Ministry of DoNER in the planning and monitoring relating to the
implementation of 22.92 MWHFO based Thermal Power Project at Dimapur,
Nagaland under NLCPR. The project was approved by the Ministry of Power at a
cost of Rs. 105.57 crore in September, 2003 which was scheduled to be completed
in May, 2005. However, the project was foreclosed in May, 2005 after incurring an
expenditure of `32 crore towards construction of building and procurement of

4
machinery and equipment which was released by the Ministry of DoNER as their
share. In June, 2006 it was realized by the Ministry of Power that the cost of the
electricity produced by this power Plant would be very high (Rs. 5.65/unit) as
compared to the cost of the Power purchased by the State Government of Nagaland
(` 1.95/unit) from other sources. Deprecating the casual manner displayed by the
Ministry in taking up such an important project without conducting any study on
the economic viability and without ascertaining the economic feasibility of the
project, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to beef up their planning
and monitoring systems before according their approval and releasing funds to
the State Governments for implementation of the projects.
10. The Ministry of DoNER in their Action Taken Note have stated us under:
"The PAC in its meeting on 1st February, 2011 directed that a fresh case may
be made of the matter and taken to PMO. Accordingly, PMO was apprised of
the status in March, 2011. The PMO director, vide ID No. 14/14/2004-NESC
dated 16.06.2011, that the matter may be placed before the Committee of
Secretaries (CoS).
Draft CoS Note was circulated to all concerned Ministries for comments and
the State Governments were also requested to furnish report on the status of
the projects and stock of equipment and machineries. After obtaining
comments, the final Note incorporating the comments was sent to Cabinet
Secretariat on 20.09.2011.
The matter was discussed in the meeting of the CoS in Cabinet Secretariat on
2nd November, 2011. The decisions taken in the meeting circulated vide O.M.
of Cabinet Secretariat, dated 14.11.2011 were as under:
(a) The land acquired for the project and the civil structures may be utilized
by the State Government for any other public purpose;
(b) The equipment procured for the project may be auctioned by the State
Government on as is where is basis after ascertaining the reserved price
in consultation with BHEL and the proceeds thereof may be remitted to
Government of India within 3 months;
(c) Shortfall of proceeds vis-a-vis the amount released by Ministry of DoNER
may be waived off.
(d) The CoS decision was intimated to State Government vide letter dated
17.11.2011 with the request to initiate action immediately so as to complete
the entire process within the stipulated time."
11. The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation, the Ministry
made a fresh case and took it to the PMO who in turn directed that the matter be
placed before the Committee of Secretaries (CoS). The Committee find that the
CoS took certain decisions like utilization of the land and civil structures by the
State Government for any other public purpose, auction of the equipment procured
etc. The Ministry have intimated that the decisions of the CoS have been forwarded
to the State Government on 17th November, 2011 for necessary action. But the

5
Ministry have not intimated the Committee of the specific action taken by the
State Government on the CoS decisions, even though the ATN was furnished to
the Committee four months after the CoS decision was conveyed to the State
Government. The Committee would therefore like to be apprised of the detailed
action taken by the Government of Nagaland on the CoS decision within one
month of the presentation of this Report. The Committee hope that the Dimapur
Thermal Power Project fiasco would act as an eye opener for the Ministry and
the Ministry would take all requisite measure i.e.  prudent advance planning and
conducting study on the economic viability/feasibility of the projects funded from
the Prime Minister’s special package so that the projects are actually realized
and the intended benefits accrued to the people of the North-Eastern States. The
Committee, however, recommend that responsibility be fixed on the Officials
responsibile for the Dimapur Thermal Power Project fiasco so that such lapses
do not recur.
C. Abnormal Delay in Utilization of Funds by the States/Implementing Agencies
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
12. The Committee, in their Thirty-eighth Report, had observed poor
implementation of the NLCPR projects, Despite availability of funds, the aggregate
amount released to North-Eastern States was only Rs. 3205 crore i.e. only 49.12
per cent of the accruals, against the total accrual of Rs. 6525.12 crore in the
NLCPR during 2003-04 to 2007-08. Further it was observed that there were delays
on the part of State Governments in transferring the funds to their executing
agencies as well as delays ranging from 2 to 49 months in utilisation of the funds
in a number of projects by the States. Expressing their concern over the fact that
annual accruals under NLCPR were much higher in comparison to the annual
release from the fund resulting in accumulation of huge surplus balance under
NLCPR, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry of DoNER in
consultation with State Governments should develop a strategy to improve
utilisation of funds so as to accelerate the pace of development in North-Eastern
Region.
13. The Ministry of DoNER in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:
"The accruals in the "Central Resource pool for development of North-
Eastern Region" are not available to the Ministry of DoNER, however, they
are kept in a national pool. The Ministry of DoNER only gets budgetary
allocation every year from the "Central Resource pool for development of
North-Eastern Region" for funding the infrastructure projects under NLCPR
Scheme. The Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region have
successfully exhausted the budget allocations of NLCPR scheme year after
year, except for couple of years when the funds were not released to the
State Governments at the fag-end of financial year, as advised by the Ministry
Finance, to avoid parking of funds.
To accelerate the Utilization of funds in the NLCPR Pool and to increase the
pace of development in NE Region, Ministry have introduced a new scheme
called 'NLCPR-Central' on 19.09.2011. The 'NLCPR-Central' shall be effective

6
from the year 2012-13. Under NLCPR-Central Scheme, the funds of the
"Central Resource pool for development of North-Eastern Region" are made
available to the various Central Ministries on 100 percent grant basis for
taking up the projects of regional and national priorities in the North-Eastern
Region in addition to the projects taken up through 10 percent mandatory
earmarking. Like NLCPR Scheme, under NLCPR-Central Scheme also funds
are not meant to supplement the normal Plan Programme of the Central
Ministries/Departments/Agencies. The NLCPR-Central Scheme is expected
to utilize the funds in the "Central Resource pool for development of North-
Eastern Region" with greater efficiency and increase the pace of development
in the North-Eastern Region."
14. The Committee note that the Ministry have introduced a new scheme
called 'NLCPR-Central' on 19th September 2011 with a view to accelerating the
utilization of funds in the NLCPR Pool and increasing the pace of development
in the North-Eastern Region. The Committee also, find that like the NLCPR
Scheme, under the 'NLCPR-Central' Scheme also, funds are not meant to
supplement the normal Plan Programme of the Central Ministries/Departments/
Agencies. What concerns the Committee is the fact that without spelling out the
specific measures contemplated for proper and optimal utilization of funds under
the newly launched 'NLCPR-Central' Scheme, the Ministry have just expected
that there would be greater utilization of funds and faster development in the
North-Eastern Region. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that without
leaving things to take their own course, the Ministry should take concerted
measures, in light of the experience gained in the process of implementation of
the earlier scheme where funds utilization was low, so that utilization of fund
under the new scheme is done with greater efficiency and the pace of development
in the North-Eastern Region accelerated commensurately.

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE WHICH HA VE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 2
The Committee note that as of 30th September, 2008, 959 projects with an
approved cost of Rs. 7070.38 crore had been sanctioned from the NLCPR. However,
only 435 projects (56 per cent) involving an expenditure of Rs. 1934.49 crore had
been completed within the stipulated period of i.e. by October, 2008 as against the
target of 783 projects. Further out of 435 projects completed upto October, 2008,
only 210 projects (48.27 per cent) were completed as per schedule and the remaining
225 projects were delayed with time overruns ranging from 1 month to 69 months.
The Committee further note that out of 91 projects reviewed by the Audit with
approval cost of Rs. 1399.89 crore, only 36 projects involving expenditure of
Rs. 380.46 crore were completed as of November, 2009. Of these 36 projects, 21
projects were completed with time overrun ranging 4 months to 47 months. The
Ministry stated that as on 31.7.2010 there were 321 projects which were incomplete
constituting 28.92% of the total projects approved. The Secretary during evidence
attributed delay to factors such as law and order, poor availability of the material,
the machinery and the manpower. The Committee recommend that Ministry may in
coordination with the State Governments analyze the reasons for delays in
completion of works, so as to remove bottlenecks and ensure timely and efficient
execution of the projects.
[Sl. No. 2 of the 38th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
To ascertain the reasons for delay, apart from holding reviews State Governments
were invited to make presentations before the NLCPR Committee. It was observed
that besides, law and order, poor availability of the material, machinery and
manpower; the short working season, long rainy season, severe winter and adverse
geographical conditions are also the reasons for delay in completion of projects.
Hence, State Governments have been advised to use the lean period for
documentation purpose such as preparation of DPRs, tendering of works etc. so
that optimum use of working season could be made for actual construction. Further
regular reviews are being held with the State Governments and emphasis is being
given on the site inspections and monitoring. The monitoring of projects by the
independent agencies, in line with JNNURM Scheme, has been introduced since
13.07.2011. Besides State Governments are being called to make representations
before the NLCPR Committee explaining their action plan for completion of projects.
Up to 31.12.2011 the State Governments have reported completion of 635 projects
which is expected to increase further.
7

8
Comments of DG Audit (CE)
No comments.
[Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region O.M. No. DNER/NLP/
NER/1(PAC)/2010 dated 15.03.2012]
Observation/Recommendation No. 3
The Committee note that the scrutiny of 32 projects viz. (14 bridges, 17 roads
and a porter track) out of total 224 Road projects that were sanctioned during the
period 2002-03 to 2007-08 has revealed that only 11 projects had been completed
i.e. four bridges, six road projects (68.77 km) and the porter track (95 km.). The
remaining 21 projects were yet to be completed. The Committee note that in most
of these cases, progress of execution was very slow and the projects have been
inordinately delayed for period ranging from one to five years or more. In many
cases, non-completion of the projects was attributable to delay on the part of
authorities concerned in release of funds to the executing agencies and the situation
is alarming especially in the State of Assam, where there was a delay of 1461 days
in respect of completion of project 'Construction of RCC Bridge No. 20/1, Nalbari
Road'; 1255 days in 'Construction of RCC Bridge No. 156/2, 159/2, 163/2, 165/2,
172/2, 174/2, 177/1 & 182/2 on Dhodar Ali'; 1058 days in the project 'Construction
of RCC bridge No. 2/2 on Haripur Sensarghat Road'; and delay of 1020 days in
the project 'Improvement of Bhowraguri Kachugaon Road'; and delay of 1020
days in the project 'Improvement of Dhamdhama Tupali Subankhata (DTS) Road'.
Besides the Committee also noted other irregularities in execution of roads and
bridges in NE region such as diversion of funds, cost overrun, undue benefit to
contractor, idling of material, improper planning, change in specifications, delay in
finalization of tenders, contractors' lackadaisical attitude and law and order problems
etc. The Committee recommend that the Ministry need to strengthen their financial
management systems by close monitoring and follow up to ensure that there is no
diversion or irregular utilization of NLCPR funds by the State Governments and/or
implementing agencies. They should also ensure that there are no cost and time
overruns in the execution of projects.
[Sl. No. 3 of the 38th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Under NLCPR Scheme that cost overrun due to time overrun is normally not
being considered to discourage the delay in project implementation. To avoid
delay in transfer of funds by State Government to the implementing agencies,
NLCPR Scheme guidelines have been amended and time limit of 15 days has been
fixed for transfer of funds by the State Governments to implementing agencies.
Also State Government has to appoint Nodal officer for each project who is
responsible for submission of quarterly progress reports to the Ministry. To
strengthen the monitoring of projects, apart from the area officer designated for
the various States, inspections are also being conducted by the officers of
Technical Wing of the Ministry.

9
To further strengthen the monitoring mechanism the projects monitoring through
independent agencies, in line with JNNURM Scheme, have been introduced since
13.07.2011. Wherein, projects will be inspected by the independent agency during
construction and post construction stages for which funds will be provided by
the M/o DoNER. Ministry has already short listed the projects for independent
monitoring for current financial year and sent it to the State Governments for
appointment of independent agencies and monitoring on 08.09.2011. Under the
mechanism the State Governments are also free to take up the projects for
independent monitoring in addition to list provided by the Ministry. The Chief
Secretaries of North-Eastern States have been advised again to review the NLCPR
projects regularly on quarterly basis to avoid delay in implementation of projects
and other issues like time and cost overrun etc. They have also been advised to
conduct the regular audit of NLCPR Scheme to ensure proper utilization of funds.
Comments of DG Audit (CE)
As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Ministry may also
mention about the action taken to strengthen the monitoring mechanism to ensure
that there is no diversion or irregular utilization of NLCPR funds by State
Govenments and/or implementing agencies.
Reply of Ministry of DoNER
The diversion or irregular utilization of funds by the State Governments can
only be checked with regular Audit of Accounts. Hence, apart from strengthening
the monitoring system the Chief Secretaries of North-Eastern States have been
advised for regular review of NLCPR projects and to conduct the regular audit of
NLCPR Scheme/projects. The DG Audit (CE) may also like advise their counterpart
in the NE States for conducting regular audit of NLCPR Scheme/projects.
[Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region O.M. No. DNER/NLP/
NER/1(PAC)/2010 dated 15.03.2012]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I
Observation/Recommendation No. 4
Yet another glaring instance of Poor Project Planning relates to the
implementation of "22.92 MWHFO base Thermal Power Plant at Dimapur" under
NLCPR. The Committee note that the Union Ministry of Power had approved this
project at a cost of Rs. 105.57 crore in September, 2003, as a part of PM's special
economic package for the State of Nagaland which was scheduled to be completed
by May, 2005. However, audit scrutiny of records of the Electrical Transmission
Division, Dimapur revealed that the project was foreclosed in May, 2005 after
incurring Rs. 32 crore towards construction of building and procurement of
machinery and equipment and M/s BHEL handed over the project on 'as is where
is basis' to the State Government in July, 2006. The Ministry in their reply have
stated that they have released their entire share of Rs. 32.00 crore and the amount

10
was utilized by the State by 1st February, 2005. In June, 2006 it was observed by
the Ministry of Power that even after trying up the necessary financial resources
the average cost of electricity produced would be around Rs. 5.65 per unit whereas
power was available to the State at much cheaper rate from other sources. The
unit cost of power was likely to exceed 5.70 per unit as against the bulk power
purchased by Government of Nagaland at an average cost of Rs. 1.95 per unit
even after the conversion of the power plant to gas based. Hence no further
headway could be made in the proposal. The Committee cannot but deprecate the
casual manner with which such an important project was taken up without
conducting any study on the economic viability of the project, which is a sine
qua non of project planning. Obviously, lack of project planning or deficient/poor
planning could have been the reason for this fiasco. What is surprising to the
Committee is the fact that Ministry have released the entire amount of the State
Government without ascertaining whether the project was economically feasible or
not. This indicates total lack of planning and monitoring at the Ministry level. The
Committee therefore, recommend the Ministry should take lession from this episode
and should beef up their planning and monitoring system before according their
approval and releasing funds to the State Government for implementing of the
projects.
[Sl. No. 4 of the 38th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Feefteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The PAC in its meeting on 1st Feb., 2011 directed that a fresh case may be
made of the matter and taken to PMO. Accordingly, PMO was apprised of the
status in March 2011. The PMO directed, vide ID No. 14/14/2004-NESC dated
16.06.2011, that the matter may be placed before the Committee of Secretaries
(CoS).
2. Draft CoS Note was circulated to all concerned Ministries for comments and
the State Government was also requested to furnish report on the status of the
project and stock of equipment and machineries. After obtaining comments, the
final Note incorporating the comments was sent to Cabinet Secretariat on 20.09.2011.
3. The matter was discussed in the meeting of the CoS in Cabinet Secretariat
on 2nd November, 2011. The decisions taken in the meeting circulated vide OM of
Cabinet Sectt., dated 14.11.2011 were as under:
(a) The land acquired for the project and the civil structures may be utilized
by the States Government for any other public purposes;
(b) The equipment procured for the project may be auctioned by the State
Government on as is where is basis after ascertaining the reserved price
in consultation with BHEL and the proceeds thereof may be remitted to
Government of India within 3 months;
(c) Shortfall of proceeds vis-a-vis the amount released by M/o DoNER may
be waived off.

11
4. The CoS decision was intimated to State Government vide letter dated
17.11.2011 with the request to initiate action immediately so as to complete the
entire process within the stipulated time.
Comments of DG Audit (CE)
No comments.
[Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region O.M. No. DNER/NLP/
NER/1 (PAC)/2010 dated 15.03.2012]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter-I.
Observation/Recommendation No. 6
The Committee note that a terms of the NLCPR guidelines, funds available
under the pool are not meant to supplement the normal plan programmes either of
the State Government or Union Ministries/Department/agencies, However, Audit
scrutiny of records revealed that the Ministry of DoNER diverted an amount of
Rs. 1796.58 crore from NLCPR to fund other schemes resulting in incorrect utilization
and shrinkage of the NLCPR pool. According to Audit the Ministry decided to
deduct on amount of Rs. 1605.38 crore spent by NEC during 1998-99 to 2001-02
from the NLCPR pool. This decision of the Ministry was against norms stipulated
in the guidelines. The Ministry have stated that the matter has been taken up
with the Ministry of Finance and as a result the NLCPR funds are not being
diverted to meet NEC expenditure. The Committee trust that the Ministry would
take steps to ensure that in future the expenditure incurred on NEC and other
inadmissible heads should under no circumstances be debited from the funds of
NLCPR.
[Sl. No. 6 of the 38th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry have already written to M/o Finance conveying its portest for
such diversion of funds. As a result of decisions taken subsequent to meeting of
the Committee of Secretaries, dated 16/5/2007, the NLCPR funds are not being
diverted to meet NEC expenditure.
Comments of DG Aduit (CE)
No comments.
[Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region O.M. No. DNER/NLP/
NER/1 (PAC)/2010 dated 15.03.2012]
Observation/Recommendation No. 7
The Committee are concerned to note that the monitoring the NLCPR Scheme
both at the Ministry level as well as State level is weak and ineffective. Audit

12
scrutiny has revealed that the representative of the Ministry took part in just two
out of seven meetings held in Nagaland, one out of 14 meetings in Meghalaya, in
none of the seven meetings held in Sikkim and in three out of 17 meetings in
Manipur. The Ministry explained to the Committee that owing to paucity of staff
it had not fixed criteria for the number of projects to be inspected by the officers.
The Ministry further stated that the projects were being monitored through
quarterly progress reports utilization certificates inspection reports of nodal officers
photographs and also through field visits which are carried out at the State level.
The Committee recommended that ministry should take all possible steps to ensure
that the monitoring system are streamlined so that the projects undertaken by the
States are completed on time without any cost and time overruns. They also
recommended that necessary steps should be taken by the Ministry to ensure
that adequate staff is deputed for monitoring the progress of implementation of
projects at regular invervals.
[Sl. No. 7 of the 38th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Considering the paucity of staff in the Ministry, Area Officers have been
designated for the various States for taking up the field inspection of the projects.
Apart from Area Officers, officers of Technical Wing of M/o DoNER are also
being deputed from time to time for inspection of projects. The Nodal officers of
the project appointed by the State Governments are also responsible for
implementation and inspections of projects. The Inspection reports of the Nodal
Officers are being asked invariably before considering the release of 2nd and
subsequent installments of funds in each project. The Chief Secretary of the
States have been advised to take up the regular review of NLCPR projects on
quarterly basis. The Ministry has also asked the officers up to the level of Under
Secretary above in the Ministry for taking field inspections.
To further stregthen the existing monitoring mechanism, Ministry has introduced
the independent monitoring of the projects inline with JNNURM Scheme on
13.07.2011.
Comments of DG Audit (CE)
No comments.
[Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region O.M. No. DNER/NLP/
NER/1 (PAC)/2010 dated 15.03.2012]
Observation/Recommendation No. 8
The Committee note that there has been Poor Project Planning and Management
in the implementation of the projects by the various North-Eastern States. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry of DoNER, set up especially with the
objectives of accelerating development of NE State, should take immediate and
appropriate measures to strengthen the capacity building of the States in

13
augmenting their projects planning, good management practices and accelerated
and equitable development.
[Sl. No. 8 of the 38th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by  the Government
The Ministry has an on-going scheme called Capacity Building and Technical
Assistance (CB&TA). Under the Scheme for strengthening the capacity of the
States in augmenting their projects planning, good management practices and
accelerated and equitable development the Ministry has conducted following
training programme during last three years:
Y ear Nos. of Details
Govt.
Officials
trainees
2008-09 173 Training in
i. Rural Dev. through Agro Entrepreneur.
ii. Promotion of Micro Enterprises.
iii. Promotion of Micro Enterprise for SHGs.
iv. Development of Enterprise through cluster Dev.
in NER.
v. Training of Trainees on Entrepreneurship Dev.
5. Courses by NIMSME
vi. Programme on planning, implementation,
monitoring & Evaluation of Dev. Prog. by
Admn. Staff College of India, Hyderabad.
2009-10 190 i. Programme on planning, implementation,
monitoring & Evaluation of Dev. Prog. by
Admn. Staff College of India, Hyderabad.
ii. Programme on enhancing analytical skill for
rational decision making by NIFM Faridabad.
iii. Six management course programmes by IIM
Kolkata.
2011-12 840 i. Programme on enhancing analytical skill for
rational decision making NIFM, Faridabad.
ii. Road construction and maintenance by National
Institute for training of Highway Engineers.

14
The Ministry will continue conducting such programme to strengthen the
capacity building of any State for planning, management and implementation of
projects to accelerate the development.
Comments of DG Audit (CE)
No comments.
[Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region O.M. No. DNER/NLP/
NER/1(PAC)/2010 dated 15.03.2012]

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 1
The Committee note that in terms of the Cabinet decisions taken in November
1997, the Ministry of Finance (Department of expenditure) was required to create
a fund titled the "Central Resource pool for development of North-Eastern Region"
in the Public Account. However, no such reserve fund had been created in the
Public Account and the funding of the NLCPR Scheme was being effected through
the annual budget exercise. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry
that the proposal for creation of the fund was discussed in Planning Commission
which agreed in principle for  creation of the same. However, the Department of
Expenditure was stated to have opposed the proposal an account of practical
difficulties associated with creating a distinct account head for the Fund/Pool.
During evidence the Secretary deposed that they are in in-principle agreement not
for creating a separate fund but for making these funds available for different
schemes and projects of the Central Ministry. The Committee are of the considered
view that given the fact that the NLCPR funding constitutes only around four
per cent  of the total expenditure in NE Region, and the scheme has failed to
achieve its intended objective of ensuring speedy development of infrastructure
in NE States, the Ministry may review the further continuance of NLCPR scheme.
The funds can still be made available to meet the same objectives either through
State Plans or the Central Ministries.
[Sl. No. 1 of the 38th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Though NLCPR funding constitutes only 4% of the total expenditure of the NE
Region, but it is over and above the mandatory 10% of GBS earmarked by 52 non-
exempted Central Ministries and the State Annual Plans approved by Planning
Commission. The details of expenditure by non-exempted Central Ministries/
Departments and Annual Plan outlays of the North-Eastern States during last
three years are given in table below. The various Central Ministries who deal with
the specific sectors of development have  major role for all-round development of
North-Eastern region. It may be seen that during 2010-11 the expenditure of non-
exempted Central Ministries/Departments is more than 24 times and Annual Plan
outlays are more than 26 times the spending through NLCPR Scheme.
15

16
(Rs. in crore)
Y ear Expenditure by non- Annual Plan outlay Expenditure
exempted Ministries/ of NE States through NLCPR
Departments NE Scheme
Region
2008-09 12733.74 14938.11 660.38
2009-10 14692.68 17675.00 668.62
2010-11 *197 79.06 21010.00 805.77
47205.48 53623.11 2134.77
*Figures of 2010-11 are provisional. Confirmation from M/o Finance awaited.
The NLCPR scheme  is for spending the unspent amount of mandatory 10%
earmarked GBS of 52 non-expempted Ministries. Under the NLCPR scheme funding
is provided for the projects which are not covered under the normal schemes of
various Central Ministries. Hence, the continuance of NLCPR scheme is important
to ensure the funding of such gaps which are not covered under any other
scheme of the Central Ministries. Also the guidelines of NLCPR scheme are being
amended from time to time to make it more efficient and to increase the fund flow.
Further, to increase the fund flow from "Central Resource pool for development
of North-Eastern Region" and to increase the pace of development, Ministry of
Development of North-Eastern Region have introduced a new scheme called
'NLCPR-Central' on 19-09.2011. The 'NLCPR-Central' shall be effective from the
year 2012-13 under 'NLCPR Central' Scheme, the funds of the "Central Resource
pool for development of North-Eastern Region" are being made available to the
various Central Ministries on 100% grant basis for taking up the projects of
regional and national priorities in the North-Eastern Region in addition to the
projects taken up by them through 10% mandatory earmarking. Like NLCPR Scheme,
under 'NLCPR-Central' Scheme also funds are not meant to supplement the normal
Plan Programme of the Central Ministries/Departments/Agencies. The NLCPR-
Central Scheme is expected to utilize the funds in the "Central Resource pool for
development of North-Eastern Region" with greater efficiency and increase the
pace of development in the North-Eastern Region.
Comments of DG AUDIT (CE)
No Comments.
[Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region O.M. No. DNER/NLP/
NER/1(PAC)/2010 dated 15.03.2012]

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation No. 5
The Committee note that as against the total accrual of Rs. 6525.12 crore in the
LNCPR during 2003-04 to 2007-08, the aggregate amount released to NE States
was only Rs. 3205 crore constituting 49.12 per cent of the accruals, indicating
poor implementation of the programme despite availability of funds. The Committee
further note that there were delays on the part of the State Governments in
transferring the funds to their executing agencies, ranging from one month to
more than thirty months, thereby adversely affecting the implementation of the
projects. Further, in terms of the scheme guidelines funds released by the
Government of India were to be utilized within six months (as per pre-revised
guidelines up to 6th July, 2004) or nine months (after revision of guidelines in
July, 2004). However, the Committee find that there were delays ranging from 2 to
49 months beyond the permissible six/nine months in utilization of the funds in
43 projects by the States. The Ministry had stated that the guidelines were amended
in August, 2009 to tighten the provisions and the States had to transfer the funds
to excecuting agencies within 15 days. Area Officers for all eight N.E. States had
been appointed to verify the fact during their visits. As regards utilization of
funds, the Ministry have stated that the delay in utilization was due to various
reasons such as restricted working reason due to prolonged rainy season and
limitations of technical and professional experts. The Committee are concerned to
note that annual accruals under NLCPR are much higher in comparison to annual
release from the fund resulting in accumulation of huge surplus balance under
NLCPR. The Committee recommend that Ministry in consultation with State
Governments should develop a strategy to improve utilization of funds and
accelerate the pace of development in NE Region.
[Sl. No. 5 of the 38th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The accruals in the "Central Resource pool for development of North-Eastern
Region" are not available to the Ministry of DoNER, however, they are kept in a
national pool. The M/o DoNER only gets budgetary allocation every year from
the "Central Resource pool for development of North-Eastern Region" for funding
the infrastructure projects under NLCPR Scheme. The M/o Development of North-
Eastern Region have successfully exhausted the budget allocations of NLCPR
Scheme year after year, except for couple of years when the funds were not
17

18
released to the State Governments at the fag-end of financial year, as advised by
the M/o Finance, to avoid parking to funds.
To accelerate the utilization of funds in the NLCPR pool and to increase the
pace of development in NE Region, Ministry have introduced a new scheme called
'NLCPR-Central' on 19.09.2011. The 'NLCPR-Central' shall be effective from the
year 2012-13. Under NLCPR-Central Scheme, the funds of the "Central Resource
pool for development of North-Eastern Region" are made available to the various
Central Ministries on 100% grant basis for taking up the projects of regional and
national priorities in the North-Eastern Region in addition to the projects taken up
by them through 10% mandatory earmarking. Like NLCPR Scheme, under 'NLCPR-
Central' Scheme also funds are not meant to supplement the normal plan programme
of the Central  Ministries/Departments/Agencies. The NLCPR-Central Scheme is
expected to utilize the funds in the "Central Resource pool for development of
North-Eastern Region" with greater efficiency and increase the pace of development
in the North-Eastern Region.
Comments of DG Audit (CE)
No comments.
[Ministry of Development of North-Eastern Region O.M. No. DNER/NLP/
NER/1(PAC)/2010 dated 15.03.2012]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter-I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-NIL-
NEW D ELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 August, 2012 Chairman,
06 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
19

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 23RD AUGUST, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 23rd August, 2012 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Room No. '51' (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Dr. Shashi Tharoor
9. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri Prakash Javadekar
12. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
13. Shri N.K. Singh
14. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
20

21
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
2. Ms. Geetali Tare — Pr. Director (Scientific Departments)
2. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee then took-up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
( i ) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Thirty-eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Non-Lapsable
Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) Scheme'.
5. After Some discussions, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports and
authorized the Chairman to finalise the four Reports adopted by them, in light of
their suggestions and the factual verifications received from the Audit and present
the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports and Selection of additional subjects.
The Committee, then adjourned.
***Matters not related to this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations - 08
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the - T otal: 6
Committee which have been accepted by Percentage-75%
the Government :
Para Nos. 2-4, 6-7 and 8
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the - Total: 1
Committee do not desire to pursue in view Percentage-12.5%
of the replies received from the Government :
Para No. 1
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of - Total: 1
which replies of Government have not been Percentage-12.5%
acepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para No. 5
(v) Observations/Recommenations in respect of - Total: 0
which Government have furnished interim Percentage-0%
replies:
-NIL-
22
GMGIPMRND—2659LS—12-10-2012.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006.
(A.P)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28 Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2671,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P)
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL  MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,
NEW DELHI.