45
NON-COMPLIANCE BY
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS
IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON
THE NON-SELECTED AUDIT
PARAGRAPHS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Eleventh Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FORTY-FIFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE
NON-SELECTED AUDIT PARAGRAPHS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Eleventh Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.12.2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19.12.2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1953
Price:  ` 54.00/-
     2011  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.
©

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12)  . . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
CHAPTER I Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by  the Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
the Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
C
HAPTER IV Observations/ Recommendations   in   respect   of   which
replies  of  Government  have  not  been  accepted  by  the
Committee and which require reiteration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations   in   respect   of   which
the Government have furnished interim replies  . . . . . . . . . 41
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sixth s itting of Public Accounts Committee
(2011-12) held on 23rd September, 2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Eleventh Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47

(iii)
COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
21. *Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
* Elected  w.e.f.  29th August 2011, vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan
appointed Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Forty-Fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Eleventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in Timely Submission of Action Taken
Notes on the Non-Selected Audit Paragraphs' (Ministry of Finance—Department of
Expenditure).
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/Laid in Rajya Sabha on
29th April, 2010. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 31st December, 2010. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 23rd September,
2011. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix- I.
3 . For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of  India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Eleventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
15 November , 2011 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the action taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Eleventh Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Non-Compliance by the Ministries/
Departments in Timely Submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs' relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).
2. The Eleventh Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in
Rajya Sabha on 29th April, 2010. The Report contained 10 Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) and these have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10
Total: 8
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Paragraph No.           -Nil-
Total: 0
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph No. 3
Total: 1
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies:
Paragraph No. 6
Total: 1
Chapter V
1

2
3. The Eleventh Report of the Committee was based on Non-Compliance by
the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of action taken notes on the audit
paragraphs which were not selected for detailed examination by the Committee. The
detailed examination of the subject by the Committee revealed inordinate delays in
submission of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes by various Ministries/
Departments; 4934 Action Taken Notes pending with various Ministries/Departments
since 1997-98 despite repeated directions of the Committee for their timely submission;
deficiency in monitoring mechanism both at the Ministry/Department level as well
as in the Department of Expenditure, etc. The Committee had accordingly given their
Observations/Recommendations in the Eleventh Report.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) to each of the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Eleventh Report have been reproduced in the relevant
chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on their Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration
on merit comments.
A. Large Scale Pendency of Action Taken Notes in Various Ministries/
Departments
(Recommendation Para No. 3)
5. In their Eleventh Report, the Committee had observed that as on 15th March,
2010 as many as 4934 Action Taken Notes were pending with various Ministries/
Departments for a very long period i.e. from the year 1997-98 to 2007-08. The break
up being 3646 paras related to Department of Revenue (3172 CBDT, 462 CBEC and
12 relating to Department of Revenue) followed by Ministry of Railways (553), Defence
(202), Telecommunication (90) and Health (49). As per information furnished by the
Office of C&AG , as of February, 2010, a total of 3450 Action Taken Notes were pending
in various Ministries/Departments. Out of these 2208 pertain to revenue wing
comprising Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) and Central Board of Excise and
Customs (CBEC) alone, followed by Railways wing (481), Defence wing (229),
Autonomous Bodies wing (180), Scientific Departments wing (165), and Civil Ministry
Wing (142). Further out of these 3450 pending paras, Action Taken Notes in respect
of 1891 paras had not been received in the Audit even for the first time. Though
Action Taken Notes in respect of 960 paras were received by the Audit, these were
returned to the respective Ministries/Departments for clarifications which were still
awaited. The Committee had expressed their serious concern and displeasure over
the indifference shown by the Ministries/Departments and deficiencies in the
monitoring mechanism both at the Ministry/Department level as well as in the
Department of Expenditure, the nodal agency for monitoring the Action Taken Notes
and had therefore, impressed upon the Ministries/Departments that the Chief
Accounting Authorities should be made personally accountable in all cases of
abnormal delays in taking remedial actions and submitting Action Taken Notes to
the Public Accounts Committee.

3
6. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Notes has stated as under:—
"Concern/displeasure expressed by the Committee regarding large scale
pendency of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on Audit Paras in various
Ministries/Departments over long periods were communicated by the
Department of Expenditure to concerned Ministries/Departments for
compliance/expeditious settlement of pending Action Taken Notes.
Instructions were also issued to all the Secretaries of the Government of
India at the level of Secretary (Expenditure) vide Office Memorandum
dated 1st July, 2010 that they will be personally responsible/accountable as
Chief Accounting Authority for ensuring that Action Taken Notes on audit
paras are finalized within the prescribed time frame. Further, as a follow up
action on the observations of the Committee regarding deficiencies in the
monitoring mechanism both at the level of Ministry/Department and
Department of Expenditure/Monitoring Cell, it is submitted that all the
Secretaries of the Government of India were advised by Secretary (Exp.)
vide O.M. dated 1st July,  2010 to put in place proper monitoring mechanism
by way of setting up of Standing Audit Committee (SAC) to be chaired by
Secretary/Special Secretary including the Financial Adviser and also
conducting Action Taken Note (ATN) Adalat/workshop to ensure speedy
resolution of pending audit paras. Detailed guidelines for establishment of
Standing Audit Committee in consultation with C&AG were issued vide
Department of Expenditure's OM dated 2nd August, 2010. The nominee of
the C&AG will participate in the SAC in respect of Ministry of Defence,
Railways, Department of Telecommunication and Department of Revenue
(CBDT & CBEC) against whom large number of paras are pending. The SAC,
as a nodal agency, will monitor and review the submission of Action Taken
Notes on Audit Paras on a monthly basis so as to ensure that all audit paras
are responded to within the stipulated time limit and also take appropriate
remedial measures for systematic and other required changes in order to
prevent recurrence of persistent irregularities pointed out in the audit paras.
Simultaneously, Ministries/Departments have been advised to organize
Action Taken Note Adalat/Workshop every quarter inviting representative
of audit to resolve and finalise pending Action Taken Notes.
As a result of various measures taken by the Department of Expenditure,
position of pending audit paras in various Ministries/Departments have
shown considerable improvement. The pendency position has come down
from 4934 pending Action Taken Notes earlier reported by Monitoring Cell
as on 15th March, 2010 in respect of CAG reports from 1997-98 to 2007-08
to 2284 as on 30th September, 2010. Out of 2284 pending ATNs, total 848
Action Taken Notes (excluding current year paras) are reported to have not
been sent to Audit even for the first time by the Ministries/Departments as
against 1891 paras reported by Audit earlier."

4
7. The Committee deplore that notwithstanding some measures initiated by
the Government, ATNs in respect of 848 Paras were not sent by the concerned
Ministries/Departments to the Audit for vetting even for the first time. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
ask all the defaulting Ministries/Departments to liquidate the arrears of pending
Action Taken Notes within the prescribed time frame of four months. They would
also like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard within three months
from the presentation of the Report alongwith the particulars of Ministries who
persist defaulting. The Ministry of Finance also need to evolve a firm procedure so
that all such delays are reported to the Public Accounts Committee at regular
intervals.
B. Variation in the figures relating to pending Action Taken Notes in various
Ministries/Departments furnished by the Monitoring Cell, Department of
Expenditure & the Office of C&AG
(Recommendation Para No. 9)
8. The Committee in their Eleventh Report had observed that there is variation
in the figures furnished by the Monitoring Cell Department of Expenditure and the
Office of C&AG relating to pending Action Taken Notes in various Ministries/
Departments. According to the information furnished by the Monitoring Cell of the
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance as on March, 2010, Action Taken
Notes in respect of 4934 paras, contained in the Audit Reports from 1997-98 to
2007-08 are pending in various Ministries/Departments. However, this figure is at
variance with that furnished by Audit as according to them, Action Taken Notes in
respect of 3450 Audit Paras are pending from different Ministries/Departments as on
February, 2010. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed
that the problem of conciliation of figures between the Audit and Department of
Revenue viz. CBDT and CBEC was more acute. Further it was observed that in respect
of Scientific Ministries, Audit had shown a large number of old paras outstanding
while the Ministries were showing them as cleared. The Committee had, therefore,
recommended that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) should
coordinate with the various Ministries/Departments and the Audit in order to reconcile
the figures relating to pending Action Taken Notes and eventually to arrive at a
precise figure at the earliest. The Committee had also desired to be apprised of the
progress made in this regard.
9. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Notes has stated as under:—
"The Committee pointed out variation in the figures of pending ATNs (1484
nos.) between the pendency position reported by Monitoring Cell and Audit
in respect of C&AG reports from 1997-98 to 2007-08. As per Monitoring
Cell, total 4934 paras were reported as pending as on 15th March, 2010 as
against audit figures of 3450 as on February, 2010. Comparative statement
indicating variation in pendency position as on September, 10 (Ministry-
wise) reported by Monitoring Cell and Audit is attached. It may be noted

5
that there have been considerable reduction in the variation of pending ATNs
between Monitoring Cell and Audit. In compliance of the recommendation
of the Committee, Monitoring Cell of the Department of the Expenditure have
been coordinating with the concerned Ministries on regular basis, requesting
for reconciliation of difference in the pendency position reported by
Monitoring Cell and audit and for submission of reconciled pending status
after consultation with the Office of C&AG on priority basis. Audit have
also been separately requested to get the discrepancies in the figures of
pending ATNs reconciled in consultation with concerned Ministries and to
provide the reconciled status to the Department of Expenditure vide DO
letters dated 4.11.2010 and 22.11.2010 (copy enclosed). Further, with the
commencement of the e-monitoring of submission of ATNs on Audit Paras
at various stages, the possibility of discrepancy in the pendency position
will be minimized substantially. In their vetting remarks, Audit have observed
that a mechanism needs to be put in place to ensure that finalized ATNs are
submitted by the Ministries to the PAC/Monitoring Cell/Audit. It is stated
that with the commencement of computerized monitoring of Audit paras, all
the stakeholders/C&AG Office/PAC Branch will be able to view the status
of pending ATNs/submitted ATNs/settled ATNs. Further, Audit have viewed
that presence of both the Audit and Ministry's representatives are necessary
during the reconciliation process. In this regard a copy of Jt. CGA's DO
letter dated 16.12.2010 to Audit H.Q (with the request to hold a meeting
with all concerned Audit Offices and Departments for reconciliation of the
discrepancies in the figures of pending ATNs) is attached. Reconciled
pending status of Audit paras will be apprised to PAC and Audit later on".
10. The Committee deplore that despite lapse of more than ten months from
the date of presentation of their 11th Report (15 Lok Sabha), the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) is yet to ascertain the exact number of pending Action
Taken Notes lying with various Ministries/Departments. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) in
cooperation  with the Audit make concerted efforts so that the figures relating to
pending paras are reconciled within a definite time period. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard within three months from
the date of presentation of this Report. The Committee expect the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) to expedite the settting up of e-monitoring system in
consultation with Audit for closer and effective monitoring of such pendencies and
removal of statistical discrepancies.
C. Poor progress made in setting up/and conducting the meetings of Standing
Audit Committees (SACs) and organizing of ATN Adalats/Workshops by
various Ministries/Departments
(Recommendation Para No. 10)
11. In their Eleventh Report, the Committee had observed that in deference to
their recommendation, the Department of Expenditure — Monitoring Cell had stated
that they had advised the Secretaries of Ministries/Departments to establish Action

6
Taken Notes Workshops for enabling the finalization of Action Taken Notes.
Welcoming this step, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the progress made
by the Department of Expenditure — Monitoring Cell in this regard.
12. The Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure in their Action Taken
Note has stated as under:—
"In response to the instructions issued by the Department of Expenditure,
as on September, 2010, 48 Departments have set up Standing Audit
Committee (SAC) as nodal agency to monitor and review the progress of
submission of pending Action Taken Notes. However, 28 Departments could
hold the meeting of SAC and remaining Ministries have been reminded to
constitute SAC/hold meetings of SAC. As on September, 2010,  14 Ministries
have also conducted Action Taken Note Adalat/Workshop. Further progress
in setting of SAC and holding of ATN Adalat/Workshop by Ministries/
Departments will be intimated to Public Accounts Committee/Audit in due
course of time. It is submitted that monitoring mechanism at all levels
(Ministry and Department of Expenditure) has been adequately streamlined
with the setting up of institutional mechanism by way of constitution of
SAC and Action Taken Note Adalat, review of progress in resolution of
pending paras by holding COS meeting on quarterly basis,
operationalisation of centralized computerized monitoring system for time/
expeditious submission of Action Taken Notes on Audit paras at the level
of Monitoring Cell, user Ministries, Audit and Public Accounts Committee
Branch as envisaged. It is expected that Ministries/Departments will be able
to show considerable improvement in the matter of reduction of the pending
Audit paras. Further progress in this regard will be apprised to Public
Accounts Committee and Audit later on."
13. The Committee express their displeasure over poor progress made in
setting up/and conducting the meetings of Standing Audit Committees (SACs) and
also organizing of the necessary workshops for disposal of pending Action Taken
Notes by the various Ministries/Departments. The Committee are perturbed to note
that out of 48 Ministries/Departments that have constituted SACs, only
28 Ministries/Departments could hold the meetings of SACs and the remaining
Ministries/Departments are yet to constitute and hold the meetings of SACs. As
regards ATN Workshops, the position is even worse, as only 14 Ministries/
Departments have conducted the same. The Committee urge upon the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) to closely monitor the setting up/and
conducting of meetings/workshops by the defaulting Ministries/Departments at
periodical intervals so that the  pending Action Taken Notes are cleared/settled
expeditiously. They would also like to be apprised of the impact made by the SACs
in timely submission of corrective Action Taken notes and reducing the pendency
thereof.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 1
The Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India after being laid in
Parliament in terms of Article 151 of Constitution of India, stand referred to the Public
Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. These Audit Reports contain several
paragraphs. Since it is not possible for the Committee to go through every issue
dealt with in the various Audit Reports, it is necessary for the Committee to be
selective in its approach. Thus, at the beginning of the term every year, the Public
Accounts Committee generally selects  for  in-depth examination only a few relatively
more important paragraph from the various  Reports of Comptroller and Auditor
General of India. As regards a large number of audit paragraphs which are not formally
selected and taken up for detailed examination by the Committee are dealt with by
means of a procedure whereby the Ministries/Departments are required to furnish to
the Committee remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on all the audit paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 1, Part-II, Para-1 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Contents of this Para relates to observations of the Public Accounts Committee
regarding the procedure being followed by them for dealing with/examination of
C&AG audit paras and no specific action is required on the part of Monitoring Cell
of the Department of Expenditure.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O. No. 806/152/Rep.C/2010, dated 16.12.2010.
Observation/Recommendation No. 2
Taking cognizance of the inordinate delays and persisting failures on the part
of a large number of  Ministries in reporting to the Committees the corrective action
taken on audit paragraphs, the Committee in their 105th Report (10th Lok Sabha —
1995-96) recommended that the Action Taken Notes on all the paragraphs of the
Reports of C&AG of  India should be furnished to the Committee through the Ministry
of Finance, Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) within a period of 4 months
from the date of laying of Audit Reports on the Table of the House starting from
31st March, 1996 onwards. Since excessive delays were noticed in the receipt of
Action Taken Notes from the various Ministries/Departments over the years, which
had become a chronic feature, the PAC (2008-09) took stock of the situation and
asked the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure — Monitoring Cell), to
7

8
look into the matter and expedite submission of the Action Taken Notes. As per the
information furnished by the Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure, Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes in respect of about 2500 paras were pending with the
various Ministries/Departments as on 1st September, 2008. Taking a serious view of
the inordinate delays in submission of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes by
various Ministries/Departments the Public Accounts Committee (2008-09) summoned
the Secretary, Ministry of  Finance (Department of Expenditure) for a briefing on the
matter on 15th September, 2008 wherein the Secretary (Expenditure) was directed to
take necessary action for furnishing all the pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
Notes to the Public Accounts Committee within a period of three months i.e. by
14th December, 2008. Subsequently, the then Chairman, PAC (2008-09) also wrote a
letter to the Hon'ble Prime Minister seeking his kind intervention in the matter so
that the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were furnished expeditiously by all
the Ministries/Departments concerned to the Public Accounts Committee, within the
stipulated time period. The Public Accounts Committee (2008-09) review of the
position with regard to submission of pending Action Taken Notes by various
Ministries/Departments at their sitting held on 19th January, 2009 had revealed that
there was no perceptible improvement in the furnishing of Action Taken Notes by
the defaulting Ministries/Departments. At the first sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2009-10) held on 7th September, 2009 the matter regarding large pendency
of Action Taken Notes in various Ministries/Departments was again brought to the
notice of the Committee by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. Thereupon,
the Committee considering the gravity of the problem decided to select the subject
for detailed examination.
[Sl. No. 2, Part-II, Para-2 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Considered views/observations of the Committee for selection of the subject
matter of the PAC report regarding non — compliance by Ministries/Departments in
timely submission of Action Taken Notes on non — selected Audit Paras for detailed
examination, have been noted. No specific action is called for in the matter.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O. No. 806/152/Rep. C/2010, dated 16.12.2010.
Observation/Recommendation No. 4
According to the Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure the responsibility
to furnish Action Taken Notes is primarily that of respective Ministries/Departments.
One of the reasons attributed by the concerned Ministries/Departments for the delays
in submission of Action Taken Notes is excessive time taken in data collection by
the field offices. It is to be noted that the Committee find that the same reason was
adduced by the Ministry as far back as 1995 at the time of the deliberation by
the Committee on the subject. Obviously, the administrative Ministries/
Departments concerned have not  taken any concrete measures since then to

9
streamline their procedures so as to ensure that field offices furnish data to them in
a fixed time frame in order to facilitate timely submission of Action Taken Notes to
the Public Accounts Committee, which is anything but regrettable. Another reason
cited by the Ministries/Departments for the delay is longer time taken by the Audit
in clearing/vetting the Action Taken Notes. Though in certain cases there may be
some delay on the part of the Audit, it may not be correct to transfer responsibility
on the Audit for delays which are primarily on account of the indifference of the line
Ministries/Departments. Audit has also brought to the  notice of the Committee on
several occasions the delays on the part of large number of Ministries/Departments
in submission of Action Taken Notes. To obviate such delays which are avoidable,
the Committee desire that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure —
Monitoring Cell), in coordination with Audit and the concerned Ministries/
Departments should find a workable solution for expeditious submission of Action
Taken Notes to  the Committee. The Committee be kept informed of the initiatives
taken in this regard.
[Sl. No. 4, Part-II, Para-4 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
It is admitted that delays take place on the part of the Ministries/Departments
in submission of finalised ATNs to PAC through Monitoring Cell on account of the
following main reasons:
(i) Contents of some of the audit observations relate to various autonomous
bodies and attached offices under Ministries/Departments as well as
various centrally sponsored schemes and programmes which are
implemented by State Governments/UTs through grants-in-aid. It takes
considerably long time to collect data/requisite information from the field
formations spread across the country and also from State Governments/
UTs to facilitate preparation of Action Taken Note on audit paras.
(ii) Non-availability of timely information/clarifications from some other
Ministries/Departments in respect of audit observations which relate to
more than one Ministry/Department and involve inter-ministerial
consultations.
(iii) Some Ministries/Departments have been facing difficulties in getting the
Hindi Translation of the vetted A TNs on audit paras causing delay in
submission of copies of finalised ATNs to PAC.
(iv) Delays in finalization/vetting of draft action taken notes by audit
authorities in some cases.
However, in pursuance of the recommendations of the Committee, all the
Ministries/Departments are being requested by the Department of Expenditure on
regular basis to take concerted efforts to liquidate pending Audit Paras. Progress of
settlement of pending Audit paras have also been reviewed in the meeting taken by
Secretary (Exp.) and Finance Minister with Financial Advisors of the Ministries/
Departments held on 22nd September, 2010 and 29th October, 2010 respectively.

10
In Secretary (Exp.) review meeting, Financial Advisors were requested to play a
proactive role to ensure that Department with large outstanding paras should make
special efforts to reduce the pendency.
In their vetting remarks, Audit have desired to know whether various measures
taken by Department of Expenditure would result in better compliance to CAG's Audit
Reports. Since as a result of various steps initiated by the Department of Expenditure,
the pendency position of audit paras in many Ministries/Department has come down,
it is expected that in future these measures will ensure effective monitoring of pending
audit paras leading to expeditious settlement of audit paras by Ministries/
Departments.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O. No. 806/152/Rep. C/2010 dated 16.12.2010.
Observation/Recommendation No. 5
The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) that several measures have been taken by them during
the last one and half years to expedite submission of Action Taken Notes pending
with the various Ministries/Departments. These include issue of  reminders to various
Ministries/Departments at the level of Secretary Expenditure/CGA/Additional CGA,
one to one meeting taken by the Secretary (Expenditure) with the Financial Advisors
of the major defaulting Ministries/Departments; conducting of one day workshop in
Vigyan Bhavan on 27th Novemeber, 2008 to interact with representatives of all the
Ministries/Departments and Audit to facilitate interaction and reduce the time in
finalization of Action Taken Notes. It was also stated that Hon'ble Finance Minister
took a meeting on October 29, 2009, with Financial Advisors of various Ministries/
Departments emphasizing expeditious submission of Action Taken Notes to the
Committee. The Committee note that despite these measures taken by the Monitoring
Cell, no perceptible change has taken place in the settlement of pending Action Taken
Report. This is illustrated by the fact that in respect of 1891 Audit paras, Action
Taken Notes were not furnished to the Audit by the concerned Ministries/
Departments even for the first time. Obviously, the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) have not taken any concrete steps or set up any
mechanism to ensure that the Action Taken Notes are furnished to the Committee
within the stipulated time. What is perturbing is the fact that delays in certain cases
ranged from 4 to 10 years. The Committee regret to note that this state of affairs
have not improved even after the presentation of the 9th Report of PAC
(11th Lok Sabha) on the same subject way back in 1997 and problem persists to
date. The Committee express the hope that the Department of Expenditure would
realise the seriousness of the problem and take all possible steps to clear the
pendency of Action Taken Notes within the stipulated time frame. The Committee
are informed that a computerised monitoring system to monitor processing of Action
Taken Notes on Audit Paras is being developed by the  Department of Expenditure
(Monitoring Cell). The Committee expect that computerised monitoring system will
assist in keeping track of the pendency of Action Taken Notes at various stages and
help in speeding up the submission of Action Taken Notes and also minimise/eliminate

11
discrepancies in the figures being maintained by Monitoring Cell and C&AG's Office.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the progress made in this regard
as also its efficacy within three months of the presentation of the Report to
Parliament.
[Sl. No. 5, Part-II, Para-5 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Present status of development of the centralized e-monitoring system for audit paras
is as under:—
In compliance of the directions given by the PAC in its 11th report
(15th Lok Sabha) a computerised web based monitoring system known as Audit Para
Monitoring System (APMS) has been developed in the office of CGA in consultation
with National Informatics Center (NIC). The software for this has been developed by
September, 2010 and is presently being tested prior to installation at the regular
Serverat NIC data center at Hyderabad. Few Ministries have been called for 'hands
on' demonstration. All Ministries will be given hands on training batch-wise, when a
regular server gets installed. The developer will continue to maintain, support and
work on some more features which will be an ‘enhancement’  to make this software
more user friendly. Monitoring Cell has uploaded audit paras in the local server, which
will be transferred to the regular server. The following are the features of this software:
(a) The stakeholders are (i) Office of CGA (Monitor/Admn); (ii) Mins/Depts;
(iii) Audit/C&AG; (iv) Lok Sabha Sectt. (PAC Branch). Each Min/Depts
will be given their login id/password by the administrator/Office of CGA.
(b) All reports of C&AG will be uploaded by the Monitor/Office of CGA along
with details (year-wise, Para-wise, report-wise & subject) in pdf format.
(c) Mins/Depts users will upload Draft/Final ATNs. The final ATNs will be
submitted to Lok Sabha Sectt. through Monitor/Office of CGA. The
detailed A TNs will be available in attached files for ready reference. The
various stages of submission of ATNs can be viewed on the portal.
(d) Alerts/Reminders/Standing orders/circulars for submission of draft/final
A TNs as per the due dates will be displayed in various colours on the
dashboard.
(e) All iteration/stages of Audit paras will be captured in the Report portal
with details such as (i) date of submission of draft A TN by the Min/Depts
to Audit, (ii) date of draft vetting of ATN by the Audit, (iii) date of
resubmission of revised A TN by the Min/Dept to Audit, (iv) date of final
vetting by Audit, (v) date of submission of the final A TN by Min/Depts
(in bilingual) to Monitoring Cell (MC), (vi) date of submission of the vetted
ATN by MC to Lok Sabha Sectt. (PAC).
(f) In the 'Report' portal, all stakeholders will be able to view their total
pending A TNs, status of submitted A TNs, and cleared ATNs, thereby
facilitating them to monitor their concern at all stages.

12
With this development, the portal will be made available to the Ministries/C&AG
office/PAC branch and other stakeholders for facilitation of speedy liquidation of
pending audit paras as well as for reconciliation of discrepancies in the figures of
pending A TNs.
In their vetting remarks, Audit have desired to know whether the new monitoring
system has the provision to track and update the pendeny status as soon as A TNs
on current audit paras become due for submission to  PAC and whether the system
has played a role in better tracking of individual ATNs. It is clarified that the
computerised audit para monitoring system (APMS) will become operational after
installation of the regular Server at NIC data center at Hyderabad. The APMS has all
necessary provisions for better tracking/monitoring of all stages of submission of
A TNs on pending audit paras as well as status of settled A TNs. It is expected that
monitoring mechanism will be more effective after operationalisation of APMS. Further
progress in this regard will be apprised to PAC and audit later on.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O. No. 806/152/Rep. C/2010 dated 16.12.2010.
Observation/Recommendation No. 7
In a communication forwarded to the PAC Secretariat the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure — Monitoring Cell) have brought to the notice of the
Committee that CBDT and Office of C&AG at the meeting held on 31.03.2009 and
07.09.2009 have mutually agreed not to further pursue Action Taken Notes in respect
of 1092 Paras in view of acceptance of the Audit observations by the Department of
Revenue and remedial action taken/initiated. These Action Taken Notes relate to
399 Paras contained in the C&AG Report for the year 2007-08 and 693 Action Taken
Notes relating to various Paras contained in the C & AG Reports from 1999-2000 to
2006-07. Consequently, the Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) has sought
the approval of the Public Accounts Committee for striking off these paras from the
consolidated list of pending Audit paras. The Committee concur with the decision
taken by the CBDT and the Audit in the matter and gave their approval for striking
off the aforesaid Paras from the list of outstanding Audit paras.
[Sl. No. 7, Part-II, Para-7 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
In consonance of the concurrence accorded by the PAC in para 7 under
reference, CBDT was asked by the Department of Expenditure to delete total
1092 paras in respect of the C&AG report from 1999-2000 to 2007-08 from their pending
list in view of acceptance of audit observations/remedial action taken by them. CBDT
have confirmed that they have deleted these paras from their pending list.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O. No. 806/152/Rep. C/2010 dated 16.12.2010.

13
Observation/Recommendation No. 8
The Committee regret to note the assurance given by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) in the 105th Report of PAC (10th Lok Sabha) that the
matter regarding delays in submission of Action Taken Notes by various Ministries/
Departments would be placed before the Committee of Secretaries, had not been
complied with by the Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell even after a lapse
of 13 years since the presentation of the Report. During the evidence taken on
5th March, 2010, the Secretary (Expenditure) expressed ignorance on this crucial matter.
Subsequently, the Ministry, in their post evidence reply informed the Committee that
the matter has now been brought to the notice of the Cabinet Secretary requesting
that a meeting of the Committee of Secretaries may be held in April 2010. The Committee
desire that henceforth, the matter relating to delays in submission of Action Taken
Notes should be brought before the Committee of Secretaries periodically, preferably
at quarterly intervals so as to expedite the submission of Action Taken Notes by all
the defaulting Ministries/Departments.
[Sl. No. 8, Part-II, Para-8 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
In compliance of the recommendations of the Committee, progress of resolution
of outstanding audit paras by Ministries/Departments is being reviewed by the
Committee of Secretaries chaired by Cabinet Secretary on quarterly basis. Already,
two meetings of the Committee of Secretaries (COS) chaired by Cabinet Secretary
with the Secretaries/Chairmen of the major defaulting Ministries/Departments such
as Defence, Railways, Health and Family Welfare, Telecommunications, Revenue,
CBDT and CBEC have been held on 17th June and 2nd November 2010 to review the
progress of settlement of pending audit/PAC paras. Secretary (Exp) CGA and
Dy. C&AG also participated in the COS meetings. Following are the important
decisions taken in the COS meetings:
Decisions taken in COS meeting held on 17th June 2010
(i) Secretaries of Ministries/Departments as Chief Accounting Authorities
will be personally responsible for ensuring that ATNs/A TRs on Audit
Paras/PAC Reports are finalised within the prescribed time frame.
(ii) S tanding Audit Committee to be constituted in each Ministry/Department
as the nodal agency to monitor and review the submission of ATNs on
Audit Paras and to take appropriate remedial measures.
(iii) T imely submission of ATNs/ATRs may be included as one of the targets
in the Results Framework Document (RFD) of the each Ministry/
Department as the responsibility of the Chief Accounting Authority and
assigned a weightage of two points.

14
(iv) During the next three months, all Ministries/Departments will ensure that
pendency of ATNs/ATRs is brought down by at least 50% of the present
pendency.
Secretaries/Financial Advisors of all the Ministries/Departments were advised
by Secretary (Exp.) to implement the above decisions taken in the COS meetings.
Decisions taken in COS meeting held on 2nd November, 2010
(i) All Ministries/Departments will ensure that the current pendency of audit
paras is further reduced by 50% by end March 2011.
(ii) The concerned Ministries/Departments will also ensure that first response
in all cases is sent to Audit latest by end December 2010.
(iii) The concerned Ministries/Departments will also ensure that all remaining
SACs are set up and at least one ATN Adalat/Workshop is held, by end
December 2010.
(iv) The next meeting of the COS will be held in January, 2011 to review the
progress on settlement of audit paras/PAC recommendations, submission
of first responses, setting up of SACs and holding A TN Adalats/
Workshops.
Cabinet Secretary reviewed the progress made by various Ministries/
Departments in  liquidation of pending Paras and observed that in terms of earlier
COS decisions, out of 4216 pending audit paras outstanding as in June 2010, 1932
Paras (representing approx 50% of the pending paras) have been settled and 17
Ministries have achieved 50% reduction while another 5 Ministries have achieved
reduction upto 49%. Secretary (Exp.) has also communicated the above decisions
taken in the  COS meeting to all Secretaries as Chief Accounting Authorities for
implementation vide O.M. dated 29th November 2010 (copy enclosed).
In their vetting remarks, Audit while appreciating the above steps initiated by
the Department of Expenditure for timely submission of A TNs by Ministries/
Departments, have observed that quality of the ATNs furnished by the Ministries
should be maintained by taking corrective actions as actually required/pointed out
in the audit paras and uniformity of prescribed format for submitting ATNs should
be strictly adhered to by the Ministries. In this context, a copy of the Department of
Expenditure's O.M. dated 10.06.2004 issued to all the Ministries advising to ensure
submission of ATNs in proper format is enclosed. Progress made in this regard will
be intimated to PAC/Audit later on.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O.No. 806/152/Rep. C/2010 dated 16.12.2010.

US (MC) No. 12(2)E-Coord. 2010)
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(E-Coord. Branch)
New Delhi, the 29th  November, 2010
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Non-submission/delay in submission of Action Taken Notes/Action
Taken Report—follow up to COS Meeting on November 2, 2010
regarding.
In a recent COS meeting chaired by the Cabinet Secretary on November 2, 2010,
while it was noted that considerable progress had been made to clear the pending
ATNs/ATRs on CAG Audit Paras and PAC recommendations, it was decided that
the following action may be taken:
(i) All Ministries/Departments may ensure that the current pendency of audit
paras is further reduced by 50% by end March, 2011.
(ii) Ministries/Departments may ensure that first response on Audit Paras
in all cases is sent latest by end December, 2010.
(iii) Ministries/Department which have not yet set up SACs or have not held
any workshop/Adalat will also ensure that all remaining SACs are set up
and at least one Adalat/Workshop is held by end December, 2010.
(iv) Except for D/o Revenue, D/o Telecom, M/o Railways and M/o Defence,
other Departments/Ministries are not to include a C&AG representative
on their Standing Audit Committee (SAC) and if done so already to issue
revised composition of SACs. Department of Expenditure had on
November 4, 2010 written to all the Departments/Ministries in this context.
2. The next meeting of the COS will be held in January, 2011 to review the
progress on settlement of audit paras/PAC recommendations, submission of first
responses, settling up SACs and holding Adalats/Workshops.
3. All Secretaries as Chief Accounting Authorities may note the above for
implementation.
Sd/-
(Sushama Nath)
Secretary (Expenditure)
1.   All Secretaries to Government of India.
2.   All FAs.
3.   CGA.
15

IMMEDIA TE
F.No. 5/1/2004-MC
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(Monitoring Cell)
Room No. 29, Second Floor, B-Wing,
Loknayak Bhawan, Khan Market,
New Delhi-110 003, the 10th June, 2004.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Remedial/Corrective action taken notes on Paragraphs of the reports
of C&AG of India.
The undersigned is directed to say that, while expressing serious concern over
inordinate delays in submission of ATNs on Audit Paras figuring in C&AG's Reports,
the Lok Sabha Secretariat in their O.M. No 4/5/2003-PAC dated 3.6.2004, have also
pointed to some procedural inadequacies in the submission of ATNs, such as, Action
Taken Notes not being furnished in a proper format particularly the ATNs on
Paragraphs contained in Audit Reports relating to Direct Taxes and Indirect Taxes;
non-furnishing of one advance copy of the ATNs to the Lok Sabha Secretariat while
sending vetted ATNs to the Monitoring Cell; English and Hindi Versions of the ATNs
not being furnished simultaneously etc.
2. Based on the observations of the Lok Sabha Secretariat in the aforesaid
O.M. as well as instructions being reiterated in various communications, Ministries/
Departments are requested to ensure the following while submitting the ATNs to the
Monitoring Cell for onward transmission to the Lok Sabha Secretariat:—
(i) Remedial/Corrective action taken notes on all paras of the C&AG's
Reports be submitted to the Lok Sabha Secretariat through Monitoring
Cell within stipulated period of four months from the date of laying of
Audit Reports on the Table of the House, as otherwise the very purpose
of seeking Remedial/Corrective ATNs would get defeated if the submission
of Action Taken Notes is delayed inordinately.
(ii) A TNs on audit paragraphs be furnished in proper format (Copy annexed)
in a separate page alongwith its Hindi version simultaneously. Paragraph
No., Audit Report No. and year, specific subject of the paragraph, Name
of Ministry/Department etc. should be clearly indicated in each A TN.
Action taken Notes not furnished in proper format and also not
accompanied with Hindi version will not be accepted.
(iii) One advance copy of each ATN both in English and Hindi versions
should simultaneously be supplied to Lok Sabha Secretariat while sending
the ATNs to Monitoring Cell.
16

17
(iv) In the letter forwarding ATNs to Monitoring Cell and in all other
communications to be sent to Lok Sabha Secretariat contact numbers/
Fax numbers should be variably indicated.
Sd/-
(T.S. Negi)
Under Secretary of the Government of India
Tele. No. 24626829
1. Financial Advisors/Joint Secretaries (Finance) of all the Ministries/Departments
of the Government of India.
2. Copy forwarded for information and necessary action to all Ministries/
Departments of the Government of India.
3. Financial Commissioner, Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) New Delhi.
4. Chairman (CBEC and CBDT), Department of Revenue, North Block, New Delhi.
5. Member (Finance), Deptt. of Telecom/Posts, Sanchar/Dak Bhavan, New Delhi.
6. CCA, Department of Atomic Energy, Bombay.
7. CCA, Department of Space, Bangalore.
Copy forwarded for information to Smt. Anita B. Panda, Under Secretary, Lok Sabha
Secretariat, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi w.r.t. O.M. No. 4/5/2003/PAC dated

3.6.2004.
FORMAT OF A TN FOR THE USE OF CONCERNED MINISTRIES/DEPTTS.
APPENDIX  III
(Vide para 53)
Format of Action Taken Note (on Paragraphs of C&AG Reports)
I. (a) Ministry/Department.
(b) Subject/title of the Review/Paragraph.
(c) Paragraph No.
(d) Report No. and year.
II. (a) Date of receipt of the Draft.
Paragraph/Review in the Ministry.
(b) Date of Ministry's reply.
III. Gist of Paragraph/Review.
IV . (a) Do the Ministry agree with the facts
and figures included in the Paragraph?
(b) If not, please indicate the areas of
disagreement and also attach
documents in support.
V. (a) Main Audit conclusions:
1. Deficiency in the existing system
including system of internal control.
2. Failure to follow the systems and
procedure.
3. Failure of individuals.
4. Amount of loss/short assessment/short
levy.
(b) Do the Ministry agree with the Audit
conclusions? If not, please indicate
specific areas of disagreement, reasons for disagreement and also
attach copies of relevant documents,
where necessary.
VI. Remedial actions taken:
(i) Improvement in system and
procedures including internal controls.
(ii) Recovery of overpayment pointed out
18

19
by Audit.
(iii) Recovery of under assessment, short
levy or other dues;
(iv) W rite off of amount of losses/waste
expenditure/irrecoverable amount;
(v) Modification in the scheme; and
including financing pattern
(vi) Review of similar cases/complete
scheme/project in the light of findings
of sample check by Audit.
Observation/Recommendation No. 9
The Committee note that there is variation in the figures furnished by the
Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure and the Office of C&AG relating to
pending Action Taken Notes in various Ministries/Departments. According to the
latest information furnished by the Monitoring Cell of the Department of Expenditure,
Ministry of Finance as on 15th March, 2010, Action Taken Notes in respect of
4934 paras, contained in the Audit Reports from 1997-98 to 2007-08 are pending in
various Ministries/Departments. However, this figure is at variance with that furnished
by Audit. According to the information furnished by the Audit, Action Taken Notes
in respect of 3450 Audit Paras are pending from different Ministries/Departments as
on February, 2010. The Ministry have informed the Committee that the conciliation
is an on-going process between Ministries/Departments and Audit and the problem
is more acute in the Department of Revenue viz. CBDT and CBEC. Further the
reconciliation also needs to be done in respect of Scientific Ministries where Audit
has shown large number of old paras outstanding, while the Ministries are showing
them as cleared. The Committee trust that the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) will coordinate with the various Ministries/Departments and the Audit
so that the figures relating to pending Action Taken Notes are reconciled and a precise
figure is arrived at. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in
this regard within three months from the date of presentation of this Report.
[Sl. No. 9, Part-II, Para-9 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The Committee pointed out variation in the figures of pending A TNs
(1484 nos.) between the pendency position reported by Monitoring Cell and Audit
in respect of C&AG reports from 1997-98 to 2007-08. As per Monitoring Cell, total
4934 paras were reported as pending as on 15th March, 2010 as against audit figures
of  3450 as on February, 2010.  Comparative statement indicating variation in pendency
position as on September, 2010 (Ministry-wise) reported by Monitoring Cell and Audit
is attached. It may be noted that there have been considerable reduction in the

20
variation of pending ATNs between Monitoring Cell and Audit. In compliance of the
recommendation of the Committee, Monitoring Cell of  Department of Expenditure
have been coordinating with the concerned Ministries on regular basis, requesting
for reconciliation of difference in the pendency position reported by Monitoring Cell
and Audit and for submission of reconciled pending status after consultation with
the office of C&AG on priority basis. Audit have also been separately requested to
get the discrepancies in the figures of pending ATNs reconciled in consultation with
concerned Ministries and to provide the reconciled status to the Department of
Expenditure vide D.O. letters dated 4.11.2010 and 22.11.2010 (copy enclosed). Further,
with the commencement of the e-monitoring of submission of ATNs on audit paras
at various stages, the possibility of discrepancy in the pendency position will be
minimized substantially.
In their vetting remarks, Audit have observed that a mechanism needs to be
put in place to ensure that finalised A TNs are submitted by the Ministries to the
PAC/Monitoring Cell/Audit. It is stated that with the commencement of computerized
monitoring of audit paras, all the stakeholders/C&AG office/PAC branch will be able
to view the status of pending A TNs/Submitted A TNs/settled A TNs. Further, audit
have viewed that presence of both the Audit and Ministry's representatives are
necessary during the reconciliation process. In this regard a copy of Jt. CGA's D.O.
letter dated 16.12.2010 to Audit H.Q. (with the request to hold a meeting with all
concerned audit offices and departments for reconciliation of the discrepancies in
the figures of pending ATNs) is attached. Reconciled pending status of audit paras
will be apprised to PAC and Audit later on.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O. No. 806/152/Rep. C/2010 dated 16.12.2010.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 10 of Chapter-I.

Hkkjr ljdkj
egkys[kk fu;a=d dk;kZy;
foÙk ea=ky;
O;; foHkkx
lkroha eafty] ^lh* foax
yksd uk;d Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110 003
Government of India
Office of Controller General of Accounts
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
7th Floor, ‘C’ Wing,
Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi-110 003
Tel: 24690500 Fax: 24651591
D.O. Letter No. 1/11/2010-MC Date: 4th November, 2010
Dear,
Please refer to Ms. Rekha Gupta, Dy. C&AG's D.O. letter, No. 138/110/Rep.
(Central), 2010 dated 28.10.2010 to Secy. (Exp.) regarding the meeting of COS wherein
it was inter-alia intimated that total 2811 ATNs on CAG Paras are pending as on
20.09.2010, as per record of Audit. In  this connection, I would like to mention that as
per information available with Monitoring Cell, total 2284 A TNs in respect of Audit
reports upto 2009 are pending against various Ministries as on 30.09.2010. Comparative
statement indicating difference in pendency position has been attached. Further, in
pursuance of recommendations of PAC in its 11th report of 15th Lok Sabha, Financial
Advisers of all Ministries/Departments were requested in August and October, 2010 to
take expeditious action to reconcile the discrepancies in the figures of pending ATNs
in consultation with the office of C&AG and furnish updated reconciled pending
position. Copies of Department's O.M. dated 11.08.2010 and 01.10.2010 are enclosed.
This Department's O.M. of even No. dated 11.08.2010 and 01.10.2010 to you also refer.
I shall be grateful, if you could kindly look into the matter personally and arrange
to get the discrepancies in the figures of pending ATNs reconciled in consultation
with the concerned Ministries on priority basis and make available to us, the
reconciled pending status of A TNs, Ministry-wise latest by 18.11.2010, to enable us
to prepare Action Taken Report on the PAC recommendations contained in the
11th Report of PAC (of 15th Lok Sabha).
Regards
Yours Sincerely,
Sd/-
(Archana Nigam)
Smt. Subha Kumar,
Principal Director (Report Central),
O/o the C&AG of India,
9, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Marg,
ARCHANA NIGAM
ADDL. CONTROLLER GENERAL
OF ACCOUNTS
21

22
New Delhi-110 024
List of 14 Ministries/Departments
FA, M/o Commerce and Industry
FA, M/o Urban Development
Secy. (Defence Fin.), M/o Defence
Financial Commissioner, M/o Railways
Member (Finance), M/O Telecom
CCA, M/o Atomic Energy
FA, M/o Information Technology
FA, M/o Science and Technology
FA, M/o Scientific and Industrial Research
Addl. Secy. M/o Space
FA, M/o ICAR
Director, CBDT
Commissioner (PAC), Excise
Director, Customs

23
Status of Pending ATNs on CAG Paras as on 30th September, 2010
S. Ministry/Department No. of Paras (in T otal No. of Paras V ariation in the
No. respect of CAG (in respect of CAG figures of pending
reports upto 2009) reports upto 2010) A TNs (excluding
pending as on 30th pending as on new paras) as on
September, 2010 as 20th Sept., 2010 September, 2010 in
per information as reported by respect of CAG
available with Audit Reports upto the
Monitoring Cell year 2009.
1 2  3 45
1. Finance (Exp/Eco. Affairs/ 19 17 2
Financial Services/Admn./
Deptt. of Revenue)
2. Information & Broadcasting 5 8 3
3. Health & F.W. (Including 43 39 4
ICMR)
4. Culture 13 13 0
5. Tribal Affairs 4 4 0
6. Human Resource Development 29 41 1
(Hr. Education & School Edu.)  (28+13 New  paras)
7. External Affairs 22 25 3
8. Social Justice & Empowerment 4 3 1
9. Law & Justice 1 1 0
10. Home 7 7 0
11. Labour 3 3 0
12. Women & C.D. 2 3 1
13. Overseas Affairs 1 1 0
14. Textiles 5 5 0
15. Tourism 4 5 1
16. Water Resources 0 1 1
17. Commerce & Industries 8 3 5
18. Rural Development 3 3 0
19. Urban Development 24 81 54
(78+3 New paras)
20. Road & Transport 0 1 1
21. Statistics & Planning 1 1 0
22. Personnel and P&G 1 1 0
23. Youth Affairs 3 3 0

24
1 2  3 45
24. Consumer Affairs 1 1 0
25. Shipping 12 25 2
(14+11 New paras)
26. Agriculture 2 2 0
27. Small Scale & Medium 0 2 0
Enterprises ( 2 New paras)
28. Defence 120 155 35
29. Revenue (Direct Taxes) 1079 1247 168
30. Revenue (Indirect T axes) 178 239 61
31. Revenue (Customs) 202 224 22
32. Railways 372 477 1
(373 + 104 New paras)
33. Telecommunication & Posts 61 29 32
(Telecom 43 + (Telecom 12 +
Post 16) Post 17)
34. Ayush 0 0 0
35. Coal 0 0 0
36. Civil Aviation 0 0 0
37. Power 0 0 0
38. Housing & U.P.A. 0 0 0
39. Food Processing Industries 0 0 0
40. Bio-Technology 0 0 0
41. Chemical & Petro Chemical 0 0 0
42. Land Resources 0 0 0
43. Panchayati Raj 0 0 0
44. Fertilizer 0 0 0
45. Corporate Affairs 0 0 0
46. Petroleum & N.G .
47. Steel 0 0 0
48. Pharmaceuticals 0 0 0
49. Disinvestment 0 0 0
50. Industrial Policy & Promotion 0 0 0

25
1 2  3 45
51. Minority Affairs 0 0 0
52. North-Eastern Region 1 1 0
53. Atomic Energy 8 32 24
54. Information Technology 3 10 7
55. Science & Tech. 7 13 6
56. Scientific & Ind. 8 45 37
Research
57. Space 2 5 3
58. Geological Survey of 2 2 0
India/Mines
59. Ind. Council of 4 12 8
Agri. Research
60. Earth Sciences 6 5 1
61. Environment & Forest 13 11 2
62. New & Renewable 1 2 1
Energy
63. Centre for Development of - 3 3
Telematics
Total 2284 2811 (including 133
new paras for the
current year, 2010)

Hkkjr ljdkj
egkys[kk fu;a=d dk;kZy;
foÙk ea=ky;
O;; foHkkx
lkroha eafty] ^lh* foax
yksd uk;d Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110 003
Government of India
Office Of Controller General Of Accounts
Ministry Of Finance
Department Of Expenditure
7th Floor, 'C' Wing,
Lok Nayak Bhavan, New Delhi-110 003
Tel: 24690500 Fax: 24651591
D.O. Letter No. 1/11/2010-MC Date: 19th/22nd November, 2010
Dear,
Please refer to this Department's O.Ms. of even No. dated 11.08.2010 and
01.10.2010 regarding reconciliation of discrepancy in the figure of pending Action
Taken Notes on C&AG  paras in pursuance of the PAC recommendations contained
in its Eleventh Report (15th Lok Sabha). As you are, PAC have expressed displeasure
over the variation in the figures of pending ATNs which need to be reconciled
between Audit and Ministries/Departments to arrive at a precise figure. I would like
to inform that as desired by PAC, the progress made in this regard needs to be
incorporated inthe Action Taken Note of Monitoring Cell of the Department and of
A TN on the 11th report of PAC, duly vetted by Audit is required to be sent to PAC
latest by the extended timeframe i.e. by 09.12.2010. Copies of list of Pending Audit
Paras as on 10.09.2010 in respect of C&AG reports upto 2009 as per data available
with Monitoring Cell as well as the list provided by Audit as pending as on 20.09.2010
(including current Paras) in respect of your Ministry/Department are enclosed for
ready reference.
I shall be grateful, if you could kindly look into the matter personally and arrange
to get the discrepancies in the figures of pending ATNs reconciled in consultation
with the office of  C&AG on priority basis and make available to us reconciled pending
status of A TNs, latest by 26.11.2010 positively to facilitate preparation of Action
Taken Note. Concerned Under Secretaries Section Officer may be deputed to
Monitoring Cell along with reconciled pending status of ATNs (year-wise/para-wise)
latest by 29.11.2010
Regards
Yours Sincerely,
Sd/-
(Archana Nigam)
ARCHANA NIGAM
ADDL. CONTROLLER GENERAL
OF ACCOUNTS
26

27
Concerned Financial Advisers of 14 Ministries/Departments where major difference
in the figures of pending ATNs have been noticed (as per list enclosed)
Raj Kumar, Commissioner (PAC), CBEC (Central Excise) Hudco Vishala Building,
S.K. Gotru, Director (CBDT) Hudco Vishala Building.
R.P. Singh, Director, CBEC (Customs) North Block
Ms. Shubha Kumar for necessary action w.r. to D.O. letter dated 04.11.2010.
Principal Director (Report Central)
O/o of the C&AG of India,
9, Deen Dayal Upadhyay Marg,
New Delhi-110 024
Sd/-
(Archana Nigam)

Hkkjr ljdkj
egkys[kk fu;a=d dk;kZy;
foÙk ea=ky;
O;; foHkkx
yksd uk;d Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110 011
Government of India
Office Of Controller General Of Accounts
Ministry Of Finance
Department Of Expenditure
Lok Nayak Bhavan New Delhi-110 011
Telefax: 24624614
D.O. letter No. 1/11/2010-MC 16th December, 2010
Dear,
Please refer to your letter No. 747/Report Central/2010 dated 09.11.2010 and
Smt. Archana Nigam, Addl. CGA's D.O. letter of even no. dated 22.11.2010 for
furnishing reconciled status on pending A TNs on audit paras (Ministry-wise)
in pursuance of the PAC recommendations contained in its Eleventh Report
(15th Lok Sabha).
As per feedback received from some Departments, main reasons for
discrepancies in the reported pendency of A TNs are (i) some Departments have
included commercial paras in their pending list whereas audit as well as Monitoring
Cell are not showing them as pending (ii) Some Departments have shown total no.
of sub-paras as pending paras whereas audit have treated only main paras as pending
and have not shown sub-paras in their pending list (iii) Pendency position reported
by Monitoring Cell to COS in respect of CAG reports was upto 2007-08 as on
30.09.2010 whereas audit have indicated pendency in respect of reports upto
2008-09 as on 20.09.2010 (iv) Monitoring Cell has been reporting the position of settled
paras only after receipt of copies of finalised vetted ATNs (in bilingual) from
Departments whereas some of the audit offices dealing with paras pertaining to CBDT,
CBEC and Scientific Departments are showing paras as settled at vetting stage
resulting in discrepancy in the pending status. It is understood that some other offices
of audit are showing settled paras at final stage after receipt of copy of finalised
vetted ATNs from Departments.
Since all offices of audit are not following uniform practice while reporting settled
paras, I shall be grateful if office of C&AG HQ (Report) may kindly consider to issue
necessary guidelines to all concerned audit offices to follow the uniform procedure
of reporting the position of settled paras only after receipt of copies of finalised
vetted ATNs (in bilingual) from Departments. It is also suggested that Audit HQ
may like to hold a meeting with all concerned audit offices and Departments for
ehñ Jh/kju
la;qDr egkys[kk fu;a=d
M. SRIDHARAN
JOINT CONTROLLER GENERAL OF
ACCOUNTS
28

29
reconciliation of the discrepancies in the figures of pending A TNs. I shall be grateful
if you could kindly arrange to expedite Ministry-wise reconciled status of pending
A TNs separately in respect of paras upto report year 2007-08 and 2008-09 as per
attached format indicating updated position latest by 3rd January, 2011. I would also
like to inform that in future, as and when copies of finalised/settled A TNs, on receipt
from Departments, are sent to PAC branch of Lok Sabha Secretariat by Monitoring
Cell, a list of the same will be forwarded to Audit HQ (Report) for information/record.
Regards
Yours Sincerely,
Sd/-
(M. Sridharan)
Ms. Shubha Kumar
Principal Director (Report Central)
O/o of the C&AG of India,
9, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg,
New Delhi-110 024
Copy to:
Jt. Secy. (Pers.), for Information,
DOE, North Block, New Delhi.

30
Updated reconciled status of pending ATNs Format
 Name No. of Paras No. of Paras No. of Paras No. of new Total No. of
 of Pendings as on Pending as Pending as Paras as on old and new
 Min./ 30.9.10 in r/o on 20.09 .10/30. on 15.12.10 15.12.10 in r/o paras Pending
 Dept. CAG reports 09.2010, duly in r/o CAG CAG reports for as on 15.12.10
upto 2007-08 reconciled, reports upto 2008-09 as per In r/o CAG
as Reported to as per Audit 2007-08 as Audit reports upto
COS (Figures in r/o CA G per Audit 2008-09 as
indicated to reports per Audit
Audit)
Upto      Upto T otal  Pending
2007-     2008- Paras
08         09 included
in CAG
Reports

31
Observation/Recommendation No. 10
The Committee are of the considered view that the Department of Expenditure—
Monitoring Cell should facilitate conducting Workshop with the participation of
concerned C&AG's officials and the respective defaulting Ministries/Departments
with a view to expedite clearance of pending Action Taken Notes at regular intervals,
atleast once in 3 months. In their post evidence reply the Department of Expenditure—
Monitoring Cell have stated that they have advised the Secretaries of the Ministries/
Departments to establish Action Taken Notes Workshops for enabling the finalization
of Action Taken Notes. The Committee welcomes the step taken by the Department
and expect them to ensure setting up of Action Taken Notes Workshops by all
Ministries/Departments within a definite time frame. The Committee would also like
to be apprised of the progress made in this regard within three months from the
presentation of the Report.
[Sl. No. 10, Part-II, Para-10 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken by the Government
In response to the instructions issued by the Department of Expenditure, as
on September, 2010, 48 Departments have set up Standing Audit Committee (SAC)
as nodal agency to monitor and review the progress of submission of pending ATNs.
However 28 Departments could not hold the meeting of SAC and remaining Ministries
have been reminded to constitute SAC/hold meetings of SAC. As on September,
2010, 14 Ministries have also conducted ATN Adalat/Workshop. Further progress in
setting of SAC and holding of ATN Adalat/Workshop by Ministries/Departments
will be intimated of PAC/Audit in due course of time.
It is submitted that monitoring mechanism at all levels (Ministry and Department
of Expenditure) has been adequately streamlined with the setting up of institutional
mechanism by way of constitution of SAC and ATN Adalat, review of progress in
resolution of pending paras by holding COS meeting on quarterly basis,
operationalisation of centralized computerised monitoring system for timely/
expeditious submission of ATNs on audit paras at the level of Monitoring Cell, users
ministries, audit and PAC branch as envisaged. It is expected that Ministries/
Departments will be able to show considerable improvement in the matter of reduction
of the pending audit paras. Further progress in this regard will be apprised to PAC
and audit later on.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O. No. 806/152/Rep. C/2010 dated 16.12.2010.
Comments of the Committee
 Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I

CHAPTER  III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
-Nil-
32

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation No. 3
The Committee's examination of the pending position regarding submission of
Action Taken Notes by the various Ministries/Departments revealed several
deficiencies in the monitoring mechanism both at the Ministry/Department level as
well as in the Department of Expenditure which is the nodal agency for monitoring
the Action Taken Notes. As per the latest information furnished by the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) as on 15th March, 2010, the
total number of Audit paras in respect of which Action Taken Notes are pending
with various Ministries/Departments from the year 1997-98 to 2007-08 stood at 4934.
Out of the these 3646 paras related to Department of Revenue (3172 CBDT, 462 CBEC
and 12 relating to Department of Revenue), followed by Ministry of Railways (553),
Defence (202), Telecommunication (90) and Health (49). However, as per information
furnished by the Office of C&AG, Audit wing-wise, as of February, 2010, a total of
3450 Action Taken Notes are pending in various Ministries/Departments. Out of these
2208 pertain to Revenue wing comprising Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) and
Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) alone, followed by Railways wing (481),
Defence wing (229), Autonomous Bodies wing (180), Scientific Departments wing
(165), and Civil Ministry wing (142). Further out of these 3450 pending paras, Action
Taken Notes in respect of 1891 paras have not been received in the Audit even for
the first time. Though Action Taken Notes in respect of 960 paras were received by
the Audit, these were returned back to the respective Ministries/Departments and
their re-submission  for further vetting is awaited. Action Taken Notes in respect of
402 paras pertaining to various Ministries/Departments are stated to be under vetting
by Audit. The Committee are dismayed at the large scale pendency of Action Taken
Notes in various Ministries/Departments and also the long periods for which these
are pending. The Non-Compliance by the Ministries/Departments at this scale and
magnitude establishes the indifference of the Ministries/Departments to the
observations/recommendations of the Committee. Such indifference on the part of
Departments Officers/Chief Accounting Officers of the Ministries/Departments
undermines the supervisory role and authority of Parliament and also encourages
financial indiscipline and inefficiency among the rank and file of the field offices in
the Ministries/Departments. The Committee note that as per Rule 64 of General
Financial Rules 2005, one of the primary responsibilities of the Secretary, who is the
Chief Accounting Authority of the concerned Ministry/Department is to submit
Action Taken Notes on CAG's Reports within the prescribed period of four months.
The Committee therefore recommended that  the Chief Accounting Authorities should
be made personally accountable in all cases of abnormal delays in taking remedial
actions and submitting Action Taken Notes to the Public Accounts Committee.
[Sl. No. 3, Part-II, Para-3 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
33

34
Action Taken by the Government
Concern/displeasure expressed by the Committee regarding large scale
pendency of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on Audit paras in various Ministries/
Departments over long periods were communicated by the Department of
Expenditure to concerned Ministries/Departments for compliance/expeditious
settlement of pending ATNs. Instructions were also issued to all the Secretaries of
the Government of India at the level of Secretary (Expenditure) vide Office
Memorandum dated 1st July 2010 (copy enclosed) that they will be personally
responsible/accountable as Chief Accounting Authority for ensuring that Action
Taken Notes on audit paras are finalized within the prescribed time frame. Further, as
a follow up action on the observations of the Committee regarding deficiencies in
the monitoring mechanism both at the level of Ministry/Department and Department
of Expenditure/Monitoring Cell, it is submitted that all the Secretaries of the
Government of India were advised by Secretary (Exp.) vide O.M. dated 1st July 2010
to put in place proper monitoring mechanism by way of setting up of Standing Audit
Committee(SAC) to be chaired by Secretary/Special Secretary including the Financial
Adviser and also conducting ATN Adalat/Workshop to ensure speedy resolution of
pending audit paras. Detailed guidelines for establishment of Standing Audit
Committee in consultation with C&AG were issued vide Department of Expenditure's
O.M. dated 2nd August 2010 (copy enclosed). The nominee of the C&AG will
participate in the SAC in respect of Ministry of Defence, Railways, Department of
Telecommunications and Department of Revenue (CBDT & CBEC) against whom large
number of paras are pending. The SAC, as a nodal agency, will monitor and review
the submission of ATNs on Audit Paras on a monthly basis so as to ensure that all
audit paras are responded to within the stipulated time limit and also take appropriate
remedial measures for systematic and other required changes in order to prevent
recurrence of persistent irregularities pointed out in the audit paras. Simultaneously,
Ministries/Departments have been advised to organise ATN Adalat/Workshop every
quarter inviting representative of audit to resolve and finalise pending ATNs.
As a result of various measures taken by the Department of Expenditure,
position of pending audit paras in various Ministries/Departments  have shown
considerable improvement. The pendency position has come down from 4934 pending
A TNs earlier reported by Monitoring Cell as on 15th March 2010 in respect of CAG
reports from 1997-98 to 2007-08 to 2284 as on 30th September 2010. Out of 2284
pending ATNs, total 848 ATNs (excluding current  year paras) are reported to have
not been sent to Audit even for the first time by the Ministries/Departments as
against 1891  paras reported  by Audit earlier.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O. No. 806/152/Rep. C/2010 dated 16.12.2010.
Comments of the Committee
 Please see Paragraph No. 7 of Chapter I.

No. 12(2)/ E-Coord./2010
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(E-Coordination Branch)
Dated 1st July, 2010
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Non-submission/delay in submission of Action Taken Notes/Action Taken
 Reports—following up to CoS Meeting regarding.
In recent  CoS meeting convened by the Cabinet Secretary on 17 June, 2010, it
was decided that special efforts may  be made to clear the pending ATNs/ATRs on
CAG Audit Paras and PAC  recommendations  within the next three months. In
pursuance of the meeting it is reiterated that:—
(i) Secretaries of Ministries/Departments as Chief Accounting Authorities
will be personally responsible for ensuring that ATNs/A TRs on Audit
Paras/PAC  Reports are finalised within the prescribed timeframe.
(ii) ATN Adalats/Workshops  may be or ganised  every quarter inviting
representative of audit, to resolve  and  finalise the pending ATNs/ATRs.
(iii) T imely submission of ATNs/ATRs has been included as one of the targets
in the RFD of the each Ministry/Department as the responsibility  of the
Chief Accounting Authority  and assigned a weightage of two points.
(iv) As per list obtained from Department of Official Language (MHA),
Departments could consider outsourcing the Hindi Translation to
translators from approved  panel and at approved rates, to expedite the
pending reports/notes (copy enclosed).
(v) During the next three months, all Ministries/Departments will ensure that
pendency of ATNs/ATRs is brought down by at least 50%  of the present
pendency. The next meeting  of the CoS on this  subject will take place
in the second half of October, 2010.
2. In order to expedite action in the future the following institutional mechanism
needs to be put in place:—
(i) A TN Adalats as indicated in (ii)  above
(ii) S tanding  Audit Committee to be constituted in all Ministries/
Departments. For this more detailed instructions will be issued shortly
in consultation with the Office of C&AG .
3. All Secretaries as Chief Accounting Authorities may note the above  for
implementation.
Sd/-
(Sushama Nath)
Secretary (Expenditure)
1. All Secretaries to Government of India.
2. All FAs.
35

No. 12(2)/E-Coord. 2010
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(E-Coord. Branch)
New Delhi, dated 2nd August, 2010.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject:—Non-Submission/delay in submission of A TNs/ATRs—Constitution of
Standing Audit Committee (SAC)—reg.
Attention is invited to this Department's O.M. of even No. ................... dated
1st July, 2010 on the subject cited above wherein it was indicated that Standing Audit
Committees (SACs) would be constituted  in all Ministries/Departments for which
detailed instructions would be issued in consultation with C&AG . In pursuance
thereof, it has been decided  that the composition of the Standing Audit Committees
would be (i)  Secretary of the Department; (ii) Financial Adviser; and (iii) Any other
member the SAC may wish to co-opt. The nominee of the C&AG  at the level of DG/
PD will participate in the SAC in respect of Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Railways,
Department of Revenue (CBDT and CBEC) & Deptt.  of Telecommunications. The
SAC, as a nodal agency, will  monitor and review on a monthly basis the submission
of ATNs on C&AG's Audit Paras and ATRs on PAC recommendations and take
appropriate remedial measures.
2. Further, the Terms of References (ToRs)  of the Standing Audit Committee
(SAC) will be as follows:—
(i) The main objective of SAC will be to ensure that all Audit Paras printed
in CAG's  Audit Report are responded  to within the time-limits to be
specified by the  SAC  concerned and in any case not later than that
prescribed by CAG , and consider fixing responsibility in all cases of
non-adherence to such time-limits.
(ii) The SAC should cover  the ATNs/ATRs  pertaining to not only the
Ministry but also  its subordinate offices, PSUs and Autonomous Bodies.
(iii) The SAC  shall hold  regular meetings to deal with the pending ATNs/
ATRs by classifying them in any manner  that they may deem fit (e.g.
thematically, department-wise, age-wise etc.) in order to  ensure speedy
compliance.
(iv) The SAC may also oversee the effectiveness of functioning of Ad hoc
Committees, where these have been set up in terms of the instructions
contained in the letter No. 12(9)-E Coord./84 dated 1st  January, 1985
(copies enclosed), which aims at settlement of audit paras at the initial
stages when it is issued through Inspection Reports (IR). At this stage,
if suitable remedial action is initiated or compliance made, it will have a
positive impact of,  on the one hand ensuring better governance  and
on the other hand saving time on dealing with ATNs.
36

37
(v) The SAC shall ensure dissemination of the assurances given in the final
A TNs so that the cases where audit contention has been  accepted, are
promptly complied with by all  concerned, in the department and there is
no recurrence of such cases.
(vi) SAC may consider suitable incentives/disincentives to  ensure settlement
of pending ATNs through speedy compliance of audit observations and
circulate best practices in this regard.
(vii) SAC shall hold discussions regarding systemic and other  changes that
may be necessary in order to prevent recurrence of persistent
irregularities coming to their notice which may require change in any rule,
procedure etc. which normally do not get addressed at the lower levels
leading to audit objections remaining  outstanding  despite  exchange of
replies.
(viii) Any issues where there is difference of opinion between the Department
and Audit regarding interpretation of Rules/Notification could also be
discussed by SAC to reach a mutually acceptable conclusion and action
for inclusion in the ATNs.
(ix) A Nodal Officer may be appointed by the SAC to coordinate all matters
relating to ATNs/ATRs.
3. All Ministries/Departments are requested to constitute the SAC immediately.
A copy of the order issued in this regard  may be endorsed to this Department.
Sd/-
(Madhulika P. Sukul)
Joint Secretary (Pers.)
1. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
2. All Financial Advisers.
Copy for information to:
1. Cabinet Secretariat (Smt. Mala Dutt, Director) w.r.t. CoS Meeting held on
 17th June, 2010.
2.  Smt. Rekha Gupta, Dy. Comptroller & Auditor General.

No. 12(9)-E-Coord./84
Government  of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
New Delhi, the 1st January, 1985
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject:—Outstanding audit objections—formation of Ad hoc Committees for
  settlement thereof.
The undersigned is directed to say that instructions have been issued  from
time to time emphasising on the importance of prompt settlement  of audit objections
by the  administrative authorities and for  keeping a close watch over the clearance
of objections outstanding for over six months. Attention in this connection is invited
to  Secretary (Expenditure), Shri T.P. Singh's D.O.  letter No. 12 (49)-E-Coord./66
dated 27.2.1967 (copy enclosed) wherein  Ministries were requested to take suitable
remedial measures for reducing the backlog of audit  objections. It was also mentioned
that where  a Ministry had a large number of chronic objections which had somehow
defied attempts at settlement  in the ordinary order, Administrative Secretaries might
consider the appointment of an 'Ad hoc Committee' which a representative of Audit
as an observer to go through  the backlog and  dispose of the objections  by taking
appropriate action on each one of them. It may please be confirmed urgently whether
such an Ad hoc Committee was set up in the Ministry   of Home Affairs etc. In case
no such Committee has  been formed  so far, immediate action may be taken  for
formation of the Committees under intimation to this Department. The need to
constitute an  Ad hoc 'Committee', as mentioned above, would, of course, not  arise,
if the Ministry/Department concerned did not have many  outstanding audit
objections.
Sd/-
(M.S. MATHUR)
Director
To
All Ministries/Departments of the Govt. of India.
Copy for information to:
Comptroller & Auditor General with reference to his letter No. 1602-45--82. II
dated 12.12.1984.
Copy of D.O. letter No. F.12(49)-E-Coord./66 dated 27.2.1967 from Shri T.P. Singh,
Secretary, Deptt. of Expenditure to all Administrative Secretaries.
I am writing to you on the subject of prompt attention being given to draft
audit paragraphs received from the Audit Departments and also the timely clearance
of audit objections. Shri Dehejia  had written to Secretaries  on the 6th January, 1982
(vide D.O. No. 98-PSS/65 on the subject  and our memorandum No. F.14(58)-E-Coord./
38

39
65-II dated 28.1.1966   also refer to this. The Audit Report (Civil) 1966 gives statistics
of the pending objections and it is seen that a large number of such objections
relating to the period  earlier than  April 1962 are still pending. The Public Accounts
Committee at the last  meeting when they examined the Finance Ministry  were rather
concerned about the state of affairs, and  one cannot but agree with them than  the
some special steps are necessary to improve the position.
2. Regarding audit objections, the best arrangement would be to take preventive
action and see that objections of the same nature do not recur. Normally, it should
be possible to send  proper explanations or take remedial action within a period of
six months from the date on which such objections are  raised. In regard to the
pending objections,  it would be necessary to work on the basis of a time schedule
and  this question has been specifically emphasised by the P.A.C. With reference  to
the old  objections relating to the period earlier than April 1962 which are still  pending,
it has been suggested that a serious effort should be made to dispose of them within
a period of  six months. I shall be grateful if you take necessary action to settle the
objections on the above basis by issuing suitable instructions to your  Heads of
Departments etc., where necessary. The C&A.G .,  has issued  instructions to the
Acctts. General, Director of Commercial Audit and Director of Audit, Defence
Services, to furnish lists with necessary details of all objections outstanding  for
over six months in the half-yearly returns sent by them to the various Ministries/
Deptts.  of the Govt. of India in pursuance of the  instructions contained in the Ministry
of Finance O.M. No. 27(7)-EGI/53, dated 19.12.1953. He has also instructed chair to
furnish half-yearly, a list of paras  outstanding in the  inspection reports  for over
one year. These reports should help on administrative Ministries/Deptts. in
expeditious  settlement of outstanding objections. You will no doubt obtain from the
authorities concerned reports showing the progress made from time to time. Though
this matter is primarly the concern of  the administrative authorities, I would, in view
of the interest  certified by P.A.C. , advise that in reviewing the progress made and
in initiating any further  measures that may be necessary for speedier disposal, you
may associate the F. of  your Ministry, where the Ministry has a large number of
chronic objections which have somehow defied attempts at settlement in the ordinary
manner you may consider with appointment of an Ad hoc Committee  including
backlog and dispose of the objections by taking appropriate action on of them. Such
a procedure has been followed on the Defence side with satisfactory results. I think
a review of progress  the  in two months might also because fully made in the
circumstances.
3. Regarding the manner in which Audit paragraphs sent to Ministries in draft
should be dealt with, there are already clear instructions on the subject in the
Standing Guard File prepared by the Ministry of Finance on "Speedy Settlement of
Audit Objection, Inspection reports and timely disposal of draft Audit Paragraphs"
(Vide Ministry of Finance letter No. 32(9)-EGI/60, dated 3.6.1960, on pages 20-21 of
the Guard File). Briefly, instructions exist that comments on draft Audit paragraphs
have to be submitted to Audit within a period of six weeks. If in exceptional cases
this is not possible, it is necessary for the Ministry to get in touch with the Audit
Officer concerned and report the position with the available facts. In the absence of

40
any communication, the draft Audit Paragraphs will be incorporated in the Audit
Report on the basis of fact available to Audit. I would suggest your kindly reviewing
the existing arrangements for the receipt and disposal of Audit Paragraphs in your
Ministry and taking all necessary steps for ensuring prompt action so that the present
state considered to be extremely unsatisfactory by the P.A.C. does not persist.
4. It has been brought to our notice that in a number of cases the comments of
the Ministries on the draft paras are communicated to the Acctts. General over the
signature of junior officers, Sections Officers/Under Secretaries. As the draft paras
are sent by the Acctts. General to the Secy. concerned for his information and to
enable him to look into the papers before the case comes for examination before the
P.A.C. (Vide paragraphs 1(c) of Shri M.V . Rangachari's letter No. 26/SF/55, dated 6.1.55
to all the Secys. of the Govt. of India, and as it would be advantagious if the draft
para are examined at a sufficiently high level in the Ministries, I would suggest that
comments on the draft paras should be communicated to the Acctts. General, etc.,
over the signature of the Jt. Secy. concerned and where this is not practicable, it
should be mentioned in the forwarding letter that the comments have the approval
of the Secy./Jt. Secy. Formal orders to this effect have been issued in our O.M. No.
F. 12(9)-E(Coord)/67 dated 8.2.1967.
It is desirable for the Admn. Secy. concerned to have a control Register opened,
in which audit paragraphs in draft, as they are received may be diarised and their
disposal watched. This will avoid a large number of paragraphs remaining
uncommented upon and in time.
For our part, I have discussed the matter with the C. & A.G. as desired by the
P .A.C., and it is being arranged that Audit will sent to the Associat F. copy of each
Audit Paragraphs sent to the administrative Ministry in order that he may be in the
picture from the beginning and find such assistance as may be required.
5. You have no doubt appointed, as required under the existing instructions, a
senior officer in your Ministry to coordinate all members relating to audit objections
and audit paragraphs. He should as far as possible use the facility of consultation
with the Audit Officer concerned and reduce the number of audit paras or objections
at the very outset.
6. I would request you to keep me informed of the action taken in regard to
your Ministry and officers under your control.

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation No. 6
The Committee note that there is a heavy pendency of Action Taken Notes in
respect of Paras relating to Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance in the
Revenue divisions viz. Direct Taxes (CBDT) and Central Board of Excise and Customs
(CBEC). As on 15.09.2009, the total number of Action Taken Notes pending with the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for the period 1996-97 to 2006-07 stood
at 1811. Out of these, 760 Paras pertained to the Customs division, 565 Paras to the
Central Excise and 486 to the CBDT. However, as per the statement furnished by the
Audit as on February, 2010, a total of 2208 Action Taken Notes are pending with the
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. Out of these 1476 Action Taken Notes
were stated to be not received in the Audit Office even for the first time. While
461 Action Taken Notes are awaiting re-submission by the Department to the Audit
after their return by Audit, 271 Action Taken Notes are under vetting by the Audit.
According to the Department of Revenue the reasons for large scale pendency of
Action Taken Notes in the three revenue divisions are due to numerous Audit Paras
being sub judice and that Action Taken Notes in respect of these paras can be
submitted only after the judicial process is over, which takes time anywhere between
6 months to 4 years. However, a scrutiny of the statement furnished by the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) reveals that a substantial
number of Action Taken Notes are pending for more than 4 years and some of them
are as old as 10 years. Hence, the plea taken by the Department of Revenue for the
inordinate delays in submission/finalization of Action Taken Notes is not entirely
accurate in a substantial number of cases. Obviously the Chief Controlling Authority,
Department of Revenue needs to pay serious attention to this problem. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the break-up of all cases of pending Action Taken Notes
indicating the number of Action Taken Notes that are pending before courts/tribunals
in respect of each revenue division viz. Central Board for Direct Taxes (CBDT) and
Central Board for Excise and Customs (CBEC). The Committee desire that Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) in consultation with the Audit should find ways
and means to address this problem so as to ensure that the Action Taken Notes are
furnished to the Committee within a stipulated time sounding the importance of
adhering to standards of parliamentary accountability.
[Sl. No. 6, Part-II, Para-6 of the 11th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
41

42
Action Taken by the Government
Observations of the Committee regarding large pendency of A TNs in respect
of CBDT and CBEC have been communicated to the concerned organisations for
necessary remedial action. Secretary (Revenue) was also requested by Secretary (Exp.)
vide DO letter 21st June, 2010 (copy enclosed) seeking intervention for submission
of first response to audit in respect of pending ATNs concerning CBDT and CBEC
within next 15 days. As on September, 2010, total 1459 audit paras pertaining to CBDT
and CBEC were reported to be outstanding. Out of these, 1079 paras related to CBDT,
178 to Custom and 202 to Excise Divisions of CBEC. As per information made available
as on 15th November, 2010, first response in respect of total 701 A TNs in respect of
CAG reports upto the year 2007-08 are yet to be sent to audit by CBDT. CBEC
(Customs) and CBEC (Excise) have reported that first response to audit have been
sent in respect of all pending paras contained in CAG reports upto the year 2007-08.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Committee, CBDT and CBEC (Customs
and Excise) were requested to furnish details of cases of ATNs pertaining to them
which are pending before Courts/Tribunals. Customs Divisions and Central Excise
of CBEC have reported that total 01 and 24 cases respectively are pending before
various Courts/Tribunals. Information from CBDT is awaited and will be intimated to
PAC/Audit later on.
This Action Taken Note has been vetted by Office of the C&AG of India vide
their U.O. No. 806/152/Rep. C/2010 dated 16.12.2010.
N
EW D ELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
15 November, 2011 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

DO No. 12(2)/E-Coord/2010
O;; foHkkx
foÙk ea=ky;
Hkkjr ljdkj
Department Of Expenditure
Ministry Of Finance
Government Of India
ubZ fnYyh/New Delhi-110001
Tel. : 23092929
        : 23092663
Fax : 23092546
21st June, 2010
Dear Sunil,
In a recent review on non-submission/delay in submission of Action Taken
Notes/Action Taken Reports on the reports of PAC and C&AG taken by the Cabinet
Secretary, it was observed that in the case of a large number of audit Paras, A TNs
have not been sent by the Ministries even for the first time.
In the case of your Ministry, there are 1529 Paras on which the first response
has not been sent. Cabinet Secretary has directed that in the case of all such pending
cases, the first response from the Ministries may be sent to the office of the C&AG
within the next 15 days. You are, therefore, requested to kindly ensure that A TNs in
these cases are sent within the next fortnight under intimation to Department of
Expenditure and the Monitoring Cell.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Sushama Nath)
Shri Sunil Mitra,
Secretary,
Department of Revenue,
North Block, New Delhi.
lq"kek ukFk
lfpo
Sushama Nath
SECRETARY
43

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12) HELD ON 23RD SEPTEMBER, 2011
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 23rd September, 2011 from
1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Room No. '53',  Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
 3. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
 4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
 6. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
 7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
 8. Shri Adhi Sankar
 9. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
10. Shri K. Sudhakaran
11. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Naresh Gujral
15. Shri Prakash Javadekar
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
6. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
44

45
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri K.P. Sasidharan — Director General (AB)
2. Ms. Subha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
3. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director (ESM)
4. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director (AFN)
5. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Principal Director (Railway Audit Board)
2. **** **** ****
3. **** **** ****
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports, one by one,
for consideration and adoption:
(i) **** **** ****
(ii) **** **** ****
(iii) **** **** ****
(iv) **** **** ****
  (v)  Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eleventh Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on 'Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission
of Action Taken Notes on the non-selected Audit Paragraphs';
(vi) **** **** ****
(vii) **** **** ****
(viii) **** **** ****
5. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all but one Draft Report
mentioned at Sl No. (vii) above, with some modifications/suggestions.
**** **** ****
Similarly, while discussing the Draft Report mentioned at Sl. No. (v) some
Members suggested that the Expenditure Secretary should be called before the
Committee to explain the measures taken by different defaulting Ministries/
Departments to submit the Action Taken Notes on various Audit Reports within the
stipulated time frame of four months and the action taken by the Monitoring Cell
against them.
6. **** **** ****
**** Matters not related to this Report.

46
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the adopted Draft Reports
in light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to the
House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee, then, adjourned .

APPENDIX  II
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR
ELEVENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations — 10
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee which have been accepted by the — Total: 8
Government: Percentage—80
Para Nos. 1,2,4,5,7,8,9 and 10
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of — Total: 0
the replies received from the Government: Percentage—0
-Nil-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require — Total: 1
reiteration: Percentage—10
Para No. 3
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which Government have furnished interim — Total: 1
replies: Percentage—10
Para No. 6
47
GMGIPMRND—3619LS—02.02.2012.