MANAGEMENT OF FOODGRAINS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Seventy-third Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY  OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
(DEPARTMENT  OF FOOD & PUBLIC
DISTRIBUTION)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2009-10
SECOND REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
2

SECOND REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MANAGEMENT OF FOODGRAINS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Seventy-third Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY  OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS, FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
(DEPARTMENT  OF FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26.11.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26.11.2009
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2009/Kartika, 1931(Saka)

PAC No. 1897
Price : Rs. 95.00
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10).............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ...................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which have  been accepted
by Government ........................................................................ 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government.............................................................................. 45
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ................................................... 54
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect  of which the
Government have furnished interim replies.............................. 61
ANNEXURES
I. Nine Point Action Plan for curbing leakages/diversion of
Foodgrains under PDS ............................................................. 63
II. Guidelines  on Procurement  of Foodgrains for the State
Governments............................................................................ 65
III. Letter from the Ministry to various State Governments........... 72
IV . State-wise details  of BPL families............................................ 74
V. Statement showing the number of bogus/ineligible rations
cards deleted by the State/UT Governments with effect from
July 2006 onwards.................................................................... 76
VI. State-wise details of action taken against the  officials/persons
who had issued bogus ration cards and individuals who were
detected possessing bogus ration cards  with effect from
 July, 2006................................................................................. 77
VII. Statement showing results  of action taken by the State/UT
Governments under  Clauses 8 & 9 of the PDS (Control)
 Order, 2001 from January 2006 to June, 2008........................... 79
VIII. Statement showing additional commodities  being distributed
through PDS outlets other than wheat, rise coarsegrain, sugar
& kerosene oil (as reported BT respective State/UT) .............. 82
(i)

IX. Summary of Concurrent  Evaluation  of  the   Targeted   Public
Distribution System (Study Conducted  by the NCAER) ........ 86
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the  Third sitting  of  Public  Accounts  Committee
(2009-10) held on 27.10.2009..................................................... 90
II. Analysis  of  the  Action  Taken  by t he  Government  on  the
Observations/Recommendations  of  the  Public  Accounts
Committee contained in their Seventy-third Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha)............................................................................... 92
P
AGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
Shri Jaswant Singh — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Gopinath Munde
9. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Addl. Director
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2009-10), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present on their behalf this Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
on action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations  of the
Committee contained in their Seventy-third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘‘Management of Foodgrain’’.
2. The Seventy-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 29th  April, 2008.
Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report were received  on 18th November, 2008. The Public Accounts Committee
considered and adopted their Second Report at the sitting held  on 27th October,
2009. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix I.
3. For facility of reference  and convenience, the Obserations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type  in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government  on the  Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventy-thrid Report  (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix II.
N
EW DELHI; SHRI  JASWANT SINGH,
13 November, 2009 Chairman,
22 Kartika, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report  of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
73rd Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India for the year ended 31st March,  2005 (No. 16 of 2006), Union Government
(Civil Performance Audit) relating  to ‘‘Management of Foodgrains’’.
2. In their 73rd Report presented to Lok Sabha  on 29th April, 2008, the Committee
dealt with various issues relating   to the effectiveness of the system for management
of foodgrains for securing food security  in the country; the efficiency of the system of
procurement  by Food Corporation of India and the States; efficiency and economy in
storage and movement operations; and effectiveness  of distribution arrangements  of
Government  to ensure that all people  had proper access to the foodgrains.
3. The Action  Taken  Notes in respect of all the 23 Recommendations/Observations
have been received from the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
(Department of Food and Public Distribution) and these  have been categorized as
under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 16, 17, 18, 21, 22, and 23
Total : 14
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of  the replies received from Government:
Sl. Nos. 11, 12, 13 and 15
Total : 4
Chapter -III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 6, 14, 19 and 20
Total : 4
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect  of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Sl. No. 8.
Total : 1
Chapter-V
1

2
GIST OF COMMITTEE’S OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED
IN 73RD REPORT (14TH LOK SABHA)
4. The Committee in their 73rd Report on the subject had made the following important
Observations/Recommendations:
/circlesolidExpressing their serious concern over the shortfall in decentralised procurement
of foodgrains being implemented in some States, the Committee had
recommended that emphasis needs to be laid on the adequacy in Cash Credit
limits sanctioned by Reserve Bank of India to the State Governments and full
reimbursement  of expenses and timely release of subsidies by the Central
Government. Government  was also asked to re-visit  the decentralised
procurement  scheme with a view  to optimizing both costs and extent of
procurement.
/circlesolidThe Committee had  recommended formulation  of a comprehensive  National
Food Security Policy, particularly in a scenario when global production of
foodgrains is on the decline and the prices are on the rise.
/circlesolidGovernment should carry out an assessment study on the Minimum Support
Price Scheme and its effectiveness in providing remunerative prices for farmers
to overcome the distress sale of foodgrains by farmers.
/circlesolidWith a view to ensure food security and make  farming sustainable, the Committee
suggested that new frontiers of research in agriculture should be supported
and the gap between academic agricultural research and its effectiveness on
the field should be bridged.
/circlesolidThe Committee had asked the Food Corporation of India to pull up its quality
control wing and take follow-up action on each quality related complaint
scrupulously.
/circlesolidGovernment should have a fresh look at the definition of poverty line in
consultation with the Planning Commission so as to arrive at a more realistic,
inclusive and acceptable set of criteria/norms for the identification of
beneficiaries by the States.
/circlesolidThe Committee had emphasised that the Government should take prompt and
effective measures to control the price rise including deterrent action against
hoarders, if necessary, by amending the Essential Commodities Act and
imposing a ban on Forward/Futures Trading in essential commodities.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food
and Public Distribution have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.
The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of
their Observations/Recommendations, that require reiteration or merit comments.
6. The Committee desire that Government should furnish final/conclusive action
taken replies to the recommendations for which interim replies have been furnished.

3
A. Impact Assessment Study of Minimum Support Price Scheme on Farmers
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6, Para No. 192)
7. The Committee in their 73rd Report had noted that no impact assessment survey
was ever conducted by the Ministry to study the extent of denial of benefits of Minimum
Support Price among farmers, leading to distress sale of foodgrains. The Committee
had expressed that in the absence of such an assessment study, the actual penetration
and impact of Minimum Support Price Scheme and its shortcomings, if any, cannot
come to the fore and appropriate interventions would not be possible. Keeping this
background, the Committee had asked the Government to carry out an assessment
study on the Minimum Support Price Scheme and its effectiveness in providing
remunerative prices for farmers and in overcoming distress sale of foodgrains by
farmers. The Committee had also suggested that the constraining factors affecting the
Minimum Support Price Scheme in general should be identified and remedial measures
must be taken at the earliest.
8. Apprising the Committee about the steps that have been taken by the Ministry
on the aforementioned recommendation, the Ministry in their Action Taken Note stated
as under:
‘‘In order to generate awareness of Minimum Support Price (MSP) among the
farmers, instructions have been issued by the Department of Food and Public
Distribution to FCI and the State Governments to give wide publicity in the local
media regarding the MSP scheme, names of the procurement agencies, particulars
of purchase centres and FAQ specifications. The State Governments have been
further requested to instruct their procuring agencies to organize wide publicity
(in association with FCI) through print and visual media as well as through
banners, pamphlets etc. Regional Offices of the FCI and State Governments like
Punjab, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala etc. have
confirmed that they are giving wide publicity about MSP in the local media
before the commencement of every Kharif and Rabi Marketing Season. The
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has also informed that to create
awareness among farmers, support is provided to the States in strengthening
extension programmes through a number of schemes. The various schemes
include support to State Extension Programmes for Extension Reforms, Mass
Media Support to Agriculture, Kisan Call Centres and Establishment of Agri-
Clinic and Agri-Business Centres by Agriculture Graduates. Agriculture related
information and knowledge to the farming community including the Minimum
Support Prices is also provided through the network of Radio Stations  and
Doordarshan on the National as well as regional channels. No impact assessment
survey to determine the extent of deprivation of benefits of Minimum Support
Price to the farmers has been conducted by the Department of Food and Public
Distribution. However, before every procurement season, the Department of
Food and Public Distribution issues instructions to the FCI and concerned State
Governments to organize publicity about the MSP operations  and also to set up
Control Rooms in FCI headquarters, Regional Offices of FCI and in the State
Governments. A Control Room is also available in the Ministry which gets daily

4
reports of the quantum of foodgrains procured in every State as well as reports
of distress sale (if any). As recommended by the Committee, Planning Commission
is being requested to undertake a study about the efficacy of MSP regime. In
case a report of distress sale is received, the concerned State Government and
Regional Office of FCI is immediately directed to investigate the report. As a
result of wide publicity of enhanced MSP of wheat (Rs. 1000 per quintal) in RMS
2008-09, the total procurement for Central pool has touched an all time high of
224 lakh tonnes."
9. The Committee note that as a follow up of their recommendation in the Original
Report, the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution have requested
the Planning Commission to undertake a study on the efficacy of Minimum Support
Price Scheme to farmers. However, the Ministry's reply does not indicate the time-
frame by which the study would be completed. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should emphasise upon the Planning Commission to expedite the study and submit
the Report thereon within a definite time period. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made in this regard within 3 months from  the date of
presentation of the Report.
B. Elimination of Bogus Ration Cards
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14, Para No. 200)
10. Noting that the efforts made by the Ministry to eliminate bogus ration cards as
well as bogus units in the ration cards had not yielded any tangible results and
considering the magnitude of the problem, the Committee had asked the Ministry to
apprise them about the latest position on this count as well as on the updating of lists
of beneficiaries in all the States/Union Territories.
11. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:
‘‘As of now, 12 State Governments have reported deletion/cancellation of
 96.86 lakh of ration cards belonging to non-existent families/ineligible families.
All the State and UT Governments have been requested again to furnish the
detailed information on (i) number of bogus/ghost ration cards deleted
w.e.f. July, 2006, (ii) Action taken against the families who were found possessing
bogus/ghost ration cards and also action taken against the officials who issued
such bogus/ghost ration cards."
12. The Committee regret to find that only 12 States have reported deletion/
cancellation of the bogus ration cards and the information in respect of other States/
UTs is still awaited. Obviously the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution does not seem to have approached the problem with all the seriousness
that it deserved. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to make concerted
efforts in coordination and cooperation of the remaining State Governments/UTs so
that bogus ration cards are removed within a definite time-frame. The Ministry should
also periodically monitor the progress made by the States/UTs so that they continually
update respective lists of Above Poverty Line/Below Poverty Line/Antyodaya Anna
Yojana families every year.

5
C. Settlement of Pending Claims of Food Corporation of India against Railways
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19, Para No. 205)
13. The Committee in their 73rd Report had found that Food Corporation of India's
pending claims against the Railways in March, 2005 had amounted to Rs. 796.45 crore.
Out of this, refund of freight amounting to Rs. 37.41 crore had been pending for
periods ranging from 12 to 27 years. Reasons attributed for such long pendency were
non-availability of relevant records with the Railways including the original Physical
Delivery Certificate against which payments were made. The Committee suspected
that these are cases of collusive corruption between Food Corporation of India and
Railways officials. The Committee had  therefore, recommended that Inter-Ministerial
meetings should be held at the  highest level and measures to tackle such problem be
sorted out instead of prolonging the cases by taking recourse to legal option. The
Committee had also deplored the laxity of Food Corporation of India in monitoring the
claims which had led to their pendency for a number of years. While taking a serious
view of this matter the Committee had recommended that the Food Corporation of
India should enquire into the conduct of the concerned officials and apprise the
Committee of the action taken thereof. The Committee had also emphasised that the
Food Corporation of India must also strengthen its monitoring mechanism and devise
effective means for vigilance to tackle such issues in its nascent stage itself.
14. In their Action Taken Notes the Ministry have stated as under:
"The Department and FCI have been constantly pursuing the matter with the
Railway Board for settlement of the claims which are pending with the Railway
for a long time. Meetings were held at the apex level for settlement of pending
claims against the Railways. The pendency of Railway claims is also due to the
fact that Railway have shown their inability to settle the old cases as the relevant
period record reportedly is not available with them. It has also been stated by
the Railways that due to non-availability of original Physical Delivery Certificate
(PDC), Railway freight claims are pending. In the meeting held on 21.3.2005, it
was agreed by the Railways that the FCI may produce their shadow file to the
Zonal Railways concerned so that these cases may be built up again and settled
accordingly. The issue of Refund of claim cases prior to July, 95 the records of
which were stated to have been weeded out by Railways  under age limit was
discussed in the meeting held with CCO and with FA&CAO (T&S), Northern
Railway held on 17.7.2005 at FCI Zonal office (North), Noida wherein it was
decided that taking the spirit of the Railway Board directive, the claim cases
would be settled on the basis of shadow files prepared by the FCI as per
discussions. The shadow files of the  refund of freight claim cases were
submitted, but Railway refused to deal  with the cases on the plea that the
verification of the cases cannot be done as the booking station records have
also been destroyed. In order to resolve this issue, a meeting was also taken by
Secretary (FPD) with Railways and FCI officers, wherein it was decided that FCI
would certify the genuineness of the copies of the PDC submitted and Railways
would examine the possibility of settling claims on their basis. Settlement of
pending claims of FCI are also discussed in the periodic meetings held between

6
officers of Department of Food & P .D. and Railway Board. FCI has been following
up the settlement of pending claims with Railways at various levels. However,
there is till a pendency of large number of cases, primarily due to the procedural
requirements of Railways. FCI  Headquarters has been regularly pursuing the
issue with the concerned EDs(Zone)/GM(Region) and also with the Railway
Board for early settlement at the highest level. FCI has also been advised to
examine all the cases of pending claims with Railways and take action if there is
any case of laxity or collusive corruption between FCI and Railway officials."
15. The Committee regret to note that though the Ministries of Consumer Affairs,
Food and Public Distribution and Railways have made efforts for settlement of a large
number of pending claims of Food Corporation of  India against Railways in respect of
refund of freight, these have not yielded any tangible results. From the reply it is
apparent that the issue could not be settled due to the procedural wrangles and
intransigence on the part of the Ministry of Railways. The Committee are of the
considered view that since considerable delay has already taken place, the Ministry
of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution should in coordination with the
Ministry of Railways, take concrete action which culminates into finalisation of
pending cases within a fixed time frame. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the outcome in this regard.
D. Strengthening the Enforcement Wing and Anti Hoarding Cell (Recommendation
Sl.No. 20,  Para No. 206)
16. The Committee in their 73rd Report had noted that there was high leakage/
diversion of more than 75 per cent of the total off-take of Below Poverty Line (BPL)
quota in Bihar and Punjab and at the all India level, the overall diversion of rice and
wheat was 39 per cent and 53 per cent respectively. The Committee had therefore,
opined that diversion of foodgrains from the system is a menace which should be
checked on top priority and had desired that the Enforcement Wing and Anti-Hoarding
Cell should be strengthened and people engaged in Public Distribution System made
accountable and Inspection Parties acting as Flying Squads should be constituted to
inspect the movement and distribution of foodgrains. The Committee had recommended
that to minimize the human intervention, Information Technology could be put to use
for providing an end-to-end automated system, which will bring about transparency in
the system.
17. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note on the aforementioned recommendation
inter-alia stated as under:
"To streamline the functioning of Targeted Public Distribution System, the
Department has been continuously taking a number of measures as explained
in replies to earlier paras. In addition, the following steps are being taken to
harness use of IT in functioning of TPDS as recommended by the Committee.
This Department has appointed the National Institute of Smart Government,
Hyderabad as Project Consultant to prepare a detailed project report on the
project on computerization of TPDS operations upto Block Level by studying
systems and processes of TPDS in four States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam,

7
Chhattisgarh and Delhi. The software applications, etc. to be designed based
on  the study will be piloted in these four States. After successful
implementation and experience gained from the Pilot Project, it would be rolled
out in rest parts of the country. As part of pilot project website is also planned
which will provide information to public about allocation, availability and
offtake at various levels. Introduction of Smart Card based delivery of
foodgrains in Haryana and Chandigarh is being taken up on pilot basis. This
is a very innovative way to eliminate malpractices in TPDS. Piloting of Global
Positioning System (GPS) for tracking movement of vehicles carrying TPDS
commodities has been taken up in Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu and Delhi in
order to minimize diversion during movement of foodgrains from godowns to
Fair Price Shops. For better coordination among the work of State Governments
and UT Administrations and FCI, the Department takes periodical review
meetings. The Department has already directed the State Governments and
UT Administrations to act upon a reform agenda for TPDS. This consists of
the following actions: (i) Implementation of revised Citizens, Charter;
(ii) Monthly certification by local bodies of receipt of TPDS foodgrains by
Fair Price Shops and their distribution to ration card holders; (iii) Concurrent
evaluation of TPDS; (iv) Publicity-cum-A wareness Campaign on TPDS;
(v) Computerization of TPDS operations. (Govt of India, Ministry to Block
level); (vi) Computerization of monitoring and distribution of TPDS
commodities at Fair Price Shops; (vii) Piloting of Global Positioning System to
track movement of vehicles transporting TPDS foodgrains; (viii) Direct transfer
of food subsidy in cash to BPL families, and (ix) Introduction of Smart Cards
under TPDS in Chandigarh and Haryana. Under the revised Citizens' Charter
issued in July, 2007, the State Governments have been directed to constitute
State Level Committee under chairmanship of the State Food Minister so that
better coordination with various agencies takes place in practice. In view of
recommendations of the Committee, the Department will further attempt to
enlarge scope of work of the State level committee for better coordination
among State agencies as well as Central agencies like FCI."
The Ministry further stated:
"The National Institute of Smart Government (NISG) was appointed as Project
Consultant and their team commenced work from 15.04.08. The NISG has
furnished three deliverables namely—Report on study of existing systems and
processes under TPDS, report on best practices for benchmarking and report
on to-be processes and design of proposed solutions. Further, the NISG has to
submit DPR along with proposal for piloting the project in four States namely
Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Delhi. The Pilot Project will be
launched in the proposed four States after the DPR is received and examined in
the Department and the project is approved. Based on Finance Minister's Budget
Announcement 2008-09 for introduction of Smart Cards for delivery of essential
commodities under TPDS on pilot basis in Haryana & Chandigarh, this
Department had requested both the Governments to furnish their DPRs on the
project. They submitted their respective revised DPRs in August, 2008. The

8
cost estimates of this Scheme are of Rs. 144.82 crores. The scheme is presently
under appraisal by the Committee on Non-Plan expenditure."
18. The Committee note with satisfaction that pursuant to their recommendation,
a number of steps have been taken by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution to harness the Inforamtion Technology in the implementation of
targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS). The Committee would like to be apprised
of the outcome of the various pilot projects undertaken by the National Institute of
Smart Government, Hyderabad in some States and their impact in bringing about
efficiency in the functioning of TPDS and eliminating malpractices as also the steps
taken to extend these projects  to other States/UTs as well.
The Committee further note that under the revised Citizen's Charter issued in
July, 2007, the Ministry have directed the State Governments to constitute a State
Level Committee under the Chairmanship of State Food Minister to ensure better
coordination among various agencies in monitoring the functioning of the TPDS.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the impact made by the respective
State Level Committees in ensuring proper coordination among various agencies in
the implementation of the Scheme.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
Management of food pricing and distribution in India seeks to achieve the twin
objectives of providing remunerative prices to farmers and building up a buffer stock,
together with availability of foodgrains at affordable prices to the common man and
targeted distribution of foodgrains for the survival of the poor. The food policy of
Governemnt is based on ensuring minimum support prices for farmers and managing a
Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) policy. The process of foodgrains
management thus involves pricing policy, procurement, storage, movement and
distribution. The Commission for Agricultural Costs and Prices is the recommendatory
body for suggesting minimum support prices to the Government, which are meant to
mitigate risks that farmers face and also to reward the efficient farmer. Procurement of
foodgrains is handled primarily through the Food Corporation of India (FCI), with
decentralized procurement allowed in eleven States/Union Territories. The food stocks
are maintained by the Government of India in order to meet prescribed Minimum Buffer
Stock norms, monthly releases for supply through Targeted Public Distribution System
and welfare schemes, meet emergent situations and for market intervention to help
moderate the open market prices. In order to make foodgrains accessible to the
population throughout the country, Food Corproation of India has been entrusted the
responsiblity to ensure efficient co-ordination and monitoring of the movement of
foodgrains from surplus to deficit regions, proper storage and close liaison with
Railways, handling and carriage contractors alongwith the State Governments.
Distribution of foodgrains is managed through a Targeted Public Distribution System
(TPDS) involving a network of around 4.92 lakh Fair Price Shops (FPS) throughout the
country and the State Governments are responsible for identificaiton of beneficiaries,
issue of ration cards and distribution of foodgrains to the beneficiaries through Fair
Price Shops.
[Sl. No. 1]
Para No. 187 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by the Government
The observation of the Committee is a statement of facts and requires no action.
[File No. 166 (9)/2008-Py.I]
9

10
Observation/Recommendation
The Performance Audit of 'Management of Foodgrains' and the Committee's
examination of the issues raised by Audit has revealed very significant deficiencies
and lapses in the implementation of the Government's food management policy. There
were large inefficiencies in procurement of foodgrains with quantified financial effect
of Rs. 1310.30 crore and several instances of reimbursement of excessive statutory
levies and non-statutory charges to State Governments, comprising procurement
incidentals amounting to Rs. 2005.61 crore. Glaring lapses were noticed in the
distribution of foodgrains, which affected the achievement of food security in the
country. Rampant irregularities came to the fore in identification of Below Poverty Line
and Antyodaya Anna Y ojana beneficiaries, including lacunae in the identification
process and issue of ration cards, failure to weed out ineligible/bogus beneficiaries
and issue of ration cards to ineligible beneficiaries. Large scale diversion of foodgrains
from the TPDS was prevalent in several States. Foodgrains was distributed at lower
than the prescribed scale of issue by 4kg to 25kg in several States/Union Territories.
The actual arrangements for quality control, monitoring and inspection in the operation
of TPDS were also found to be largely inadequate.
[Sl.No.2]
Para No.188 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
Sporadic cases of inefficiencies brought out to the notice of the Department by
Audit in Para No. 5.2.1 and 5.2.2 of Report No. 16 (Civil) of 2006 of C&AG have been
referred to the State Governments and the FCI and replies have been received from
most of the State Governments. A comprehensive ATN was sent to the CAG . In its
vetting comments, C&AG has sought details on a few cases of inefficiencies for
further appreciation of the PAC. Review A TN is being prepared on the basis of
information received from State Governments. However, it may be stated that
reimbursement of incidentals is done after detailed examination at several stages and
finalizaiton of accounts is being done after receipt of audited accounts of the State
Governments.
The following measures have been taken to strengthen the TPDS:
(i) Since most of the action points to improve the PDS falls in the domain of State
Governments, they are being addressed on a regular basis to take effective
steps.
(ii) Based on the evaluation report of TPDS by PEO & ORG MARG received in
2005, a 9 Point action plan which was prepared in 2006, is being implemented by
the State and UT Government. Department of Food & Public Distribution is
continuously reviewing the progress of implementation of 9 Point action Plan.
Matter has been taken up with the State & UT Government at the level of
Minister of CA, F&PD and Secretary (F&PD) for a strict action to eliminate
diversion and leakages under the TPDS.

11
State & UT Governments have reported reduction in the diversion and leakages of
foodgrains under TPDS through:—
(a) elimination of bogus ration cards,
(b) introduction of coupons/bar coded coupons in some States,
(c) allocation of Fair Price Shops to Women's Self Help Groups, and
(d) door delivery of foodgrains upto Fair Price Shops.
(iii) Concurrent evaluation of the functioning of TPDS has been taken in 26 States/
UTs by NCAER and IIPA. The first report of NCAER for 6 States has revealed
improvement in the functioning of TPDS as compared to earlier evaluation
made by PEO and ORG MARG.
(iv) A revised Citizens Chartered has been issued in July, 2007 for adoption and
implementation by the States/UTs Government for facilitating use by Citizens
of provisions of RTI Act.
(v) An Awareness cum Publicity Campaign on TPDS is being taken up as a part of
the Planned Scheme on strengthening of TPDS.
(vi) A road map for reform in States and UTs and enforcing it by reducing allocations
to States & UTs in case of non-compliance will be prepared and implemented.
(vii) V illage level Committees have been constituted who will certify arrivals of
foodgrains as well as distribution of the same by FPS.
(viii) Emphasis is being laid on removal of ineligible beneficiary or bogus cards. As a
result of this initiative, more than 96 lakhs of ration card have been cancelled.
[File No. 166 (9)/2008-Py.I]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that the Programme Evaluation Organisation of the Planning
Commission had also made the following assessment about the TPDS:—
(i) Implementation Targeted Public Distribution System was plagued by targeting
errors, prevalence of bogus cards and unidentified households;
(ii) though the off-take per household had shown some improvement under Targeted
Public Distribution System, yet only about 57% of Below Poverty Line
households were covered by it;
(iii) Fair Price Shops were generally not viable because of low annual turnover
and they remained in business through leakages and diversion of subsidized
grains;

12
(iv) Leakage and diversions of subsidized grains were large and only about 42% of
subsidized grains issued from the Central Pool reached the target group;
(v) Over 36% of the budgetary subsidies on food was siphoned off from the supply
chain and another 21% reached the Above Poverty Line households; and
(vi) Cost of income transfer to the poor through Public Distribution system was
much higher than that through other modes.
 [Sl. No. 3]
Para No. 189 of 73rd Reprot of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
It may be stated the PDS is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central
and the State Governments. The Central Government has taken the responsibility for
procurement, storage, transporatation and bulk allocation of foodgrains, etc. The
responsibility of effectively distributing the same to the ration cardholders through
the network of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) lies with the State Governments. The operational
responsibilities including allocation within the State, identification of families below
poverty line, issue of ration cards to them, supervision over and monitoring the
functioning of FPSs rest with the State Governments.
Review of TPDS functioning is a continuous on-going process. To overcome the
shortcomings pointed out by PEO (Planning Commission) and ORG Marg reports, a
9-points Action Plan was formulated to be implemented by State/UT Governments. A
copy of the 9-points Action Plan is annexed (Annexe-I). The Department of Food and
Public Distribution is continuously reviewing progress of implementation of the
9-point Action Plan. Secretary, Government of India has been taking it up with Chief
Secretaries of States and UT Governments, and Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food &
Public Distribution has written to Chief Ministers drawing their personal attention for
taking strict action to eliminate diversion and leakages under the TPDS. State & UT
Governments have reported reduction in diversions and leakages of foodgrains under
TPDS through:—
(a) elimination of bogus ration cards,
(b) introduction of coupons/bar coded coupons in some States,
(c) allocation of Fair Price Shops to Women's Self Help Groups, and
(d) door delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops.
It may be mentioned here that, as recommended by the Committee, while reviewing
functioning of TPDS, advice of experts is also taken.
As a part of continuous monitoring and review of TPDS operation, experts like
NCAER have been engaged to evaluate performance of TPDS and suggest corrective
measures for rectifying the problems noticed. International agencies like FAO do not
seem to have any experience of operating a PDS like in our country.

13
Concurrent Evaluation of TPDS has been undertaken in 26 States & UTs to assess
extent of improvement as a result of various steps initiated by the Government for
improving TPDS, after detailed review of TPDS functioning based on earlier evaluation
studies.
In order to maintain supplies and securing availability and distribution of essential
commodities, Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001 has been notified on
August 31, 2001. In para 1 of Annexe to the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 inter-alia it has
been provided that (i) Gram Sabhas shall finalise the list of beneficiaries belonging to
BPL and Antyodaya categories drawn up by the designated authority in respect of the
area under their respective jurisdiction. (ii) Where there are no Gram Sabhas, the local
representative bodies shall finalise the list of beneficiaries belonging to BPL and
Antyodaya categories within their respective jurisdiction. (iii) The designated authority
of the State Government or the local representative bodies including Gram Sabhas and
Gram Panchayats which have been entrusted with the task of identification of
beneficiaries, shall verify and certify the information in the prescribed proforma for
BPL and Antyodaya families.
Further para 4(3) of the Annexe to PDS (Control) Order, 2001 stipulates that:—
(i) the designated authority of the State Governments shall ensure delivery of one
copy of allocation order made to the fair price shop simultaneously to Gram
Panchayats or Nagar Palikas or Vigilance Committees or any other body
nominated for monitoring the functioning of the fair price shops by the concerned
State Government, and
(ii) Gram Panchayats or Nagar Palikas or Vigilance Committees or any other body
nominated for monitoring the functioning of the fair price shop by State
Governments shall display the stocks of essential commodities allotted during
the month to the fair price shops on a notice board outside their office.
To make vigilance machinery of TPDS functional, the Department has been taking
action as follows:—
(a) Detailed guidelines were issued by the Department in June, 1999 for greater
involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the functioning of TPDS
and to bring in a more transparent and accountable system of distribution as a
measure of social audit. As a strategy to reduce diversion at village level,
greater emphasis is being laid on involvement of village level Panchayat
functionaries/ULB members in maintaining vigil over FPSs.
(b) As requested by the Committee, the Department has initiated action to introduce
social audit of TPDS and to replicate healthy initiatives in a decentralized
format.
As a measure of social audit, in order to ensure increased transparency in functioning
of FPSs, the State and UT Governments have been directed in March, 2008 to introduce
monthly certification by Village Panchayats/Vigilance Committees/Urban Local Bodies/
Self Help Groups for delivery of foodgrains to FPS and their distribution to ration card
holders. Such a certification of actual delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops in time

14
and their distribution to ration card holders is also expected to streamline functioning
of Vigilance Committees at Fair Price Shop level.
(c) In order to make TPDS operations transparent and amenable to RTI Act
provisions, a revised model Citizens' Charter was issued in July, 2007 for
adoption and implementation by State Governments/UT Administration for
facilitating use by citizens of provision of RTI Act, 2005 in relation to functioning
of the TPDS. Similarly, for greater public scrutiny of the TPDS functioning
through the provisions of RTI Act, 2005, publicity cum awareness campaign on
TPDS is being taken up as a part of the Plan scheme on strengthening of TPDS.
Similarly as part of capacity building of village level functionaries, members of
vigilance committees at various levels and Departmental officers/staff, this
Department is continuing the Plan Scheme on Training Research and
Monitoring. With the above measures, local level vigilance of TPDS by ration
card holders is being sought to be put in place. The Department has noted the
recommendations of the Committee and would endeavour to take further action.
However, it is to be mentioned that the vigilance machinery of TPDS can be
strengthened only when State Governments and UT administrations take this
task seriously.
In order to take help of information technology in better monitoring of TPDS
operations, a pilot project on computerization of TPDS operations at National/States/
Districts and Block levels is being undertaken during 11th Plan Period. For this the
NISG has been appointed as project consultant, it is studying processes and systems
of TPDS functioning in 4 pilot States to prepare detailed project report. Similarly, in
order to track movement of vehicles carrying TPDS commodities, piloting of GPS has
been taken up in three States. Piloting of smart cards (with biometric features) based
delivery of TPDS commodities is planned in Haryana and Chandigarh
In order to check diversion of wheat into open market, distribution of wheat flour
(i.e. atta) instead of wheat is being emphasized under a revised policy, issued in
January, 2008.
Vetting comments of Audit
Result of the 9 point action Plan may be furnished to PAC for their appreciation.
Findings of concurrent evaluation of PDS in 26 States may be furnished to PAC for
their appreciation
Further reply
On implementation of the 9-Point Action Plan, as per reports received upto 30.9.2008,
the following results have been achieved:-
(i) Review of BPL/AAY list : Thirty State & UT Governments have
reviewed the BPL & AAY lists.
(ii) Ensure leakage free : Twenty-nine State & UT Governments
distribution of foodgrains by have taken steps to  stop diversions
taking action against the guilty and leakages and punish the guilty.

15
(iii) Involvement of PRI : Twenty four State & UT Governments
Members have PRI Members in Vigilance
Committees in relation to functioning of
TPDS.
(iv) Display of BPL/AAY : T wenty nine State & UT Governments
list on the FPS have displayed BPL/AAY lists at FPSs.
(v) District and FPS wise : Eighteen State & UT Governments have
allocation of foodgrains put displayed information about allocation
on website as public scrutiny of foodgrains on the website.
(vi) Door step delivery of : Sixteen State & UT Governments
foodgrains arranged door step delivery of
foodgrains.
(vii) Timely availability of : Thirty one State & UT Governments
foodgrains at FPS have made arrangements for timely
availability of foodgrains at FPSs.
(viii) Training of Members : Twenty-five State & UT Governments
of FPS level Vigilance arranged training/trained Members of
Committee. FPS level Vigilance Committee.
(ix) Step taken towards : Government of India will be implementing
Computerization of a Central Sector Scheme during XI Five
TPDS operations Year Plan for computerization of PDS
operations, with an outlay of  Rs. 376 Cr.
The DPR is being drawn up in
association with NISG and EFC proposal
will be circulated during 2008.
Concurrent Evaluation Study was awarded on TPDS for twenty six States to NCAER
& IIPA. NCAER was to conduct study in twelve States whereas IIPA was awarded
study for fourteen States. NCAER has submitted its study report for all the twelve
States. Report for the six States namely Assam, Mizoram, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh & Rajasthan has been accepted by the Government. Copy of summary of
findings is given in Annexe-IX. Report for another six States Kerala, Maharashtra,
Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand & Delhi is under examination. IIPA has not
yet submitted its final report for the fourteen States in which the study was awarded to
them.
[File No. 14(3)/2006-PD.III]
Observation/Recommendation
The examination of the policy regarding the procurement of foodgrains revealed
that farmers were to get remunerative prices for their produce so as  to reduce fluctuations
in grain prices, avoid distress sale of foodgrains and to build up a stock of foodgrains,
which would ensure supply of subsidized foodgrains to the needy and poor through

16
the Targeted Public Distribution System and other welfare schemes like the Mid-day
Meal Scheme and Food for Work Programmes. In the system that has been prevalent,
foodgrains procurement was handled primarily through the Food Corporation of India
in association with the State Governments and their procurement agencies. However,
with the objective of reducing over-dependence of the State Governments on the
Food Corporation of India for ensuring availability of locally produced foodgrains,
the Government in 1997-98 introduced the Scheme of Decentralized Procurement of
foodgrains. Under this Scheme, the States/Union Territories themselves procured
foodgrains, retained the quantity required for Public  Distribution System and
surrendered the rest to Food Corporation of India for the Central Pool.  The Committee
have been apprised that this Scheme has been implemented in eleven States/Union
Territories and has been very successful particularly in increasing procurement of rice
in non-traditional States. In the case of wheat, procurement in  four decentralized
procurement States namely, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttaranchal and Gujarat
had declined owing to increasing private purchases of wheat in these States. The
Committee have been apprised that in order to increase wheat procurement by
Government agencies in these States, the Ministry had initiated certain measures,
which included enhancement of commission to societies/sub-agents to 2.5% of
Minimum Support Price and engagement of National Agricultural Cooperative
Marketing Federation of India (NAFED) to procure wheat on behalf of Food Corporation
of India in Uttar Pradesh. The Ministry have also sent letters to States to ensure that
private traders paid statutory levies and did not get price  advantage over Food
Corporation of India by not paying levies. The Committee hope that the shortfall
noticed in decentralized procurement would be overcome by the corrective measures
that have been initiated by the Ministry. The hindrances faced by the States which
were implementing Decentralized Procurement Scheme ought to be addressed by the
Ministry in order to realize the objectives of the Scheme. Necessary instructions should
be issued by the Ministry in this regard to the concerned States. The Committee would
also like to emphasise that there should be adequacy in Cash Credit limits sanctioned
by Reserve Bank of India to the State Governments, their expenses be reimbursed
in toto and the subsidies be released by the Central Government timely.
[Sl. No. 4]
Para No. 190 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
The State Governments that adopted the decentralized procurement scheme had
requested for adequate attention on the following issues:—
1. Sanction of adequate Cash-Credit Limits in time by the Reserve Bank of India.
2. Full reimbursement of expenses and timely release of subsidy by the Central
Government.

17
With regard to reimbursement of expenses, the following additional components of
costs have been sanctioned to DCP States:—
(i) Transportation cost from the procurement centre to the storage point and from
the storage point to the milling point (in case of paddy);
(ii) Commission to Societies at 2.5% of MSP on lines of Arhatia Commission in
Punjab/Haryana;
(iii) Payment of cost towards transportation of gunnies from railheads to procurement
centers;
(iv) Enhancement of milling rate of parboiled rice from Rs. 15 per quintal to
Rs. 20 per quintal.
For effecting early payment of subsidies to the State agencies payments are released
through electronic clearing.
With regard to problems faced by DCP States in sanctioning of adequate Cash-
Credit Limits in time by the Reserve Bank of India, a working group constituted under
the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance
has recommended that valuation of stocks of State Agency should be done at average
acquisition cost for the first 12 months and thereafter at the highest CIP amounts the
all welfare schemes for the next 2 years. However, RBI is of the view  that timely and
speedy disbursal of food subsidy is the only solution to the problem of irregularities in
the food credit account, rather than relaxation to the norms and has requested to set up
effective steps for a stock audit so as to the principle of valuation  of stocks based on
the closest market value as a long term solution to the issue.
Minister of Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution has also
written in this regard to Finance Minister requesting him to advise the RBI to revise
the system of valuation of stock as recommended by the Working Group constituted
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, D/o Financial Services. D/o Financial Services
has also written a letter to RBI wherein it has been requested that RBI may narrow
down the difference in valuation principle of stocks of FCI and that of State Agencies
to make it at par with FCI's valuation of stock at least for a period of 12 months from the
date of procurement. In order to sort out the difficulties of DCP States, D/o Food and
PD is pursuing the matter with RBI regularly.
(File No. 166(9)/2008-Py.I)
Observation/Recommendation
Under the Scheme of Decentralised Procurement, the States/Union Territories
themselves procured foodgrains, retained the quantity required for Public Distribution
System and surrendered the rest to Food Corporation of India for the Central Pool. The
Scheme intended to eliminate over-dependence on Food Corporation of India for
Public Distribution System supplies of foodgrains, to free them from the task of
procurement and to reduce the subsidy burden, as the economic cost of the States/
Union Territories was expected to be lower than that of Food Corporation of India.
However, it has been noticed that the economic cost of Decentralised Procurement

18
was higher in many cases than the corresponding cost of FCI's operations in the same
State. There were also instances of avoidable handling charges by way of infructuous
movement of foodgrains from procurement centers to FCI godowns and again from the
godowns to their storage point, leading to payment of avoidable incidental charges to
the State Governments. In the light of the higher costs and lower procurement reported
under the Decentralised Procurement Scheme, the Committee desire that the Ministry
would do well to re-visit the Scheme with a view to optimising both costs and extent of
procurement.
The examination of the Decentralised Procurement Scheme revealed that there was
a declining trend in wheat procurement in Rabi Marketing Season 2007-2008. The
lower procurement was attributed to low market arrivals and high private participation.
Further, since this was less than the requirement for the Targeted Public Distribution
System and the Welfare Schemes, recourse had to be taken to import wheat to meet the
requirements. The Committee feel that such a scenario would not have arisen if the
procurement by FCI was prompt and proactive and procurement under Decentralised
Procurement Scheme was effective. The Committee would therefore recommend that
the Ministry should critically examine the reasons for the shortfall in procurement of
wheat and apprise the Committee of the corrective measures for proactive procurement
taken by Government agencies including the policy changes initiated thereupon.
In the context of shortfalls in procurement, the Committee apprehend that such
shortfalls, if not promptly attended to, would affect the buffer stocks of the country
and consequently put the food security of the nation at a risk. Since shortfalls in
procurement cannot always be made up through imports, the Ministry, may, if necessary,
have a re-look at the present procurement systems and bring about requisite changes
in order to increase the efficiency of procurement. In this context, the Committee are of
the view that the Government may consider formulating a comprehensive National
Food Security Policy, enunciating the strategies to be followed for augmenting
foodgrains production in the country, particularly in a scenario when global production
of foodgrains is on the decline and the prices are on the rise. It is imperative that the
Government takes urgent steps to cushion the country from the impact of global food
situation. The impact of global climate changes may also be factored in while planning
our policy.
[Sl. No. 5]
Para No. 191 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
Economic cost of FCI is fixed on All India basis and as such cost of individual
operations of FCI in a State is not comparable to that of State. Some of the FCI's
operations are booked under distribution cost as compared to State where these
operations are booked under acquisition cost. Also the multiple handling of foodgrains
in States are sometimes necessary as State deliver foodgrains to FCI in surplus districts
and lift foodgrains from the FCI in deficit districts.
The Ministry is continuously striving to bring down the cost of procurement and
distribution operation of DCP States as well as that of FCI. Ministry is insisting on

19
strict auditing of DCP States operations so that only the genuine expenditure incurred
by the States are reimbursed and any avoidable expenditure is not allowed. The
Government has also been emphasizing upon the State Governments to finalize their
accounts of previous years so that their economic cost can be finalized.
In the light of constant monitoring of developments under DCP like utilizing Central
Pool stocks for the schemes of the State for supplying subsidized foodgrains, apart
from TPDS and Other Welfare Schemes, the MOUs signed earlier are being amended in
order to make the DCP opertions more effective. This Ministry shall continue the
monitoring for continuous improvement of both cost and extent of procurement.
Over and above several measures taken to maximize wheat procurement in the
Central Pool in RMS 2008-09, specific measure to encourage wheat procurement in
DCP States such as Commission to Societies/Sub-agent @ 2.5% of MSP has been
permitted for U.P., M.P., etc. on the lines of Arhatia Commission in Punjab and Haryana.
Further, NAFED has been permitted to procure wheat on behalf of FCI in M.P. and
Gujarat. State Government including State undertaking DCP Scheme have been
instructed to closely monitor mandi arrivals, ensure that all the taxes/levies are paid by
the private companies/traders when they move foodgrains from the State.
The details regarding production of wheat, target fixed for wheat procurement in
RMS 2008-09 and actual procurement of wheat during RMS 2007-08 and 2008-09 is as
follows:—
(in lakh tonnes)
Estimated Estimated Actual Actual
production procurement in procurement in procurement in
(2007-08 RMS 2008-09 RMS 2007-08 RMS 2008-09
crop)* (as on 12.8.08)
DCP States
Uttar Pradesh 254.32 20.00 5.46 31.23
Madhya Pradesh 62.67 3.00 0.57 23.37
Gujarat 37.64 2.00 0.02 4.15
Uttarakhand 7.07 1.00 0.00 0.84
Total 361.70 26.00 6.05 59.59
Others 422.31 127.00 105.23 166.14
Total 784.01 153.00 11 1.28 225.73
*As per 4th Estimates of DAC (July, 2008)
As may be seen, 59.59 lakh tonnes of wheat has been procured by DCP States as on
12.8.2008 against 6.05 lakh tonnes procured during RMS 2007-08. Procurement of
wheat in DCP States of UP, Gujarat and MP has been remarkably higher as compared to
previous year and it constitutes 26% of the overall wheat procerement in 2008-09.
Wheat was never procured in Gujarat in previous years and it's a success of DCP
operation that Gujarat has also contributed to wheat procurement.

20
Since 225.72 lakh tonnes of wheat have been procured in current RMS 2008-09
against the requirement of 150 lakh tonnes for TPDS and other welfare schemes, there
is no need to import wheat in 2008-09.
In order to increase production of wheat, rice and coarse cereals, Centrally Sponsored
Integrated Cereals Development Programme (ICDP) is in operation from October, 2000.
The Government has also initiated two schemes for increasing foodgrains production
and improving the agricultural growth in the country. These are (i) National Food
Security Mission (NFSM) and (ii) Rashtriya Krishi Vikash Yojana (RKVY). NFSM has
been launched in the country from 2007-08. It aims at increasing the production of rice
by 10 million tonnes by the end of the Eleventh Plan (2011-12). This alongwith the
Rashtriya Krishi Vikash Yojana will improve the supply position of foodgrains including
wheat.
(File No. 166(9)/2008-Py.I)
Observation/Recommendation
The effectiveness of procurement is invariably linked to the quantum and nature of
agricultural production including land use and cropping patterns across the country.
Changes in croping patterns like shift towards commercial crops would thus have to
be studied for their impact on procurement for the TPDS and its implications for food
security in the country. Therefore, close co-ordination and synergy between the
Ministries of Food and Agriculture is called for in order to ensure that yields of food
crops are adequate and agricultural production is sustained to keep pace with the ever
growing demands of the nation. The Committee desire that the Government through
investments invital agricultural infrastructure, credit support and the use of latest farm
techniques should focus on accelerated foodgrains production on a sustainable basis
which would help the nation to achieve food security in a realistic timeframe. For this
purpose, it is impreative that Government must revamp and gear up their Department
of Agricultural Research and Extension, particularly the Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR). The Committee's Observations/Recommendations in their 40th Report
(14th LS) on the Performance Review of ICAR, its various projects and their impact on
productivity should be taken note of in this context. The Committee would like to
emphasise that for ensuring food security and for making farming sustainable, new
frontiers of research in agriculture should be supported and the gap between academic
agricultural research and its effectiveness on the field should be bridged.
[Sl. No. 7]
Para No. 193 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has intimated that ICAR with
the State Agricultural Universities in the country is undertaking the research activities
in several foodgrain crops which include cereals and pulses. In crop improvement
programme the research activities includes use of conventional and innovating
technologies of frontier areas such as biotechnology, genetic engineering, molecular
biology, bio-informatics etc. for the development of suitable varieties and hybrids for

21
different agro-ecologies. Similarly several matching crop production and protection
technologies have been developed and are being developed considering the need of
the time. Low cost technologies have been developed which includes use of organics,
Resource Conservation Technologies, Integrated Pest Management modules and
varieties having better water and nutrients use efficiency.
It has further been informed that ICAR is involved in providing technical support in
National Food Security Mission, a Centrally sponsored scheme which has been
launched by DAC from 2007-08 with an objective to enhance the production of rice,
wheat and pulses by 10, 8, 2 million tonnes respectively during the XI Plan period.
ICAR is providing details about the newly released varieties/hybrids along with the
production and protection technologies in implementation of this scheme. Further,
ICAR is also involved in production of breeder seed as per requirement.
The Council has provided sufficient funds for the scheme related to rice, wheat and
pulses during the XI Plan. Some of the highlights and achievements of rice, wheat and
pulses are as under:—
Rice:
— Seven new rice hybrids namely RH 204, Suruchi-5402, Pant Sankar Dhan 3,
Narendra Usar Sankar Dhan 3, DRRH 2, Rajlakshmi and Ajay with higher
heterosis were released during the period 2002-2006.
— Using molecular markers three BLB resistance genes xa5, xa13, xa21, have been
pyramided in the background of BPT 5204 and Pusa Basmati.
— Pusa Sugandh 2, Pusa Sugandh 3, Pusa Sugandh 5, Vasumatiu, Mugand
Sugandh and the first superfine grained aromatic rice hybrid Pusa RH 10 were
released for cultivation.
Wheat:
— Eight new varieties PBW 7, PBW 550, HI 1544, HI 8663 for timely sown
conditions and DBW 16, RAJ 4083, HD 2833 and HD 2932 for late sown condition
have been released.
— Diversification of rice-wheat system by introducing short duration crops like
potato/vegetables/peas in between early rice and late sown wheat and
introducing green manuring of green gram crop during the turn around period
after wheat harvest have been found more remunerative and also helpful in
increasing soil fertility. This also resulted in curtailing the problem of Phalaris
minor weed.
Pulses:
— Six varieties of chickpea, 8 varieties each of pigeon pea and mung bean, 3 of
urdbean, 4 of fieldpea, 3 each of rajmah, lentil and arid legumes were developed
suitably for different agro-ecological zones.
— First CMS based pigeonpea hybrid GTH 1 released for Gujarat and short
duration varieties like mungbean (IPM 89-125), urdbean (WBU 109) and fieldpea
(Adarsh and Vikas) have been developed.

22
— Rice-rajmash-mungbean for upland conditions and rice-wheat mungbean under
lowland condition proved more productive under crop intensification.
— An upgraded prototypes of IPR mini dal mill has been developed that avoids
wear and tear.
(File No. 166(9m)/2008-Py. I)
Observation/Recommendation
The personnel of FCI looking after quality control are responsible for ensuring the
requisite quality of the procured foodgrains as per the prescribed specifications.
However, it has come to the notice of the Committee that there was widespread
acceptance of sub-standard rice by the designated FCI officials in Punjab and Haryana
regions. There were significant shortfalls in checking and inspection of depots by the
designated officials of FCI. Whatever inspections were done appeared to be perfunctory
and the overall performance of the quality control officials found to be far from
satisfactory, as was ascertained during the visits of the Inspection squads of the
regional offices of FCI. It is thus evident that FCI needs to pull up its quality control
wing and immediately follow-up each quality related complaint scrupulously. Action
should also be initiated against the officials found to be negligent. The Committee
should be apprised of the steps taken by FCI in the matter.
[Sl. No. 9]
Para No. 195 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
Procurement by FCI:
There is a laid down mechanism to ensure that foodgrains are procured by FCI
strictly as per the prescribed specifications by means of checking and inspections of
foodgrains from Technical Assistant level to Executive Director level for each and
every procuring region including Punjab and Haryana. Besides, there is also a
mechanism of super-checks and inspection by the officers of FCI Headquarters
including its Vigilance Division to ensure the quality of procured foodgrains. Further,
before the onset of Kharif and Rabi Marketing Seasons every year, FCI Headquarters
circulates a well defined set of instructions for compliance to each and every level of
its field offices.
Procurement by State Governments/their agencies:
State Governments and their procuring agencies are also engaged in procurement
of foodgrains under Price Support Operations either on behalf of FCI or independently
under Decentralized Procurement Scheme. As the finances of Government of India are
involved in procurement operations, it becomes imperative on the part of the procuring
agencies (FCI and State agencies) to adhere to quality norms fixed by the Government
of India and facilitate inspection by the officers of the Quality Control Cells of
Government of India and FCI.

23
Keeping in view the need to streamline the procurement of foodgrains under
Decentralized Procurement Scheme guidelines for the State Governments and their
agencies had been formulated and issued by this Department on 9.10.2002. These
guidelines clearly emphasize inspection of the stocks procured by State Governments/
their agencies by the FCI. A copy of the guidelines is enclosed (Annexe-II). To ensure
that foodgrains are procured strictly as per uniform specifications and regular inspection
of stocks by FCI is facilitated, these instructions have again been reiterated on
19th September, 2007 (Annexe-III).
Despite these checks, stray incidents of acceptance of beyond specification stocks
have been reported which cannot be avoided in view of the volume of procurement
operations within a short span of time. Such stray incidents are also attributable to
shortage of quality control staff and officers at the purchase as well as supervisory
level in FCI; besides in some cases to malafide intention of procuring officers/officials.
Officers/officials responsible for such lapses are dealt with by the FCI sternly. There is
a mechanism to punish the defaulters by initiating departmental vigilance action, which
not only allows to correct the defaulting officials/officers but acts as a deterrent to
others.
During the crop year 2004-05, instances where sub-standard foodgrains were
procured and despatched by FCI officials in Punjab region have come to notice.
480 quality complaints in respect of a quantity of 5.65 lakh MTs of rice despatched
from Punjab were received from various consignee regions during KMS 2004-05.
FCI had initiated disciplinary action against 12 category-I officers, 74 category-II
officers and 150 category-III officials. 2 category-I officers were removed from the
service and on others, penalty was imposed. 11 category-II officers and 42 category-III
officers have been compulsorily retired under FCI Staff Regulations.
FCI Punjab Region had taken following steps to deal with the situation during KMS
2005-06:—
(i) Punjab Region procured a quantity of 85.82 lakh MTs of rice during
KMS 2005-06 and Area Managers had inspected 290431 MTs rice (3.37% of
total procurement) in their respective areas in comparison to prescribed norms
of 171650 (2%), which is more by 118781 MT than prescribed norms. AGMs
(QC) of the Punjab Region had to inspect 858248 MT rice (10% of procurement)
as per prescribed norms but total inspection done by them was 942302 MTs
(10.97%) which was 84054 MTs more than the prescribed limit.
(ii) Dy. General Manager (QC) and General Manager of the region had also
conducted inspections as per norms in spite of their other official administrative
obligations.
(iii) The Regional Office, Punjab as a preventive measure had constituted 8 vigilance
squads to oversee the rice receipt operations in the region. The vigilance squad
had inspected 29,624 MTs of rice and found 1275 MTs as BRL for which the
cases were sent to Vigilance Branch for taking further action against the
delinquents.

24
As a result of these measures, the cases of quality complaints recorded in the
consignee regions were only for 19601 MTs of rice, which is only 0.23% of the total
stocks procured in Punjab region during KMS 2005-06. These quality complaints were
sent to Vigilance Branch of FCI for taking action against the defaulters. Similar steps
had been taken in respect of Haryana Region also.
(File No. 40-11/2006-QCC)
Observation/Recommendation
It has been revealed that during the period 2000-04, FCI incurred a total loss of
Rs. 556.88 crore on account of transit shortages of foodgrains, which aggravated the
subsidy burden of the Government. The factors cited for transit losses in foodgrains
were mainly pilferage and theft en-route, driage, multiple handling, weak texture of
gunnies, spillage through wagon holes etc. The Committee are surprised to learn that
FCI had not set any norms for transit and storage losses. Further, FCI had also incurred
storage losses of Rs. 842.31 crore during the period 1999-2004. No norms have been
fixed even for these losses despite the Ministry's instructions and the stipulation in
FCI's Quality Control Manual. Huge number of cases involving transit and storage
losses amounting to several crores of rupees remained pending for investigation and
disposal. The Committee are distressed to note that FCI has not been paying proper
attention to controlling transit and storage losses in the movement of foodgrains.
Negligence on the part of officials responsible for this may be investigated. In case it
is true that tolerable levels of such losses have not been laid down, the Committee
would urge the Ministry to get clear-cut norms/guidelines formulated in this respect.
The latest techniques/modes of transportation also require to be adopted for the
movement of foodgrains so that the losses occurring due to avoidable/preventible
factors could be minimized.
The Committee would also like the Ministry to enquire into reported instances
of losses arising out of smuggling of foodgrains out of the country to
neighbouring countries like Nepal and Bangladesh and apprise the Committee
about the findings.
[Sl. No. 10]
Para No. 196 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
1. The Department of Food and Public Distribution and FCI have been constantly
monitoring the transit and storage losses. All field functionaries of FCI have also been
advised to closely and constantly monitor storage and transit losses, review the trend
of such losses in the monthly meetings and take necessary corrective/remedial measures
to reduce the same. The overall position of such losses is also being reviewed by
CMD, FCI regularly. Concerted efforts made at all levels for reducing/containing S&T
losses i.e. by taking necessary corrective measures have successfully brought down
the percentage of such losses over the years.
2. Wherever negligence or lapse on the part of FCI officials detected leading to
storage and transit losses, disciplinary action is initiated by FCI. From 2005 onwards,

25
the details of the disciplinary cases initiated and penalties imposed in cases involving
storage and transit losses are as under:—
Y ear No. of cases No. of Cases Penalty imposed
initiated officials finished (Amount in Lakhs
during the involved of Rupees)*
year
2005 1002 5391 997 98.47
2006 1364 8014 1101 62.61
2007 1038 4729 388 83.77
2008 72 72 25 4.14
up to March
Total 3476 18206 2511 248.99
3. Apart from the recoveries, there are various kinds of stringent penalties which
have been imposed for the various lapses including storage loss and transit loss
cases. The details of the same are as under:—
Sl. Nature of Penalty 2005 2006 2007 2008
No. imposed (up to
April)
(i) Dismissal/removal/compulsory retired 44(1) 79(3) 50(-) 9(-)
(ii) Reduction in rank 30(-) 30(-) 46(-) 6(-)
(iii) Reduction in time scale of pay 313(2) 318(2) 274(4) 108(-)
(iv) Withholding of increment 118(2) 216(1) 195(1) 21(-)
(v) Recovery from pay
of the loss caused to FCI 886(2) 1731(23) 1821(35) 548(2)
(vi) Withholding of promotion 5(-) 2(-) 66(-) 0(-)
(vii) Censure 307(6) 382(6) 358(16) 218(3)
Total 1703(13) 2758(35) 2816(56) 910(5)
(viii) W arning issued/exoneration/
cases closed 248(5) 323(4) 400(23) 126(1)
Grand Total 1951(18) 3081(39) 3216(79) 1036(6)
(Note: Figures in bracket indicate penalty imposed on Category-I Officers out of the
total figures indicated above).
From the above, it is evident that FCI management has been taking strict action
against officials responsible for storage and transit losses.
4. The possibility of laying down acceptable levels of transit and storage losses has
been examined in detail by FCI and the Department. Various Committees have been
formed to go into this issue. In January 2004, M/s RITES was also entrusted with a
study on the transit losses of foodgrains. However, after examining the recommendations

26
made by various Committees, it has been decided that the norms for storage and
transit losses should not be fixed as the losses vary from place to place, grain to grain,
storage period, natural phenomenon like climatic conditions, etc. Further, in case an
acceptable limit for storage and transit losses is conveyed to the field offices of FCI,
there is a possibility of misuse of this provision and theft/pilferage may be resorted to
by the staff as long as the total losses are within the stipulated limits. Therefore,
instead of laying down acceptable limits for these losses, FCI has continued the
existing system of investigation into each and every case of storage and transit loss.
FCI has now again appointed an independent Consultant in December, 2007 for
undertaking a scientific study on norms of storage and transit losses. The report of the
consultant has not yet been received by the FCI.
However, it has been the constant endeavour of the Department to minimize storage
and transit losses and FCI has been advised to minimize these. Accordingly, in the
MoUs signed by the Department with FCI, stiff targets of storage and transit losses at
the aggregate level are laid down in order to evaluate its efficiency. In the MoU signed
by the Department with FCI for 2008-09, target of 0.18% for storage losses and 0.40%
for transit losses has been laid down.
5. In order to minimize storage and transit losses by adopting the latest techniques/
mode of transportation, a National Policy on Bulk Handling, Storage and Transportation
of foodgrains was formulated in June, 2000. Under this policy, integrated bulk handling
and transportation facilities are to be created at identified locations in procuring and
consuming areas through private sector participation on Build-Own-Operate (BOO).
At present, two locations have been identified and M/s Adani Agri Logistic Ltd. has
been formed as Special Purpose Company (SPC) for the project and two Base Depots
at Moga and Kaithal having 2 lakh MT capacity each have been commissioned and
FCI has started using these silos. During the current Rabi marketing season 2008-09,
2 lakh MT of wheat has been stored in each silo in Moga and Kaithal. Based on the
performance of the pilot project, this bulk handling, storage and transportation model
decision regarding its replication in other circuits would be taken.
6. The reported instances of smuggling of foodgrains out of the country to the
neighbouring countries are not pertaining to the stock held by FCI and therefore, there
is no question of losses. However, as smuggling of foodgrains decreases their net
availability in the country, the Department has been taking up this issue with
Home Ministry, Govt. of India and also with the concerned State Governments to
check smuggling of foodgrains.
Vetting comments of Audit
Findings of the consultant report may be furnished to PAC.
Further reply
It has been informed by FCI that the Consultant's report on norms for storage and
transit losses of foodgrains is expected by December, 2008.
(File No. 12-1/2008-M.II)

27
Observation/Recommendation
The Public Distribution System is built around the network of 'Fair Price Shops' and
these distribution centers are under the purview of the State Governments. State-level
Departments of Food and Civil Supplies regulate networks of ration shops within their
jurisdiction and are responsible for allocating licenses to the private traders who operate
the shops. The Committee have found that there were numerous irregularities in the way
Fair Price Shops operated. These included non-display of stock position, beneficiaries
attached and scale of ration allowed, acknowledgement from beneficiaries by way of
signature/thumb impressions not been obtained, improper accounting of foodgrains
issued and irregular maintenance of requisite registers. With regard to these deficiencies,
the Committee have been assured that the field machinery of the State and Union Territory
Governments are in place to ensure compliance by the Fair Price Shop owners. The
Ministry have suggested that these deficiencies could be eliminated or minimised if the
Vigilance Committees at the Fair Price Shops level functioned actively and if there was
involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions in the Vigilance Committees. Further, the
Ministry have sought to assure that the enabling environment for taking requisite action
had been provided in the form of Public Distribution System (Control) 2001, guidelines
and other operational prescriptions. The Ministry's explanation notwithstanding, Audit
sample survey in diverse States like Manipur and Delhi has revealed major lapses with
regard to the enforcement of rules and procedures and compliance by the Fair Price
Shops (FPS). Several instances  of the beneficiary households receiving foodgrains at
double the stipulated prices were noticed. Neither were the foodgrains issued according
to the prescribed scale. A number of households complained of erratic supply by the
FPS. Furthermore, significantly large number of beneficiaries complained of poor quality
of the foodgrains issued. It was also common practice that the FPS owners did not care
to observe the prescribed timings for opening of shops, which resulted in avoidable rush
and long queues. The measures stated to have been initiated by the Ministry could thus
be construed as merely routine or ritualistic without the intended outcomes. The Committee
would therefore recommend that the vigilance mechanism of transporting grains and Fair
Price Shops should be made stringent with deterrent provisions operating against the
offenders as well as the guilty officials. Modalities of social audit as adopted in Guidelines
of Ministry of Rural Development for National Rural Employment Guarantee Act should
also be harnessed to support public vigilance.
[Sl. No. 16]
Para No. 202 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
It may be stated that PDS is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central
and the State Governments. The Central Government has taken the responsibility for
procurement, storage, transportation and bulk allocation of foodgrains, etc. The
responsibility for effectively distributing the same to the consumers through the network
of Fair Price Shops (FPS) lies with the State Governments. The operational
responsibilities including allocation within the State, identification of families below
poverty line, issue of ration cards, supervision and monitoring the functioning of FPSs
rest with the State Governments.

28
For making the vigilance mechanism strong for FPS, by involvement of Panchayati
Raj Institutions in the functioning of TPDS, detailed guidelines were issued by this
Department in June, 1999 and to bring in a more transparent and accountable system of
distribution as a measure of social audit.
Further, as part of social audit of TPDS, Ministry has started monthly certification
of delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops and their distribution to ration card
holders by a Committee consisting of Urban/Local bodies/Panchayati Raj Institutions,
members of Self Help Groups and Vigilance Committee with effect from 1st April, 2008.
Similarly a provision similar to those of RTI Act was made in PDS (Control) Order, 2001
to make Fair Price Shop documents accessible to citizens. Guidelines for setting up of
Vigilance Committee at Village Level, Block Level, District Level and State Level have
also been issued. Revised Citizen's Charter has been issued in July, 2007. Clause XI,
Chapter 1 of the Revised Citizen's Charter (July 2007) also lays down the procedure for
Constitution of the Vigilance Committees at all levels.
In order to maintain supplies and securing availability and distribution of essential
commodities, Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001 has been notified on
August 31, 2001. Details on PDS (Control) Order, 2001 have been mentioned in reply to
paras 189, 197 and 208.
As part of vigilance action, under the EC Act 1955, the States & UT Governments
are employed to take penal action for irregularities under TPDS. The State/UT
Governments have been maintaining vigil over malpractices in TPDS and taking action
as per law. Details of action taken under Clauses 8 & 9 of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001
by State Governments/UT Administrations during the years 2005-06, 2006-07 and
2007-08 are given in Annexure-VII.
It is to be stated here that existing provisions of the Essential Commodities
Act, 1955, are already quite stringent. Therefore, what is required is their stricter
enforcement by the State Government/UT Administration machinery. The Department
will further emphasize upon them to improve the enforcement of Essential Commodities
Act provisions, including activizing Vigilance Committees.
(File No. 14(3)/2006-PD.III)
Observation/Recommendation
Another critical feature that came to the notice of the Committee was the fact that
the Fair Price Shops, which were economically unviable, continued to operate without
reasonable returns. Their net income in many places were less than even the income
limit prescribed for BPL beneficiaries. The Committee feel that the distribution network,
which totally relied on these Fair Price Shops would be put to jeopardy, if they are not
made economically viable and sustainable. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministry in coordination with State Governments should critically review the question
of viability of the Fair Price Shops so that their owners get reasonable returns.
Simultaneously, steps should also be intimated against the delinquent ones who should
be penalized. The Committee would also expect the Ministry to focus special attention
on areas with concentration of tribal population living below the poverty line.
[Sl. No. 17]
Para No. 203 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)

29
Action Taken by Government
The subject of viability of FPS was reviewed in detail on receipt of PEO and
ORG MARG reports.
To make operations of FPS viable, the Department has been taking steps. This
Department has requested all States to encourage Fair Price Shops to sell non-PDS
items. Similarly it has been requesting States to increase margin money paid to Fair
Price Shops to make them viable. Besides this, all the State/UT Governments have
been requested to adopt Gujarat and Kerala model to increase the viability of Fair Price
Shops. In Gujarat the State Government is encouraging the Fair Price Shops to upgrade
themselves as rural malls to increase their viability.
State Governments have been encouraging the FPS to sell non-PDS items. A
statement showing additional commodities being distributed through PDS outlets
other than wheat, rice, course-grains, sugar and kerosene oil (as reported by various
States/UT Governments) is enclosed (Annexure-VIII). From these details, it may be
seen except Bihar, Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and
Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep States and UTs, in rest of States and UTs
the FPSs are selling non-PDS items.
In order to focus on the poorest of the poor families in rural and urban areas,
Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) was launched in the year 2000 and all primitive
households have been chosen to be one of the three priority groups for selection in
expanded AAY (2nd and 3rd expansion) scheme. Thus the Department has been
focusing on tribal population living below poverty line since 2004.
(File No. 14(3)/2006-PD.III)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee were apprised that delay in loading and unloading of Railway wagons
attracted demurrage from Railways. In respect of operations carried out on contract
basis, demurrage/wharfage for delays was recoverable from contractors and in operations
carried out through departmental labour, Food Corporation of India was responsible.
During the examination of this issue, the Committee found that accrual of demurrage was
due to non-synchronisation of working hours of Food Corporation of India with that of
Railways, non-presence of labour on Sundays/Holidays, increase in loadabilityof wagons,
decrease in free time allowed by Railways for loading/unloading of rakes from 10 hours
to 9 hours and poor productivity of the departmental labour. A perusal of these reasons
which had caused payment of huge demurrage charges depicts that most of them were
not beyond human control and thus could be overcome by enhancing efficiency. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to make efforts to ensure that the operations
pertaining to loading and unloading are taken care of in such a manner that unreasonable
demurrage charges could be avoided. The Ministry must also take up the matter of
waiver of demurrage charges with Railways as per waiver norms governing bulk
consumers. The Committee were assured that the Ministry were trying to optimize the
movement of foodgrains using the linear programming Software. The Committee would
like to be apprised about its implementation and how cost effective it has proved to be.
[Sl. No. 18]
Para No. 204 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)

30
Action Taken by Government
1. The demurrage charges incurred by various regions of FCI are monitored by CMD,
FCI on a monthly basis and remedial/corrective action undertaken wherever possible.
The Department is also regularly monitoring the accrual of demurrage charges by FCI.
The major accruals of demurrage charges take place in the North-East Zone of FCI.
In order to minimize these, direct booking of Railway rakes on the broad gauge terminals
in North-East zone has been started. Further, the Department and FCI have also been
taking up the matter with Railway Board for improving facilities at Railway good-sheds
(especially better approach roads, proper lighting, etc.), which would help in reducing
accrual of demurrage charges.
2. The following steps have also been taken by FCI to bring down demurrage:—
/circlesolidAll Zones have been advised to investigate the reasons for rise in the demurrage
charges during 2007-08.
/circlesolidZones have advised their Regions to watch for on run position of day to day rake
movement from the Railways freight operation information system. Immediate
arrangements should be made to post sufficient staff who in turn advise the
concerned to engage adequate number of workmen and to provide adequate
number of trucks for quick movement of stocks from siding/good-sheds to FCI
depots paving the way for immediate release of wagons within free time allowed
by the Railways to avoid the incurrence of demurrage charges/detention.
/circlesolidGM (Regions) and Area Manager have to monitor the daily rake movement to
identify the centres which are facing chronic problems in unloading of rakes.
/circlesolidField offices have been advised to make alternative H&T arrangements to work
on Sundays and Holidays wherever the labourers are not attending office on
these days.
/circlesolidGMs (Regions) have been advised to expeditiously apply for first, second and
third appeal for waiver to the Railway authorities concerned to ensure that
100% waiver is obtained from the Railways.
/circlesolidDemurrage charges are paid only if these are economical as compared to OTA.
3. FCI has been maintaining close liaison with the Railways to get maximum waiver
of demurrage charges. The Department has also been taking up the issue with Railway
Board for maximum waiver of demurrage charges incurred by FCI. This issue has also
been raised by FCI in the various Customer-Railways meetings held. FCI has been able
to get waivers of around 30% of demurrage charges from Railways. Further, in its
Handling and Transport Contracts, FCI has imposed recovery of demurrage charges
from the contractors in case the detention to wagons is due to failure on the part of the
contractor.
/circlesolid

31
(Fig. in Lakh)
Accrual W aiver by Recovery from Paid by FCI
Railways H&TC
Zone 2005- 2006- 2007- 2005- 2006- 2007- 2005- 2006- 2007- 2005- 2006- 2007-
06 07 08 06 07 08 06 07 08 06 07 08
NE 1398.7 826.6 899.5 593.8 324.6 363.0 Nil Nil Nil 852.8 430.5 484.2
East 516.4 285.0 463.3 119.1 92.4 48.0 44.7 70.1 211.4 393.6 187.0 135.9
South 246.7 185.5 226.9 66.5 58.1 56.6 123.7 66.2 77.9 61.1 49.4 69.2
North 515.8 346.8 404.5 162.0 99.7 113.3 256.6 189.2 185.4 104.8 79.4 82.8
West 606.8 629.5 526.0 95.1 92.6 66.9 82.6 132.9 250.5 480.4 342.7 240.9
Total 3284.4 2273.4 2520.2 1036.5 667.4 647.8 507.6 458.4 725.2 1892.7 1089.0 1013.0
Zone-wise accrual of demurrage charges, waiver by Railways, recovery from H&TC and paid by FCI for the period from 2005-06 to
2007-08 is as under:—

32
It may be seen that during 2007-08 FCI has paid Rs. 1013 lakh of demurrage as
against 1089.0 lakh during 2006-07 and Rs. 1892.7 lakh paid during 2005-06.
4. The implementation of LP Linkages generated by the software given by Mc.Kinsey
& Co. was started in Feb, 2006. However, the implementation of the linkages generated
by the software has been affected due to the operational constraints of Railways. This
matter has been repeatedly taken up with Railways by FCI and the Department. Further,
to improve the software and take care of some constraints relating to Railways, FCI &
State Governments, it has been decided to prepare new dynamic software. Proposals
in this regard have been received from IITs/IIMs, RITES, MDI Gurgaon, ISI Kolkata
and are under examination by FCI. Quantification of savings would be possible only
after the new dynamic software is implemented.
(File No. 12-1/2008-M.II)
Observation/Recommendation
One of the envisaged objectives of the Public Distribution System is to ensure food
security to public at affordable prices and eradication of poverty. It is fact intended to
serve as a safety net for the poor whose number is more than 330 million. In this
respect, the Committee would like to dwell a little further on the current price scenario
that is prevalent in the country. The prices of essential commodities have shot up over
a short span of time and with the inflation rate also being high, the Committee fear that
in an uncontrolled situation, very soon, the numbers in the Below Poverty Line category
would swell, if they have not already reached alarming proportions. In addition, the
other inevitable consequence would be the vast price difference between the essential
commodities that are made available through the Public Distribution System and the
ones that are available in the open market. This huge gap would inevitably increase the
chances of pilferage and diversion, thereby compounding the problem further. Hence,
it is very important that the Government takes prompt and effective measures to control
the price rise including deterrent action against hoarders, if necessary, by amending
the Essential Commodities Act. Imposing a ban on Forward/Futures Trading in essential
commodities may also be considered for this purpose.
[Sl. No. 21]
Para No. 207 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
Following steps have been taken by the Government to contain rise in prices of
wheat and rice:—
Wheat in (RMS) 2008-09
(i) The MSP for wheat has been fixed at Rs. 1000 per quintal for RMS 2008-09 to
encourage farmers to grow more wheat thereby increasing the availability of
wheat in the open market.

33
(ii) Import of 18 lakh tonnes of wheat was done in 2007-08, which improved the
stock position of wheat in the Central Pool. The wheat stocks (as on 1.4.2008)
were 58 lakh tonnes i.e. 18 lakh tonnes more than the buffer norms of 40 lakh
tonnes at the start of RMS 2008-09.
(iii) Wheat exports on private account have been banned till further orders. Wheat
exports from Central Pool are also banned.
(iv) A notification titled "Wheat (Stock Declaration by Companies or Firms or
individuals) Order, 2008 has been issued under the Essential Commodities
Act, 1955 on 11.2.2008. The order provides that any Company or Firm or individual
which purchases wheat beyond 10,000 tonnes during 2008-09 shall furnish
return to Secretary, Food of the State from where maximum quantity has been
purchased.While a return for purchase of wheat beyond 25,000 tonnes is required
to be furnished to the Central Government.
(v) Department of Consumer Affairs has extended upto 31st  August, 2008
notification under the EC Act enabling State Governments to impose stock limit
on wheat.
(vi) Import of wheat on private account at zero duty has been permitted till further
orders.
Rice in (KMS) 2007-08
(i) The MSP for paddy was fixed at Rs. 645 and Rs. 675 per quintal for Common and
Grade 'A' variety respectively for KMS 2007-08, giving an increase of Rs. 65 per
quintal over the MSP of KMS 2006-07. The Government has announced a
bonus of Rs. 100 per quintal over and above the MSP of paddy in KMS 2007-08.
While considering recommendations of CACP for Kharif Crops to be marketed
in KMS 2008-09, the Government has decided to increase MSP of both varieties
of paddy by Rs. 105 per quintal on ad-hoc basis, with immediate effect.
Accordingly, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has issued order on
24.6.2008 for increasing the MSP to Rs. 850 per quintal for common and Rs. 880
per quintal for Grade 'A' paddy. Department of Food and Public Distribution has
implemented the orders of Government and new MSP has been made applicable
to paddy procured on or after 24.6.2008.
(ii) Export of non-basmati rice has been banned.
(iii) Import of rice at zero duty has been permitted.
(iv) A notification titled "Rice (Stock Declaration by Companies or Firms or
Individuals) Order 2007 has been issued under the Essential Commodities
Act, 1955 on 27.11.2007. The order provides that any Company or Firm or
individual which purchases paddy (in terms of rice) or rice beyond 10,000 tonnes
during Kharif Marketing Season 2007-08 (October-September) shall furnish a
return to the Secretary, Department of Food of the State from where maximum
quantity has been purchased. In case the purchase of paddy (in terms of rice) or
rice exceeds 25,000 tonnes (throughout the country) the retun in the prescribed
proforma to Department of Food & Public Distribution of Central Government.

34
Department of Consumer Affairs has informed that the Government had set up an
Expert Committee on 2.3.2007 under the Chairmanship of Professor Abhijit Sen, Member,
Planning Commission to study, inter alia, the extent of impact, if any of futures trading
on wholesale and retail prices of agricultural commodities. Besides as a matter of
abundant caution, the Government have suspended futures trading in eight comodities
namely, urad, tur, wheat, rice, chana, rubber, potato and soy oil. Department of CA
further intimated that the Expert Committee set up by the Government analyzed the
daily, weekly and monthly data on price volatility (spot price) and concluded that
given the conflicting results from daily as against weekly and monthly data, no strong
inference can be drawn on whether introduction of futures trade is associated with
decrease or increase in spot price volatility. The Expert Committee also analyzed annual
growth rate in prices of sensitive commodities (food grains and sugar) in pre-future
period and post future period and concluded that although inflation clearly increased
post-futures in some sensitive commodities that have higher weight in consumer price
indices, it is not possible to make any general claim that inflation accelerated more in
commodities with future trading.
The Central Government issued a Central Order No. 1373 (E) dated 29.8.2006 by
virtue of which the words or expressions made in respect of purchase, movement, sale,
supply, distribution or storage for sale in the "Removal of (Licensing requirements,
Stock limits and Movement Restrictions) on Specified Foodstuffs Order, 2002" notified
on 15.2.2002 have been kept in abeyance for commodities namely wheat and pulses for
a period of six months. The Order of 29.08.2006 was initially in force for a period of
6 months, which was extended thrice for a period of 6 months each by Central
Notification dated 27.2.2007, 31.8.2007 and 28.2.2008. This order is currently in force up
to 31.8.2008. The Order has permitted State/UT Governments to fix stock limits in
respect of wheat and pulses. With the approval of the Cabinet, the Government has
further decided to impose similar restrictions by keeping in abeyance some provisions
of the Central Order dated 15.2.2002 for a period of one year with respect to edible oils,
edible oilseeds and rice, so as to tackle the rising trend of prices as well as availability
of these commodities to the common people.
The State Governments/UT Administrations have been delegated powers to take
necessary action under the provisions under "The Essential Commodities Act, 1955"
and "The Prevention of Black marketing of Essential Commodities Act, 1980". Both
these Acts provide adequate powers to the State Governments/UT Administrations to
take necessary action against unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and
malpractices in essential commodities.
Secretary (Consumer Affairs) has also vide his d.o. letter dt. 14.6.2007 to Chief
Secretaries of all States/UTs, advised them to strengthen the enforcement machinery
to prevent mal practices in essential commodities and take necessary action against
the unscrupulous persons indulging in hoarding and black marketing of essential
commodities
(File No. 166(9)/2008-Py.I)

35
Observation/Recommendation
As a part of the process of over-seeing the process of procurement and distribution,
the Food Corporation of India (FCI) had entrusted the responsibility for conducting
regular and surprise inspection of sensitive spots, and for reviewing the procedures
that afforded scope for corruption to its Vigilance Division. This Division was also to
initiate measures for prevention, detection and punishment of those responsible for
corruption or misconduct. However, the Committee find to their dismay that the Vigilance
Division of FCI was almost non-functional, as several cases of misappropriation,
corruption, shortages and losses due to negligence or breach of contract reported to
the Vigilance Squads was constituted by theVigilance Division for conducting surprise
field inspections. Shockingly, on no occasion did the Vigilance Division of FCI make
suggestions for streamlining the procedures/contracts on the basis of the inputs/
feedback received by them.
Further, to strengthen vigilance, the Public Distribution System (Control) Order,
2001 had envisaged constitution of Vigilance Committees at State/Union Territory,
District and Block levels for the enforcement of guidelines and monitoring of the
functioning of Fair Price Shops. However, it was found that the Vigilance Committees
were not constituted in many States or when constituted hardly met, thus rendering
them ineffective. There was also no additional mechanism for verifying the distribution
of foodgrains to the beneficiaries. The system of inspection by district level officers
and the Vigilance Committees over the functioning of FPS was thus found to be
deficient. The Committee would therefore recommend that the Vigilance machinery of
the TPDS be made functional for better enforcement. In this respect, the Committee
have noted the initiatives of the Ministry to involve Members of the Panchayati Raj
Institutions in the Vigilance Committees. Modalities of social audit could also be
added to such measures. The Committee hope such healthy initiatives to decentralize
the process of enforcement will be followed up with all the States for greater
participation.
[Sl. No. 22]
Para No. 208 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
Vigilance Division in F.C.I. functions under the overall supervision of ED Vigilance
who has been appointed by the Government in consultation with Central Vigilance
Commission.
Instructions/circulars issued by various divisions of FCI indicating the procedures
are invariably screened in Vigilance Division and in case any changes/amendments are
needed, the same are conveyed to the operating division for further actions. Vigilance
Division has prepared a rules made easy booklet namely 'DOs and DONTs' which
could be reffered to immediately by the employees especially those working in the
field.

36
The full fledged separate vigilance squad is in existence since 1998 in F.C.I. Through
this division of F.C.I. surprise inspections are carried out at procurement centres,
loading stations, unloading stations etc.
Every year, an analysis is being done by Vigilance Division of FCI, Headquarters to
identify the sensitive spots which are prone to corruption so as to keep maximum vigil
on them. As a result of this, following preventive checks were conducted during the
last three years.
Y ear Regular Checks Surprise checks Total
2005 3247 2105 5352
2006 3764 2663 6427
2007 5266 3709 8975
On Account of Extensive Checking of the corruption prone areas and also screening
the files, following vigilance cases were initiated during the last three years by F.C.I.
Sl.No. Nature of irregularity 2005 2006 2007
1. Acceptance of illegal gratification/ 4 11 10
disproportionate assets
2. Defalcation of accounts/misappropriation 34 79 70
3. Misappropriation of dead stocks/ 13 6 11
construction of godowns
4. Purchase of sub-standard stocks 1026 569 288
5. Award of Handling and Transport 12 3 11
contracts
6. Transit/Storage Losses 901 1195 850
7. Administrative lapses/ 155 141 142
miscellaneous
Total 2145 2004 1382
It could be observed that exemplary punishment were imposed ranging 'dismissal
from service' to recoveries of the losses. The details are as shown here:—
Sl.No. Nature of irregularity 2005 2006 2007
(i) Dismissal/removal/compulsorily 44(1) 79(3) 50(-)
retired
(ii) Reduction in rank 30(-) 30(-) 46(-)
(iii) Reduction in time scale of pay 313(2) 318(2) 274(4)
(iv) W ithholding of increment 118(2) 216(1) 195(1)

37
(v) Recovery from pay of the loss 886(2) 1731(23) 1821(35)
 caused to FCI
(vi) W ithholding of promotion 5(-) 2(-) 66(-)
(vii) Censure 307(6) 382(6) 358(16)
Total 1703(13) 2758(35) 2816(56)
(viii) W arning issued/exoneration/cases 248(5) 323(4) 400(23)
closed
Grand Total 1951(18) 3081(39) 3216(79)
NOTE: Figures in bracket indicate penalty imposed on category-I officers out of the
total figures indicated above.
Apart from the above, following actions were taken to strengthen the vigilance
machinery in F.C.I.
Preventive Measures
1. Identification of depots where more storage/transit losses are incurred for
close review and checks.
2. Frequent surprise/squad checks at vulnerable depots/loading/unloading points/
centres, particularly during procurement operations.
3. Liaison and assistance to CBI and joining them in their raids/surprise checks.
4. Plugging loopholes in the system/procedure/instructions.
5. Preparation of doubtful integrity and agreed lists.
6. Scrutiny of property returns.
7. Identification of training needs.
8. Review of sensitive postings and appropriate suggestion to displace persons
of doubtful integrity.
9. Vigilance awareness programme to awaken the public against corruption.
Detection and punishment of those responsible for corruption and misconduct is
done in the following lines:—
1. Investigation of complaints.
2. Issue of charge sheets in prima facie established cases after preliminary inquiry.
3. Finalization of departmental proceedings (major/minor) within the prescribed
time limits as far as possible and imposition of appropriate penalties.
4. Review of pending complaints and disciplinary proceedings at the level of
lower disciplinary authorities.
Sl.No. Nature of irregularity 2005 2006 2007

38
5. Exemplary punishment in cases involving conspiracy or misconduct by
individual officers as a strategy to sabotage the system, in appropriate cases.
6. Reference to CBI/local police of cases where besides departmental action,
criminal misconduct/nexus with outside parties is suspected.
Apart from that it is to highlight that FCI is pursuing vigilance cases which have
been intiated to dispose of in a time bound manner and the gist of vigilance cases
initiated and disposed of during the last three years is as under:—
Pendency and Disposal of Vigilance cases
PERIOD Opening Number T otal Number Closing
Balance at the of cases number of of cases Balance
beginning of added cases finalised
the year during the
year
2005 1219 2877 4096 1951 2145
2006 2145 2940 5085 3081 2004
2007 2004 2594 4598 3216 1382
The column No. 5 indicates accelerated process of disposal. From column No. 6 it
could be clear that the pendencies are reduced to a great extent.
Because of these sincere and dedicated efforts of FCI, the transit and storage
losses have come done significantly over a period of time which can be seen from the
following data:—
Transit Losses
(Qty. in lakh MT/Value Rupees in crores)
Y ear Loss Qty. Loss Value Total Qty. %age of Loss
Issued
2000-01 1.56 145.31 375.27 0.42
2001-02 1.44 143.02 578.98 0.25
2002-03 3.17 309.39 831.34 0.38
2003-04 2.32 244.59 821.18 0.28
2004-05 1.46 156.37 767.02 0.19
2005-06 1.17 133.87 729.69 0.16
2006-07* 1.36 153.22 642.29 0.21

39
Storage Losses
(Qty. in lakh MT/Value Rupees in crores)
Y ear Loss Qty. Loss V alue Total Qty. %age of Loss
Moved
2000-01 1.55 134.76 185.40 0.84
2001-02 1.42 123.12 234.28 0.61
2002-03 1.70 148.52 297.46 0.57
2003-04 1.70 150.48 341.74 0.50
2004-05 1.83 149.93 382.77 0.48
2005-06 1.51 143.00 355.75 0.43
2006-07* 1.25 130.39 326.92 0.38
(Prov.)
*Figures of 2006-07 are unaudited.
Apart from control of losses, the vigilance measures in detection and exemplary
punishment of corrupt have resulted improvement in the quality of foodgrains procured
and distributed. As a result quality complaints have come down over a period of time.
The details of last three years are as under:—
Y ear No. of quality complaints
2005 276
2006 107
2007 89
Joint Secretary, Vigilance in the Department has been asked to review the
performance of Vigilance Division of F.C.I. in every quarter and submit a report to the
Government.
It may be stated that PDS is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central
and the State Governments. The Central Government has taken the responsibility for
procurement, storage, transportation and bulk allocation of foodgrains, etc. The
responsibility of effectively distributing the same  to the ration cardholders through
the network of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) lies with the State Governments. The operational
responsibilities including allocation within the State, identification of families below
poverty line, issue of ration cards to them, supervision over and monitoring the
functioning of FPSs rest with the State Governments.
Review of TPDS functioning is a continuous ongoing process. To overcome the
shortcomings pointed out by PEO (Planning Commission) and ORG Marg reports,
a 9-point Action Plan was formulated to tbe implemented by State/UT Governments. A
copy of the 9-point Action Plan is annexed. The Deptt. of Food and Public Distribution

40
is continuously reviewing process of implementation of the 9-point Action Plan.
Secretary, Government of India has been taking it up with Chief Secretaries of States
and UT Governments, and Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution
has written to Chief Ministers drawing their personal attention for taking strict action
to eliminate diversion and leakages under the TPDS. State & UT Governments have
reported reduction in diversions and leakages of foodgrains under TPDS through:—
(a) elimination of bogus ration cards,
(b) introduction of coupons/bar coded coupons in some States,
(c) allocation of Fair Price Shops to Women's Self-Help Groups, and
(d) door delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops.
It may be mentioned here that, as recommended by the Committee, while reviewing
functioning of TPDS, advice of experts is also taken.
As a part of continuous monitoring and review of TPDS operation, experts like
NCAER have been engaged to evaluate performance of TPDS and suggest corrective
measures for rectifying the problems noticed. International agencies like FAO do not
seem to have any experience of operating a PDS like in our country.
Concurrent Evaluation of TPDS has been undertaken in 26 States & UTs to assess
extent of improvement as a result of various steps initiated by the Government for
improving TPDS, after detailed review of TPDS functioning based on earlier evaluation
studies.
In order to maintain supplies and securing availability and distribution of essential
commodities, Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001 has been notified on
August 31, 2001. In para 1 of Annex. to the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 inter-alia it has
been provided that (i) Gram Sabhas shall finalise the list of beneficiaries belonging to
BPL and Antyodaya categories drawn up by the designated authority in respect of the
area under their respective jurisdiction, (ii) Where there are no Gram Sabhas, the local
representative bodies shall finalise the list of beneficiaries belonging to BPL and
Antyodaya categories within their respective jurisdiction, (iii) The designated authority
of the State Government or the local representative bodies including Gram Sabhas and
Gram Panchayats which have been entrusted with the task of identification of
beneficiaries, shall verify and certify the information in the prescribed proforma for
BPL and Antyodaya families.
Further para 4(3) of the Annex to PDS (Control) Order, 2001 stipualtes that:—
(i) the designated authority of the State Governments shall ensure delivery of one
copy of allocation order made to the fair price shop simultaneously to Gram
Panchayats or Nagar Palikas or Vigilance Committees or any other body
nominated for monitoring the functioning of the fair price shops by the concerned
State Government, and
(ii) Gram Panchayats or Nagar Palikas or Vigilance Committees or any other body
nominated for monitoring the functioning of the fair price shops by State

41
Governments shall display the stocks of essential commodities allotted during
the month to the fair price shops on a notice board outside their office.
To make vigilance machinery of TPDS functional, the Department has been taking
action as follows:—
(a) Detailed guidelines were issued by the Department in June, 1999 for greater
involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the functioning of TPDS
and to bring in a more transparent and accountable system of distribution as a
measure of social audit. As a strategy to reduce diversion at village level,
greater emphasis is being laid on involvement of village level Panchayat
functionaries/ULB members in maintaining vigil over FPSs.
(b) As requested by the Committee, the Department has initiated action to introduce
social audit of TPDS and to replicate healthy initiatives in a decentralized
format.
As a measure of social audit, in order to ensure increased transparency in
functioning of FPSs, the State and UT Governments have been directed in
March, 2008 to introduce monthly certification by Village Panchayats/Vigilance
Committees/Urban Local Bodies/Self Help Groups for delivery of foodgrains
to FPS and their distribution to ration cardholders. Such a certification of
actual delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops in time and their distribution
to ration cardholders is also expected to streamline functioning of Vigilance
Committee at Fair Price Shop level.
(c) In order to make TPDS operations transparent and amenable to RTI Act
provisions, a revised model Citizens' Charter was issued in July, 2007 for
adoption and implementation by State Governments/UT Administration for
facilitating use by citizens of provision of RTI Act, 2005 in relation to functioning
of the TPDS. Similarly, for greater public scrutiny of the TPDS functioning
through the provisions of RTI Act, 2005, publicity-cum-awareness campaign
on TPDS is being taken up as a part of the Plan scheme on strengthening of
TPDS. Similarly as part of capacity building of village level functionaries,
members of vigilance committees at various levels and Departmental officers/
staff, this Department is continuing the Plan Scheme on Training, Research
and Monitoring. With the above measures, local level vigilance of TPDS by
ration cardholders is being sought to be put in place. The Department has
noted the recommendations of the Committee and would endeavour to take
further action. However, it is to be mentioned that the vigilance machinery of
TPDS can be strengthened only when State Governments and UT
administrations take this task seriously.
In order to take help of information technology in better monitoring of TPDS
operations, a pilot project on computerization of TPDS operations at National/States/
Districts and Block levels is being undertaken during 11th Plan Period. For this the
NISG has been appointed as project consultant, it is studying processes and systems
of TPDS functioning in 4 pilot States to prepare detailed project report. Similary, in
order to track movement of vehicles carrying TPDS commodities, piloting of GPS has
been taken up in three States. Piloting of smart cards (with biometric) based delivery of
TPDS commodities in planned in Haryana and Chandigarh.

42
In order to check diversion of wheat into open market, distribution of wheat flour
(i.e. atta) instead of wheat is being emphasized under a revised policy, issued in
January, 2008.
(File No. 18-5/2008-FC-1, 14(3)/2006-PD.III)
Observations/Recommendations
The multiple agencies involved in procuring, storing, distributing and selling
commodities as well as those formulating policies on the operation of the Public
Distribution System include a range of Central and State authorities, which created
overlapping lines of accountability, resulting in distortions in the delivery of the system.
The blurred lines of accountability particularly affected the potential for follow-up
action in cases of investigation and enforcement action against observed cases of
irregularity. The Committee find that there are not only too many links in the chain of
command but also many criss-crossing reporting relationships among the multi-agency
personnel involved in the Public Distribution System operations, making the assignment
of responsibility very arduous. The Committee, therefore, urge that the delivery
mechanism be streamlined and better co-ordination ensured among the different
agencies involved so that accountability can be precisely established.
While taking a serious view of the various shortcomings and irregularities that
have come to their notice, the Committee urge the Ministry to squarely address all the
key issues concerning procurement, movement and distribution of foodgrains and
particularly the rampant corruption afflicting the Public Distribution System and its
network of Fair Price Shops.
The Committee note that the Ministry have initiated a few measures for bringing
about improvements in the administration of the Targeted Public Distribution System
(TPDS), such as a revised format of citizen charter on TPDS setting out the model
procedure and time schedule for the provision of services to the intended beneficiaries,
and a Nine-Point Action Plan for TPDS. However, the Committee note this Nine-Point
Action Plan does not comprehensively cover the need for alternative systems, as
clearly indicated by both C&AG's Report and Planning Commission's evaluation.
Innovative measures like Food Coupons have been introduced in some States like
Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Bihar as a tracking/verification mechanism for
the quantities of ration commodities lifted from the Fair Price Shops. The Commitee
hope that the policy initiatives taken by the Ministry would be more comprehensive
and not remain just on paper but constantly followed up and reviewed with States and
translated into tangible outcomes at the ground level. Successful experiments carried
out by some States may be tried out in other States as well. The Committee would also
expect the Ministry to be pro-active and help the States in the computerization process
of Targeted Public Distribution System operations, which will enable them to monitor
and strengthen the delivery system.
[Sl. No. 23]
Para No. 209 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)

43
Action Taken by the Government
To streamline the functioning of TPDS, the Department has been continuously
taking a number of measures as explanined in replies to earlier paras. In addition, the
following steps are being taken to harness use of IT in functioning of TPDS as
recommended by the Committee.
(i) This Department has appointed the National Institute of Smart Government,
Hyderabad as Project Consultant to prepare a detailed project report on the
project on computerization of TPDS operations upto Block Level by studying
systems and processes of TPDS in four States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam,
Chhattisgarh and Delhi. The software applications, etc. to be designed based
on the study will be piloted in these four States. After successful implementation
and experience gained from the Pilot Project, it would be rolled out in rest parts
of the country. As part of Pilot Project, website is also planned which will
provide information to public about allocation, availability and offtake at various
levels.
(ii) Introduction of Smart Card based delivery of foodgrains in Haryana and
Chandigarh is being taken up on pilot basis. This is a very innovative way to
eliminate malpractices in TPDS.
(iii) Piloting of Global Positioning System (GPS) for tracking movement of vehicles
carrying TPDS commodities has been taken up in Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu and
Delhi in order to minimize diversion during movement of foodgrains from
godowns to FP Shops.
For better coordination among the work of State Governments and UT
Administrations and FCI, the Department takes periodical review meetings.
The Department has already directed the State Governments and UT Administrations
to act upon a reform agenda for TPDS. This consists of the following actions:—
1. Implementation of revised Citizens' Charter.
2. Monthly certification by local bodies of receipt of TPDS foodgrains by FPS
and their distribution to ration cardholders.
3. Concurrent evaluation of TPDS.
4. Publicity-cum-Awareness Campaign on TPDS.
5. Computerization of TPDS operations (Govt. of India, Ministry to Block level).
6. Computerization of monitoring and distribution of TPDS commodities at Fair
Price Shops.
7. Piloting of Global Positioning System to track movement of vehicles transporting
TPDS foodgrains.

44
8. Direct transfer of food subsidy in cash to BPL families.
9. Introduction of Smart Cards under TPDS in Chandigarh and Haryana.
Under the revised Citizes' Charter issued in July, 2007, the State Governments have
been directed to constitute State level committee under chairmanship of the State
Food Minister so that better coordination with various agencies takes place in practice.
In view of recommendations of the Committee, the Department will further attempt to
enlarge scope of work of the state level committee for better coordination among State
agencies as well as central agencies like FCI.
Vetting comments of Audit
Results on the projects on the computerization of TPDS operations upto Block
level prepared by the National Institute of Smart Government, Hyderabad (Project
Consultant) may be furnished to PAC.
Results of Intoduction of Smart Card in Haryana and Chandigarh on pilot basis may
be furnished to PAC and results of other remedial measures taken may also be furnished.
Further reply
The National Institute of Smart Government (NISG) was appointed as Project
Consultant and their team commenced work from 15.04.08. The NISG has furnished
three deliverables namely — Report on study of existing systems and processes under
TPDS, report on best practices for bench marking and report on to-be processes and
design of proposed solutions. Further, the NISG has to submit DPR alongwith proposal
for piloting the project in four States namely Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh
and Delhi. The Pilot Project will be launched in the proposed four States after the DPR
is received and examined in the Department and the project is approved.
Based on Finance Minister's Budget Announcement 2008-09 for introduction of
Smart Cards for delivery of essential commodities under TDPS on pilot basis in Haryana
& Chandigarh, this Department had requested both the Governments to furnish their
DPRs on the project. They submitted their respective revised DPRs in August, 2008.
The cost estimates of this Scheme are of Rs. 144.82 crores. The schemes in presently
under appraisal by the Committee on Non-Plan expenditure.
[File No. 14(3)/2006-PD-III]

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 11
197. The Public Distribution System was originally conceived as an instrument for
protecting consumers from food shortages and producers from price fluctuation, with
the specific proclaimed task of providing food security to vulnerable households. It is
built around a network of around 4.92 lakh 'Fair Price Shops' commonly referred to as
'ration shops', making it one of the biggest such systems in the world. The Public
Distribution System is not only enormous in terms of its expenditure and reach, but
also in terms of the range of agencies involved in its operation. This system, despite its
many successes, has, over the years, manifested a broad array of problems. It suffers
from chronic mismanagement, cost inefficiencies, poor quality of foodgrains supplied
and large inaccuracies in the enumeration of beneficiaries, resulting in exclusion of
substantial number of the poor from the system entirely. To make matters worse, the
illegal diversion of Public Distribution System commodities to the open market through
a highly institutionalized network of agents and other middlemen, severely undermines
the capacity of the system to serve the needs of the poor. The Committee are thus
constrained to observe that the Public Distribution System in the country warrants
immediate attention, requiring a thorough overhaul. The Committee would like the
Ministery to review, if necessary, with the expert guidance and support of the Food
and Agriculture Organisation of United Nations, the operations of the Public
Distribution System across the country, identifying its strengths and weakness, based
on the experiences and experiments of different States right from identification of
beneficiaries to ensuring that the beneficiaries get their due. In particular, the enormous
costs due to inefficiency of Food Corporation of India (FCI) may be gone into in-detail
and corrective action taken immediately and the Committee be apprised of the same.
[Sl. No.11]
Para No. 197 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by the Government
It may be stated that PDS is operated under the joint responsibility of the Central
and the State Governments. The Central Government has taekn the responsibility for
procurement, storage, transportation and bulk allocation of foodgrains, etc. The
responsibility of effectively distributing the same to the ration cardholders through
the network of Fair Price Shops (FPSs) lies with the State Governments. The operational
responsibilities including allocation within the State, identification of families below
45

46
poverty line, issue of ration cards to them, supervision over and monitoring the
functioning of FPSs rest with the State Governments.
Review of TPDS functioning is a continuous ongoing process. To overcome the
shortcomings pointed out by PEO (Planning Commission) and ORG Marg reports,
a 9-point Action was formulated to be implemented by State/UT Governments. A copy
of the 9-points Action plan is annexed. The Departemnt of Food and Public Distribution
is continuously reviewing progress of implementation of the 9-point Action Plan.
Secretary, Governmentof India has been taking it up with Chief Secretaries of States
and UT Governments, and Minister of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution
has written to Chief Ministers drawing their personal attention for taking strict action
to eliminate diversion and leakages under the TPDS. State & UT Governments have
reported reduction in diversions and leakages of foodgrains under TPDS through:—
(a) elimination of bogus ration cards,
(b) introduction of coupons/bar coded coupons in some States,
(c) allocation of Fair Price Shops to Women's Self Help Groups, and
(d) door delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops.
It may be mentioned here that, as recommended by the Committee, while reviewing
functioning of TPDS, advice of experts is also taken.
As a part of continuous monitoring and review of TPDS operation, experts like
NCAER have been engaged to evaluate performance of TPDS and suggest corrective
measures for rectifying the problems noticed. International agencies like FAO do not
seem to have any experience of operating a PDS like in our country.
Concurrent Evaluation of TPDS has been undertaken in 26 States & UTs to assess
extent of improvement as a result of various steps initiated by the Government for
improving TPDS, after detailed review of TPDS functioning based on earlier evaluation
studies.
In order to maintain supplies and securing availability and distribution of essential
commodities, Public Distribution System (Control) Order, 2001 has been notified on
August 31, 2001. In para 1 of Annex. to the PDS (Control) Orer, 2001 inter-alia it has
been provided that (i) Gram Sabhas shall finalise the list of beneficiaries belonging to
BPL and Antyodaya categories drawn up by the designated authority in respect of the
area under their respective jurisdiction, (ii) Where there are no Gram Sabhas, the local
representative bodies shall finalise the list of beneficiaries belonging to BPL and
Antyodaya categories within their respective jurisdiction, (iii) The designated authority
of the State Government or the local representative bodies including Gram Sabhas and
Gram Panchayats which have been entrusted with the task of identification of
beneficiaries, shall verify and certify the information in the prescribed proforma for
BPL and Antyodaya families.

47
Further para 4(3) fo the Annex. to PDS (Control) Order, 2001 stipulates that:—
(i) The designated authority of the State Governments shall ensure delivery of
none copy of allocation order made to the fair price shop simultaneously to
Gram Panchayats or Nagar Palikas or Vigilance Committees or any other body
nominated for monitoring the fuctioning of the fair price shops by the concerned
State Government, and
(ii) Gram Panchayats or Nagar Palikas or Vigilance Committees or any other body
nominated for monitoring the functioning of the fair price shop by State
Governments shall display the stocks of essential commodities allotted during
the month to the fair price shops on a notice board outside their office.
To make vigilance machinery of TPDS functional, the Department has been taking
action as follows:—
(a) Detailed guidelines were issued by the Department in June, 1999 for greater
involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) in the functioning of TPDS
and to bring in a more transparent and accountable system of distribution as a
measure of social audit. As a strategy to reduce diversion at village level,
greater emphasis is being laid on ivolvement of village level Panchayat
functionaries/ULB members in maintaining vigil over FPSs.
(b) As requested by the Committee, the Department has initiated action to introduce
social audit of TPDS and to replicate healthy initiatives in a decentralized
format. As a measure of social audit, in order to ensure increased transparency
in functioning of FPSs, the State and UT Governments have been directed in
March, 2008 to introduce monthly certification by Village Panchayats/Vigilance
Committees/Urban Local Bodies/Self Help Groups for delivery of foodgrains
to FPS and their distribution to ration cardholders. Such a certification of
actual delivery of foodgrains to Fair Price Shops in time and their distribution
to ration cardsholders is also expected to streamline functioning of Vigilance
Committees at Fair Price Shop level.
(c) In order to make TPDS operations transparent and amenable to RTI Act
provisions, a revised model Citizens' Charter was issued in July, 2007 for
adoption and implementation by State Governments/UT Administrations for
facilitating use by citizens of provision of RTI Act, 2005 in relation to functioning
of the TPDS. Similarly, for greater public scrutiny of the TPDS functioning
through the provisions of RTI Act, 2005, publicity-cum-awareness campaign
on TPDS is being taken up as a part of the Plan scheme on strengthening of
TPDS. Similarly as part of capacity building of village level functionaries,
members of vigilance committees at various levels and Departmental officers/
staff, this Department is continuing the Plan Scheme on Training, Research
and Monitoring. With the above measures, local level vigilance of TPDS by
ration cardsholders is being sought to be put in place. The Department has
noted the recommendations of the Committee and would endeavour to take
further action. However, it is to be mentioned that the vigilance machinery of
TPDS can be stengthened only when State Governments and UT
administrations take this task seriously.

48
In order to take help of information technology in better monitoring of TPDS
operations, a pilot project on computerization of TPDS operations at National/States/
Districts and Block levels is being undertaken during 11th Plan Period. For this the
NISG has been appointed as project consultant, it is studying processes and systems
of TPDS functioning in 4 pilot States to prepare detailed project report. Similarly, in
order to track movement of vehicles carrying TPDS commodities, piloting of GPS has
been taken up in three States. Piloting of smart cards (with biometric features) based
delivery of TPDS commodities is planned in Haryana and Chandigarh.
In order to check diversion of wheat into open market, distribution of wheat flour
(i.e. atta) instead of wheat is being emphasized under a revised policy, issued in
January, 2008.
The foodgrains are made available to the State Governments and its nominees for
PDS requirement and other Governments sponsored schemes.The moment the
foodgrains leave the FCI godowns, the FCI does not have control over them. It is
therefore, the PDS system which needs proper overhauling so that there is no diversion
or misappropriation of foodgrains. Perhaps the same needs appropriate study to plug
the loopholes for strengthening the public distribution sytem. It is correct that due to
sytem failure in PDS, the foodgrains do not reach the targeted poor population and
most of the times reported to be from PDS.
In so far as the Food Corporation of India is concerned, the Government of India
appointed M/s Mc Kinsey & Company to conduct a study of operation of FCI. The
Consultant submitted a report in improving the efficiency of FCI in July, 2005. Later, the
Government engaged M/s Mc Kinsey & Company again in February, 2006 and they
were asked to prepare a blue print for making FCI and efficient organization. A number
of action have been taken by FCI on the recommendations of Mc Kinsey & Co. Some
of the important dicisions taken by FCI in this regard are summarized as under:—
(i) Linear Programming for foodgrains.
(ii) Consolidation of handling and road transport contract in Punjab and Haryana.
(iii) Renting out of storage capacity godowns considered excess in 2006-07.
(iv) Use of once used gunny for CMR paddy.
(v) Improve management of FCI finances.
(vi) Rotation of pending cases of vigilance of R.O. Punjab.
(vii) Reduction in storage and transit losses.
(viii) Improve monitoring of important parameters through the introduction of Key
Performance Indicators.
(ix) Engagement of consolidation of monitoring of prices.
Vetting Comments of Audit
Results/improvements as initiated by the Ministry may be furnished to PAC for
their appreciation.

49
Further reply
To curb leakages and diversion of foodgrains meant for TPDS, the Central
Government, in consultation with State and UT Governments, evolved a 9-point Action
Plan in 2006. This includes measures such as review of BPL & AAY lists for exclusion
of ineligible families and inclusion of eligible families, ensuring leakage-free disribution
by taking penal action against those found indulging in malpractices, involvement of
Panchayati Raj Institution in functioning of Fair Price Shops (FPS), display of BPL and
AAY lists at FPS, door step delivery of PDS commodities to FPS, etc. The Action Plan
is under implementation in States and UTs since July 2006 and is being closely monitored
by FPS level Vigilance Committees. As a result of this exercise, so far 14 States/UTs
have reported deletion of 99.36 lakh bogus/ineligible cards since July, 2006 against
23.69 crore ration cardes issued by the States/UTs as on 30.09.08.
The Government has taken various other measures to improve functioning of the
TPDS . A Revised Citizen' Charter has been issued and is being implemented since July,
2007. As on 30.09.2008, twelve States/UTs have reported adoption of the revised
Charter. Monthly certification of delivery of allocated foodgrains to FPS and their
distribution to ration cards holders has been introduced from April, 2008. As on
30.09.2008, out of 35 States/UTs, 5 States/UTs namely Bihar, Kerala, Orissa, West
Bangal and Dadra & Nagar Haveli are reported to have started monthly certification.
Training programmes for TPDS functionaries are being taken up. During the current
financial year i.e. 2008-09, an amount of Rs. 28.35 lakh has been released for the
training programmes. Computerization of TPDS operations has been initiated. Use of
new technologies such a Global Positioning System (GPS) to monitor movement of
foodgrains under TPDS has been undertaken on a pilot basis in Delhi, Chhattisgarh &
Tamil Nadu for which an amount of Rs. 44.76 lakh has been released to these States
during 2007-08. Policy guidelines have also been issued on distribution of wheat flour
under TPDS , so that the poor families are benefited. For increasing awareness on
TPDS, publicity-cum-awareness campaign has also been taken up. Under the plan
scheme Publicity-cum-Awareness Campaign an amount of Rs. 52.40 lakh has been
released to Nine States during 2007-08. These States are Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Assam,
Manipur, Orissa, Mizoram, Punjab and Tripura & West Bengal.
(File No. 14(3)/2006-PD. III, 18-5/2008-FC. I, 166(9)/2008-Py. I)
Joint Secretary (BP, PD & IC)
Observation/Recommendation No. 12
With regard to the identification of targeted beneficiaries under Below Poverty Line
(BPL) category, the Committee were informed that this was done by the respective
States/Union Territories. The estimation in this regard was however done by the
Planning Commission on a uniform methodology which was designed to yield
comparable estimates of poverty across the States. The actual identification of Below
Poverty Line families was done by the States and Union Territories based on the
parameters laid down by the Ministry of Rural Development for poverty alleviation
programmes. It is strange that when Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution held the responsibility of providing essential commodities to the identified

50
beneficiaries under the TPDS, and Planning Commission had developed a methodology
for this purpose, the actual identification of Below Poverty Line families had been
done by State Government based on the criteria of Ministry of Rural Development.
Such an incoherence in the methodology of identification resulted in an inaccurate
database on which rested the onus of successful implementation of the Targeted
Public Distribution System. With several State Governments adopting their own norms
for identification of BPL beneficiaries, it resulted in these States having estimates of
BPL beneficiaries much higher than that of Union Government. The Committee have
found to their displeasure that this phenomenon led to scaling down of ration entitlement
lower than that prescribed by the Ministry. In some cases, where the States' estimate
were lower than that of the Union Government, it led to the quota released remaining
undrawn by these States. As such arbitrary variations in the methodology/norms
across States for the identification of the targeted beneficiaries had an adverse bearing
on the efficacy of the TPDS itself and defeated the very rationale of such a focused/
targeted Scheme, the Ministry in consultation with the Planning Commission and
Ministry of Rural Development should consider evolving a uniform methodology and
set of norms for the States/Union Territories to follow. Individual States may be asked
to consult the Ministry before they opt for any deviation or variation according to
their needs.
[Sl. No. 12]
Para No. 198 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
This Department does of issue guidelines for identification of BPL families. This is
done by respective State and UT Governments based on guidelines issued by Ministry
of Rural Development and Ministry of Housing and Urban Development in consultation
with Planning Commission. The State Food and Civil Supply Department rely on the
BPL list made available to them by their Rural Development and Urban Development
counter parts.
Based on 1993-94 poverty estimates of Planning Commission and March, 2000
population estimates of Registrar General of India, the number of BPL families (including
AAY) is 6.52 crore. On the basis of poverty estimates for the year 2004-05 of the
Planning Commission and population estimation of Registrar General of India as in
March, 2008 the number of BPL families works out to 5.83 crore (Annexe-IV). The
Government of India makes allocation of foodgrains under TPDS for 6.52 crore BPL
families. However, the State and UT Governments have issued 10.27 crore BPL ration
cards. In other words the State/UT Governments have issued the BPL and AAY cards
more than 3.76 crore than the number of BPL families accepted by the Government.
This Department has taken up this matter with the State/UT Governments and requested
them to detect and cancel the bogus/ineligible ration cards. Suggestions have also
been sought from State Governments for resolving this issue of BPL ration cards in
excess of number of BPL families accepted for allocations.
Also, request received from various State Governments for accepting increased
number of BPL ration cards for allocations have been referred to Planning Commission

51
from time to time. As recommended by the committee, the Department will again take
up this issue with the Ministry of Rural Development and Planning Commission.
(File No. 14(3)/2006-PD. III)
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee were apprised that an Expert Group under the Chairmanship
Dr. Lakdawala was constituted in September, 1989 to consider methodology and
computation of proportion and number of poor in India. The definiation of poverty line
that was accepted by this Expert Group was based on the definition given by the Task
Force which was set up by the Planning Commission in 1979. The Commitee were
informed that the Planning Commission was using these criteria given by the Expert
Group for assessment of the number of poor people in the country. According to the
Task Force, poverty line was defined as the per capita expenditure level at which the
average per capita per day calorie intake was 2435 in rural areas and 2095 calories in
urban areas. This corresponded to average consumer expenditure of Rs. 49 per capita
per month for rural areas and Rs. 56.64 per cpaita per month expenditure for urban areas
on the basis of 1973-74 prices. As more and more States seem to be devising their own
norms for identification of BPL beneficiaries, this method of estimation and the criteria
have become out of date. The Committee would therefore suggest that the Ministry
should have a fresh look at the definition of poverty line for the TPDS in consultation
with the Planning Commission so as to arrive at a more realistic, inclusive and acceptable
set of criteria/norms for the identification of beneficiaries by the States.
[Sl. No. 13]
Para No. 199 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
This Department does not issue guidelines for identification of BPL families. This is
done by respective State and UT Governments based on guidelines issued by Ministry
of Rural Development and Ministry of Housing and Urban Development in consultation
with Planning Commission. The State Food and Civil Supply Departments rely on the
BPL list made available to them by their Rural Development and Urban Development
counter parts.
Based on 1993-94 poverty estimates of Planning Commission and March, 2000
population estimates of Registrar General of India, the number of BPL families (including
AAY) is 6.52 crore. On the basis the poverty estimates for the year 2004-05 of the
Planning Commission and population estimation of Registrar General of India as in
March, 2008 the number of BPL families works out to 5.83 crore (Annexe-IV). The
Government of India makes allocation of foodgrains under TPDS for 6.52 crore BPL
families. However, the State and UT Governments have issued 10.27 crore BPL ration
cards. In other words the State/UT Governments have issued the BPL and AAY cards
more than 3.76 crore than the number of BPL families accepted by the Government.
This Department has taken up this matter with the State/UT Governments and requested
them to detect and cancel the bogus/ineligible ration cards. Suggestions have also

52
been sought from State Governments for resolving this issue of BPL ration cards in
excess of number of BPL families accepted for allocations.
Also, request received from various State Governments for accepting increased
number of BPL ration cards for allocations have been referred to Planning Commission
from time to time. As recommended by the committee, the Department will again take
up this issue with the Ministry of Rural Development and Planning Commission.
(File No. 14(3)/2006-PD. III)
Observation/Recommendation
It was further observed that the off-take of foodgrains under the different categories
was also not satisfactory. The total off-take by the Above Poverty Line (APL) category
was a mere 10.88% of the total allotment during the period 2000-05. The off-take under
the BPL category at 66.33% was not encouraging either. For instance, in some States,
the shortfall in off-take of BPL rice ranged from 30 to 67 per cent. The Committee desire
that the Ministry must look into the reasons for such low off-take of foodgrains from
the central pool and take up the matter with the deficient States. The Ministry should
seize this opportunity to identify the deficiencies existing in the system for deciding
State-wise allocations. The problems confronting the States with poor off-take may be
addressed accordingly.
[Sl. No. 15]
Para No. 201 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
At any given point of time various reasons may contribute of low off-take by State
Governments viz. resource crunch faced by State Government, adminstrative or
infrastructural problems created by natural calamities and the price differential between
APL issue prices market prices.
Significantly, during the period from 2000 to 2005, the stock of foodgrains in the
Central Pool was much above the minimum buffer norms. Since foodgrains were
available in the open market at competitive prices, the off-take under APL was was
quite less. Earlier the practice followed was to make allocations based on demands of
State Governments. Also, the norm of allocation under the APL category was revised
to 35 Kgs per family per month in 2002, implying a substantial increase in allocation
of foodgrains under APL category, which also reflected in reduction in off-take
percentage under APL.
The decrease in off-take under TPDS in BPL category is because AAY families are
a segment of BPL families. With the identification of additional AAY families during
three expansions, there is a corresponding decrease in the number of other BPL families
and off-take of other BPL families. Consequently, while the off-take of foodgrains
under other BPL category has decreased, the off-take of foodgrains under AAY category
has increased correspondingly. Therefore, if the total off-take of foodgrains for BPL
families including AAY families, is considered since 2004-05, there has not been any
decline in the off-take.

Nevertheless, with a view to encourage the State/UT Governments for lifting the
allocated quantities of foodgrains under TPDS, the Government decided to rationalize
the wheat and rice allocations for APL categroy w.e.f. June, 2006 and April, 2007
respectively by linking them with average off-take of the respective State/UT during
previous 3 years i.e., 2003-04, 2004-05 and 2005-06. Thereafter, in view of constraints
on availability of rice in the Central Pool on account of its lower procurement during
KMS 2006-07 and 2007-08, the allocation of rice has been further rationalized w.e.f. from
April, 2008, linking it with average off-take of 2006-07 and 2007-08.
As a result, the off-take of allocated foodgrains under the TPDS is now showing a
rising trend from 2005 onwards. This is amply reflected in the comparative off-take
figures from 2004-05 to 2008-09 (upto May, 08), as per table below:—
(In lakh tons)
year Allocation Offtake %Offtake
BPL APL Total BPL APL Total BPL APL Total
+AAY +AAY +AAY
2004-05 273.321 443.677 716.997 229.231 64.319 293.550 83.9 14.5 40.9
2005-06 272.682 443.533 716.215 230.849 80.205 311.053 84.7 18.1 43.4
2006-07 273.733 302.828 576.561 229.010 84.685 313.695 83.7 28.0 54.4
2007-08 274.62 118.16 392.78 245.61 87.19 332.81 89.4 73.8 84.7
2008-09 46.00 13.85 59.85 42.79 14.1 56.80 93.0 101.2 94.9
(Upto May)
In view of this, no further action is required to be taken by the Department with
reference to the recommendation.
[File No. 14(3)/2006-PD. III]
53

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH HAVE REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation
In their examination of the issue relating to procurement of foodgrains, the fixation
of Minimum Support Price of foodgrains played an important role. The Committee
have been apprised that these Minimum Support Prices were normally announced
upfront before commencement of sowing operations of the particular crop and these
were usually remunerative and significantly higher than the costs.Therefore, the
Minimum Support Price was the floor price which the farmers were assured of getting
for their produce. In order to ensure that farmers were aware of the Minimum Support
Price, steps were stated to have been taken by Government to educate farmers by
giving wide publicity through the print and visual media as well as banners, pamphlets
etc. The Committee would recommend that the Government must air more programmes
like Krishi Darshan on Doordarshan and All India Radio, focusing on technology,
trends of price (daily) in national, regional and local mandis, Fair Price Shops, Ration
Cards and prices for BPL and APL households. In this regard, the Committee would
also expect the District Administration led by the District Collectors to take initiatives
in creating awareness among farmers.
The Committee have however been informed that no impact assessment survey
was ever conducted by the Ministry to study the extent of denial of benefits of Minimum
Support Price among farmers, leading to distress sale of foodgrains. The Committee
are of the opinion that in the absence of such an assessment study, the actual
penetration and impact of Minimum Support Price Scheme and its shortcomings, if
any, cannot come to the fore and appropriate interventions would thus not be possible.
It is therefore necessary that an assessment study be made in regard to the Minimum
Support Price Scheme and its effectiveness in overcoming distress sale of foodgrains
by farmers. Such a study will also enable the Government to gauge the efficacy of its
procurement operations in the light of increasing demand of foodgrains for the TPDS
and other welfare schemes and the crying need to provide remunerative prices for the
farmers.
On the procurement policy of the Government, the Committee were apprised that
the Government procured foodgrains at the Minimum Support Price and there was no
concept of separate procurement price. The Ministry were of the view that
distinguishing the Minimum Support Price from the procurement price had its own
problems in operation. As a result, the Food Corporation of India was bound to procure
the produce at the price offered to farmers and because of this, at times, Food
Corporation of India were unable to procure more to meet their requirement. As this is
54

55
a serious constraint conceded by the Secretary (Food and Public Distribution) himself
in his deposition, the Committee would like the Ministry to carry out a thorough study
in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and the Planning Commission about
the factors that were plaguing the Minimum Support Price Scheme as such, which were
responsible for some of the problems cited like procurement not meeting the
Government's requirement.
[Sl. No. 6]
Para No. 192 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
In order to generate awareness of MSP among the farmers instructions have been
issued by the Department of Food & Public Distribution to FCI and the State
Governments to give wide publicity in the local media regarding the MSP scheme,
names of the procurement agencies, particulars of purchase centres and FAQ
specifications. The State Governments have been further requested to instruct their
procuring agencies to organize wide publicity (in association with FCI) through print
and visual media as well as through banners, pamphlets etc.
Regional Offices of the FCI and State Governments like Punjab, Haryana,
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala etc. have confirmed that they are
giving wide publicity about MSP in the local media before the commencement of every
Kharif and Rabi Marketing Season.
The Department of Agriculture and Cooperation has also informed that to create
awareness among farmers, support is provided to the States in strengthening extension
programmes through a number of schemes. The various schemes include support to
State Extension  Programmes for Extension Reforms, Mass Media Support to Agriculture,
Kisan Call Centres and Establishment of Agri-Clinic and Agri-Business Centres by
Agriculture Graduates. Agriculture related information and knowledge to the farming
community including the Minimum Support Prices is also provided through the network
of Radio Stations and Doordarshan on the national as well as regional channels.
No impact assessment survey to determine the extent of deprivation of benefits of
Minimum Support Price to the farmers has been conducted by the Department of Food
and Public Distribution. However, before every procurement season, the Department
of Food & Public Distribution issues instructions to the FCI and concerned State
Governments to organize publicity about the MSP operations and also to set up
Control Rooms in FCI headquarters, Regional Offices of FCI and in the State
Governments. A Control Room is also available in the Ministry which gets daily reports
of the quantum of foodgrains procured in every State as well as reports of distress sale
(if any).
As recommended by the Committee, Planning Commission is being requested to
undertake a study about the efficacy of MSP regime.
In case a report of distress sale is received, the concerned State Govt. and Regional
office of FCI is immdiately directed to investigate the report. As a result of wide

56
publicity of enhanced MSP of wheat (Rs. 1000 per quintal) in RMS 2008-09 the total
procurement for central pool has touched an all time high of 224 lakh tonnes.
(File No. 166(9)/2008-Py. I)
Comments of the Committee
Please see paragraph No. 9 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation
Apart from the flaws in identification of beneficiaries, the Committee in their course
of examination have found several irregularities in the manner in which the ration cards
were issued. It is common knowledge that the possession of a ration card is a prerequisite
for establishing one's identity and domicile. Hence, obtaining it would be one of the
major preoccupation of many poor families, leading to increase in the demand for
ration cards and thereby rendering the process vulnerable to corruption. A limited
survey conducted in Delhi itself by Audit revealed that 22.80% of the surveyed BPL
population/households could not be traced, but cross-verification with the Fair Price
Shop (FPS) records indicated that ration was being claimed against those names. In
Delhi alone, the implementation of the TPDS was found deficient on one count or the
other in respect of majority of beneficiaries surveyed, that is, 53.38%. The efforts made
by the Ministry to eliminate bogus ration cards as well as bogus units in the ration
cards have thus evidently not yielded tangible results. Although, the Ministry have
stated to have eliminated at the macro level 61 lakh bogus cards in 13 States since July
2006, considering the magnitude of the problem, the Committee would like to be apprised
about the latest position on this count as well as on the updating of lists of beneficiaries
in all the States/Union Territories.
[Sl. No. 14]
Para No. 200 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
As of now, 12 State Governments have reported deletion/cancellation of 96.86 lakh
of ration cards belonging to Non-existent families/ineligible families (details enclosed).
All the State & UT Governments have been requested again to furnish the detailed
information on (i) number of bogus/ghost ration cards deleted w.e.f. July, 2006,
(ii) action taken against the families who were found possessing bogus/ghost ration
cards and also action taken against the officials who issued such bogus/ghost ration
cards. A summary of replies received from 10 State Governments and UT Administrations
is (Annexure-V and VI).
(File No. 14(3)/2006-PD. III)
Comments of the Committee
Please see paragraph No. 12 of Chapter I.

57
Observation/Recommendation
While examining the movement of foodgrains, the Committee found that as in
March, 2005, Food Corporation of India's pending claims against the Railways had
amounted to Rs. 796.45 crore. Out of this, refund of freight amounting to Rs. 37.41 crore
had been pending for periods ranging from 12 to 27 years. Reasons attributed for such
long pendency were the non-availability of relevant records with the Railways including
the original Physical Delivery Certificate against which payments were made. The
Committee have been apprised that the matter had been taken up by Food Corporation
of India with Railways and it had been agreed upon to build up the cases again and
settle accordingly. However, in the meeting held by Northern Railway with Claims
division, this proposal was vetoed, stating that Railway Board instructions were
applicable only to cases of compensation claims and not for the refund of freight
claims.The Committee suspect that these are cases of collusive corruption between
Food Corporation of India and Railways officials. The Committee would recommend
that Inter-Ministerial meetings should be held at the highest level and measures to
tackle such problem be sorted out instead of prolonging the cases by taking recourse
to legal option. The Committee deplore the laxity of Food Corporation of India in
monitoring the claims which had led to their pendency for a number of years. The
Committee, while taking a serious view of this matter, recommend that the Food
Corporation of India should enquire into the conduct of the concerned officials and
apprise the Committee of the action taken thereof. The Food Corporation of India must
also strengthen its monitoring mechanism and devise effective means for vigilance to
tackle such issues in its nascent stage itself.
[Sl. No. 19]
Para No. 205 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
1. The Department and FCI have been constantly pursuing the matter with the
Railway Board for settlement of the claims which are pending with the Railway for a
long time. Meetings were held at the apex level for settlement of pending claims against
the Railways. The pendency of Railway claims is also due to the fact that Railway have
shown their inability to settle the old cases as the relevant period record reportedly is
not available with them. It has also been stated by the Railways that due to non-
availability of original Physical Delivery Certificate (PDC), Railway freight claims are
pending. In the meeting held on 21.3.2005, it was agreed by the Railways that the FCI
may produce their shadow file to the Zonal Railways concerned so that these cases
may be built up again and settled accordingly.
2. The issue of Refund of claim cases prior to July, 95 the records of which were
stated to have been weeded out by Railways under age limit was discussed in the
meeting held with CCO and with FA&CAO (T&S), Northern Railway held on 17.7.2005
at FCI Zonal office (North), Noida wherein it was decided that taking the spirit of the
Railway Board directive, the claim cases would be settled on the basis of shadow filed
prepared by the FCI as per discussions. The shadow files of the refund of freight claim

58
cases were submitted, but Railway refused to deal with the cases on the plea that the
verification of the cases cannot be done as the booking station records have also been
destroyed.
3. In order to resolve this issue, a meeting was also taken by Secretary (FPD) with
Railways and FCI officers, wherein it was decided that FCI would certify the
genuineness of the copies of the PDC submitted and Railways would examine the
possibility of settling claims on their basis. Settlement of pending claims of FCI are
also discussed in the periodic meetings held between officers of Department of Food
& P.D. and Railway Board.
4. FCI has been following up the settlement of pending claims with Railways at
various levels. However, there is still a pendency of large number of cases, primarily
due to the procedural requirements of Railways. FCI Headquarters has been regularly
pursuing the issue with the concerned EDs(Zone)/GM(Region) and also with the
Railway Board for early settlement at the highest level. FCI has also been advised to
examine all the cases of pending claims with Railways and take action if there is any
case of laxity or collusive corruption between FCI and Railway officials.
(File No. 12-1/2008-M. II)
Comments of the Committee
Please see paragraph No. 15 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation
While examining the diversion component in the Targeted Public Distribution
System, the Committee were apprised that in the year 2003-2004, out of 14.07 million
tonnes of foodgrains issued to 16 States at Below Poverty Line issue prices from the
Central Pool, only around 5.93 million tonnes was delivered to poor families. Further,
out of the remaining 8.14 million tonnes, 5.12 million tonnes leaked out from the supply
chain owing to corrupting in the delivery system. It was in fact seen that effectively
only 57% of the Below Poverty Line households were covered by Targeted Public
Distribution System. Abnormally high leakage/diversion of more than 75% of the total
off-take of BPL quota was notices in Bihar and Punjab. At the all India level, the overall
diversion of rice and wheat was 39 per cent and 53 per cent respectively. These glaring
statistics do not augur well for the successful operation of the Scheme. The Committee
believe that diversion of foodgrains from the system is a menace which should be
checked on top priority. The Enforcement Wing and Anti-Hoarding Cell should be
strengthened, people engaged in Public Distribution System made accountable and
Inspection Parties acting as Flying Squads should be constituted to inspect the
movement and distribution of foodgrains. Instances of malpractices should be dealt
with firmly and severely. As subsequent to lifting the foodgrains from godowns of
Food Corporation of India, the responsibility of distribution of foodgrains to the
consumers through Public Distribution System rested with the State Government, it
has been stated that it was not possible for the Ministry to estimate the quantity of
diversion of foodgrains in the open market. In this regard, the Committee recommend
that to minimize human intervention, Information Technology could be put to use for

59
providing an end-to-end automated system, which will bring about transparency in
the system. While it may not be feasible to cover Fair Price Shops in this system due to
lack of connectivity, weekly arrivals of foodgrains through the public distribution
chain at the Block level should be made available immediately on websites open to
public scrutiny.
[Sl. No. 20]
Para No. 206 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
To streamline the functioning of TPDS, the Department has been continuously
taking a number of measures as explained in replies to earlier paras. In addition, the
following steps are being taken to harness use of IT in functioning of TPDS as
recommended by the Committee.
I. This Department has appointed the National Institute of Smart Government,
Hyderabad as Project Consultant to prepare a detailed project report on the project on
computerization of TPDS operations upto Block Level by studying systems and
processes of TPDS in four States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh and Delhi.
The software applications, etc. to be designed based on the study will be piloted in
these four States. After successful implementation and experience gained from the
Pilot Project, it would be rolled out in rest parts of the country. As part of pilot project,
website is also planned which will provide information to public about allocation,
availability and off-take at various levels.
II. Introduction of Smart Card based delivery of foodgrains in Haryana and
Chandigarh is being taken up on pilot basis. This is a very innovative way to eliminate
malpractices in TPDS.
III. Piloting of Global Positioning System (GPS) for tracking movement of vehicles
carrying TPDS commodities has been taken up in Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu and Delhi
in order to minimize diversion during movement of foodgrains from godowns to FP
Shops.
For better coordination among the work of State Governments and UT
Administrations and FCI, the Department takes periodical review meetings.
The Department has already directed the State Governments and UT Administrations
to act upon a reform agenda for TPDS. This consists of the following actions:
(1) Implementation of revised Citizens' Charter.
(2) Monthly certification by local bodies of receipt of TPDS foodgrains by FPS
and their distribution to ration card holders.
(3) Concurrent evaluation of TPDS.
(4) Publicity-cum-Awareness Campaign on TPDS.
(5) Computerization of TPDS operations. (Govt. of India, Ministry to Block level).

60
(6) Computerization of monitoring and distribution of TPDS commodities at Fair
Price Shops.
(7) Piloting of Global Positioning System to track movement of vehicles transporting
TPDS foodgrains.
(8) Direct transfer of food subsidy in cash to BPL families.
(9) Introduction of Smart Cards under TPDS in Chandigarh and Haryana.
Under the revised Citizens' Charter issued in July, 2007, the State Governments
have been directed to constitute state level committee under chairmanship of the Sate
Food Minister so that better coordination with various agencies takes place in practice.
In view of recommendations of the committee, the Department will further attempt to
enlarge scope of work of the state level committee for better coordination among state
agencies as well as central agencies like FCI.
Vetting comments of Audit
Results on the projects on the computerization of TPDS operations upto Block
level prepared by the National Institute of Smart Government, Hyderabad (Project
Consultant) may be furnished to PAC.
Results of Introduction of Smart Card in Haryana and Chandigarh on pilot basis
may be furnished to PAC and results of other remedial measures taken may also be
furnished.
Further reply
The National Institute of Smart Government (NISG) was appointed as Project
Consultant and their team commenced work from 15.04.08. The NISG has furnished
three deliverables namely—Report on study of existing systems and processes under
TPDS, report on best practices for bench marking and report on to be processes and
design of proposed solutions. Further, the NISG has to submit DPR along with proposal
for piloting the project in four States namely Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh
and Delhi. The Pilot Project will be launched in the proposed four States after the DPR
is received and examined in the Department and the project is approved.
Based on Finance Minister's Budget Announcement 2008-09 for introduction of
Smart Cards for delivery of essential commodities under TPDS on pilot basis in Haryana
& Chandigarh, this Department had requested both the Governments to furnish their
DPRs on the project. They submitted their respective revised DPRs in August, 2008.
The cost estimates of this Scheme are of Rs. 144.82 crores. The scheme is presently
under appraisal by the Committee on Non-Plan expenditure.
(File No. 14(3)/2006-PD.III)
Comments of the Committee
Please see paragraph No. 18 of Chapter I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH  THE
GOVERNMENT  HAVE  FURNISHED  INTERIM  REPLIES.
Observations/Recommendations
While dealing with the issue of procurement cost-incidentals, the Committee were
apprised that the procurement cost-incidentals comprised of Statutory and Non-
Statutory charges levied by State Governments. The Central Government reimbursed
all these expenses incurred by agencies of the State Governments which procured
foodgrains for the Central Pool. These charges varied from State to State and the
Ministry had not succeeded in having a uniform regime. The Committee have been
apprised that the Ministry had suggested to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana
and Punjab to set up a Regulatory Authority to examine and recommend local taxes on
procurement of foodgrains. Further, the Committee have been informed that Punjab
had not found the need for setting up such a body as the funds collected through
taxes were stated as being used for developing the agriculture marketing and rural
infrastructure. However, the States of Haryana and Andhra Pradesh had not given
their views in this regard. The Committee would like the Ministry to urgently obtain the
views of the other States also in the matter. Subsequently, the Ministry may examine
the feasibility of having a uniform tax regime for marketing foodgrains in order to
curtail arbitrary levies by States, as these incidentals are eventually borne by the
Ministry/Food Corporation of India, adding to the costs of procurement and the subsidy
burden of the Government.
[Sl. No. 8]
Para No. 194 of 73rd Report of PAC
(Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
Government of Andhra Pradesh has informed that issue regarding setting up of
Regulatory Authority to examine and recomend local taxes on procurement of foodgrains
was examined in consultation with Revenue Department and has intimated that till an
Advisory Body by way of Empowered Committee is already existing at the National
Level.
It has been further informed that setting up of a Regulatory Authority to decide
about the taxes to be levied by the State Government would be an infringement of the
autonomy of the State within the federal structure. Therefore, Government of
Andhra Pradesh has not agreed with the need of any other Regulatory or Advisory
body.
61

62
Comments of Government of Haryana were sought on this issue, which are still
awaited. The Ministry has vigorously been pursuing with the State for early response.
(File No. 166(9)/2008-Py. I)
Joint Secretary (Policy & FCI)
NEW DELHI; Jaswant Singh,
13 November, 2009 ( Chairman),
22 Kartika, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE - I
Nine Point Action plan for curbing leakages/diversion of foodgrains under PDS
1. States should undertake a campaign for Review of BPL/AAY lists, to eliminate
ghost ration cards.
2. Strict action should be taken against the guilty to ensure leakage free distribution
of foodgrains. In this respect information asked for under clause 7 & 9 of PDS
Control Order, may also be sent.
3. For sake of transparency involvement of elected PRI members in distribution
of fodgrains be ensured. As far as possible, FPS licenses be given to SHGs,
gram panchayats, cooperatives, etc.
4. BPL/AAY lists should be displayed on all FPSs.
5. District-wise and FPS-wise allocation of foodgrains should be put up on websites
and other prominent places, the public scrutiny.
6. Wherever possible, door step delivery of foodgrains should be ensured by
States. Instead of letting private transporters/wholsalers to transport goods.
7. Timely availability of foodgrains at FPS level and fixed dates of distribution of
ration card holders should be ensured.
8. Training of members of FPS level Vigilance Committees should be ensured.
Proposals for funding training can be sent to the Government of India.
9. Computerization of TPDS operations is undertaken.
63

SANJAY KAUL la;qDr lfpo
Tel: 338 2956 (O) Hkkjr ljdkj
6106561 (R) miHkksDrk ekeys] [kk| vkSj lkoZtfud forj.k ea=ky;
338 8302 (Fax) [kk| vkSj lkoZtfud forj.k foHkkx
d`f"k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh & 110 001
JOINT SECRETARY
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
KRISHI BHAW AN, NEW DELHI-110 001
D.O. NO. 8-11/2002-S&I October 9, 2002
Dear
State Governments and their agencies are engaged in the procurement of foodgrains
under price support operations either on behalf of FCI or independently under the
decentralized scheme. It has been observed that during the procurement of foodgrains
proper arrangements are not being made by some of the State Governments and their
Agencies. Specifically, the quality control mechanisms and measures for the scientific
storage of foodgrains are inadequate. This results in procurement of sub-standard
foodgrains and deterioration in the quality of foodgrains during storage. There is need
to ensure that procurement and storage of foodgrains is properly regulated so that
better quality foodgrains is available to consumers through TPDS and other welfare
schemes.
2. Keeping in view the need to streamline the procurement of foodgrains, guidelines
for the State Governments and their Agencies have been formulated by this Ministry.
A copy of the same is enclosed to this letter.
3. It is requested that these guidelines may be circulated among all field functionaries
who are engaged in the procurement and storage of foodgrains with instructions that
these are strictly followed by all the officers. It is also requested that you may review
the arrangements made in the light of these guidelines both at the commencement of
the procurement season as well as periodically and send reports to this Ministry of the
reviews undertaken. The FCI is also being asked to coordinate its efforts with the State
Governments.
4. Action taken in this regard may be communicated to the Ministry.
Encl: As above. Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
Secretary (Food & Civil Supplies), (SANJAY KAUL)
All States/UTs.
64

ANNEXURE-II
Guidelines on Procurement of Foodgrains for the State Governments
1. General Guidelines
Grains procured under the decentralised procurement (DCP) scheme or by the State
Governments on behalf of FCI are ultimately a part of the Central Pool. Therefore, there
is a need to ensure that the existing DCP scheme is properly regulated the guidelines
framed hereunder should be strictly followed by the State Governments, FCI and the
officials of the S&R Division. The general guidelines for the procurement of foodgrains
are as under:
(i) Foodgrains should be procured strictly conforming to the Uniform Specifications
prescribed by the Government of India. These specifications have already been
issued by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution,
Government of India vide letter on 8-8/2002-S&I dated 20th September 2002 for
KMS 2002-03. The uniform specifications of foodgrains should be widely
publicised by the State Government. The uniform specifications should be
prominently displayed at procurement centres and mandis so that the farmers
may be fully aware of them.
(ii) The Minimum support price (MSP) for the different foodgrains should also be
publicised and displayed.
(iii) Adequate number of mandis/procurement centres of States agencies should be
set up and operated efficiently, effectively and economically.
(iv) The field staff should be deputed in all the mandis/procurement centres well
before the commencement of the season and pay office/district lab. etc. should
be kept ready and functional in all respects.
(v) Proper cleaning of the paddy/wheat/coarse grain stocks should be ensured
before purchase. For this, necessary cleaning facilities should be provided.
(vi) Stocks must be strictly procured on first come first served basis.
(vii) There should be no undue delay in accepting stocks and making payment to
farmers.
(viii) Immediate clearance and liquidation of the procured foodgrain stocks from the
mandis/procurement centres should always be ensured.
(ix) Supervising officers should be continuously on the move for close supervision
of the procurement operations including the quality of procured stocks.
2. Administrative arrangements
(i) There should be no delay in the issue of authorisation for operation of bank
accounts. It should be ensured that bank accounts are opened well before the
commencement of the procurement season.
65

66
(ii) There should be timely appointment of mandi labour contractors and transport
contractors for handling operations in the mandis/purchase centres.
(iii) W eights and scales, gunnies, dunnage material (wooden crates) polythene
sheets/tarpaulins should be made available in time at all purchase centres.
Weights and scales should be stamped/verified well before mandi operations.
(iv) Adequate storage capacity should be arranged in advanced keeping in view the
estimated procured stocks at various centres.
3. Quality assurance of the procured stocks
(i) Quality inspectors/purchase staff at each every purchase centre must be fully
equipped with analysis kits and moisture meters (duly calibrated).
(ii) They should be aware of the procedure for physical analysis of foodgrains
including determination of moisture contnet and Government of India's uniform
specification of foodgrains applicable for the respective marketing season.
(iii) Quality inspectors/purchase staff must have adequate number of cloth bags
and polythene bags for drawing samples. These samples should be regularly
sent to the District Office laboratory for analysis with proper labelling viz., name
of mandi, date of sampling commodity, signature of inspector etc.
(iv) Adequate laboratory facilities for the analysis of foodgrains at district level
should be provided by the State Governments. The expenditure may be met out
of 2.5% administrative charges given to the State Governments for the
procurement operations.
4. Operation in mandis/Purchase centres
(i) Stocks brought by farmers should be heaped separately to maintain individual
identity. Prior to purchase, the Quality inspectors/Purchase staff should inspect
the stocks heap-wise, to assess quality and advise farmers to do necessary
cleaning/upgradation wherever necessary.
(ii) At the time of final acceptance of the stocks, the presence of officials of the
mandi committee and representative of farmers is necessary. The report indicating
the reasons for rejection of each rejected lot must be maintained by the quality
inspector in a separate register.
(iii) In case of any dispute arising on the quality of foodgrains, the quality inspector/
purchase staff should bring the matter to the notice of senior officers without
any delay.
5. Stitching and stencilling on bags
(i) Manual stitching of paddy/coarse grain bags with minimum 14-16 cross stitches
across the mouth of the bags should be carried out to avoid "bleeding" of the
stock during handling, transportation and storage. In the case of wheat, double
line machine stitching should be carried out. Wherever such facilities are not
available, hand stitching as mentioned above, should be carried out.

67
(ii) Quality inspector/purchase staff must ensure that proper stencilling on bags is
done before packing of stocks procured. The stencilling should comprise name
of the procuring agency, mandi, commodity, crop year and net weight.
(iii) Stencilling marks should be in the middle of the bags.
6. Record of purchase
(i) For each day's purchase, the mandi committee/purchase centres should maintain
purchase records containing the name of the cultivator, commodity and
approximate quantity in heaps and the name of the arthiya (commission agent,
if any). Similar details should be maintained by the quality inspector/purchase
staff for the lots purchased.
(ii) The position of stocks purchased by procuring agency and private traders/rice
millers should be reported daily to the district office/control room.
7. Payment
In the case of direct purchase from the farmers, payment must be ensured immediately
after effecting the purchases. The purchase from farmers should be made after ensuring
his proper identity (co-operative loan Book, etc.) This is necessary to avoid complaints
of purchase through middle men.
8. Storage of foodgrains
Most of the paddy/wheat procured by State Government agencies is ordinarily
stored in open space [covered and plinth (CAP) complexes] due to shortage of covered
storage facilities. All necessary precautions should be taken to maintain the quantity
and quality of foodgrains (wheat and paddy) particularly stored in CAP complex. The
following code of practice for the scientific storage of foodgrains to be stored under
CAP as well as in covered godowns should be followed by all procuring agencies to
minimise losses during storage:
(i) Site(s) selected for 'CAP' storage must be high plinth preferably with Pucca
masonary work. These sites should have proper drainage facilities, good
approach roads, necessary provision for security etc. The plinths should be
free from cracks and crevices, termites and there should not be unwanted wild
vegetation growth around the plinths.
(ii) Proper dunnage material viz. wooden creates/stone slabs/wooden poles, etc.
should be used for stacking the bags to avoid damage to the lower layers from
moisture.
(iii) Stack planning must be done in such a manner so that alleyways (3 feet) gangways
(5 feet) are left for proper operation of the CAP complexes.
(iv) Stacks must be formed of standard size and height in a regular dome shape so as
to avoid ballooning of the cover and avoid any accumulation of water on the
stacks. The quantity of foodgrains to be stored in each stack should not be
more than 150 MTs.

68
(v) Rodent control measure must be taken regularly by fumigating the live rat burros
with Aluminimum Phosphide Tablets (half tablet per burrow) or by poisoning
the rat burrows with Zinc Phosphide (torpedo-bating).
(vi) Birds (parrot, sparrow, pigeon, crow and maina, etc.), the major avian pests
causing damage to foodgrains stored in CAPs should be kept away from
complexes by using bird scares, making noise, destroying their nests, etc. These
birds not only eat away the grains but cause extensive spillage, damage to the
bags and polythene covers, thus rendering them unfit for fumigation.
(vii) Prophylactic and curative control for the control of insects should be regularly
carried out in CAP complexes. Malathion 50% EC in 1:100 dilution with water @
3 litres Emulsion/100 Sq Mtr. of surface area should be sprayed at fortnightly
intervals. Deltamethrin 2.5% WP (40 gms/litre of water) @ 3 litres Emulsion/100
Sq Mtr. of surface area) may be sprayed at three month intervals. Similarly,
Aluminum Phosphide @ 9 gms/tonne may be used for fumigation of foodgrains
as and when required.
(viii) Moisture, a major factor responsible for adversely affecting the quality/
merchantability/nutritive value of the foodgrains must be controlled metculously.
In CAP storage, sometimes the grain is, directly exposed to rain water due to
leakage/seepage. Therefore, immediate aeration of such rain-affected stacks
should be carried out during sunny days. Otherwise, this may cause germination
of grains and development of fungus, and heating of grains which leads to
deterioration.
(ix) Only dedicated well motivated energetic and knowledgeable staff should be
posted at CAP complexes who have the capacity and capability to take right
decisions on the spot. They must have a set of detailed instructions in hand to
consult and act upon.
(x) The stacks should be broken and aerated where ever the heating of grain is
observed.
(xi) The staff must have the first aid kit and antedotes for insecticides and fumigants
and knowledge for meeting unforeseen circumstances such as snake/scorpion
bite, injury due to collapsing stacks etc.
(xii) Sufficient number of ladders should available in the CAP storage premises for
the inspection of the stacks from the top.
(xiii) The staff must be specifically trained to pull, shift and move the polythene
covers which is one of the main reasons for tearing up of the covers. The staff
must also know as to how to effect minor repairs of the polythene covers.
Necessary material for carrying out for such repairs should be provided to
them.
(xiv) The staff must be extra cautious while issuing the stocks as to avoid any
complaints. In case of incidents of localized detarioration, flour formation inwheat
bags, germination etc., same may be segregated from the sound stocks.

69
9. Quality control in the procurement of rice
The following steps should be taken for monitoring the quality of rice at the time of
procurement/receipt in the godowns:
(i) The rice should be procured/accepted strictly conforming to Uniform
Specifications prescribed by the Government of India. Special care should be
taken that the percentage of damaged grain, broken grains including small
broken grains and moisture content is well with in the laid down specifications.
(ii) The samples of rice should be carefully drawn and should be analysed
immediately before accepting the rice stocks.
(iii) Some samples should be regularly sent to district office/laboratory for analysis.
10. Storage of rice
The storage function is an important link in the whole system of production,
marketing and consumption of foodgrains. During storage, rice may be damaged due
to abiotic factors viz temperature, moisture and biotic factors viz insects, rodents,
birds and micro-organisms. The type of damage caused is summarised below:
(a) Damaged by abiotic factors
(i) Damage to stocks due to exposure during natural calamities like fire, flood,
cyclone etc.
(ii) Damage to bottom layer stocks due to absorption of floor seepage if stacked on
baked floor without proper and adequate dunnage.
(iii) Prolonged storage in open due to constant exposure to sun and rain and leakage
in CAP covers etc.
(iv) Negligence in undertaking storage as per laid down code of storage practices
and due to unscientific storage godowns.
(b) Damage by biotic factors
(i) Insect infestation during storage resulting in excessive weevilisation, powder
formation etc.
(ii) Microbial (fungal) damage due to excessive moisture in the grain resulting in
charring/caking of grains due to 'wet grain heating'.
Steps to be taken for safe storage of rice
To ensure safe storage of rice and avoid any damage, the following steps should be
taken:
(i) Rice with moisture content within the safe storage limit as per uniform
specifications only should be procured/acepted for storage.
(ii) Stocks should be stored in scientific godowns.
(iii) Suitable dunnage such as wooden crates or bamboo mats sandwiched with
polythene film should be used to avoid absorption of floor seepage.

70
(iv) Stocks should be properly stacked and periodically inspected every fortnight
to check development of insect infestation, if any.
(v) The stocks should be subjected to prophylactic treatment with Deltamethrin,
Malathion or air charging with DDVP for prevention of insect infestation.
(vi) In case of heavy insect infestation, immediate curative action by way of
fumigation with suitable fumigant should be undertaken.
(vii) The stocks should be issued on "first-in-first-out" (FIFO) basis so as to avoid
damage to stocks due to prolonged storage.
Proper training of the staff engaged in procurement and storage of foodgrains
should be arranged by the State Government. Short duration training programme on
procurement and scientific storage of foodgrains may be organised by the Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution and FCI on the request of the State
Government.
11. Role of the FCI
As foodgrains procured under the DCP scheme or by the State Government's on
behalf of FCI ultimately belong to the Central Pool, it is important that the officers of
the FCI at H.Qtrs. as well as at Zonal and Regional Offices level also ensure that the
scheme is implemented as per the guidelines issued by this Department. In specific
terms, the following steps should be taken by the FCI Officers:
(i) The Head Quarter and the Zonal Office of FCI may depute teams to the DCP
states on a regular basis during the procurement season comprising both
administrative and quality control staff. The team should make random visits to
the procurement centres/locations. They should interact with the state agencies
and regional offices and provide guidance and supervision for smooth
procurement operations.
(ii) These teams should take up detailed review to ensure that all the guidelines
enumerated above are being strictly followed.
(iii) The regional offices should be in constant touch with the state agencies. The
SRMs, DMs and quality control (QC) staff should be constantly on the move
draw random samples on daily basis. Where ever lapses are noticed, these
should be brought to the notice of the food Secretary of the State as also to the
FCI H.Qtrs. and the Ministry.
(iv) The QC Division of the FCI based on the information collected by the team/
regional offices prepare a monthly report for submission to MD, FCI, Ministry
and the concerned State Government, with suggestions for corrective actions,
where ever lapses have been reported.
12. Role of the S&R Division
(i) The quality control officers of the S&R division should also ensure that the
guidelines mentioned above are strictly followed by the procuring agencies of
the State Governments.

71
(ii) They should carry out inspections of the procurement centres of the State
agencies and collect the samples of foodgrains for analysis to know the quality
of foodgrains. The cases of procurement of Beyond Rejection Limit (BRL)
foodgrains should be brought to the notice of concerned State Governments.
(iii) The officers of S&R Division should also carry out detailed inspection of CAP
complexes/covered godowns to ensure that the code of practices of scientific
storage of foodgrains are adopted by the agencies.

ANNEXURE-III
Sl.No.-2(I)
la;qDr lfpo
Hkkjr ljdkj
miHkksDrk ekeys] [kk| vkSj lkoZtfud forj.k ea=ky;
[kk| vkSj lkoZtfud forj.k foHkkx
d`f"k Hkou] ubZ fnYyh & 110 001
Dr. Joy I. Cheenath JOINT SECRETARY
Joint Secretary (Impex, SRA, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
EOP) & QCC MINISTRY OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS,
Tele: 2338 2956 - Fax: 2309 7028 FOOD & PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
DEPARTMENT OF FOOD AND
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
KRISHI BHAW AN,
NEW DELHI-110 001
D.O. No. 40-8/2007-QCC/861 September 19, 2007
Dear
State Governments and their agencies are engaged in the procurement of foodgrains
under Price Support Operations either on behalf of FCI or independently under the
decentralized procurement scheme. Keeping in view the need to streamline the
procurement of foodgrains, guidelines for the State Governments and their agencies
had been formulated and issued vide this Ministry's DO No. 8-11/2002-S&I
dated 9.10.2002. These guidelines clearly envisaged inspection of the stocks procured
by State Governments/their agencies by the FCI.
2. Accordingly, FCI was also instructed to inspect such stocks besides officers of
Quality Control Cells of the Ministry who inspect stocks being procured/procured by
the procuring agencies, with a view to monitoring its quality. In the past, it has come to
the notice that some of the State Governments/field functionaries of State Governments
have been showing reluctance in facilitating inspection of stocks of State Governments
and its agencies by FCI. You may appreciate that the FCI is inspecting stocks procured
by State Governments and its agencies on behalf of Government of India. As such, not
allowing FCI to inspect the stocks procured by State Governments/its agencies is
contrary to guidelines.
3. As the finances of Government of India are involved in procurement operations,
it becomes imperative on the part of the procuring agencies (FCI and State agency) to
adhere to quality norms fixed by the Government of India and facilitate inspection by
the officers of Government of India and their representatives of stocks procured/being
procured by them.
72

73
4. I therefore, request you to kindly take immediate necessary action to ensure that
foodgrains are procured strictly as per uniform specifications and regular inspection
of stocks by FCI is facilitated. Action taken in this regard may please be intimated to
this Ministry, at the earliest.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Dr. Joy I. Cheenath)
Joint Secretary (Impex, EOP & SRA)
Encl: As above
To
Secretary (by name),
Department of Food & Civil Supplies,
Govts. of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, West Bengal.
Copy to: CMD, FCI, New Delhi—for information and necessary action.

ANNEXURE-IV
State-wise details of BPL Families
In lakh
Accepted No. of BPL Estimated No. of
Families as on March BPL Families as on
States/UTs 2000 population and March 2008
1993-94 poverty Population and Difference
estimate 2004-05 poverty
estimates
12 3 4
A.P. 40.63 28.85 -11.78
Arunachal Pradesh 0.99 0.41 -0.58
Assam 18.36 10.92 -7.44
Bihar 65.23 64.74 -0.49
Chhattisgarh 18.75 18.96 0.21
Delhi 4.09 4.92 0.83
Goa 0.48 0.49 0.01
Gujarat 21.20 18.22 -2.98
Haryana 7.89 5.84 -2.05
H.P. 5.14 1.31 -3.83
J&K 7.36 1.03 -6.33
Jharkhand 23.94 21.60 -2.34
Karnataka 31.29 28.14 -3.15
Kerala 15.54 10.93 -4.61
M.P. 41.25 48.24 6.99
Maharashtra 65.34 66.97 1.63
Manipur 1.66 0.78 -0.88
Meghalaya 1.83 0.85 -0.98
Mizoram 0.68 0.25 -0.43
Nagaland 1.24 0.68 -0.56
Orissa 32.98 38.57 5.59
Punjab 4.68 3.99 -0.69
Rajasthan 24.31 23.42 -0.89
74

75
Sikkim 0.43 0.25 -0.18
Tamil Nadu 48.63 34.74 -13.89
Tripura 2.95 1.38 -1.57
U.P. 106.79 96.33 -10.46
Uttarakhand 4.98 7.10 2.12
West Bengal 51.79 42.56 -9.23
A&N Islands 0.28 0.20 -0.08
Chandigarh 0.23 0.17 -0.06
D&N Haveli 0.18 0.18 0.00
Daman & Diu 0.04 0.04 0.01
Lakshadweep 0.03 0.02 -0.01
Pondicherry 0.84 0.53 -0.31
Total 652.02 583.61 -68.41
12 3 4

ANNEXURE-V
Statement showing the number of bogus/ineligible rations cards deleted by the
State/UT Governments with effect from July 2006 onwards
(as on 30.06.2008)
(fig. in lakhs)
Sl. State Y ear BPL/AAY Lists & Nos. of
No bogus cards deleted
1. Andhra Pradesh 06-07 10.46
2. Assam 06-07 0.02
3. Chhattisgarh 06-07 2.00
4. Delhi 06-07 14.62
5. Gujarat 06-07 0.36
6. Karnataka 06-07 3.48
7. Madhya Pradesh 07-08 24.87
8. Maharashtra 06-07&07-08 29.45
9. Orissa 06-07 2.50
10. Uttar Pradesh 06-07 3.96
11. Uttaranchal 06-07&07-08 0.14
12. West Bengal 06-07 5.00
Total 96.86
76

77
ANNEXURE-VI
State-wise details of action taken against the officials/persons who had issued bogus ration cards and individuals who were detected
possessing bogus ration cards with effect from July, 2006
(As compiled on 30.06.08)
Sl. Name of the Number of Number of Details of Number Details of action
No. State/UT bogus ration staff action taken of  persons/ taken against such
cards members who against the families found pers ons/families
deducted/ had issued staff possessing
deleted/ such bogus responsible bogus ration
cancelled ration cards cards
1. Himachal There are no bogus/ghost ration cards of BPL/AAY in the State as cards
Pradesh under the scheme are issued to the beneficiaries as per the identification list supplied by the Rural/Urban Department.
2. Kerala 103 genuine cards Staff is not 41 Where invalid cards were found
are issued and responsible registered with Authorized
later the card for issue since Retail Depots (ARDs)/Fair
holders migrate to genuine cards Price Shops (FPS), their
some other issued. are They detect authorization has been
places due to invalid cards  on suspended. Single member
various reasons verification and cards due to expiry of card
without cancelling cancel them. holder.
the cards. Such
cards are detected
and cancelled.
3. Maharashtra 29,45,000 The distribution of foodgrains have been stopped against these
approxi- ration card holders.
mately

78
12 3 4
4. Mizoram 889 No action has been taken against the defaulting officials/families during the period in question.
5. Chandigarh 6935 BPL These cards have been weeded out/deleted as they were found to have either attained the status
2519 AAY of APL or found to have shifted from Chandigarh. In these circumstances, no penal action has been
taken against any person/official.
6. Pondicherry 422 As the door to door enumeration was done by engaging the services of various Government
Departments' officials, the responsibility may not be fixed in this regard at this juncture.
7. Goa
8. Tripura
No bogus ration cards have been detected.9. A&N Island
10. D&N Haveli

ANNEXURE-VII
Statement showing  results of action taken by the State/UT Governments
under Clauses 8 & 9 of the PDS (Control) Order, 2001 from
January 2006 to June, 2008
Sl. Name of the Y ear Number Number Number of Number of
No. State/UT of FPS of raids persons FPS
inspected conducted arrested/ Licenses
prosecuted/ suspended/
convicted Cancelled/
Show
cause
notices
issued/FIR
lodged
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Andhra Pradesh 2006 18929 5001 48 635
2007 12484 3379 8 1415
2008 * * * *
2. Arunachal 2006 89 37 00 139
Pradesh 2007 81 9 00 51
2008 * * * *
3. Assam 2006 322 309 24 22
1007 2346 630 15 484
2008 * * * *
4. Bihar 2006 25431 138 1 1738
2007 00 69 2 00
2008 * * * *
5. Chhattisgarh 2006 9276 1370 14 1056
2007 16719 907 90 862
2008 10772 840 49 384
6. Delhi 2006 508 62 46 321
2007 235 94 72 248
2008 135 121 252 125
7. Goa 2006 92 05 00 00
2007 116 00 00 26
2008 38 00 00 00
8. Gujarat 2006 17440 10 225 82
2007 15454 01 186 86
2008 5324 02 11 71
9. Haryana 2006 2373 491 12 2934
2007 1777 457 26 2803
2008 567 190 12 878
10. Himachal 2006 19766 00 5 1339
Pradesh 2007 29522 00 47 2548
2008 7271 00 1 510
79

80
11. J&K 1.01.06 to 7532 1390 228 255
31.03.07
2008 * * * *
12. Jharkhand 2006 * * * *
2007 17364 00 00 2777
2008 * * * *
13. Karnataka 2006 674 23 13 15
2007 * * * *
2008 * * * *
14. Kerala 2006 161010 8111 5 516
2007 124433 43428 1 225
2008 32976 29752 00 53
15. Madhya 2006 * * * *
Pradesh 2007 * * * *
2008 * * * *
16. Maharashtra 2006 00 557 1449 00
2007 * * * *
2008 * * * *
17. Manipur 2006 124 1 00 00
2007 101 8 00 00
2008 20 4 2 00
18. Meghalaya 2006 900 208 7 66
2007 2075 184 10 139
2008 * * * *
19. Mizoram 2006 76 79 00 00
2007 92 190 00 00
2008 * * * *
20. Nagaland 2006 101 11 00 00
2007 83 00 00 00
2008 * * * *
21. Orissa 2006 74384 1478 75 1560
2007 76766 4885 161 2212
2008 15728 504 44 356
22. Punjab 2006 * * * *
2007 * * * *
2008 * * * *
23. Rajasthan 2006 87 907 211 07
2007 00 490 203 00
2008 * * * *
24. Sikkim 2006 * * * *
2007 * * * *
2008 * * * *
25. Tamil Nadu 2006 2414 9775 52 00
12 3 4 5 6 7

81
2007 83 11584 854 00
2008 70261 6490 325 00
26. Tripura 2006 9501 79 04 210
2007 9410 547 16 297
2008 2027 144 1 99
27. Uttarakhand 2006 16979 16979 30 264
2007 9788 9788 29 104
2008 2543 2543 22 25
28. Uttar 2006 217992 12589 1303 13887
Pradesh 2007 245253 34999 3385 17240
2008 61372 9855 1494 3576
29. West  2006 2130 417 229 501
Bengal 2007 995 342 153 123
2008 * * * *
30. A&N 2006 369 00 00 25
Islands 2007 234 00 00 00
2008 82 00 00 1
31. Chandigarh 2006 98 1 3 63
2007 42 00 00 07
2008 * * * *
32. D&N 2006 73 00 00 02
Haveli 2007 40 00 00 00
2008 6 19 00 00
33. Daman & Diu 2006 * * * *
2007 * * * *
2008 * * * *
34. Lakshadweep 2006 * * * *
2007 24 00 00 00
2008 00 00 00 00
35. Pondicherry 2006 2040 113 33 10
2007 4288 850 66 00
2008 1561 163 12 00
Total 2006 590710 60141 4567 25647
2007 569810 112499 5525 31647
2008 210683 50627 2225 6078
Grant Total= 1371203 223267 12317 63372
2006+2007+2008
*Information not provided
12 3 4 5 6 7

ANNEXURE-VIII
(As on 31.7.2008)
Statement showing additional commodities being distributed through Pds outlets
other than Wheat, Rice, Coarsegrain, Sugar & Kerosene Oil
(As reported by respective State/Ut.)
Sl. State/UT Name of Item/Commodity
No.
12 3
1. Andhra Pradesh 1. enriched Wheat floor
2. Iodized Salt (G.M.)
3. Red Gram Dal
4. Tamarind
5. P . Oil
6. Black Gram Dal
7. Green Gram Dal
2. Arunachal Pradesh 1. Edible Oil
2. Pulses
3. Vanaspati Ghee
4. Milk Powder
5 . Baby Food
6 . Dry Cells
7 . Matches
8 . All types of soap
9 . Paper including newsprint, paper boar &
straw boar
10. Hurricane Lanterns
11 . Lead writing pencils
12 . Exercise books
13 . Butter
14 . Tea
15 . Yarn
3. Assam 1. Iodised salt under State Zonal  quota
2. -do-
4. Bihar No item other than PDS items is sold through
FPS.
5. Chhattisgarh Iodized Amrit Salt
6. Delhi No. additional commodities  is sold through FPS
on subsidized rates
7. Goa Taluka Mormugao, Goa
1. Sugar (Open Market)
2. Tur dal
3. Masur Dal
4. Vartana
82

83
5. Harbour
6. Chana dal
7.  Joggary
8. Rava
9. Atta
10. Maida
Taluka Sanguem, Goa
1. Onion
2. Potatoes
3. Tea Powder do branded packets
4.  Iodized salt
5. Palmoleine Oil
6. Veg. Ghee Packets
7. Sugar
8. Rava
9. Maida
10. Atta
11. Tur dal, masur dal, Chana dal, Moong dal,
Urad dal, etc.
8. Gujarat 1. Iodized Salt
2. Edible Oil
9. Haryana The State Govt. has issued instructions to
all District Food & Supply Officers to sell
also items other than PDS items i.e. Pulses,
Copies, Vegetable Oil, Candle, Match Box,
Salt and Soap through FPS and the State
Govt. has no objection in this regard.
10. Himachal Pradesh 1. Dal Malka
2. Dal Channa
3. Urad Sabut
4. Mustard Oil
5. Refined Oil
6. Iodized Oil
11. J&K No item other than PDS items is sold
through FPS.
12. Jharkhand Iodized salt
13. Karnataka 1. Crystal (Common) and free flow salt brand
name suruchi Iodized Salt
2.  Condom
14. Kerala 1.  Green Gram
2. U.D. Washed
3.  U.D.
12 3

84
Split
4. B.G. Bold
5. Lobia
6. Toor dal
7. Peas dal
8. Chillies
9. Corriander
10.  Cuminseed
11. Mustard
12. Maida
13. Sabari tea
14. Sabari Palm Oil 1 Ltr.
15. Free flow salt 1 kg.
16. Crystal Salt 1 kg.
15. Madhya Pradesh No item other than PDS items is sold through
FPS.
16. Maharashtra Not reported
17. Manipur Not reported
18.  Meghalaya Not reported
19. Mizoram Nil
20. Nagaland Not reported
21. Orissa The Govt. has allowed to FPS owners to
sale non-PDS commodities in FPS. FPS have
been allowed to operate Public Telephone
Booth.
22. Punjab Not reported
23. Rajasthan Iodized Salt
24. Sikkim FPS in the State are permitted to sell all
consumer items. However, no subsidy is
provided to the additional items/
commodities sold by them.
25. Tamil Nadu 1. T oor Dal
2.  Oral Dal
3. Palm Oil
4. Rava
5.  Maida
26. Tripura 1. Atta (wheat is converted into whole meal
atta)
2. Iodized Salt in 1(one) kg. poly packet
27. Uttaranchal Not reported
28. Uttar Pradesh Soap
Toothpaste
Oil
Pulses
12 3

85
Iodized Salt
Tea
ORS Tablet
Condom & Sanitary napkins
29. West Bengal 1. Mustard Oil
Iodized Salt
a) Essential
b) Labonya
30. A&N Islands No item other than PDS items is sold
through FPS.
31. Chandigarh FPS are granted to the kiryana merchants
who apart from distributing the Essential
commodities under TPDS to BPL & AAY
are also retailing grocery items and other
items of daily use like Toothpaste, soaps,
detergent powder, tea, salt, match boxes etc.
32. D&N Haveli No item other than PDS items is sold
through FPS.
33. Daman & Diu Not reported
34. Lakshdweep Not reported
35. Pondicherry 1. Toor Dal
2. Black Gram
3. Coriander
4. Long chillies
5. Iodised Powdered salt
6. Tamarind
12 3

ANNEXURE-IX
Summary of Concurrent Evaluation of the Targeted Public Distribution System
(Study Conducted by the NCAER)
The main objective of the study was to examine the extent to which foodgrains
disbursed under TPDS were actually reaching the BPL and AAY categories of
population in the country and to identify the incidence as well as the mode of
irregularities in the system. The study was carried out with the help of primary survey.
Six  States namely, Assam, Mizoram, UP , Bihar, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan were selected
for the primary survey. A total number of 6000 households (one thousand for each
state) were surveyed consecutively for 6 months period for detailed information. The
purpose of surveying some households repeatedly for six times was to check the
regularity of the delivery of PDS and its other efficiency indicators. The BPL and APL
samples were drawn in the proportion of 80 and 20, respectively. The main findings of
the study are the following:
The delivery mechanism of PDS was found more effective in four of the six selected
States were more than 80 per cent of the below poverty households obtained their
entitled quantity of cereals quite regularly. The delivery was very poor in Bihar and
less than satisfactory in Assam (see Table 1). The entitlement of food for below poverty
households including that of antyodaya families was fixed at 35 kgs., either for wheat/
rice or combination of these two. In the selected States, majority of the below poverty
households received close to the fixed entitlment of these two cereals except in the
case of Mizoram, where a majority of the poor households obtained around 25kgs., of
rice. The food distributed through PDS could meet 2/3rd share of the total food
requirement of the poor except in the case of Bihar where it could fulfil only 1/3rd food
requirement of the poor. The price charged for PDS food was close to Rs. 2 per kg. for
wheat and Rs. 3 per kg. for rice for majority of antyodaya families. Similarly, for the
other below poverty households, in majority of the cases, price paid was close to the
stipulated price. However, among a few households, higher than the stipulated prices
were paid because shop-keepers passed on the transportation charges to the
households.
Reporting quality of grains distributed, a majority of the households were satisfied
with the quality of grain supplied in almost all the States except Bihar. In Bihar, more
than 70 per cent households were not happy with the quality supplied through
government shops. Presence of impurities, insect infested supply, broken grains and
very bad taste of the grains were the common reasons for their dissatisfaction. Similar
problems were quoted by the discontented households in the other States also.
Household rated the performance of TPDS during the period of distress as satisfactory
or highly satisfactory in Chhattisgarh, Assam and Mizoram. It was satisfactory in
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, while in Bihar, around half of the interviewed households
rated it poor or very poor.
Although delivery of grains was found working well in majority of the selected
States, flaws in identification of target groups were noticed in all the selected States.
Alongwith problems of identification, excess number of cards issued and huge amount
of diversion of food was found among most of the selected States. Using the census
86

87
data and the number of cards issued based on the secondary sources (Ministry of
Food), number of excess cards/unidentified families were calculated for all the States
as well as for the all India. The number of excess cards issued was very high in
Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Haryana. The total number of excess
cards issued at all India were more than 2 crore. Similarly, unidentified families without
having any card aggregated at 1.2 crore at the all India level. The study calculated
excessive targeting (inclusion of non-poor) and failure of targeting (exclusion of poor
from the Subsidy) errors for all the States as well as all India using the same sources.
The exclusion of poor from the subsidy scheme was highest in Goa and Uttarakhand
where the TPDS failed in targeting up to 30 per cent. The inclusion of non-poor in the
subsidized food was a much more severe problem and the incidence was found occurring
in almost all the States. At the all India level, inclusion error was up to 25 per cent as
number of BPL cards issued were 9.7 crore in comparison to only 5.8 crore existing
families. By comparing the observed per capita income and expenditure from our survey
data with the Planning Commission cut-off income for poverty, the extent of inclusion
and exclusion errors was worked out (for the selected States). The average income and
expenditure criterion indicated that inclusion error was highest around 75 per cent in
Mizoram, 50 to 60 per cent in Assam, around 50 per cent in Rajasthan and Bihar, around
35 per cent in Chhattisgarh and 20 to 30 per cent in Uttar Pradesh. On the exclusion
error, the data indicated that the phenomenon of poor households being not issued a
below poverty card was minimum in the North-Eastern States, less than 15 per cent,
followed by Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan.
In addition to the incidence of mis-targeting, there was some proportion of food
that was not being actually distributed among any of the households but it was shown
in the state records as uplifted.Therefore, we can presume that foodgrains not
distributed but withdrawn from the state accounts were being diverted to the black
market or in the open market or may be distributed among the non-poor people at a
higher price. Among the selected States, diversion of Antyodaya food was found in
two States namely, Bihar and Mizoram. The magnitude of diversion was estimated up
to 41 per cent for wheat in Bihar and 36 per cent for rice in Mizoram. In the case of other
below poverty households, almost all States had the incidence of diversion, except
Rajasthan. The diversion was highest in Assam and Mizoram in rice, and Bihar and
Chhattisgarh in wheat. In all these cases, diversion was up to 40 per cent of total
offtake. In the case of food designated for the above poverty households, the whole
amount of wheat offtake and more than 80 per cent of rice offtake were diverted in the
two North-Eastern States of Assam and Mizoram. In the other four States diversion of
food for APL households was found only in Chhattisgarh (See Table 2).
Thus, study potrays a mixed picture. On the one hand, food was being delivered to
the poor quite regularly during the survey period in majority of the selected States. the
Fact that poorest of the poor do obtain their entitlement quite regularly indicates
allocative efficiency of the PDS system including that of fair price shops. On the other
hand, deeper probing revealed gross irregularities indicating large-scale identification
errors, excess cards issued and widespread diversion of food entitled for the poor.
These issues need to be corrected if the functioning of the PDS system is to be
improved. The correct identification of the beneficiary is the first step in that direction.

88
Although, attempts have been m ade to decentralize the identification process by
involving the Panchayats and other Local Bodies, the latter process has also to
some extent politicized the whole process of identification of the poor. This is
happening because of complete lack of monitoring of the system at any stage. Given
the ground reality, it would not be possible to improve the PDS system unless the
consumer especially the poorest ones become aware of their rights. The problem of
identification error arises because of lack of information/awareness among the poor
about the eligibility criteria for the AAY or BPL or any other welfare schemes for that
matter. The people in the lower strata seem to be unaware of the criteria being
followed in issuing AAY , BPL or APL card. It would  not be possible to improve this
system unless the consumers are properly educated on these issues. For this purpose
mass information system like local language newspapers, regional radio and television
stations should be used to keep the villagers informed and updated about the criteria,
entitlement, price of PDS grains etc. Proper monitoring of the system and effective
punishment against the culprit for wrong identification would be needed. It would
be more appropriate if there are multiple authorities cross checking the identification.
In the long run, distribution system should be computerized and all FPS and civil
supply godowns should be connected online. This will bring more efficiency and
transparency in the system and reduce the scope for diversion of benefits away from
the beneficiaries.
Table 1: Percentage of households obtaining their entitlement of cereals in the
selected states during 6 months of survey period
Rajasthan Chhattisgarh Uttar Bihar Assam Mizoram
Pradesh
Antyodaya
families 91.3 94.7 92.8 55.3 61.9 88.9
Other below
poverty 90.7 95.8 85.8 36.3 66.7 85.4
Households
Table 2: Diversion of food in the selected states (Percentage of off-take)
Rajasthan Chhattisgarh Bihar Uttar Assam Mizoram
Pradesh
Antyodaya Families
Rice 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.5 36.2
Wheat 0.0 0.0 41.4 0.9 0.0 0.0
Other Below Poverty Households
Rice 0.0 1.0 0.0 8.3 45.2 37.4
Wheat 0.0 42.3 46.9 20.7 0.0 0.0

89
Above poverty households
Rice 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 83.3 81.1
Wheat 0.0 78.3 0.0 0.0 10.0 100.0
Rajasthan Chhattisgarh Bihar Uttar Assam Mizoram
Pradesh

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10) HELD ON 27TH OCTOBER, 2009
The Committee sat from 1230 hrs to 1330 hrs. on 27th October, 2009 in Room No. 53,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Jaswant Singh — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
5. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
6. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
9. Shri Ashwani Kumar
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller & Auditor General of India
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG Report Central (RC),
3. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit, (Defence
Services)
4. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
5. Shir P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (Report Central)
A. Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department
of School education and literacy)
1. Smt. Anshu Vaish — Secretary (SE&L)
2. Shri S.K. Ray — AS&FA (HRD)
3. Smt. Anita Kaul — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Ananti Kumar Singh — Joint Secretary
90

91
B. Representative of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Shri Amit Mohan Prasad — Joint Secretary
C. Representative of Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food And Public Distribution
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)
Shri Bhagwan Sahai — Joint Secretary
2 . **** **** ****
3 . **** **** ****
4 . **** **** ****
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
5. The Committee, then, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:—
( i ) **** **** ****
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Seventy-third Report (Fourteeth Lok Sabha) on
'Management of Foodgrains'; and
(iii) **** **** ****
6. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the abovementioned Draft Reports.
The Chairman, however, desired that suggestions/modifications, if any, of the Memebrs
may be communicated to the Lok Sabha Secretariat latest by 4th November, 2009.
7. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Draft Reports in the
light of  the factual verifications received from the Office of the C&AG and present the
same to the House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
**** Matters not related to this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para. 5 of Introduction)
Analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their Seventy-third
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
(i) Total Number of Observations/Recommendations 23
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government
Sl.No./Paragraph Nos.
Sl. Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,7,9,10,16,17,18,21,22 &23
Total : 14
Percentage : 61
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the reply of the Government.
Sl. Nos. 11,12,13 &15
Total : 4
Percentage : 17
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration.
Sl. Nos. 6,14,19 &20
Total : 4
Percentage : 17
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies
Sl. No. 8
Total : 1
Percentage : 5
92
GMGIPMRND—4526LS—10-08-2010