51
FREIGHT AND WAGON MANAGEMENT
ON INDIAN RAILWAYS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Nineteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FIFTY-FIRST  REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FIFTY-FIRST REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
FREIGHT AND WAGON MANAGEMENT
ON INDIAN RAILWAYS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Nineteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
Presented to Lok Sabha on  28 December, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 December, 2011
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa 1933 (Saka)

PAC No. 1960
Price:  ` 90.00
© 2012  BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi 110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2011-12) ........................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been
accepted by the Government .............................................. 12
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not  desire  to  pursue  in  view of  the replies  received  from
the Government................................................................... 54
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
replies of  the Government  have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration ............................. 55
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
the Government have furnished interim replies................... 78
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the Twelfth Sitting of the Public  Accounts
Committee (2011-12) held on 21st December, 2011.............. 79
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of  the  Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Nineteenth Report  (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha).......................................................................... 81

COMPOSITION OF THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
*Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide, the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
(iii)

(v)
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
4. Shri S.L. Singh — Committee Officer
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Fifty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on‘Freight
and Wagon Management on Indian Railways’.
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
29th April, 2010. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 7th July,  2011. The Public Accounts Committee
considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 21st December, 2011.
Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
23 December, 2011 Chairman,
2 Pausa, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

CHAPTER   I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Nineteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "Freight and Wagon Management on
Indian Railways".
2. The Nineteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 29th April 2010, contained 21 Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations
have been received from the Ministry of Railways and are categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1-3, 8-15 and 17-20
Total: 15
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:
Paragraph No. -Nil-
Total: Nil
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 4-7, 16 and 21
Total: 6
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
Paragraph No. -Nil-
Total: Nil
Chapter V
3. The Action T aken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Nineteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the
succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the action taken by the

2
Government on their Observations/Recommendations made in the Original Report
which merit reiteration.
I. Enhancement of Carrying Capacity of Wagons
[Observation/Recommendation Paragraph No. 4 of the Nineteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha)]
4. In their Nineteenth Report, the Committee had noted that the carrying capacity
(CC) of a wagon is based upon the load that the axles of the wagon can carry. Prior to
November 2004, the wagons were allowed to be loaded up to CC+2 tonne where the
permissible axle load was taken as 20.32 tonne. From November 2004 onwards, the
loading was permitted up to CC+4+2 tonne. In May 2005, as a pilot project, the Railway
Board permitted running of these wagons loaded up to CC+8+2 tonne on sixteen
identified iron ore router in order to increase throughput. Subsequently, wagons loaded
with coal up to CC+6+2 tonne were also allowed to run on nominated coal routes.
However, no detailed scientific and engineering study on the technical feasibility of
the enhanced wagon loading was carried out through any independent accredited
agency and this important decision of increasing wagon carrying capacity beyond the
prescribed limits i.e. upto CC+8+2T was taken solely based on the field experience
gained after running freight wagons for years and in-house research and development
work done by the Research Design and Standards Organization (RDSO). This
questionable decision of the Ministry of Railways challenged the conventional/
prevailing system of assessing weight bearing limit of tracks and had led to large scale
premature damages to tracks, bridges and rolling stock belying the Railway Board's
contention that no appreciable adverse effect has been noticed. The Railway Board
themselves admitted that actual consequences of the enhanced loading on tracks and
wagons would be clearer when more results become available in due course which may
span over 30 years. The Committee had observed that until the Railway Board complete
their ongoing impact analysis of enhanced loading on rail infrastructure and the results
prove beyond doubt that their venture is risk free, the decision of enhanced loading
remains a risky venture fraught with latent physical damage to rail infrastructure which
even poses rail safety concerns. Pointing out that this decision of the Ministry of
Railways to enhance the carrying capacity of wagons was aimed at short-term revenue
gains at the post of long-term damages to the railway infrastructure, the Committee
had expressed the view that CC of wagons should have ideally been enhanced only
after undertaking a proper scientific evaluation and detailed feasibility study. They
had also cautioned the Railway Board to desist from taking indiscreet action which
may cause harm to rail infrastructure in future.
5. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:—
“The main issues pointed out in the above paragraph are:
(a) No detailed scientific and engineering study on the technical feasibility of
the enhanced wagon loading was carried out through any independent
accredited agency and this important decision of increasing wagon carrying
capacity beyond the prescribed limits i.e. up to CC+8+2T was taken solely
based on the field experience gained after running freight wagons for years

3
and in-house research and development work done by the Research Design
and Standards Organization (RDSO).
(b) The Committee are, therefore, constrained to observe that until the Railway
Board complete their ongoing impact analysis of enhanced loading on rail
infrastructure and the results prove beyond doubt that their venture is risk
free, the decision of enhanced loading remains a risky venture fraught with
latent physical damage to rail infrastructure which even poses rail safety
concerns.
(c) The Committee feel that CC of wagons should have ideally been enhanced
only after undertaking a proper scientific evaluation and detailed feasibility
study. They would also like to caution the Railway Board to desist from
taking indiscreet actions which may cause injudicious harm to rail infrastructure
in future.
With regard to (a) above, it is to be pointed out that RDSO has been involved
in the design and development of rolling stock since its establishment way
back in the fifties. All the wagons plying on the Indian Railway system have
been designed/approved by RDSO. To enhance the carrying capacity of
these wagons, RDSO did not need to consult any independent accredited
agency as the technical know-how of these wagons was already available
with RDSO.
With regard to (b) and (c), it is to be pointed out that running of trains loaded
with enhanced quantity was done based on field experience after running
freight trains for years and in-house research by RDSO. Additional springs
are being provided in suspension to contain the effect of enhanced loading.
The provision of additional springs is almost completed.
Earlier BOY and BOBS wagons with an axle load of 22.9 metric tonne have
been introduced on Indian Railways. These wagons are running for a
considerable time and no adverse effect has been noticed on the track.
Over the years, not only the track structure has improved but maintenance
standard has also improved considerably, 90R rails have been replaced with
52 kg. and 60 kg. rails. In addition to improvement in rail section, rail metallurgy
has also improved considerably. Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) of rail has
been improved from 72 UTS to 90 UTS. Bhilai Steel Plant is now using RH
degasser for restricting the hydrogen content to avoid rail fractures on this
account. Rails are being tested on-line with Ultra Sonic Flaw Detection (USFD)
System and Eddy Current testing machines for detecting any internal flaw
and surface defects.
Use of longer rail panels has resulted in reduction of nos. of in-plant and
in-situ welded joints which are normally considered relatively weaker zones
in track. This has resulted in reduced maintenance cost and longer life of
track components.
Similarly, sleeper technology has also changed completely. Metal sleepers
have been replaced with PSC (Pre Stressed Concrete) sleepers. These sleepers
are provided with the state-of-the-art track machines. With the introduction

4
of 52 kg.60 kg. rails on PSC sleepers, track modulus, has improved considerably
and axle load capacity of the track has improved.
Keeping in view the above developments, a corporate decision was taken by
Railway Board to permit CC+8+2T on iron ore routes in May, 2005 as a Pilot
project. The issue has been examined in-house by the experts in the field and
in RDSO. RDSO has also conducted a number of studies on the effect of
enhanced loading on track and bridges and working with Wheel Impact Load
Detectors (WILD) instruments. With enhancement of Carrying Capacity (CC)
of railway wagons, the assets are subjected to more intensive use and their
earlier renewal is on accepted lines.
While permitting higher axle load, greater emphasis on monitoring of in service
behaviour of infrastructure, both fixed and rolling stock is being kept in mind.
Higher axle load may decrease life of rail but with greater emphasis on having
zero tolerance for overloading, USFD examination of rails, monitoring of in
service defects of wagons with help of WILD, instrumentation of bridges
etc., effects of higher axle loads on track will get reduced. Rail grinding have
been envisaged to long life of rails.
The project is being monitored by Multi-disciplinary Core Group comprising
of Heads of Departments from Civil, Mechanical, Electrical and Operating
departments and the same is being reviewed by General Managers of
Zonal Railways. Quarterly review reports are also being submitted to Railway
Board. A number of instructions have been issued by Railway Board to control
overloading. To effectively monitor and control overloading, Zonal Railways
were advised to implement unified Joint Procedure Orders (JPO) issued from
Board. Speed restrictions are being imposed on overloaded wagons. Evidently,
Railways are taking sufficient measures to nullify/minimize adverse impact of
Higher Axle Load running over fixed infrastructure."
6. Having observed that the enhanced loading of railway wagons causes large
scale premature damages to tracks, bridges and rolling stock, the Committee in
their original report had recommended that carrying capacity of wagons should have
ideally been  enhanced only after undertaking a proper scientific evaluation and
detailed feasibility study. The Ministry, in their action taken reply has stated that to
enhance the carrying capacity of wagons, RDSO did not need to consult any
independent accredited agency as the technical know-how of these wagons was already
available with RDSO. The Ministry has also stated that in addition to various safety
measures, a number of instructions have been issued by the Railway  Board to control
overloading and to nullify/minimize adverse impact of Higher Axle Load  running
over fixed infrastructure. Surprisingly, most of the safety measures are, admittedly,
in the nature of advisories and have not been implemented throughout  the length and
breadth  of the Indian Railways. Taking note of the frequency of accidents, the
Committee note that weak spots are widespread in the railway network marked by
aged/distressed bridges and worn-out/debilitated tracks. The Committee are
apprehensive that until the Railways complete their on-going impact analysis of
enhanced loading on rail infrastructure and the results prove beyond doubt that their
venture is risk free, the decision to enhance carrying capacity of wagons remains a

5
dangerously risky venture fraught with latent physical damage to rail infrastructure.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendations that the
Railway Board desist from taking indiscreet action which may cause avoidable harm
to rail infrastructure in future. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised
about the outcome of the safety measures taken to nullify the adverse impact of
overloading of wagons.
II. Expansion of Enhanced CC Routes
[Observation/Recommendation Paragraph No. 5 of the Nineteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha)]
7. In their Nineteenth Report, the Committee had found that initially, the
Railway Board permitted running of freight trains loaded up to CC+8 tonne with an
additional loading tolerance of 3 tonne on certain specified routes mostly dedicated
freight routes as a pilot project for one year effective from 15.05.2005. The commodities
permitted to be loaded under this arrangement were ores, gypsum, limestone, dolomite,
etc. Later, some CC+6 routes were also notified for loading of E&F grade coal, inferior
grade coal, washed coal, and washery middling in addition to ores, gypsum, limestone
and dolomite up to CC+6  tonne. The Pilot Project was gradually enhanced and more
routes have been included in the project and in addition to BOXN wagons, other
wagons were also included in the project. Cement, grain, sugar etc. were also included
in permitted commodities list in addition to iron ore, coal and other heavy minerals.
Subsequently, CC+6 routes have been universalized and all BG routes of Indian Railways
except a few have been notified as CC+6 routes. In defence of such questionable and
risky decisions, the Railway Board pleaded that as capacity additions in the Indian
Railways have long gestation periods, the quantum increase in the freight loading
could be made possible only through  a major strategy of increasing the axle  load. The
Committee had expressed that they were not convinced by this approach of the Ministry
of Railways particularly when the enhanced loading was effected without the matter
being subjected  to a thorough scientific and engineering study and more routes were
arbitrarily brought under the pilot project without any assessment of their impacts.
Against this backdrop, the Committee did not consider the decision to enhance carrying
capacity of wagons much above the originally permissible carrying capacity as a
prudent, safe and technically sound way of augmenting earning capacity of the Railways.
While expressing serious concern over this uncertain step, the Committee had desired
that the Railway Board should avoid pursuing a reckless policy of expanding enhanced
CC routes until favourable impacts of the existing pilot project are established.
8. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as under:—
“The Committee has basically pointed out that the decision of enhanced
loading was effected without the matter being subjected to a thorough
scientific and engineering study and more routes were brought in the ambit
of enhanced loading without any assessment of their impact. Thus, the
Committee does not find this decision to be prudent, safe and technically
sound.
......The Ministry of Railways is of the opinion that adequate experience has
been gained for enhanced axle load and adequate measures to ensure safety

6
have also been taken. Thus the Committee's observation above is not right
keeping in view the better technological inputs being provided on a continuous
basis."
9. The reply of the Ministry that adequate experience has been gained for enhanced
axle load and that adequate measures to ensure safety have also been taken, is not
acceptable as the concern raised by the Committee about 'safety' has not been addressed.
The enhanced loading of railway wagons has led to large scale premature damages to
tracks, bridges and rolling stock and by their own admission the actual consequences
of enhanced loading on tracks and wagons would be clearer when more results become
available in due course which may span over an abnormal long period of 30 years. The
Committee, therefore, do not consider bringing more routes arbitrarily under pilot
project of enhanced loading as a prudent, safe and technically sound way of augmenting
the earnings of the Railways. Apprehensive of the serious consequences, the
Committee reiterate that the Railway Board should avoid reckless expansion of
enhanced CC routes until favourable impacts of the existing pilot project are
empirically established.
III. Non-fulfilment of Pre-requisite Conditions of the Enhanced Loading
[Observation/Recommendation Paragraph Nos. 6 and 7 of the Nineteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha)]
10. In their Nineteenth Report, the Committee had noted that in terms of Research
Design and Standards Organisation's (RDSO's) conditions and the clarifications issued
by the Railway Board in March and May 2005 in the matter of permitting enhanced
loading, installation of Wheel Impact Load Detectors (WILDs) and in-motion
weigh-bridges are considered essential for monitoring the impact of enhanced loading.
However, in almost all the Railway Zones, the pilot projects of permitting the wagons
loaded up to CC+8+2 tonne and CC+6+2 tonne were commenced even without fulfilling
the prescribed conditions of installation of in-motion weigh-bridges and provision of
Wheel Impact Load Detectors. Even though eleven in-motion weigh-bridges were
slated to be installed on East Coast Railway, only one was installed as of September
2006. Similarly, on South Central Railway only five out of the stipulated nine
weigh-bridges could be installed. Worse still, not a single Wheel Impact Load Detector
was provided on any of the Railway during the same period. Considering the failure of
the Railway Board in fulfilling the pre-requisite conditions before permitting enhanced
loading as a major systemic failure/lapse, the Committee had asked the Railway Board
to look into the entire issue afresh and take immediate corrective measures. The
Committee had also urged upon the Railway Board to accord the highest priority of
fulfilling the pre-requisite conditions of wagon CC enhancement i.e. installation of all
the requisite devices/instruments like WILDs, weigh-bridges, other essential
mechanical devices/instruments etc.
11. Further, the Committee had noticed that by December 2008, a total of 9 WILDs
had been installed and tender for procurement of further seven systems was under
finalization by Central Organisation for Modernisation of Workshops (COFMOW).
Besides, the Railway Board also planned to incorporate WILD in Online Monitoring of
Rolling Stock (OMRS) system and another indent for procurement of 25 Nos. Of
Acoustic Bearing Detector and WILDs for Online Monitoring of Rolling Stock was

7
under finalization. However, this position remained unchanged till December 2009,
obviously indicating that no specific action plan had been implemented for expeditious
installation of WILD on all identified vulnerable routes. Subsequently, the Railway
Board constituted a Committee during 2008-09 to draw up a blue print indicating all the
locations on Indian Railways where electronic in-motion weigh-bridges were needed.
Inspite of this, the position of installation of weigh-bridges remained dismal as against
84 and 68 weigh-bridges planned for installation during 2008 and 2009 respectively,
only 11 and 8 weigh-bridges could be commissioned. Surprisingly, as a remedial measure,
the Railway Board had merely reissued a set of old instructions asking all Zonal
Railways to commission entire planned/proposed weigh-bridges within the next six
months besides mandating provision of in-motion weigh-bridges in all new private
sidings having outward traffic. The same instructions were issued in 2008 by the
Railway Board without yielding any tangible results. The Committee had regretted that
even after 5 years of enhanced loading, the Railways miserably failed to commission
the requisite numbers of WILDs and in-motion weigh-bridges despite their importance
in monitoring the impact of enhanced loading to the rail infrastructure. In order to
protect costly and vulnerable rail infrastructure from damages, the Committee had
recommended that it should be made obligatory for all the Zonal Railways to install
and commission all the pending WILDs and weigh-bridges on priority basis and any
laxity in the matters should be dealt with sternly.
12. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) have
stated as under:—
“Almost all the wagons have been strengthened by the provision of additional
springs as per the recommendations of Research Design and Standards
Organisation. Close monitoring of CC+8+2 operation is being done so that
the date so obtained can be an instrument of decision-making regarding
inputs in key areas, like upgradation of technology, maintenance etc. so that
the investments can be prioritized accordingly.
Wheel Impact Load Detectors (WILDs) have been installed at the following
locations:
Sl. Location Division Railway Date of
No. Installation
1. Mahalimarup Chakradharpur SER 18.07.2007
2. Hospet Hubli SWR 22.07.2007
3. Bhilai Raipur SECR 28.11.2007
4. Arakkonam Chennai SR 31.01.2008
5. Mughalsarai Mughalsarai ECR 10.04.2008
6. Mughalsarai Mughalsarai ECR 10.04.2008
7. Guntakal Guntakal SCR 25.02.2008
8. Asansol Asansol E R 24.04.2008
9. Vishakhapatnam Waltair ECoR 30.05.2008

8
WILD is a new technology on the Indian Railways. We are still on the initial part
of the learning curve. Some time is required for the technology to be absorbed
completely. The focus through WILD is on isolation of defective wagons in order
to minimize harm to both the wagon and the track. However, the primary objective
is still the prevention of defects through inputs in technology, quality control in
manufacture and improved maintenance.
Significant progress has been made in terms of understanding the use of this new
technology and using it for benefit of IR. Based on the experience of first lot of 09
WILDs installed, certain improvements have been made in the second lot of six
orders for which have been placed for:
Sl.No. Location Division Railway
1. Nagpur Nagpur SECR
2. Ajni Nagpur C R
3. Bina Bhopal WCR
4. Itarsi Bhopal WCR
5. New Katni Jabalpur WCR
6. Barwadih Dhanbad E C R
The above 6 WILD equipments are planned to be installed in 2010.
The pilot implementation of the Acoustic Bearing Monitor has been done at
Bakkas (Northern Railway). The system has been commissioned in January 2010.
The system validation process is in hand as this system requires correlation of
field data with the associated examination results. This is a complex imported
technology requiring critical initial process as the standards pertaining to IR
systems need to be developed."
13. The Ministry of Railways further submitted statements detailing year-wise
and Railway-wise status of installation of in-motion weigh-bridges. As shown in these
statements as of 20 February, 2010, 147 electronic in-motion weigh-bridges have been
commissioned, 25 were under commissioning and 46 were planned for commissioning.
14. The Committee regret to note that while the action taken replies were
furnished by the Ministry of Railways in July, 2011, the figures regarding installation
of Wheel Impact Load Detectors (WILDs) pertain to the years 2007 and 2008.
Apparently, after 2008, no WILD was installed in any Railway Zones and no concrete
action was taken by the Ministry to fulfil the pre-requisite conditions before permitting
enhanced loading of wagons i.e. installation of Wheel Impact Load Detectors and
electronic in motion weigh-bridges. As per the information furnished to the Committee,
the position of the installed Wheel Impact Load Detectors as well as of electronic
in-motion weigh bridges, remains more or less, the same. Worse, the reply of the
Ministry does not indicate any follow-up action taken by them to speed up installation
of Wheel Impact Load Detectors and electronic in-motion weigh bridges pursuant to
the Committee's recommendation. The Committee are unhappy to note that the
Railways have failed to commission requisite number of WILDs and in-motion weigh-

9
bridges despite the dire need of these equipments/installations in monitoring the
impact of enhanced loading to the rail infrastructure. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the status of the six WILD equipments which were scheduled to be installed
in 2010 and the target for such installations in the succeeding 5 years. The Committee
further recommend that the Railway Board make it obligatory for all the Zonal
Railways to install and commission all the pending WILDs and weigh-bridges without
further delay. The specific steps taken in the regard may be informed to the Committee
within 3 months of the presentation of the Report.
IV . Inadequate Investment on Infrastructure for Regaining the Lost Rail Traffic
Share
[Observation/Recommendation Paragraph No. 16 of the Nineteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha)]
15. In their Nineteenth Report, the Committee had noted that the investment under
major plan heads aimed at creating infrastructure for improving freight and passenger
services over the years was not commensurate with the buoyancy level of the Railways'
earnings. As a result, capacity augmentation over the existing facilities was very poor
and was marked by fluctuations of marginal declines and increases continually from
the years 2002-03 to 2006-07. The Committee had observed that this lack of growth in
the Railways infrastructure had perhaps a causative role in the reduction of the Railways
share of the total transport share from 53 per cent in the IV Five Year Plan to 37 per cent
in the IX Five Year Plan. Considering that such an inadequate investment on Rail
infrastructure was a serious handicap on the part of the Railway Board, which may
deprive them of achieving the required pace of acceleration both in passenger and
freight operations and earnings thereof, the Committee had expressed the view that
the Railways need to invest heavily on their infrastructure development for furthering
their performance and achievement and more especially in the post freight rationalization
and carrying capacity enhancement phase marked by deterioration in railway
infrastructure. The Committee had, therefore, urged the Railways to pool their resources
and infuse adequate funds for infrastructural renewal/up gradation to enable the
Railways in creating the required rail infrastructure for scalling further heights in their
performance. The Committee had also recommended that the upgradation of physical
infrastructure should be complemented by a series of innovative and competitive
marketing strategies to further consolidate the Railways' performance and achievement
in freight operations.
16. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows:—
“Noted.
A number of marketing strategies have been adopted to consolidate Railway's
performance and achievements in freight operations from time to time.
In order to encourage public-private partnership in procurement of wagons
to meet the anticipated incremental freight traffic, Wagon Investment Scheme
(WIS) was launched on 28.11.2005. Approvals of 140 rakes were accorded by
IR during the period from 2005-08, out of which 103 rakes have been inducted
on IR system.

10
Similarly, Liberalized Wagon Investment Scheme (LWIS) was launched in
2008 to encourage private investment in special purpose and high capacity
wagons for transportation of bulk commodities where Railway's share is low.
Approval for procurement of 12 rakes has been given till June, 2010.
To further facilitate private investment in wagons, new schemes namely Special
Freight Train Operator (SFTO) Scheme and Automobile Freight Train Operator
(AFTO) Scheme have been launched recently to facilitate increase in IR's
market share in non-traditional low, medium and high density traffic like
automobile, vegetable oil, molasses, chemicals and petrochemicals and bulk
traffic like fly ash/bulk cement etc.
Private investment has also been encouraged in the area of terminal
development on private land through Terminal Development Scheme (TDS)
launched in 2008 and Private Freight Terminal Scheme launched on 31.05.2010
for handling rail borne traffic. To compliment AFTO scheme, a policy on
development of automobile and ancillary hub on railway land through public
private partnership mode has been issued to facilitate bulk transportation of
automobile traffic from production centers to consumption centers."
17. The Committee in their original report had recommended for heavy investment
of Railway's funds for infrastructural renewal/upgradation to meet the emerging
challenges in the post freight rationalization and wagon carrying capacity enhancement
phase. In their action taken reply, the Ministry, while noting the recommendation of
the Committee, have stated that they have initiated a large number of marketing
strategies for private participation and investment in wagons and terminal development
on private land. The reply of the Ministry is, however, silent on action taken/proposed
to be taken on infrastructural renewal/upgradation such as Gauge conversion,
Doubling, Traffic Facilities, Track renewals, Bridge Works, Signalling and
Telecommunications, electrification projects etc. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
that the Railways pool their resources and infuse adequate funds for infrastructural
renewal/upgradation to enable the Railways to create the required rail infrastructure
for scaling new heights in their performance. The Committee desire a detailed and
specific action taken statement from the Ministry.
V . Wagon Management
[Observation/Recommendation Paragraph No. 21 of Nineteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha)]
18. The Committee had noted that there were arrears in the periodical overhauling
of BG Wagons and MG Wagons. During six months period from October, 2005 to
March, 2006 alone, 30,344 wagons which were due for periodical overhauling were
stabled in the years and sent to workshops after a total delay of 1,34,591 days resulting
in loss of possible earning capacity of Rs. 27.39 crore. Even after receipt of Wagons in
the workshops, they could not be taken up for periodical overhauling due to capacity
constraints and bunched supply. It was also found that most of the wagons undertaken
for periodical overhauling were not turned out within the prescribed period due to
shortage of material and staff, prevalence of serious damages requiring major repairing/

11
modifications, denting and painting etc. Further, the repaired wagons were also not
sent for use immediately after overhauling resulting in a loss of a total of 81,434 days
with possible earning capacity of Rs. 16.57 crore. The Committee had also found that
as many as 9,748 wagons were lying sick as on 09.11.2008. Observing that the existing
arrangement was not conducive for preserving operational readiness of the Indian
Railways' Wagon fleet, the Committee had recommended that the Railway Board should
take effective steps for ensuring periodic inspection of their wagons with a purpose of
identifying/categorizing them into different types of repairing/periodical overhauling
job. further, there were instances of movement of trains on invalid brake Power Certificate
in violation of Boards instruction and in August, 2008, 795 trains were reported to be
running with invalid Brake Power Certificate. Observing that scarcity of wagon spare
parts had gravely affected wagon overhauling job, the Committee had asked the
Railways to enter into an effective arrangement with their spare parts suppliers/
maintenance providers for ensuring availability of necessry spare parts so that timely,
smooth and speedy overhauling of damaged wagons was achieved and delays obviated.
19. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Railways have stated as follows:—
"Noted. The instructions for dealing with invalid BPCs are very clearly laid
down. Cases of invalid BPCs arise primarily due to unforeseen delays in
transit. In such case, the driver and the guard are supposed to check the train
for adequate safety and move to the nearest train examining point wherein
the train will be examined. The Railways also have a system of inspections
wherein such deviations are found out and remedial action is also taken."
20. The Committee are dissatisfied that the various measures recommended by
them for wagon management have been merely 'noted' by the Ministry without spelling
the action initiated by them for implementing the recommendations. The Committee
would like to be informed of the action taken on each of their recommendations for
better wagon management. The Committee would like to make it clear to the Ministry
of Railways that while recommending the measures for wagon management in their
original report, the Committee were aware about the instructions for dealing with
invalid Brake Power Certificates. Therefore, the reply of the Ministry which is
restricted to merely 'noted' and informing about the system of inspection, is
unfortunate, to say the least. The Committee expected a detailed reply indicating the
effective remedial measures taken to ensure periodic inspection of wagons,
categorizing them into different types for repair/overhauling and the arrangements
made for ensuring availability of necessary spare parts for timely and speedy
overhauling of damaged wagons. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
recommendations and desire the Ministry of Railways to inform about the precise
action taken in this regard.

CHAPTER   II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
 ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 1
Indian Railways with a vast network of 63,465 route kilometres, are the principal
mode of transportation for long haul freight movement in bulk and they play a crucial
role in the socio-economic development of the nation. During the year 2004-05, the
Railways carried around 600 million tonne of freight comprising 64 per cent of the
total revenues earned by them. Being a derived demand, Railway transportation is
directly dependent on the growth of six major infrastructure industries in the country
viz. electricity, coal, steel, crude petroleum, petroleum refinery products and cement
to which the majority of railway customers belong. However, the Railways' share of
the total transport share had come down from 53 per cent in the Fourth Five-Year
Plan to 37 per cent in the Ninth Five-Y ear Plan. The Report of the Working Group on
Railway Programmes for the Tenth Five-Year Plan lays down detailed freight
operational and marketing strategies for achievement of projected freight targets.
The achievement of these targets largely depend on the manner in which the Railways
reshape their policies and strategies not only to regain the lost share in  freight
traffic but also to provide value for money to customers in terms of better facilities
and improved services.
[Sl. No. 1 Part II, Para No. 1 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The target of freight loading as per the X Five Year Plan and the achievement
therein are tabulated below:
X Five Year Plan target            Actual %age over target
Freight loading 624 Million Tonn es 727.75 Million Tonnes 16.63%
NTKM 396 Billion 480.993 Billion 21.46%
It can be  seen that the Indian Railways exceeded the projected freight targets of
loading and NTKMs substantially.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP, dated 09.02.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight
MIP, dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
"Audit appreciated that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing
safety measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in motion weight bridges,
12

13
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight trains. Further,
imposing punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to
safeguard the condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty
which may constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR also
needs to ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of various
traffic facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in workshops as
this will help in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Ministry of
Railways have initiated measures/marketing strategies in the X as well XI
Plan for setting up a trend reversal in the market share of Indian Railways
which registered a continuous decline in the past two decades, the record
made available by Ministry does not indicate any improvement.”
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the Railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a derived demand and is dependent on the
growth of the economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation
output is NTKM i.e. Net Tonne Kilometres. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate
of growth of the economy have moved in a ratio of 0.8-0.9. The table below depicts
this:
Y ear GDP Growth in %age NTKM Growth in %age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65
However, as a conscious effort, the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last

14
9 years. Thus, keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximize their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No.2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 2
Since certain anomalies had crept into the freight structure over the years, due
to ad-hoc changes in the freight rates, the Ministry of Railways felt the need for
rationalization of the freight structure. In order to bring transparency in tariffs and
rules by removing these anomalies/ambiguities and to simplify and make rail traffic
more competitive with other modes of transport, the Railways have initiated the process
of rationalization of the freight structure in 2002-03. According to the Ministry of
Railways, the rationalization of freight structure is an ongoing process and is being
carried out as and when the need is felt. The Railway Board have claimed that the
replacement of the erstwhile voluminous Goods Tariff with a simple Goods Tariff has
been appreciated by customers as well as field staff and the Indian Railways have
registered unprecedented growth in freight loadings and earning as against total
freight loading of 3,81,241 million tones and earning of Rs. 27,617.96 crore in
2003-04, the Railways loaded 538226 million tones and earned Rs. 53433.40 crore
during 2008-09.
[Sl. No. 2, Part II, Para No. 2 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Ministry of Railways are of the view that above observations are factual in nature
explaining the Ministry of Railways’ position. No follow-up action is necessary so far
as these observations are concerned.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 170-RA-II/8-I/2006/Freight (MIP) dated 06.6.2011
have vetted the ATN.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Exe. Director (Accounts)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated 7.7.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 3
The Committee's examination of the Freight and Wagon Management policy
effected by the Railway Board since 2002-03 and other relevant issues has revealed
several deficiencies/shortcomings. These inter-alia include permitting running of
trains loaded with enhanced quantity without complying with the conditions laid down
for protecting track and rolling stock; continued trend of illegal overloading even
after permitting enhanced loading of wagons, as a result of which, there have been

15
increased incidences of rail fractures, weld fractures and defects in wagons and
locomotives; while rationalizing the freight structure, the transportation charges
for eleven commodities were reduced by 3 to 54 per cent and in respect of three such
commodities—Edible Oils, Motorcars and Tea—even the haulage cost could not be
recovered due to reduction in the rates. The Committee's examination has also revealed
that non-provision of wagonload class for commodities placed in the highest class has
abolished the provision of charging higher freight in case of non-compliance with
conditions laid down for availing the benefit of concessional trainload rates. As a
result, while the parties get the benefit of concessional rates even without compliance
of all conditions, the Railways have lost the operational benefits gained through bulk
movement. Further, lowering of class of Petroleum products has not resulted in
achieving the intended benefit of increasing the Railways' share of petroleum traffic
and instead, such earnings had decreased by 15 per cent in the year 2003-04 and
2.62 per cent in year 2004-05. It was also noticed that though wagon supply by the
Public Sector Undertakings was not as per target and schedule, further orders for
sizeable quantities were placed on them resulting in huge backlog of supplies and in
the process, hampering Railways; freight operations. In addition to this, many fit
wagons were detained at stations/sidings/exchange points/yards for want of adequate
handling capacity thus denying the Railways from their optimal utilization.
Consequently, the Railways suffered, as per Audit estimates, a total loss of earning of
Rs. 168.48 crore during the six month period from October 2005 to March 2006.
Further, Broad Gauge wagons were underutilized during transshipment resulting in
loss of Rs. 5.63 crore. It was also found that wagons due for periodical overhauling
underwent prolong detention at various stages resulting in loss of earning capacity
to the tune of Rs. 65.26 crore. These shortcomings/deficiencies are dealt with at
length in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 3, Part II, Para No. 3 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Detailed comments are provided for each topic in subsequent points.
Audit's comments have been brought out in replies to Recommendation
Nos. 4 and 5.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 8
The Committee are constrained to observe that illegal and clandestine overloading
beyond the permitted enhanced limits is rampant on Indian Railways and in fact such
illegal overloading was found to the extent of 1 tonne to 5.70 tonne on an average. This
means that the wagons are loaded to the extent of 24.49 tonne per axle as against the
permitted axle load of 22.82. The Committee's examination has revealed that the

16
widespread illegal overloading has not only led to increased axle damages but also
had serious implications on the maintenance of track and rolling stock thereby
threatening safe running of trains specially in the cases of wagons carrying loose
and moisture sensitive commodities whose weight tend to get increased due to rain,
moisture, etc. In facing this grave challenge, the Committee to their utter surprise
found that the Railway Board have been relying upon visual examinations of wagons
as a means of checking overloading. This is an over simplistic and unreliable method
of preventing illegal overloading. The Committee are afraid that the Railways have
failed to pursue installation of weighbridges on the designated routes on urgent basis
thereby making detection of clandestine overloading even harder. The Committee
feel that a much improved performance in the prevention of wagon overloading can be
achieved if the Railway Board emphasize on taking a more focussed action for
augmenting their technical surveillance through weighing instruments. They desire
that the Railway Board should take urgent measures in this direction to prevent all
forms of illegal and clandestine overloading at least now. In this context, the Committee
urge the Railway Board to ensure complete computerization and networking of their
weighing and freight collection operations to help prevent overloading and leakage of
freight charges. Since moisture sensitive goods carried in open wagons tend to gain
undesirable weight due to natural precipitation or otherwise, the Committee desire
that the Railways may explore taking steps like putting moisture proof covers on
these railway wagons to minimize such risk during transit.
[Sl. No. 8, Part II, Para No. 8 of  19th Report of  PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Due to levy of punitive charges for overloading of wagons at a maximum of five
times the highest class rate, incidences of overloading has been coming down. As per
the existing system, Railway Receipts are being issued and the freight charges are
collected at the originating stations only after the rake has been weighed at in-motion
weighbridges and punitive charges are collected for overloading, at the stage of issue
of RR itself. This has discouraged customers from resorting to clandestine overloading.
Details of overloading and punitive charges levied/recovered for the period
01.10.2008 to 31.7.2009 received from Zonal Railways are as follows:
Railway No. of No. of Overloaded A verage Punitive
wagons wagons quantity overloaded charges
weighed found (in tonnes) quantity per levied
overloaded overloaded (Rs. in
wagon thousands)
(in tonnes)
12 3 4 5 6
CR 360122 17797 51228 2.87 46833
E R 413688 78172 52120 0.66 55081

17
ECR 919906 44019 132956 3.02 309281
E. Coast 908996 50174 290085 5.78 457643
NR 6818 1660 7290 4.39 45070
NCR 8505 1588 2826 1.78 1861
NER 2242 299 571 1.90 376
NFR 59626 12864 19563 1.52 8284
NWR 34227 6061 4906 0.80 55
SR 134922 13488 33776 2.50 6428
SCR 510116 11811 21575 1.82 9541
SER 792577 149283 457571 3.06 232078
SECR 1507726 46396 119749 2.58 156773
SWR 404065 26080 60805 2.33 252000
WR 204940 11807 18839 1.59 33905
WCR 49816 14612 29871 2.04 31353
Total 6318292 486111 1303731 2.68 1646562
Though overloading can not be eliminated, the instances of overloading have,
however, come down. For the period  April 2008 to September 2008, the percentage of
overloaded wagons to total weighed wagons was 9.88. For the period October, 2008 to
July 2009, this percentage has come down to 6.79.
Transportation charges of eleven commodities were reduced because in the earlier
system of rating, these commodities had a minimum weight for charge which was much
less than the carrying capacity of the wagon. Once the chargeable weight for all these
commodities were increased and made uniform as per the carrying capacity of the
wagon, the class rate had to be reduced since otherwise the total freight for all these
commodities would have increased substantially and the traffic would have got diverted
to road. Nevertheless, the total freight per rake even after reduction in the class rate
was more than the freight per rake before reduction because of increased chargeable
weight.
Wagon load rate has since been introduced for the highest class rate of class 200.
Class rate for petroleum products were reduced in order to retain the traffic and
discourage Oil companies from going in for pipelines for transportation of petroleum
products.
Instructions have been issued to the Railways vide Railway Board's letter
No. 2007/CE-II/TS/8 dated 02.04.2009 wherein it is mentioned that CC+8+2 loading is
not permitted during monsoon period for those commodities which absorb water such
as coal, gypsum etc.
12 3 4 5 6

18
Moisture-proof covers in the form of waterproof sheets are already being given
especially during the wet season by customers themselves, since it would not only
involve penal freight condition but also would lead to loss in quality of commodity
being carried.
Indian Railways has already planned to integrate the weighbridge systems to
FOIS and use the information provided by these weighbridges for calculation of freight
charges in FOIS. Interface application linking the output of weighbridges to FOIS has
been developed. Infrastructure work of connecting these weighbridges with FOIS is
being taken  up.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 09.02.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight
MIP dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
“Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the
long term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of
implementing safety measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in motion
weighbridges, strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs
to vigorously pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain
the prevalent growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to
keep a watch on the damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight
trains. Further, imposing punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient
deterrent to safeguard the condition of track as traders may get away by
paying penalty which may constitute a small portion of the value of the
goods carried. IR also needs to ensure the adequate flow of funds for
speedier completion of various traffic facility works in sheds/terminals/
sidings as well as in workshops as this will help in avoiding detentions of
rolling stock. Though Ministry of Railways have initiated measures/
marketing strategies in the X as well XI Plan for setting up a trend reversal
in the market share of Indian Railways which registered a continuous decline
in the past two decades, the record made available by Ministry does not
indicate any improvement.”
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the Railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a demand and is dependent on the growth of the
economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation output is NTKM

19
i.e. Net Tonne Kilometre. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of growth of the
economy have moved in a ratio of 0.8-0.9. The table below depicts this:
Y ear GDP Growth in NTKM Growth in % age
% age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65
However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
9 years. Thus keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximize their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Advisor (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 24-02-2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 9
The Committee note that punitive charges are imposed by the Railways as a
deterrent for illegal overloading of wagons. For collecting such charges, two types of
situation ‘A’ and ‘B’ have been categorized in the Railways (Punitive charges for
overloading of wagon) Rules, 2006. In situation 'A' where the aggregated payload in
a rake does not exceed the combined Permissible Carrying Capacity (PCC) of the
rake, it is assumed that there is no mala fide intention on the part of rail user.
However, on the ground that overloading of individual wagon endangers the safety,
lenient punitive charges have been prescribed. This is 2 times of the applicable
freight class. Even in this situation, if overloading exceeds more than a limit, punitive
charges levied is 3 times of the highest freight class. In situation 'B' where the
aggregated payload in a rake exceeds the combined Permissible Carrying Capacity
(PCC) of the rake, it is assumed that rail user may have mala fide intention.
Considering that overloading of wagons in this case not only endangers the safety but
causes leakage of revenue also, stringent punitive charges have been prescribed,
which is up to 5 times the highest freight class. However, no separate data for punitive
charges collected in respect of situations 'A' and 'B' and the route-wise statistics of

20
such punitive charges collected are being maintained by the Railway Board. The
Committee are of the view that lack of clarity in data collection in respect of these
situations hampers impact analysis and cost benefit assessment of overloading rampant
in the Railways. In order to analyse and understand better all the causes and attended
risks of illegal overloading, the Committee desire that the Railway Board should
maintain a comprehensive data clearly indicating route wise, loading station-wise
and situation-wise case of overloading noticed and the amount of punitive charges so
collected.
[Sl. No. 9, Part II, Para No. 9 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Data regarding punitive charges for overloading that are collected at the time of
issuance of RRs after weighment of rakes are available in the Terminal Management
System (TMS) of Freight Operations Information System (FOIS).
However, since only Phase-I of TMS have been implemented and Phase-II is
under implementation, the availability of data is not comprehensive. After Phase-II of
TMS is implemented, most of the sidings/goods sheds would be covered by TMS and
thereafter comprehensive data pertaining to overloading would be available.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 09.02.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight
MIP dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
“Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing
safety measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in motion weighbridges,
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight trains. Further,
imposing punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to
safeguard the condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty
which may constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR also
needs to ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of various
traffic facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in workshops as
this will help in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Ministry of
Railways have initiated measures/marketing strategies in the X as well XI
Plan for setting up a trend reversal in the market share of Indian Railways
which registered a continuous decline in the past two decades, the record
made available by Ministry does not indicate any improvement.”
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means

21
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the Railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a derived demand and is dependent on the
growth of the economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation
output is NTKM i.e. Net Kilometre. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of
growth of the economy have moved in ratio of 0.8—0.9. The table below depicts
this:—
Y ear GDP Growth in NTKM Growth in % age
% age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65
However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
9 years. Thus keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximize their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Advisor (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 24-02-2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 10
The Committee's examination has revealed that out of 34,29,869 wagons weighed
during April to September 2008, as many as 3,38,966 wagons were found illegally
overloaded with an average overloaded weight of 1.49 to 4.18 tonnes, which translates
into a total punitive charge of Rs. 159.75 crore. The Committee also noticed that
there was no let up in the prevalence of overloading as can be gauged from the fact that
out of 63,18,292 wagons weighed during the period—1st October 2008 to 31st July
2009, a large number of 4,86,111 wagons were found carrying 13,03,731 tonnes of
overloaded commodities at an average of 2.82 tonnes per wagon with a combined

22
punitive charge of Rs. 164.66 crore. This situation proves beyond doubt that despite
collecting punitive charges as a deterrent for illegal overloading of wagons, the
problem is still persisting on a large scale on the Indian Railways. In view of these
facts, the Committee are skeptical of the Railway Board's claim that the levy of
punitive charges is the most effective tool to discourage overloading. The Committee
are of the opinion that overloading of wagons on the Indian Railways is a mammoth
and complex problem, which cannot be effectively tackled by mere levying of punitive
charges and fines. Moreover, in such a scenario, the income earned through penalties
or fines would not be able to compensate for the huge infrastructure losses caused to
the Railways due to overloading. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Railway
Board should strive more to take preventive steps rather than collecting punitive
charges as a deterrent to overloading. In this direction, the Committee would urge
the Railway Board to follow a policy of zero tolerance and should take stern action
against unscrupulous elements behind illegal overloading of Railway wagons. The
Committee would like to be informed about the precise steps taken by the Railway
Board in the matter.
[Sl. No. 10, Part II, Para No. 10 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The figures given indicate that the extent of overloading has come down from
9.9% to 7.7% thereby registering a 22% drop. Further efforts are being made for limiting
the adverse impact of overloading by detaching wagons overloaded beyond certain
limits and making the customers to unload the excess consignment. The policy of
having weighbridges at each new siding means that overloading would be detected at
the loading point itself and necessary adjustments would be done. At the same time,
the Railways have embarked on a policy that for loose/bulk consignments, 100%
weighment will be ensured before RRs are issued. These two steps by itself will go a
long way in eliminating the problem of overloading. Details of overloaded wagons and
punitive charges recovered during the period from 01.10.2009 to 31.7.2010 are at
Annexure D.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 09.02.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight
MIP dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
"Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing
safety measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in motion weighbridges,
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight trains. Further,
imposing punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to
safeguard the condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty
which may constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR also

23
needs to ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of various
traffic facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in workshops as
this will help in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Ministry of
Railways have initiated measures/marketing strategies in the X as well XI
Plan for setting up a trend reversal in the market share of Indian Railways
which registered a continuous decline in the past two decades, the record
made available by Ministry does not indicate any improvement.’’
Ministry's  Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a derived demand and is dependent on the
growth of the economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation
output is NTKM i.e. Net Tonne Kilometre. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of
growth of the economy have moved in a ratio of 0.8—0.9. The table below depicts
this:—
Y ear GDP Growth in NTKM Growth in % age
% age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65
However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
9 years. Thus, keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximize their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Advisor (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 24.2.2011]

24
Observation/Recommendation No. 11
The Committee note that as a consequence of CC enhancement of wagons, a
plethora of adverse impacts like increase in rail fractures and weld fractures had
severely hit railway tracks on Central and South Eastern Railways. Large scale
glued joint failures, switch expansion joints and points and crossing failures were
seen on almost all the routes and there has also been increase in cases of spring
failures, Centre Buffer Couplers (CBC) failures and body damages to wagons. While
the increase in spring failure on South Eastern Railway was 9.65 per cent, the same
was 76.84 per cent on South Western Railway. Similarly, the increase in CBC failure
was to the extent of 11.87 per cent and 16.49 per cent on South Eastern and Southeast
Central Railways respectively. Further, there was also increase in reports of cases of
stalling of trains, serious failure of certain locomotive components such as Cylinder
Heads, Brake Blocks, Dynamic Grid Separator and Element, Power Contactor Tip
and CBC Knuckles. To compound this grim scenario, there had been 45.6 per cent
increase in train parting cases, 7.7 per cent increase in hot axles, 11.32 per cent
increase in the body under frame damage and 11 and 23 per cent increase in bogie and
spring defects respectively following running of wagons with increased axle load
during 2005-06 as compared with those of 2004-05. The Railway Board, however,
allayed these findings stating that no appreciable adverse impacts have been noticed
during periodical reviews till date. Besides, they informed the Committee that impact
assessments of the enhanced loading are underway though they may take another
30 years. In this regard, the Member (Engineering), the Railway Board during
evidence stated that the deterioration of tracks with the heavier axle loads would be a
little faster. The Committee further note that as a consequence of enhanced loading,
the Ministry of Railways placed speed restriction of 30 kms. per hour on 90R rail
track structure to ensure safety even though the maximum permitted speed for goods
train running on such tracks is 60 kmph on Central and South Eastern Railways.
This unwittingly may create more traffic congestion thereby nullifying the so-called
advantages of the enhanced loading. The Committee apprehend that the aforementioned
physical and infrastructural damages caused by the enhanced loading to the Railways'
core assets would eventually suckout a large portion of the increased freight earnings.
The Committee, therefore, express their reservations that the enhancement of
carrying capacity of wagons is certain to prove costly to the Railways and the claims
for having achieved a quantum jump in freight earnings, from an amount of
Rs. 26,231.45 crore during 2002-03 to Rs. 53,433.40 crore in 2008-09 may simply
turn out to be a case of unrealistic projection. The Committee would urge upon the
Railway Board to be more vigilant, farsighted and realistic in their vision and approach
and take due note of the adverse impacts of the enhanced loading with a view to
ensuring expeditious solutions to any crises that may emerge therefrom.
[Sl. No. 11, Part II, Para No. 11 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The total equipment failure cases over IR for freight wagons have decreased from
6108 in 2004-05 to 3073 in 2009-10, while those for traction have decreased from 4181 in
2006-07 to 3505 in 2009-10. Thus, the equipment failures are under control. The problem

25
of increased wear and tear and damage of various components like CBCs, wagon body
etc. is being tackled through replacement in scheduled maintenance i.e., ROH and
POH.
While there has been slight increase in arisings on certain mechanical components
of electric locos, no major/serious failures have been reported by Zonal Railways due
to working of CC+8+2t trains. Since these trains are normally right powered, no serious
impact of increased loading has been observed on electric locos.
The Indian Railways has a formalized system of maintenance wherein both wagons
and locomotives are maintained and checked at specific periodicity. These checks
ensure that safety conditions are compiled with. There are a variety of reasons for
which train partings, stallings, hot axles take place. It would be wrong to attribute all of
them on one factor only-enhanced loading. After all, even during 20.32t axle load
running such cases used to occur.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 309-RA-II/8-1/2006 MIP/Freight dated 5.10.2010
have vetted the ATN.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Advisor (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 12
The Committee note that while Special Railway Safety Fund (SRSF) amounting
to Rs. 464.48 crore and Rs. 227.06 crore remained unutilized during the financial
years 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively, unspent SRSF to the tune of Rs. 597.78
crore accumulated during the financial years 2001-02 to 2007-08, was surrendered
in 2008-09 by the Railway Board. In the light of the adverse impacts of enhanced
loading like rail and weld fractures, damages to wagons and other rolling stock as
well as the ongoing track renewal projects and other rail safety issues, the Committee
feel that this fund ought to have been fully and more productively utilized, which
would not only take care of adverse impacts but also help in maximising the overall
operational performance and freight earnings of the Railways. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Railways should come up with a concrete perspective plan
accompanied by matching follow up action to ensure proper and judicious utilization
of SRSF with the core idea of augmenting/strengthening the infrastructure of the
Indian Railways.
[Sl. No. 12, Part II, Para No. 12 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
All the work planned under SRSF have been completed by 31.03.2008. An amount
of Rs. 16,318 crores have been spent out of total projected amount of
Rs. 17,000 crores under SRSF. To complete the ongoing works spilled over in the year

26
2008-09, Rs. 590.36 crores has been credited in Depreciation Reserve Fund. The SRSF
has already expired on 31.03.2008. The annual arising of replacement works such as
Track Renewals, Bridge works, S&T and Rolling Stock works would be cleared through
normal Depreciation Reserve Fund of the Railways. The emphasis would be to clear
the annual arising within the year itself so that there is no spill over of such replacements
to the following years. Efforts will be made to appropriate sufficient amount to the
Depreciation Reserve Fund for this purpose.
Every department defines its own parameters for safety, legislates procedures and
checks to be followed in the implementation of working systems, as also in routine,
regular and special maintenance.
Electrical
Fund allotted under Special Railway Safety Fund (SRSF) for Electrical Dte were
fully utilized and work completed well within the target of March 2008.
Signalling
Replacement/renewal of Signalling Assets is a continuous process and is always
made part of the annual plan. Signalling works are normally funded through Depreciation
Reserve Fund (DRF) and Development Fund (DF). Works for renewal of Signal Assets
are proposed based on age-cum-condition and are sanctioned regularly in the Works
Programmes and funds are being made available accordingly.
On account of limitation of funds under DRF, the entire accrual of replacement
works does not get materialized. This leads to increasing backlog of replacement. In
the past, this has led to the creation of SRSF.
Funds (SRSF and DRF) utilized for replacement works and track circuiting has
been used productively to improve the safety and operational performance.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 309-RA-II/8-1/2006 MIP/Freight dated 05.10.2010
have vetted the ATN.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Advisor (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 13
The Indian Railways network comprises about 1,27,768 bridges and out this,
42 per cent of bridges were more than 100 years old as on 1st April 2007. As per the
Railways' policy, rehabilitation/rebuilding/strengthening of bridges, which takes
about 3 to 4 years time, is undertaken on the basis of their physical condition as
ascertained during regular inspections carried out in the field. Certain bridges,
which may show signs of deterioration of physical condition indicating need for
rehabilitation etc., are classified as distressed bridges and each year, targets are
fixed for rebuilding/rehabilitation of distressed bridges depending on the number of

27
bridges available for rebuilding/strengthening on Railways. The Ministry of Railways
have stated that they accord the highest priority to completion of distressed bridges
for which instrumentation work constitutes a crucial component. The Committee,
however, find that the Railway Zones were rather slow in carrying out instrumentation/
identification and rehabilitation of the distressed bridges resulting in huge
accumulation of distressed bridges needing rehabilitation. The Ministry of Railways
have informed the Committee that the task of instrumentation has been assigned to
such specialized agencies as Structural Engineering Research Centre, Chennai,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore and Central Road Research Institute, New
Delhi. Notwithstanding these measures, the Committee note with concern that the
progress is rather slow and only 59 numbers of bridges have been instrumented in
the first round. The Committee also note that though distressed bridges numbering
122, 88, 75 and 69 were identified and sanctioned for rehabilitation on zonal railways
during the years 2005-06, 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively, the numbers
of these bridges actually rehabilitated during the corresponding periods were only
38, 34, 29 and 36. The main contributory reasons advanced by the Railway Board for
the slow pace in rehabilitating the distressed bridges are non-availability of
engineering restrictions/traffic blocks/access road, difficult working conditions,
non-availability of good agencies to take up isolated or difficult works. The Committee
do not find the reasons given by the Ministry of Railways convincing and would like
the Railways to make an honest introspection to diagnose the factors that contributed
to this malady. The Committee also find that even after a lapse of four years subsequent
to the formulation of Corporate Safety Plan, the Railways have only managed to award
pilot projects for carrying out capacity assessment and condition monitoring of
bridges, fatigue testing and residual life of bridges although proper maintenance of
bridges has become imperative in the aftermath of enhanced loading of wagons. Thus,
the duration of 3 to 4 years to complete rehabilitation of the identified distressed
bridges has proved to be too long to give the desired results. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Railways should make earnest efforts to complete proper
instrumentation and identification of all the identified distressed bridges within a
fixed time frame and ensure their timely rehabilitation to prevent any possible collateral
damage. Further, the maximum period of rehabilitating a distressed bridge may be
reduced from the current period of 4 years from the date of identification to 2 years.
[Sl. No. 13, Part II, Para No. 13 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Safety of Bridges is accorded high priority on Indian Railways. Rehabilitation/
rebuilding/strengthening of Bridges is an ongoing process on Indian Railways. A well
laid down system of multi-tier inspection of Bridges is followed on Indian Railways.
Railways undertake rehabilitation/rebuilding/strengthening of Bridges on the basis of
their physical condition as ascertained during regular inspections carried out in the
field.
To monitor the effects of Higher Axle Load (HAL) and Longitudinal Loads on
bridge components and also to confirm the theoretical values with practical results,
Indian Railways have taken up instrumentation of few selected bridges as part of pilot

28
projects of running of Heavy Axle Loads (HAL). Instrumentation work has been
assigned to specialized agencies such as Structural Engineering Research Centre
(SERC)—Chennai, Indian Institute of Science (IISc)—Bangalore, Central Road
Research Institute (CRRI)—New Delhi etc. Progress of instrumentation work is
satisfactory on IR. 71 Nos. of bridges have been instrumented in 1 st round, 58 Nos. of
bridges have been instrumented in 2nd round, 49 Nos. of bridges have been instrumented
in 3rd round. Instrumentation has helped in experimentally assessing the stress levels
in various bridge components.
Figures of 122, 88, 75 and 69 Nos. of distressed bridges are the balance number of
distressed bridges at the beginning of financial year of 2005-06, 2006-07, 2007-08 and
2008-09 respectively. Above figures indicate that every year the number of balance
distressed bridges is continuously in decline on Indian Railways. No. of distressed
bridges actually rehabilitated during  2005-06, 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 are 38, 34,
29 and 36 respectively. During 2009-10, 21 Nos. of distressed bridges have been
rehabilitated. As on 01.04.2010, there are 34 Nos. of bridges under the list of distressed
bridges in Indian Railways. It is true that constraints in rehabilitating the distressed
bridges are mainly non-availability of engineering restrictions/traffic blocks, difficult
working conditions in many cases, non-availability of goods agencies to take up
works which are isolated and in many cases, have difficult or no access by road etc. In
spite of that, Zonal Railways make all out efforts to complete the work of distressed
bridges on priority.
Following pilot projects were undertaken with foreign experts in which officers
and staff from various railways have been trained in modern bridge techniques:—
(a) A Pilot project on "underwater inspection of bridges" has been completed by
Central Railway with M/s L&T RAMBOLL, Denmark.
(b) A Pilot project on "Determination of unknown bridge foundations and integrity
assessment of foundations and condition assessment of brick masonry
structures by NDT methods" has been completed by Northern Railway from
M/s OLSON, USA with their local representative Ultra Technologies.
(c) A Pilot project on "Acoustic Emission Testing" has been completed by
Northern Railway from M/s TISEC, Canada and Western Railway from
M/s Dunegan Engineering Company, USA.
(d) A Pilot project on "Fatigue testing and remaining life analysis of steel bridges"
has been completed by North Western Railway from M/s Sharma and
Associates, Chicago, USA and Western Railway from M/s TTCI, Pueblo,
Colorado, USA.
(e) A Pilot project on "Strain gauging instrumentation and load rating of bridges"
has been completed by Western Railway from M/s Bridge Diagnostics, USA.
(f) As a pilot project "Rail-cum-Road Bridge testing laboratories equipped with
state-of-the-art NDT equipments" have been procured for each of 9 parent
Railways.

29
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 309-RA-II/8-1/2006 MIP/Freight dated 05.10.2010
have vetted the ATN.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Advisor (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 14
The Committee note that post rationalization of the freight structure, the Railways
have been incurring operational losses in transportation of eleven commodities i.e.
Motor Car, Onion, De-oiled cake, Edible Oil, Timber, Paper, Tea, Milk Powder, Dry
chilies, Turmeric and Cotton (full pressed). The estimated losses on these commodities
worked out to Rs. 21.93 crore in the year 2005-06 alone. In respect of three
commodities i.e. Edible Oils, Motorcars and Tea, the Railways were incurring losses
ranging from 13 per cent (for a distance of 500 kms.) to 24 per cent (for a distance of
2,000 kms.) Consequently, the freight rates for these three commodities did not even
cover the haulage cost. The Ministry of Railways informed the Committee that these
goods were carried below their operational cost with the intention of containing the
market prices of essential commodities of mass consumption, which is one of their
social obligations. The Committee, however, feel that classification of 'motorcar' as
an essential commodity is erroneous on the part of the Railways in view of its nature
and utilization and thus it is not acceptable that the Government have to shoulder
transportation cost. Further, the Committee's examination has revealed that the cause
for the loss incurred in respect of transporting these three commodities had its roots
in the abolition of charging freight at Minimum Weight condition and subsequent
introduction of a system whereby all commodities were to be charged on the carrying
capacity of the wagon used. Under this system, the classification of certain commodities
was lowered in order to compensate for the increase in freight due to charging for
weight not actually loaded in a wagon. This allowed certain traders to carry higher
quantity within a fixed freight load by loading the wagons with more quantity than the
minimum weight condition prescribed earlier and in the process the Railways'
earnings per wagon were reduced by 54 per cent (in the case of turmeric) to 3 per cent
(in the case of de-oiled cake) as compared with the freight that was realised at the pre-
revised class. Since the Railways, notwithstanding their social obligation, have to be
economically viable in the face of stiff competition from other modes of transportation,
the Committee urge upon the Ministry of Railways to remove the aforesaid anomally
in the freight structure emanating from abolition of charging freight at Minimum
Weight Condition. They further desire that while transporting any commodity/goods
by the Railways, the transportation and haulage cost incurred should invariably be
recovered at least.
[Sl. No. 14, Part II, Para No. 14 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

30
Action Taken
With reference to the above observations/recommendations of the Committee, it
may be submitted that abolition of Minimum Weight Condition and charging the
freight on the basis of permissible carrying capacity of the wagon was a very important
major decision taken for rationalization of freight structure. The earlier system of charging
the freight on the basis of loadability prescribed for four-wheelers had become redundant
with the phasing out of four-wheelers and the loadability of eight wheelers could not
be easily prescribed without adequate field reports. Further 4000 goods were
short-listed and classified into broad Main Commodity Heads. Because of these steps
taken for rationalization of freight, certain adjustments in the classification of goods
became inevitable. The classification of 11 commodities mentioned by the Committee
was lowered in order to compensate for the increase in the chargeable weight of these
commodities. Except automobiles, the other commodities are meant for mass
consumption. These commodities were also classified into various Main Commodity
Heads. The classification of these commodities had to match with the Class of Main
Commodity Head in which they were placed. However, all these commodities are light
weight commodities generating very meagre revenue for the Railways.
With the passage of time, the anomalies which resulted into lowering the freight
charges for these commodities had been taken care of. A statement showing the
comparison of freight rates in respect of these commodities prevailing before 01.04.2005
and those as on 01.04.2011 is attached (Annexure-E). It may be seen from this statement
except cotton pressed and turmeric, the freight rates now being charged are on the
high side ranging from 11% (Timber) to 95% (Motor cars) in respect of other nine
commodities. In view of this, there is little justification for revision of class of nine
commodities. In the year 2010, the loading of turmeric was only 321 tonnes with earning
of Rs. 2,42,661/-. In view of this low tonnage and earnings, there is little justification for
revision of freight class for turmeric. Besides, turmeric has been classified into the
Main Commodity Head of grocery. Until and unless the freight class of grocery is
revised, it is not possible to revise the class of turmeric.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 170-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight (MIP) dated 6.6.2011
have observed the following and desired that comments on these observations may be
directly communicated to PAC with a copy to Audit:—
Ministry of Railways may also indicate the haulage cost as on date for kind
appreciation of PAC. Tonnage carried and earnings realized annually in respect of
commodity-Cotton full pressed may also be indicated.

31
Ministry's Comments
The average haulage cost of a goods unit per tonne per kilometre for 2009-10 is
64.03 paise. The tonnage and earnings of Cotton-Pressed and Unpressed are as
follows:—
Y ear Tonnage (Million) Earnings (Rs. cr.)
2007-08 0.127 8.18
2008-09 0.130 9.93
2009-10 0.127 7.80
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Exe. Director (Accounts)
[Ministry of Railways’,  Case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated 7.7.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 15
With a view to achieving savings in operational costs, the Railway Board introduced
lower class for movement of traffic in trainloads instead of piece meal wagonloads in
January 1982. Prior to 1 April 2005, all commodities were assigned separate classes
when booked as trainloads and wagonloads but with effect from 1 April 2005,
commodities were assigned only trainload class with the stipulation that when such
commodities were to be booked as wagonloads the freight would be charged at the next
higher class. As per this arrangement, the classification of certain Petroleum products
was lowered from class 280 to class 250 from 1 April 2003 and further to class 240
from 1 April 2005, resulting in an approximate reduction in freight rates by 10.7 per
cent and 4 per cent respectively. Further, no distinction has been maintained between
wagonload and trainload class for commodities placed in the highest class viz. Acids,
Alcohols and POL products. This resulted in an undue advantage to the consignors in
that they were not required to pay higher freight charge even for not loading all the
wagons supplied to them. As a result of this anomaly, freight in respect of rakes
comprising 30,666 wagons, where all the wagons were not loaded, was charged at
trainload rates on eight zonal railways. Similarly, when the commodities placed in
the highest class were booked from stations/sidings not notified for handling rake
load traffic, the Railways were forced to charge only trainload rates as wagon load
class rates were not prescribed. The number of wagonsloaded with commodities
placed in the highest class by seven stations alone was 22,148 during 2005-06. In
this regard, the Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Railways that due
to high freight rates, transportation of the commodities placed in the highest class
240 (200 at present) viz. Acids, Alcohols and POL products is being constantly diverted
to pipelines and roadways which are more consumer friendly in nature and the
arrangement was done for lowering the classification of POL products to retain the
Railways' traffic share. However, despite effecting such significant reduction in
freight charges for POL products, the Railways' traffic share in respect of these
commodities has plummeted over the years, from 31 per cent in 2002-03 to

32
25 per cent in 2005-06 while that of roadways increased from 14 per cent in 2002-03
to 23 per cent in 2005-06. Similarly, transportation of POL products through pipelines
registered a significant increase, first in 2003-04 and then in 2006-07 and 2007-08.
Correspondingly, the quantum of Petroleum products traffic moved by rail decreased
by 14.08 and 6.03 per cent during 2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively as compared to
the traffic carried in 2002-03. The consequent decrease in earnings was to the extent
of 15.21 and 2.62 per cent respectively, which led to decline in the Railways overall
earnings by Rs. 419.10 crore and Rs. 72.06 crore during 2003-04 and 2004-05
respectively as compared with that of the immediate preceding year i.e. 2002-03.
These factors have primarily caused a decline in Rail Co-efficient of POL products
with the possibility of mounting losses in future. Keeping in view such stiff and
escalating competition faced by the Indian Railways in their freight operations, the
Committee desire that the Railways should go for a paradigm and strategic shift in
their freight management in such a way that either better and economical means and
ways of transporting POL products are evolved or the Railways' freight operation is
focused on their core and more remunerative areas/commodities.
[Sl. No. 15, Part II, Para No. 15 of 19th Report of PAC, (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
For commodities chargeable at the highest class (class 200) including Petroleum
products, wagonload class has been reintroduced at base freight for class 200+5%.
Hence, the anomaly that existed earlier has been removed.
Decline in rail co-efficient has been brought about as a result of Oil companies
switching over to pipelines for transportation of their products on their high density
sectors. As more and more routes get covered by pipelines, rail co-efficient on these
routes would correspondingly reduce.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 309-RA-II/8-1/2006 MIP/Freight dated 5.10.2010
have vetted the ATN.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Advisor (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways’, Case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 17
Wagons play an important role in the Railways' day-to-day freight operations
especially in the post CC enhancement phase. As a policy matter, the Indian Railways
placed 60 per cent of their tendered orders to public sector undertakings and
remaining 40 per cent to private sector units. The Committee are, however, concerned
to note that procurement of wagon fleet by the Indian Railways has been severely
crippled by the failure of both the public sector and private sector wagon
manufacturers/suppliers in adhering to their delivery schedules. It is a matter of
concern that wagons numbering as many as 2,922.5 and 2,060 were pending delivery
by 6 public sector undertakings and private manufacturing units respectively as on
the 1st April 2002. Despite this, orders for another 28,122.5 and 39,397.5 wagons
were placed on the public sector undertakings and the private manufacturers during

33
2002-03 to 2005-06. Subsequently, the PSUs failed to deliver as many as 11,327.5
wagons whereas the private sector manufacturers have delivered all the wagons due
from them. The Committee have been informed that all the Public Sector units, which
were performing well in the past, turned sick and their productivity declined which
created shortage of wagons on Indian Railways in the year 2003-04. Under revival
package for sick PSUs, certain steps are reportedly taken with some positive results,
which raised the wagon production by 47 per cent in 2006-07 as compared with that
of the corresponding period in 2005-06. However, the Committee find that PSUs are
still lagging behind in wagon production and they could supply only 755 wagons as
against 3,264 wagons supplied by private sector in 2008-09. Though the Railways
have an obligation to support the Government owned PSUs for their revival by infusing
investments and placing orders, delay in delivery of ordered wagons by these suppliers
seriously affects the operational performance of the Railways not only in terms of
quantity of freight and passenger carried but also in terms of quality of service
provided. The Committee are, therefore, of the view that the Indian Railways, as a
commercial entity, is duty bound to maintain their commercial interests and operational
readiness lest their performance would dip further. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Railway Board to enter into special arrangements with the Ministry of Heavy
Industries and the concerned PSUs to progressively clear the pending wagon orders
within a reasonable time frame failing which the Railways should not shy away from
adopting a strict policy of placing wagon procurement orders only on those companies/
manufacturers which have a proven track record of timely fulfilling/honouring wagon
delivery schedule. The Committee trust that proactive steps would be taken by the
Railway Board to coordinate with the PSUs for not only achieving faster wagon
production but also for ensuring timely delivery of wagon as per the operational
needs of the Railways.
[Sl. No. 17, Part II, Para No. 17 of 19th Report of PAC, (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Committee has recommended that Railway Board should enter into special
arrangements with the Ministry of Heavy Industry and the PSUs concerned to
progressively clear the pending wagon orders within a reasonable time frame and
adopting measures for placing wagon orders on those companies/manufacturers which
have a proven track record of timely fulfilling/honouring wagon delivery schedule.
In this connection, it is informed that despite the sluggish performance of PSUs,
Ministry of Railways have been placing orders on them with a view to give them
continued support for their revival and to enable them to improve their performance. In
addition, Ministry of Heavy Industry had suggested certain steps to revive sick PSUs
which inter alia, contained the request for cancellation of old orders, release of fresh
orders and adjustment of advance at the rate of 20% of the payment due to M/s BWEL
against fresh supply of wagons etc. These suggestions were favourably considered
by Ministry of Railways and accordingly old orders were frozen and fresh orders were
released, outstanding advance was adjusted and LD charges were waived. At the
same time, Ministry of Railways have refined the wagon distribution formula and
revised formula takes care of outstanding load on a particular unit while allocating
fresh wagon orders as a pro-active step to meet the operational needs of the Railways.

34
These measures are yielding results and the performance of the PSUs in 2008-09
has shown improvement over their performance of 2007-08. Against the wagon
production of 1378 Nos. in 2007-08 PSUs have manufactured 2130 wagons in 2008-09.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 309-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight dated 05.10.2010 have
observed the following:—
"Performance of PSUs as well as Private Sector wagon builders during the year
2009-10 may be indicated duly indicating the firm wise details".
Ministry's Comments
A statement indicating the firm-wise wagon production of PSUs and Private
sector wagon builders against RSP during the year 2009-10 is at Annexure F
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 9.2.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated  vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight
MIP dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
"Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing
safety measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in motion weight bridges,
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight trains. Further,
imposing punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to
safeguard the condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty
which may constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR also
needs to ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of vari-
ous traffic facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in workshops
as this will help in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Ministry of
Railways have initiated measures/marketing strategies in the 10th as well
11th Plan for setting up a trend reversal in the market share of Indian Railways
which registered a continuous decline in the past two decades, the record
made available by Ministry does not indicate any improvement.’’
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary adjust-
ments would be done. At the same time, the railways have embarked on a policy that
for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are issued.
These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of overloading.
Freight transportation is a derived demand and is dependent on the growth of the
economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation output is NTKM
i.e. Net Tonne Kilometer. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of growth of the

35
economy have moved in a ratio of 0.8.09. The table below depicts this:—
Y ear GDP Growth in %age N TKM Growth in %age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65
However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
 9 years. Thus keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximize their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Exe. Director (Accounts)
[Ministry of Railways, Case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated 7.7.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 18
The Committee note that on account of injudicious notification of stations/
sidings for handling full rake traffic and absence of appropriate action taken by zonal
railways for implementation of the relevant directions issued by the Railway Board in
October 2004, 71 goods sheds were notified for handling full rakes even though they
did not have adequate facilities for the task. Eventually, this injudicious notification
caused protracted detention of as many as 18,37,483 wagons/rakes handled on these
stations during October 2005 to March 2006 resulting in a loss of 5,67,026 wagons
days with possible earning capacity of Rs. 114.72 crore. This gives as unmistakable
impression that the Railway Board had failed to speed up development/creation of
terminal facility and other traffic facility works in tune with the increasing demand

36
arising from wagon CC enhancement or otherwise. The Committee have been informed
by the Ministry of Railways that top priority is now given for development of terminal
facility and other traffic facility works and the same are being monitored by zonal
railways. However, the Committee note that nothing concrete has been achieved as yet
as out of total number of 792 traffic facility  works appearing in Pink Book 2008-09, as
many as 614 works (including 304 on high density routes) were still in progress as on
31st March 2008. Further, against the 335 (165 number in high density routes) targeted,
works for completion during the year, only 48, which include 20 on high-density routes,
could be completed till 31st August 2008. The Committee regret to observe that the
main contributory reason for the slow completion of the works is non-adherence by
zonal railways to the directions issued by the Railway Board in October 2004 regarding
capacity augmentation of sidings. Wonderstruck as to how the Railway Board allowed
the zonal railways to violate or ignore instructions issued by them without any censure,
the Committee desire that the Railway Board should put in place henceforth a strict
policy for ensuring scrupulous enforcement of directives issued by them. The Committee
would also like the Railway Board to augment their efforts for speedy and proper
upgradation of terminal facilities and half rake terminals as per the requirement level
so that they do not cause further revenue loss and instead catalyse railways'
infrastructure growth for meeting emerging needs of the Railway Traffic.
[Sl. No. 18, Part II,  Para No. 18 of 19th Report of PAC, (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The comments of the Committee are noted. A large number of traffic facility
works which include provision of loop lines at stations, creation of crossing stations,
electrification of sidings, provision of IBS, development of freight terminal facilities,
upgradation of freight terminal facilities, development of coaching facilities, automatic
signaling etc. are being continuously taken up to improve operations and terminal
capacity. Of the 792 works which appear in the Pink Book 2008-09, 210 works were
completed as on 31.03.2008. Constant monitoring and follow up with the Zonal Railways
is being taken up to ensure speedy completion of traffic facility works. A special focus
since 2007 is being make to upgrade the facilities at freight terminals like provision of
additional loops, better loading/unloading platforms, improvement to lighting, yard
drainage, approach road and goods shed facilities. During the past 3 years, as many as
91 goods sheds have been taken up for upgradation. It is felt that with the focus on
upgradation of facilities at goods sheds the loading/unloading process would become
smoother and faster thereby facilitating improved freight loading in future.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 309-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight dated 05.10.2010 have
observed the following:—
“Ministry of Railways may kindly furnish the position as on 31.3.2010 in
respect of traffic facility works completed out of the 792 appearing in Pink
Book 2008-09.”

37
Ministry's Comments
Out of the 792 works appearing as per Pink Book/2008-09, 94 works were completed
during 2008-09 and 87 works were completed during 2009-10 making a total of 181
works completed within 2 years before 31.3.2010.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 09.02.2011
have desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 8-RA-II/8-1/2006/
Freight MIP dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
‘‘Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the Long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing safety
measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in motion weigh bridges,
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety  measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight trains. Further, imposing
punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to safeguard the
condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty which may
constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR also needs to
ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of various traffic
facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in workshops as this will help
in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Ministry of Railways have
initiated measures/marketing strategies in the X as well XI Plan for setting up a
trend reversal in the market share of Indian Railways which registered a continuous
decline in the past two decades, the record made available by Ministry does not
indicate any improvement.’’
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a derived demand and is dependent on the
growth of the economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation

38
output is NTKM i.e. Net Tonne Kilometer. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of
growth of the economy have moved in a ratio of 0.8-0.9. The table below depicts this:
Y ear GDP Growth in %age NT KM Growth in %age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65
However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
9 years. Thus keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximize their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Exe. Director (Accounts)
[Ministry of Railways', Case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 , dated  7.7.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 19
The Committee are dismayed to note that one hundred per cent of the rakes
underwent detention before being taken for loading on Northern, South Central,
North Central, South Western, Central, Eastern, North Western, North-East Frontier
and Central Railways. Audit test check at 29 station yards/exchange points of different
sidings has revealed that out of 13,613 rakes loaded and placed at the exchange points
for onward dispatch, 11,704 rakes (86 per cent) were detained on various accounts
such as non-availability of power, section clearance, non-availability of crew and delay
in train examination etc. thereby denying possible freight earnings of Rs. 53.76
crore during a six-month period of October 2005 to March 2006. The Committee feel
that this loss could have been prevented had the Zonal Railways displayed better
managerial skills and the Railway Board exercised adequate monitoring. The
Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Railways that it is only during the
last 3-4 years that steps have been taken to increase the capital investment required
in the Railways and railway operations at present are run on a scarcity resource
scenario. The Committee do not accept the plea that resource crunch is the cause for

39
detention of Railway wagons given the fact that huge unspent funds are lying with
them under SRSF and DRF. As the lack of additional facilities in sidings/goods sheds
for berthing of rakes, loading/unloading of rakes had an adverse effect on early/
timely release of wagons that had led to unnecessary detentions and loss in earning
potential of wagons, the Committee recommend that adequate number of loading and
unloading points complete with other facilities and amenities required primarily for
increasing load handling and wagon removing capacity of the sidings/exchange points/
yards should be set up and operationalised with a view to enhancing generation of
freight traffic by avoiding detention of wagons.
[(Sl. No. 19 Part II,  Para No. 19 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The comments of the Committee are noted. A large number of traffic facility
works which include provision of loop lines at stations, creation of crossing stations,
electrification of sidings, provision of IBS, development of freight terminal facilities,
upgradation of freight terminal facilities, development of coaching facilities, automatic
signaling etc. are being continuously taken up to improve operations and terminal
capacity. Of the 792 works which appear in the Pink Book 2008-09, 210 works were
completed as on 31.03.2008. Constant monitoring and follow up with the Zonal Railways
is being taken up to ensure speedy completion of traffic facility works. A special focus
since 2007 is being made to upgrade the facilities at freight terminals like provision of
additional loops, better loading/unloading platforms, improvement to lighting, yard
drainage, approach road and goods shed facilities. During the past 3 years, as many as
91 goods sheds have been taken up for upgradation. It is felt that with the focus on
upgradation of facilities at goods sheds the loading/unloading process would become
smoother and faster thereby facilitating improved freight loading in future.
With reference to the Committee's contention that huge unspent funds are lying
with the Railways under SRSF and DRF, it is stated that the non-lapsable SRSF was
created for renewal of over aged assets that had accumulated over the years. The fund
was in operation during 2001-02 to 2007-08. As far as DRF is concerned, work in the
nature of renewal/replacement of worn out assets are financed out of this Fund. Every
year appropriation to this fund is done based on availability of surplus internal
resources and the projected requirement for renewal/replacement of assets. In 2010-11
(BE), appropriation to DRF has been kept at Rs.7600 cr. based on provisional Actuals
2009-10, projected balance under DRF to end of 2010-11 is Rs. 109 cr.
To facilitate rapid development of a network of freight terminals with private
investment to provide efficient and cost effective logistics services to end users
including door to door services and to create additional terminals to handle
incremental traffic, a new scheme namely Private Freight Terminal (PFT) has been
launched. PFT can be green field facilities i.e., underutilized/unutilized existing private
sidings/container terminals on private land which can be permitted to be converted to
private freight terminals under the provisions of the Scheme.

40
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 9.2.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight
MIP dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
“Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing
safety measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in  motion weigh bridges,
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight trains. Further,
imposing punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to
safeguard the condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty
which  may constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR
also needs to ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of
various traffic facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in work-
shops as this will help in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Min-
istry of Railways have initiated measures/marketing strategies in the 10th as
well 11th plan for setting up a trend reversal in the market share of Indian
Railways which registered a continuous decline in the past two decades, the
record made available by Ministry does not indicate any improvement.”
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a derived demand and is dependent on the
growth of the economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation
output is NTKM i.e. Net Tonne Kilometre. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of
growth of the economy have moved in a ratio of 0.8-0.9. The table below depicts this:
Y ear GDP Growth in NTKM Gro wth in %age
%age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65

However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
9 years. Thus keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximize their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Exe. Director (Accounts)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 7.7.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No.  20
Audit scrutiny of records at four transshipment points over Western, Southern
and Northeast Frontier Railways has revealed that contents of Meter Gauge (MG)
wagons were transshipped into Broad Gauge (BG) wagons in such a manner that each
BG wagon was underutilised to the extent of 5 tonne to 23 tonne. As a result, 3.516 BG
wagons were under-loaded to the extent of 64,465.3 tonne resulting in loss of possible
earning capacity of Rs. 5.63  crore on account of underutilisation of full capacity of
the wagons. The Committee have been informed that actual carrying capacity of 4 MG
BC wagons is 138 tonnes (actual CC of MG BC wagon is 32 tonnes) while that of 3 BG
BCN wagons is 135 tonnes (actual CC of MG BCN wagon is 32 tonne) in case of Food
Grain. Accordingly, to get the optimum utilization of loading space in BG wagons for
transshipping from MG to BG wagons, the ratio of MG wagons to BG BCN wagons is
fixed as 4:3. Whilst acknowledging that under utilization of 7 tonnes in one BG BCN
wagon in a lot of 3 BCN wagons is inevitable due to technical restrictions, the
Committee are of the opinion that the prevailing method of transshipment on a
multi-gauge rail network in different railway zones across the country has proved to
be an ineffective system of rail transportation besides being inimical to the Railways'
objective of augmenting smooth freight operation for enhancing freight earnings. In
this regard, the Committee welcome the Railways' decision to undertake Project
Unigauge, which aims to convert the entire Railway network into a single gauge
system across the country for removing the problems of transshipment etc.
currently affecting the Railways' freight operations. The Committee would
encourage the Railway Board to pursue the Project Unigauge with a pragmatic
approach and complete its implementation within a specified time frame. As for the
cost, while a major portion of this expenditure can be financed from the enhanced
profit earned by the Indian Railway in the recent years, the Committee would urge the
Railway Board to take necessary steps for optimizing revenue generation from their
huge assets including land and other resources/infrastructure spread across the
country. Till the completion of the project, the Committee desire that certain
operational arrangements may be explored for eliminating/minimizing
underutilization of wagons during transshipment.
[(Sl. No. 20 Part II, Para No. 20 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
41

42
Action taken
Although, broadly, the ratio of MG wagons to BG BCN wagons are fixed as 4:3,
there are various scenarios in which this ratio does not hold true. The transshipment
done on N.F. Railway from MG wagons to BG wagons and from BG wagons to
MG wagons with different commodities is illustrated below:—
(A) MG to BG
Commodity Carrying Carrying Utilized Remarks
Capacity of Capacity of
MG BG wagons
wagons
Cement  35.4 tonnes 60.0 tonnes 1MG=1BG Most of the RRs are issued for
individual wagons only and consign-
ees are also different. In case of
clubbed consignment: 3MG=2BG
when RR is issued for more than
one wagon and MG loads are placed
in one hook.
Paper (Reel/ 35.4 tonnes 60.0 tonnes 1MG=1BG In case of reel/bundle paper, if RR
bundle is issued for more than one wagon,
paper) clubbing is done for 3MG=2B
G wagons and if MG loads are placed
in one hook.
Timber 35.4 tonnes 60.0 tonnes 1MG=1BG Loading in 1x1 is being done as per
advice of Forest Department.
Forest  Department does not want
fixing up of different qualities of
timber in one wagon.
(B) BG to MG
Commodity CC of BG wagons CC of MG Utilised
wagons
Cement & Rice 60.0 tonnes 35.4 tonnes Rangia: 4BG=7MG
Lumding: 5BG=9MG
Wheat & Urea 60.0 tonnes 35.4 tonnes 1 BG=2 MG
IT is seen that from BG to MG , the wagon space is utilized to the optimum capacity.
All Divisions of N.F. Railway have been advised to ensure proper utilization of the BG
wagons by clubbing consignments. For example, in Rangia consignments of 4 BGs are
transshipped into 7 MGs. Capacity of 4 BGs is 4870 nos. of bags. Capacity of 7MG is
4900 nos. bags. The chargeable weight of BG covered (BCN) wagon is 62 tonnes.
N.F. Railway has been charging accordingly. However, loadability may differ from
commodity to commodity. But despite that, N.F. Railway has utilized the capacity of BG
and MG wagons to the full as explained below:
1BC(MG)=35.4 tonnes
7BC(MG)=247.8 tonnes

43
1BCN(BG)=62 tonnes (61+1 tonne loading tolerance)
4 BCNs (BG)=62x4=248 tonnes.
From MG to BG, there is less utilization of capacity due to circumstances as
explained in the table given above. This is more apparent in timber due to condition
imposed by Forest Department.
In view of the above, it is not possible to lay down any general ratio for transshipment
from MG wagons to BG wagons and vice versa.
The Committee's observation on pursuing Project Unigauge with a pragmatic
approach and within a specified time frame of implementation is being done by the
Ministry of Railways.
Indian Railways introduced policy of Unigauge in 1992 to convert selected routes
for conversion as per the following:—
(i) To take up conversion of lines to develop alternative BG routes obviating the
need for doubling of existing BG lines on these routes.
(ii) To establish BG connections to ports, industrial centres and locations having
potential for growth.
(iii) To take up conversion of lines required on strategic considerations.
(iv) To minimize transshipment and to improve wagon turn around by avoiding
delays at transshipment points.
(v) To carry out the conversion of lines as per the above policy at least cost yet
provide a standard of service not lower than what rail users were getting.
As per this policy, 17754 kms have been converted so far. Progress of conversion
during various plan periods is as under:—
S.No. Plan Period Progress achieved in kms
1. 8th Plan (1992-97) 6897 kms
2. 9th Plan (1997-2002) 2103 kms
3. 10th Plan (2002-2007) 4289 kms
4. 11th Plan (1st four years) 4465 kms
Total 17754 kms
A target of 1075 kms has been set for the year 2011-12.
At present 45 gauge conversion covering a length of 10499 kms are under various
stages of execution. Anticipated cost of these projects is Rs. 13536 crore and an outlay
of  Rs. 1382.5 crore has been provided during 2011-12.
3220 kms of MG/NG network is yet to sanctioned. Besides, there exist 229 kms of
heritage lines.

44
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 170-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight (MIP) dated 6.6.2011
have observed the following and desired that comments on these observations may be
directly communicated to PAC with a copy to Audit:—
“17754 kms of track has been converted to BG so far. Ministry may, however,
bring out the comparative position on number of transshipment points ( viz
MG to BG existing as on 1.4.2006 and those still existing on date) for kind
appreciation of PAC.”
Ministry's Comments
The position of number of transshipment points on IR as on 1.4.2006 and as on
date is shown in Annexure-G.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Exe. Director (Accounts)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 7.7.2011.]

ANNEXURE D
Details of overloaded wagons & punitive charges recovered
(Period from 1.10.2009 to 31.7.2010)
Sl. Railway No. of wagons Punitive charges Total No. %age of
No. overloaded recovered (Rs. in of wagons overloaded
crores) loaded wagons
1. CR 7469 2.42 894054 0.84
2. ER 28595 8.09 736686 3.88
3. ECR 72600 48.91 1079689 6.72
4. ECOR 66141 64.75 1384955 4.78
5. NR 28202 24.77 853640 3.30
6. NCR 2505 0.37 176710 1.42
7. NER 0 0 14950 0.00
8. NFR 16958 1.3 179741 9.43
9. NWR 1488 0.22 299219 0.50
10. SR 4699 1.56 508584 0.92
11. SCR 5091 5.52 1164628 0.44
12. SER 101384 6.55 1551522 6.53
13. SWR 15466 17.91 1738081 0.89
14. SECR 24811 9.39 524708 4.73
15. WR 32803 1.5 868772 3.78
16. WCR 32280 12.21 421929 7.65
Total 440492 205.47 12397868 3.55
45

46
ANNEXURE E
Comparison of Freight Rates for Selected Commodities
Class MWC/r 8 wheeledRate/TonneFreight/wagonDifference%age
CommodityDistancewagon
Prior to As on Prior to As on Prior to As on Prior to As on
1.4.05 1.4.11 1.4.05 1.4.11 1.4.05 1.4.11 1.4.05 1.4.11
1 2 3456 7 89 1 0 1 1 1 2
(Kms) (Tonne) (Tonne)(Rs.) (Rs.) (Rs.) (Rs.) (Rs.)
Cotton full pressed 500 175 LR 4 34 61531.00 289.7718054 17676 -378 -2%
1000 34 611012.20 483.1634415 29473 -4942-14%
1500 34 611493.50 675.1450779 41184 -9595-19%
2000 34 611852.20 826.7462975 50431-12544-20%
De Oiled Cake 500 120 120 50 61364.10 499.6418205 30478 12273 67%
1000 50 61694.10 886.2234705 54059 19354 56%
1500 50 611024.10 1270.2851205 77487 26282 51%
2000 50 611270.10 1573.4763505 95982 32477 51%
Dry Chillies 500 160 LR 4 26 61485.40 289.7712620 17676 5055 40%
1000 26 61925.40 483.1624060 29473 5413 22%
1500 26 611365.40 675.1435500 41184 5683 16%
2000 26 611693.40 826.7444028 50431 6402 15%
Edible Oils 500 115 LR 4 32 61348.90 289.7711165 17676 6511 58%
1000 32 61665.20 483.1621286 29473 8187 38%

47
1500 32 61981.40 675.1431405 41184 9779 31%
2000 32 611217.20 826.7438950 50431 11480 29%
Milk Powder 500 160 LR 1 36 61485.40 394.7617474 24080 6606 38%
1000 36 61925.40 684.6433314 41763 8448 25%
1500 36 611365.40 972.6649154 59332 10178 21%
2000 36 611693.40 1200.1060962 73206 12244 20%
Motor Cars 500 240 LR 4 1258.8728.20 289.778738 17038 8300 95%
(in BCACN wagons)1000 12 58.81388.20 483.1616658 28410 11752 71%
1500 12 58.82048.20 675.1424578 39698 15120 62%
2000 12 58.82540.20 826.7430482 48612 18130 59%
Onion 500 90 LR 4 46.30 61273.10 289.7712645 17676 5031 40%
100046.30 61 520.60 483.1624104 29473 5369 22%
150046.30 61 768.10 675.1435563 41184 5621 16%
200046.30 61 952.60 826.7444105 50431 6326 14%
Paper 500 130 LR 3 34 58 394.40 324.8013410 18838 5429 40%
1000 34 58751.90 520.8225565 30207 4643 18%
1500 34 581109.40 774.3537720 44912 7193 19%
2000 34 581375.90 951.1646781 55167 8386 18%
Tea 500 140 LR 4 27 61 424.80 289.7711470 17676 6206 54%
1000 27 61809.80 483.1621865 29473 7608 35%

48
1500 27 611194.80 675.1432260 41184 8924 28%
2000 27 611481.81 826.7440009 50431 10422 26%
Timber 500 135 LR 146.25 61 409.60 394.7618944 24080 5136 27%
100046.25 61 780.80 684.6436112 41763 5651 16%
150046.25 61 1152.10 972.6653285 59332 6047 11%
200046.25 61 1428.80 1200.1066082 73206 7124 11%
Turmeric 500 140 LR 453.8 58424.80 289.7722854 16806 -6048-26%
1000 53.8 58809.80 483.1643567 28023-15544-36%
1500 53.8 581194.80 675.1464280 39158-25122-39%
2000 53.8 581481.80 826.7479721 47951-31770-40%
1 23456789 1 0 1 1 1 2
*includes Busy Season Charge @ 7%, Development Charge @ of 2% on NTR and Terminal Charge @ of Rs. 40 per terminal  charge.

49
Wagon Production during 2009-10 ANNEXURE F
Fig. in Vus
Wagon Builders Type ofO/s asFresh TotalApr. '09 May '09 June '09July '09 Aug. '09 Sept. '09 Oct. '09 Nov. '09Dec. '09 Jan. '10 Feb. '10 Mar. '10 Cum O/s
wagon  onorderordersPdn. as on
1.4.0909-10 09-101.4.10
PUBLIC SECTOR
M/s. BWEL/MFPBOXNHL 90 50 140 2 5 18 17 5 13 15 75 65
BOSTHS 000
BRNAHS 8 71 8 7 23 20 13 71
TOTAL98 50 211 8 0 7 23 22 13 5 18 17 5 13 15 146 65
M/s. BEWL MKABOXNHL 64 50 1322 3 10 15 17
BOSTHS 000
BRNAHS 56 93 6 5 11 10 10 10 4 15 8 11 3 93 0
TOTAL120 50 225 6 5 11 10 10 10 4 15 10 11 6 10 108 117
M/s. Braithwaite BTPN 30 30 15 10 530 0
BOXNHL 164 50 479 8 10 32 50 64 45 90 299 180
BOSTHS 24 394 418 24 33 33 44 45 46 33 52 10 70 390 28
BOXNLW 130 130 10 25 29 35 11 20 130 0
BOBYN 15 75 90 8 7 5 25 10 35 90 0
T
OTAL363 519 1147 39 28 37 62 76 65 97 96 102 77 65 195 939 208
M/s. Burn/BP BOBRN 290 290 22 15 15 31 32 16 34 37 32 30 20 6 290 0
BOBYN 93 9309 3
BOXNHL 114 1140 114
BOSTHS 117 1176 6 111
TOTAL614 0 614 22 15 15 31 32 16 34 37 32 30 20 12 296 318

50
M/s. Burn/HWH BOXNHL 368 218 1 1 1 6 8 12 29 189
BRNAHS 22 22 15 722 0
BOSTHS 603 731 35 30 28 30 42 42 25 10 35 40 35 60 412 319
T
OTAL993 0 971 50 37 28 30 42 43 26 10 36 46 43 72 463 508
M/s. BRBPTN 32 3203 2
BOBYN 275 275 5 10 10 20 12 16 19 20 20 22 21 175 100
BOSTHS 128 000
BOXNHL 100 100 1 2 3 97
T
OTAL535 0 407 5 10 10 0 20 12 16 20 20 20 24 21 178 229
PRIV A TE 2723 619 3575 130 95 108 156 202 159 182 196 217 189 171 325 2130 1445
SECTOR
M/s. Texmaco BOXNAL 96 9609 6
BOXNHL 162 160 1084 220 55 227232 190 26 134 1084 0
BCNHL 4841908 2392 35 28 75 84 98 80 124 140 175 190 157 235 1421 971
BOSTHS 340 340 3 12 56 50 50 50 80 39 340 0
BVZI 259 259 14 11 24 18 17 20 27 55 33 23 14 256 3
T
OTAL1341 2068 4171 255 100 325 396 356 173 328 247 269 223 180 249 3101 1070
M/s. ModernBOXNHL 517 1501002 137 125 53 30 6 3 54 99 126 141 92 136 1002 0
BCNHL 0 1432 14325 5 1427
BCFC 125 1250 125
Fig. in Vus
Wagon Builders Type ofO/s asFresh TotalApr. '09 May '09 June '09July '09 Aug. '09 Sept. '09 Oct. '09 Nov. '09Dec. '09 Jan. '10 Feb. '10 Mar. '10 Cum O/s
 on orderordersPdn. as on
wagon1.4.0909-10 09-101.4.10

51
BTPGLN 151 1510 151
BTPN 310 310 6 25 19 48 49 147 163
T
OTAL978 1707 3020 137 125 53 30 6 3 54 105 151 160 140 190 1154 1866
M/s. HEIBOXNHL 92 356 39 53 35 50 67 65 47 356 0
BOSTHS 129 221 350 63 35 55 55 46 40 34 22 350 0
BCNHL 400 365 765 1 15 25 25 7 31 50 80 234 531
BOBRNHS 200 200 24 62 72 42 200 0
T
OTAL821 586 1671 102 88 79 118 133 142 109 89 72 78 50 80 1140 531
M/s. BESCOBOBRNAL 60 6006 0
BOBRNHS 236 2360 236
BOXNAL 144 1440 144
BOXNHL 347 130 941 96 50 65 67 69 55 88 99 79 143 11 119 941 0
BCNHL 299 500 799 2 3 8 7 5 25 51 85 45 55 286 513
BTPN 150 150 50 34 34 32 150 0
BOBYN 220 44 264 20 34 50 62 54 35 9 264 0
BOSTHS 200 447 647 1 18 34 30 40 48 29 50 40 34 55 380 267
T
OTAL1656 1121 3241 116 135 169 200 193 137 150 153 180 268 91 229 2021 1220
M/s. TitagarhBOSTHS 215 240 455 100 100 51 100 61 43 455 0
BOXNHL 482 482 130 70 148 134482 0
BCNHL 1273 1715 11 60 5158 95 150 230 231 236 1122 593

52
BVZI 1 5 3 1 5 3 5 7 6 4 1 0 1 1 2 4 5 1 0 8
TOTAL2123 240 2805 230 70 248 201 167 118 101 95 154 240 232 248 2104 701
M/s. Jessop BOBSN 76 76 5 10 21 11 29 76 0
BOSTHS 100 100 14 35 37 14 100 0
BOXNHL 200 2000 200
BCNHL 565 5650 565
BOBRNHS 200 20017 5 22 178
BVZI 1 6 7 1 6 7 55 162
T
OTAL543 765 1308 5 10 26 11 29 0 14 35 37 14 17 5 203 1105
Jupiter wagon BOXNHL 28 190 305 26 2 23 7 16 37 40 31 33 33 23 34 305 0
Total 28 190 305 26 2 23 7 16 37 40 31 33 33 23 34 305 0
TOTAL Pvt. Sector7490 6677 16521 871 530 923 963 900 610 796 755 896 1016 733 1035 10028 6493
TOTAL Industry10213 7296 20096 1001 625 1031 1119 1102 769 978 951 1113 1205 904 1360 12158 7938
Fig. in Vus
Wagon Builders Type ofO/s asFresh TotalApr. '09 May '09 June '09July '09 Aug. '09 Sept. '09 Oct. '09 Nov. '09Dec. '09 Jan. '10 Feb. '10 Mar. '10 Cum O/s
wagon  onorderordersPdn. as on
1.4.0909-10 09-101.4.10

ANNEXURE G
Trans shipment Points (MG to BG) existing on Indian Railways
 Sl.No. Railways As on As on date
01.04.2006 (June/2011)
 1. CR  Nil Nil
 2. ER Nil Nil
 3. ECR Nil Nil
(Narkatiaganj for (Narkatiaganj for
Railway materials only) Railway materials only)
4. ECoR Nil Nil
 5. NR Nil Nil
 6. NCR Nil Nil
 7. NER Gonda Gonda
 8. NFR Lumding and Rangiya Lumding and Rangiya
 9. NWR Nil Nil
10. SR Nil Nil
11. SCR Nil Nil
12. SER Nil Nil
13. SECR Nil Nil
14. SWR Nil Nil
15. WR Sabarmati (BG to MG) Nil
16. WCR Nil Nil
53

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
—Nil—
54

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation No. 4
The Committee note that the Carrying Capacity (CC) of a wagon is based upon
the load that the axles of the wagon can carry. Prior to November 2004, the wagons
were allowed to be loaded up to CC+2 tonne where the permissible axle load was taken
as 20.32 tonne. From November 2004 onwards, the loading was permitted up to
CC+4+2 tonne. In May 2005, as a pilot project, the Railway Board permitted running
of these wagons loaded up to CC+8+2 tonne on sixteen identified iron ore routes in
order to increase throughput. Subsequently, wagons loaded with coal up to CC+6+2
tonne were also allowed to run on nominated coal routes. However, no detailed scientific
and engineering study on the technical feasibility of the enhanced wagon loading was
carried out through any independent accredited agency and this important decision
of increasing wagon carrying capacity beyond the prescribed limits i.e. upto CC+8+2T
was taken solely based on the field experience gained after running freight wagons
for years and in-house research and development work done by the Research Design
and Standards Organization (RDSO). The Committee's examination has revealed
that this questionable decision of the Ministry of Railways challenges the conventional/
prevaling system of assessing weight bearing limit of tracks and had led to large
scale premature damages to tracks, bridges and rolling stock belying the Railway
Board's contention that no appreciable adverse effect has been noticed. Though the
Railway Board admitted that actual consequences of the enhanced loading on tracks
and wagons would be clearer when more results become available in due course
which may span over 30 years, the Committee are of the considered view that for any
impact assessment of such nature and duration, it is not always easy to arrive at any
reliable result as various external issues or stimuli are certain to affect the process.
The Committee are, therefore, constrained to observe that until the Railway Board
complete their ongoing impact analysis of enhanced loading on rail infrastructure
and the results prove beyond doubt that their venture is risk free, the decision of
enhanced loading remains a risky venture fraught with latent physical damage to rail
infrastructure which even poses rail safety concerns. The Committee cannot but
conclude that this decision of the Ministry of Railways to enhance the carrying
capacity of wagons is aimed at short-term revenue gains at the cost of long-term
damages to the railway infrastructure. The Committee feel that CC of wagons should
have ideally been enhanced only after undertaking a proper scientific evaluation and
detailed feasibility study. They would also like to caution the Railway Board to desist
from taking indiscreet actions which may cause injudicious harm to rail
infrastructure in future.
[Sl. No. 4, PART II, Para No. 4 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The main issues pointed out in the above paragraph are:—
(a) No detailed scientific and engineering study on the technical feasibility of
the enhanced wagon loading was carried out through any independent
55

56
accredited agency and this important decision of increasing wagon carrying
capacity beyond the prescribed limits i.e. up to CC+8+2T was taken solely
based on the field experience gained after running freight wagons for years
and in-house research and development work done by the Research Design
and Standards Organization (RDSO).
(b) The Committee are, therefore, constrained to observe that until the Railway
Board complete their ongoing impact analysis of enhanced loading on rail
infrastructure and the results prove beyond doubt that their venture is risk
free, the decision of enhanced loading remains a risky venture fraught with
latent physical damage to rail infrastructure which even poses rail safety
concerns.
(c) The Committee feel that CC of wagons should have ideally been enhanced
only after undertaking a proper scientific evaluation and detailed feasibility
study. They would also like to caution the Railway Board to desist from
taking indiscreet actions which may cause injudicious harm to rail infrastructure
in future.
With regard to (a) above, it is to be pointed out that RDSO has been involved in
the design and development of rolling stock since its establishment way back in the
fifties. All the wagons plying on the Indian Railway System have been designed/
approved by RDSO. To enhance the carrying capacity of these wagons, RDSO did not
need to consult any independent accredited agency as the technical know-how of
these wagons was already available with RDSO.
With regard to (b) and (c), it is to be pointed out that running of trains loaded with
enhanced quantity was done based on field experience after running freight trains for
years and in-house research by RDSO. Additional springs are being provided in
suspension to contain the effect of enhanced loading. The provision of additional
springs is almost completed.
Earlier BOY and BOBS wagons with an axle load of 22.9 metric tonne have been
introduced on Indian Railways. These wagons are running for a considerable time and
no adverse effect has been noticed on the track.
Over the years, not only the track structure has improved but maintenance standard
has also improved considerably, 90R rails have been replaced with 52 kg. and 60 kg.
rails. In addition to improvement in rail section, rail metallurgy has also improved
considerably. Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) of rail has been improved from 72 UTS
to 90 UTS. Bhilai Steel Plant is now using RH degasser of restricting the hydrogen
content to avoid rail fractures on this account. Rails are being tested on line with
Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD) System and Eddy Current testing machines for
detecting any internal flaw and surface defects.
Use of longer rail panels has resulted in reduction of nos. of in-plant and in situ
welded joints which are normally considered relatively weaker zones in track. This has
resulted in reduced maintenance cost and longer life of track components.

57
Similarly, sleeper technology has also changed completely. Metal sleepers have
been replaced with PSC (Pre-stressed concrete) sleepers. These sleepers are provided
with the state-of-the-art track machines. With the introduction of 52 kg./60 kg. rails on
PSC sleepers, track modulus has improved considerably and axle load capacity of the
track has improved.
Keeping in view the above developments, a corporate decision was taken by
Railway Board to permit CC+8+2T on iron ore routes in May, 2005 as a Pilot Project.
The issue has been examined in house by the experts in the field and in RDSO. RDSO
has also conducted a number of studies on the effect of enhanced loading on track and
bridges and working with WILD instruments. With enhancement of Carrying Capacity
(CC) of railway wagons, the assets are subjected to more intensive use and their earlier
renewal is on accepted lines.
While permitting higher axle load, greater emphasis on monitoring of in service
behaviour of infrastructure, both fixed and rolling stock is being kept in mind. Higher
axle load may decrease life of rail but with greater emphasis on having zero tolerance
for overloading, USFD examination of rails, monitoring of in service defects of wagons
with help of WILD, instrumentation of bridges etc., effects of higher axle loads on track
will get reduced. Rail grinding have been envisaged to long life of rails.
The project is being monitored by Multi-disciplinary Core Group comprising of
Heads of Departments from Civil, Mechanical, Electrical and Operating departments
and the same is being reviewed by General Managers of Zonal Railways. Quarterly
review reports are also being submitted to Railway Board. A number of instructions
have been issued by Railway Board to control overloading. To effectively monitor and
control overloading, zonal Railways were advised to implement Unified Joint Procedure
Orders (JPO) issued from Board. Speed restructions are being imposed on overloaded
wagons. Evidently, Railways are taking sufficient measures to nullify/minimize adverse
impact of Higher Axle Load running over fixed infrastructure.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 09.02.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight
MIP dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below that ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
“Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing safety
measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in motion weighbridges,
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight trains. Further, imposing
punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to safeguard the
condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty which may
constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR also need to
ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of various traffic
facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in workshops as this will help
in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Ministry of Railways have
initiated measures/marketing strategies in the 10th as well 11th Plan for setting
up a trend reversal in the market share of Indian Railways which registered a

58
continuous decline in the past two decades, the record made available by Ministry
does not indicate any improvement.”
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the Railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a derived demand and is depedent on the growth
of the economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation output is
NTKM i.e. Net Tonne Kilometre. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of growth
of the economy have moved in a ratio of 0.8: 0.9. The table below depicts this:—
Y ear GDP Growth in N TKM Growth in %age
%age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65
However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
 9 years. Thus keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximize their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 5
The Railway Board implemented a pilot project on enhanced loading with the
objective of carrying more tonnes per wagon thereby increasing the throughput on

59
congested routes and reducing  the unit cost of operations to effect saving on
locomotives,  additional wagons, staff and paths to move additional trains. However,
the Committee find that in a series of ad hoc decisions that were taken in haste, the
Railway Board  permitted enhanced loading on more routes in several stages. Initially,
the Railway Board permitted running of freight trains loaded up to CC+8 tonne with
an additional loading tolerance of 3 tonne on certain specified routes mostly dedicated
freight routes as a pilot project for one year effective from 15.05.2005. The commodities
permitted to be loaded under this arrangement were ores, gypsum, limestone, dolomite,
etc. Later, some CC+6 routes were also notified for loading of E&F grade coal, inferior
grade coal, washed coal, and washery middling in addition to ores, gypsum, limestone
and dolomite up to CC+6 tonne. The Pilot Project was gradually enhanced and more
routes have been included in the project and in addition to BOXN wagons, other
wagons were also included in the project. Cement,  grain, sugar etc. were also included
in permitted commodities list in addition to iron ore, coal and other heavy minerals.
Subsequently, CC+6 routes have been universalized and all BG routes of Indian
Railways except a few have been notified as CC+6 routes. In defence of such
questionable and risky decisions, the Railway Board pleaded that as capacity additions
in the Indian Railways have long gestation periods, the quantum increase in the
freight loading could be made possible only through a major strategy of increasing
the axle load. The Committee are not convinced by this approach of the Ministry of
Railways particularly when the enhanced loading was effected without the matter
being subjected to a thorough scientific and engineering study and more routes were
arbitrarily brought under the pilot project without any assessment of their impacts.
Against this backdrop, the Committee do not consider the decision to enhance
carrying capacity of wagons much above the originally permissible carrying capacity
as a prudent, safe and technically sound way of augmenting  earning capacity of the
Railways. While expressing serious concern over this uncertain step, the Committee
desire that the Railway Board should avoid pursuing a reckless policy of expanding
enhanced CC routes until favourable  impacts of the existing pilot project are
established.
[Sl. No. 5 PART II, Para No. 5 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Committee has basically pointed out that the decision of enhanced loading
was effected without the matter being subjected to a thorough scientific and engineering
study and more routes were brought in the ambit of enhanced loading without any
assessment of their impact. Thus, the Committee does not find this decision to be
prudent, safe and technically sound.
With regard to scientific and engineering studies, replies have been furnished for
item No. 4. The Ministry of Railways is of the opinion that adequate experience has
been gained for enhanced axle load and adequate measures to ensure safety have also
been taken. Thus, the Committee's observation above is not right keeping in view the
better technological inputs being provided on a continuous basis.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 09.02.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight

60
MIP dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
Comments:—
“Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing safety
measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in motion weighbridges,
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight trains. Further, imposing
punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to safeguard the
condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty which may
constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR also needs to
ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of various traffic
facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in workshops as this will help
in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Ministry of Railways have
initiated measures/marketing strategies in the 10th as well 11th Plan for setting
up a trend reversal in the market share of Indian Railways wthich registered a
continuous decline in the past two decades, the record made available by Ministry
does not indicate any improvement.”
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the Railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a derived demand and is dependent on the
growth of the economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation
output is NTKM i.e. Net Tonne Kilometre. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of
growth of the economy have moved in a ratio of  0.8: 0.9. The table below depicts
this:—
Y ear GDP Growth in %age NTKM Growth in % age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65
However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the

61
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
9 years. Thus keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximize their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 6
The Committee note that while giving their green signal for enhancing wagon
load, the RDSO had, based on their studies, called for greater control on overloading
and increasing number of Wheel Impact Load Detectors (WILD) instruments along
with other factors to increase the track life. RDSO had also recommended for providing
additional springs in suspension and Association of American Railways (AAR)
approved grease in axle box bearings of wagons. In addition, the Railway Board in
March and May 2005 also clarified that the enhanced loading may be permitted
subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions. However, Audit review of eleven and six
selected routes, where enhanced loading of iron ore and coal was permitted respectively,
had revealed that in almost all the Railway Zones, the pilot projects of permitting  the
wagons loaded up to CC+8+2 tonne and CC+6+2 tonne were commenced even without
fulfilling the prescribed conditions of installation of in-motion weighbridges and
provision of Wheel Impact Load Detectors. Even though eleven in-motion weighbridges
the were slated to be installed on East Coast Railway, only one was installed as of
September 2006. Similarly, on South Central Railway only five out of the stipulated
nine weighbridges could be installed. Worse still, not a single Wheel Impact Load
Detector was provided on any of the railways during the same period. In this regard,
the Railway Board contended that the installation of Wheel Impact Load Detectors
(WILD), instrumentation of bridges, installation of in-motion weighbridge was not a
prerequisite for starting the Pilot Project. The Committee do not agree with the
Railway Board's view in the matter as it is contradictory to the recommendations of
the RDSO for greater control on overloading and increasing the number of WILD
instruments. The Committee cannot but deplore the failure of the Railway Board in
fulfilling the prerequisite conditions before permitting enhanced loading which is a
major systemic failure/lapse. They, therefore, would like the entire issue be looked
into afresh and take immediate corrective measures. The Committee also urge upon
the Railway Board to accord the highest priority henceforth on fulfilling the
prerequisite conditions of wagon CC enhancement i.e. installation of all the requisite
devices/instruments like WILDs, weighbridges, other essential mechanical devices/
instruments etc.
[Sl.No. 6, PART II, Para No. 6 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Almost all the wagons have been strengthened by the provision of additional
springs as per the recommendations of RDSO. Close monitoring of CC+8+2 operation

62
is being done so that the data so obtained can be an instrument of decision-making
regarding inputs in key areas, like upgradation of technology, maintenance etc. so that
the investments can be prioritised accordingly.
Wheel Impact Load Detectors (WILD) have been installed at the following locations:—
S.No. Location Division Railway Date of
Installation
1. Mahalimarup Chakradharpur SER 18.07.2007
2. Hospet Hubli SWR 22.07.2007
3. Bhilai Raipur SECR 28.11.2007
4. Arkkonam Chennai SR 31.01.2008
5. Mughalsarai Mughalsarai ECR 10.04.2008
6. Mughalsarai Mughalsarai ECR 10.04.2008
7. Guntakal Guntakal SCR 25.02.2008
8. Asansol Asansol E R 24.04.2008
9. Vishakhapatnam Waltair ECoR 30.05.2008
WILD is a new technology on the Indian Railways. We are still on the initial part
of the learning curve. Some time is required for the technology to be absorbed
completely. The focus through WILD is on isolation of defective wagons in order to
minimise harm to both the wagon and the track. However, the primary objective is still
the prevention of defects through inputs in technology, quality control in manufacture
and improved maintenance.
Significant progress has been made in terms of understanding the use of this new
technology and using it for benefit of IR. Based on the experience of first lot of
09 WILDs installed, certain improvements have been made in the second lot of six,
orders for which have been placed for:—
S.No. Location Division Railway
1. Nagpur Nagpur SECR
2. Ajni Nagpur C R
3. Bina Bhopal WCR
4. Itarsi Bhopal WCR
5. New Katni Jabalpur WCR
6. Barwadih Dhanbad E C R
The above 6 WILD equipments are planned to be installed in 2010.
The pilot implementation of the Acoustic Bearing Monitor has been done at
Bakkas (Northern Railway). The system has been commissioned in January 2010. The
system validation process is in hand as this system requires correlation of field data
with the associated examination results. This is a complex imported technology requiring
critical initial process as the standards pertaining to IR systems need to be developed.
With regard to installation of weighbridges, details have been provided in reply at
Item No. 7.

63
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 09.02.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight
MIP dated 05.01.2011 may  be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
“Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing
safety measures viz.  installation of WILD,  electronic in-motion weightbridges,
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier  freight trains. Further, imposing
punitive  charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to safeguard the
condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty which may
constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR also needs to
ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of various traffic
facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in workshops as this will help
in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Ministry of Railways have
initiated measures marketing strategies in the 10th as well 11th Plan for setting
up a trend reversal in the market share of Indian Railways which registered a
continuous decline in the past two decades, the record made available by Ministry
does not indicate any improvement.”
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond  certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the Railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long  way in eliminating  the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a derived demand and is dependent on the
growth of the economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation
output is NTKM i.e. Net Tonne Kilometer. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of
growth of the economy have moved in a ratio of 0.8:0.9. The table below depicts this:—
Y ear GDP Growth in NTKM Growth in %age
% age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65

64
However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
9 years. Thus, keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximise their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser (Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19 dated 24-2-2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 7
In terms of RDSO's conditions and the clarifications issued by the Railway
Board in March and May 2005 in the matter of permitting enhanced loading, installation
of Wheel Impact Load Detectors and in-motion weighbridges are considered essential
for monitoring the impact of enhanced loading. By December 2008, a total of 9 WILDs
have been installed and tender for procurement of further seven systems was under
finalisation by Central Organisation for Modernisation of Workshops (COFMOW).
Besides, the Railway Board also planned to incorporate WILD in Online Monitoring
of Rolling Stock (OMRS) system and another indent for procurement of 25 Nos. of
Acoustic Bearing Detector and WILD for Online Monitoring of Rolling Stock was
under finalisation. The Committee are distressed to find that this position remained
unchanged till December 2009, obviously indicating that no specific action plan has
been implemented for expeditious installation of WILD on all identified vulnerable
routes. Further, the Committee's examination has revealed that since 2004 greater
emphasis has been given on checking overloading after surprise checks detected
overloading to a great extent. Accordingly, power was delegated to General Managers
to sanction expenditure up to Rs. 15 lakh on installation of weighbridges. In the same
year, all Zonal Railways were directed to review the availability of weighbridges and
chalk out an action plan for providing electronic in-motion weighbridges at originating
points as also at other convenient locations where weighment was operationally feasible.
As a result, 42 weighbridges were made available by 2005 and another 48 and
24 weighbridges were commissioned during 2006 and 2007 respectively.
Subsequently, the Railway Board constituted a Committee during 2008-09 to draw up
a blueprint indicating all the locations on Indian Railways where electronic in-motion
weighbridges need to be provided. In spite of this, the position of installation of
weighbridges remained dismal till date as against 84 and 69 weighbridges planned
for installation during 2008 and 2009 respectively, only 11 and 8 weighbridges could
be commissioned and surprisingly, as a remedial measure, the Railway Board have
merely reissued a set of old instructions recently asking all Zonal Railways to
commission entire planned/proposed weighbridges within the next six months besides
mandating provision of in-motion weighbridges in all new private sidings having
outward traffic. What disturbs the Committee most is the fact that the same
instructions were issued in 2008 by the Railway Board without yielding any tangible
results. The Committee note that even after 5 years of enhanced loading, the Railways
have miserably failed to commission the requisite numbers of WILDs and in-motion

65
weighbridges despite their importance in monitoring the impact of enhanced loading
to the rail infrastructure, which is anything but regrettable. In order to protect costly
and vulnerable rail infrastructure from damages, the Committee recommend that it
should be made obligatory for all the Zonal Railways to install and commission all the
pending WILDs and weighbridges on priority basis and any laxity in the matter
should be dealt with sternly. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of
precise action taken, year-wise and zone-wise, in this regard.
[Sl. No. 7 Part II, Para No. 7 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Year-wise and Railway-wise status of installation of in-motion weighbridges is
given in Annexures-A, B and C.
Year-wise and Railway-wise status of installation of WILD is given at reply to item
No. 6.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 38-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight MIP dated 09.02.2011 have
desired that their comments communicated vide U.O. No. 08-RA-II/8-1/2006/Freight
MIP dated 05.01.2011 may be appended below the ATN followed by Ministry's
comments:—
“Audit appreciates that Ministry of Railways is keeping a watch on the long
term behaviour of the rolling stock and is also taking care of implementing safety
measures viz. installation of WILD, electronic in-motion weighbridges,
strengthening of bridges etc. Indian Railways, however, needs to vigorously
pursue the implementation of these safety measures to sustain the prevalent
growth trend in its services. Besides, it is also required to keep a watch on the
damage to track as a result of running of heavier freight trains. Further, imposing
punitive charges for overloading is not a sufficient deterrent to safeguard the
condition of track as traders may get away by paying penalty which may
constitute a small portion of the value of the goods carried. IR also needs to
ensure the adequate flow of funds for speedier completion of various traffic
facility works in sheds/terminals/sidings as well as in workshops as this will help
in avoiding detentions of rolling stock. Though Ministry of Railways have
initiated measures/marketing strategies in the 10th as well 11th Plan for setting
up a trend reversal in the market share of Indian Railways which registered a
continuous decline in the past two decades, the record made available  by
Ministry does not indicate any improvement.”
Ministry's Comments
Efforts are being made for limiting the adverse impact of overloading by detaching
wagons overloaded beyond certain limits and making the customers to unload the
excess consignment. The policy of having weighbridges at each new siding means
that overloading, would be detected at the loading point itself and necessary
adjustments would be done. At the same time, the Railways have embarked on a policy
that for loose/bulk consignments, 100% weighment will be ensured before RRs are
issued. These two steps by itself will go a long way in eliminating the problem of
overloading. Freight transportation is a derived demand and is dependent on the

66
growth of the economy, especially in the core sector. The index of transportation
output is NTKM i.e. Net Tonne Kilometre. The rate of growth of NTKM and the rate of
growth of the economy have moved in a ratio of 0.8-0.9. The table below depicts
this:—
Y ear GDP Growth in NTKM Growth in %age
%age
2001-02 5.60 3.48
2002-03 4.30 5.99
2003-04 8.50 7.94
2004-05 7.50 6.86
2005-06 9.00 7.90
2006-07 9.60 8.11
2007-08 9.00 7.70
2008-09 6.70 5.16
2009-10 7.20 8.65
However, as a conscious effort the Railways tried to focus further on improving
the growth of NTKMs by trying to capture long lead traffic. This resulted in the
growth of NTKMs being more than the growth in GDP for the first time in the last
9 years. Thus, keeping in mind the demands for freight in the economy, Railways have
tried to maximise their output which is reflected by more than proportionate growth in
NTKMs.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser(Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 16
The Committee note that in the rapidly growing and developing economy like
ours, the Railways' share of the total transport share is bound to register a declining
trend due to its operational limitations and increasing availability of other easier and
competitive modes of transportation like roadways, pipelines, etc. For regaining their
lost traffic share, the Railway Board have been taking various measures by way of
investment aimed at creating infrastructure for improved freight and passenger
services. At present, large number of activities such as introduction of new lines,
gauge conversion, track renewals, track doubling, bridge works, electrification
projects, signalling and telecommunications works, etc. are underway on the Indian
Railways, which directly or indirectly aim at improving various aspects of freight
operations and freight carrying capacity so as to provide a safe, sound and efficient
modern infrastructure, which ensures smooth passenger and freight operations.
Further the Railways have targeted augmentation of Broad Gauge track capacity by
15,500 kms. during the 11th Five Y ear Plan. However, the Committee are constrained

67
to note that the investment under major plan heads aimed at creating infrastructure
for improving freight and passenger services over the years is not commensurate
with the buoyancy level of Railways' earnings. To illustrate, the Railways reportedly
achieved a jump in their freight earnings from an amount of Rs. 26,231.45 crore
during 2002-03 to Rs. 53,433.40 in 2008-09 but no proportionate amount has been
invested for railway infrastructure development as the actual expenditure incurred
under the various plan-heads meant for increasing the freight haulage capacity like
Gauge Conversion, Track Doubling, Traffic Facilities, Rolling Stock Programme,
etc. remained almost static during 2004-05 to 2005-06. As a result, capacity
augmentation over the existing facilities was very poor and was marked by fluctuations
of marginal declines and increases continually from the years 2002-03 to 2006-07.
This lack of growth in the Railways' infrastructure had perhaps a causative role in
the reduction of the Railways' share of the total transport share from 53 percent in
the 4th Five Year plan to 37 per cent in the 9th Five-Year plan. The Committee
consider such an inadequate investment on Rail infrastructure to be a serious handicap
on the part of the Railway Board, which may deprive them of achieving the required
pace of acceleration both in passenger and freight operations and earnings thereof.
In such a scenario, the Railways need to invest heavily on their infrastructure
development for furthering their performance and achievement and more especially
in the post freight rationalization and CC enhancement phase marked by deterioration
in railway infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, urge the Railways to pool their
resources and infuse adequate funds for infrastructure renewal/upgradation to enable
the Railways in creating the required rail infrastructure for scaling further heights
in their performance. It is needless to mention that the upgradation of physical
infrastructure should be adequately complemented by a series of innovative and
competitive marketing strategies to further consolidate the Railway's performance
and achievements in freight operations.
[Sl. No. 16, PART II, Para No. 16 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Noted.
A number of marketing strategies have been adopted to consolidate Railway's
performance and achievements in freight operations from time to time.
In order to encourage public-private partnership in procurement of wagons to
meet the anticipated incremental freight traffic, Wagon Investment Scheme (WIS) was
launched on 28.11.2005. Approvals of 140 rakes were accorded by IR during the period
from 2005-08, out of which 103 rakes have been inducted on IR system.
Similarly, Liberalized Wagon Investment Scheme (LWIS) was launched in 2008 to
encourage private investment in special purpose and high capacity wagons for
transportation of bulk commodities where Railway's share is low. Approval for
procurement of 12 rakes has been given till June, 2010.
To further facilitate private investment in wagons, new schemes namely Special
Freight Train Operator (SFTO)  Scheme and Automobile Freight Train Operator (AFTO)
Scheme have been launched recently to facilitate increase in IR's market share in

68
non-traditional low, medium and high density traffic like automobile, vegetable oil,
molasses, chemicals and petrochemicals and bulk traffic like fly ash/bulk cement, etc.
Private investment has also been encouraged in the area of terminal development
on private land through Terminal Development Scheme (TDS) launched in 2008 and
Private Freight Terminal scheme launched on 31.05.2010 for handling rail borne traffic.
To compliment AFTO scheme, a policy on development of automobile and ancillary
hub on railway land through public private partnership mode has been issued to
facilitate bulk transportation of automobile traffic from production centres to
consumption centers.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 309-RA-II/8-1/2006 MIP/Freight dated 05.10.2010
have vetted the ATN.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser(Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 21
The Committee note that as per the Indian Railway Yearbook (2004-05) there
were arrears in the periodical overhauling of BG wagons (5.8 per cent) and MG
wagons (7.9 per cent) and further during six-months period from October, 2005 to
March, 2006 alone, 30,344 wagons which were due for periodical overhauling were
stabled in the yards and sent to Workshops after a total delay of 1,34,591 days with an
earning capacity of Rs. 27.39 crore. The Committee find that even after receipt of
wagons in the workshops, they could not be taken up for POH immediately due to
capacity constraints and bunched supply. Besides, most of the wagons undertaken for
periodical overhauling were not turned out within the prescribed period. The Ministry
of Railways have attributed the reasons for delays in this regard to shortage of
material and staff, prevalence of serious damages requiring major repairing/
modifications, denting and painting, etc. The Committee regret to note that the Ministry
of Railways have not taken any effective steps to minimise the time taken in periodical
overhauling by ensuring timely supply of requisite material and staff, etc. Further,
the repaired wagons were also not sent for use immediately after overhauling resulting
in loss of a total of 81,434 days with possible earning capacity of Rs. 16.57 crore. The
Committee also note that there was prolonged detention of wagons due for POH in
yards for abnormally long periods of as many as 1,34,591 days, which adversely
affected the operational capability of the Indian Railways. In this regard, the Committee
have been informed by the Railway Board that there is no prescribed period as such
for periodic overhauling of wagons and the Railways have been attempting to achieve
within a period of 5 to 8 days in their workshops. In the Committee's view, this is
nothing short of a serious lapse on the part of the Railway Board especially when
their records depict losses attributable to this account. The Committee also find that
as against the total number of 2,01,933 fit wagons on the Indian Railways, as many as
9,748 wagons are lying sick as on 09.11.2008 and during the year 2009-10, the
ineffective percentage of wagons is around 2.65 per cent, which is numerically more
than 56,095 wagons. This makes it clear that the existing arrangement needs to be

69
improved in so far as ensuring availability of a speedy and transparent system of
repairing and maintaining Railway wagons is concerned. The Committee do not
consider this practice conducive for preserving operational readiness of the Indian
Railways' wagons fleet and, therefore, recommend that the Railway Board should
take effective steps for ensuring periodic inspection of their wagons with a purpose of
identifying/categorizing them into different types of repairing/periodic overhauling
job. The Committee also note that reports of movement of trains on invalid Brake
Power Certificate in violation of Board's instruction continue to pour in from zonal
railways and in August, 2008, 795 trains were reported to be running with invalid
BPC. From this scenario, it is evident that scarcity of wagon spare parts has gravely
affected wagon-overhauling job. The Committee would like the Railways to enter into
an effective arrangement with their spare part suppliers/maintenance providers for
ensuring availability of necessary spare parts so that timely, smooth and speedy
overhauling of damaged wagons is positively achieved and delays obviated.
[Sl.No. 21, PART II, Para No. 21 of 19th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Noted.
The instructions for dealing with invalid BPCs are very clearly laid down. Cases of
invalid BPCs arise primarily due to unforeseen delays in transit. In such case, the
driver and the guard are supposed to check the train for adequate safety and move to
the nearest train examining point wherein the train will be examined. The Railways also
have a system of inspections wherein such deviations are found out and remedial
action is also taken.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 309-RA-II/8-1/2006 MIP/Freight dated 05.10.2010
have vetted the ATN.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser(Finance)
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/19, dated  24.2.2011]

ANNEXURE A
Electronic in-motion Weighbridges Commissioned
Sl. No. Rly. Division Location Date of
Commissioning
12 3 4 5
1 . C R SUR Hotgi 18-Feb-2000
2 . CR BB Kalamboli 5-May-2006
3. CR NGP Wani 17-Jun-2006
4. CR NGP Tadali 22-Nov-2009
5. ECoR WAT Simhachalam (Line No. 7) 9-Aug-2002
6. ECoR KUR Paradeep (Dn. Line) 25-Jan-2006
7. ECoR KUR Sukinda Road 18-Mar-2006
8. ECoR VSKP OEC ROH Depot/VSKP 29-Apr-2006
9. ECoR KUR Hindol Road 9-May-2006
10. ECoR SBP Titlagarh 22-Dec-2006
11. ECoR WAT Bhansi 29-Dec-2006
12. ECoR KUR Paradeep (Up Line) 21-Apr-2007
13. ECoR SBP Mandir Hasud 24-Aug-2007
14. ECoR KUR Kendujhargarh 15-Oct-2007
15. ECoR SBP Hiradud 22-Nov-2008
16. ECoR WAT Simhachalam (Line No. 10) 10-Sep-2009
17. ECR DHN Latehar 20-Oct-2004
18. ECR DHN Gomoh-1 16-Oct-2005
19. ECR DHN Renukut 11-May-2007
20. ECR DHN Singrauli 26-May-2007
21. ECR DHN Chainpur 16-Apr-2009
22. ECR MGS Mughalsarai 28-Jan-2010
23. E R ASN Andal (SA) Yard 16-Aug-1994
24. E R ASN Andal (NA) Yard 20-Apr-1996
25. E R MALDA Jamalpur W/S 25-Sep-2001
26. E R ASN Asansol 19-Mar-2004
27. E R HWH Pakur 21-Jan-2006
28. ER HWH Rajgram 22-Jan-2006
29. E R HWH Dankuni 22-Jan-2006
30. E R MALDA Sahibganj 3-Mar-2006
31. ER SADH Naihati 14-Oct-2006
32. E R MALDA Malada Town 18-Oct-2006
33. E R ASN Barakar 31-Oct-2006
70

71
34. E R ASN Waria 15-Dec-2006
35. E R HWH Howrah Parcel 19-Mar-2007
36. E R HWH Liluah (W/S) 1-Jun-2007
37. E R HWH Howrah Goods Shed 5-Mar-2009
38. KRC KR UDUPI 18-Feb-2006
39. NCR JHANSI Jhansi (W/S) 8-Oct-1999
40. NCR JHANSI Jhansi (New Yard) 19-Mar-2002
41. NCR ALD Juhi 10-Jul-2002
42. NER LJN Gorakhpur Cantt. 31-Mar-2006
43. NER IZN Chamarua 10-May-2006
44. NF R N Y Jogigopha 27-Feb-2000
45. NF KIR Rangapani 15-Nov-2000
46. NF RNY New Bongoigam 22-Nov-2004
47. NF KIR Adina 10-Sep-2005
48. NF APDJ Kamakhyaguri 6-Oct-2005
49. NR MB Chanethi 14-Mar-2001
50. NR UMB Jagadhari (W/S) 25-May-2002
51. NR UMB Bathinda 29-Oct-2003
52. NR DLI New Delhi 27-Apr-2006
53. N R DLI Tughlakabad 21-Jan-2006
54. NR LKO Vyas Nagar 1-Aug-2006
55. NR FZR Amritsar (W/S) 14-Aug-2007
56. NWR JU Merta Road 6-Jan-2004
57. NWR JU Jaisalmer 2-Oct-2008
58. NWR JU Jawa City 19-Jan-2010
59. NWR JU Thayat Hamira 20-Feb-2010
60. SCR GTL Guntakal 1-Apr-1997
61. SCR GTL Guntapalli (W/S) 23-Jun-2000
62. SCR GTL Nandalur 30-Jan-2006
63. SCR GTL Settigunta 10-Apr-2006
64. SCR GNT Nallapdu 1-May-2006
65. SCR BZA Bitragunta 21-May-2006
66. SCR BZA Rajmundri 14-Jun-2006
67. SCR GNT Nandyal 21-Aug-2006
68. SCR SC Chitpur 17-Jan-2007
69. SCR SC Kazipet 30-Oct-2007
70. SCR SC Manikgarh 7-Apr-2008
12 3 4 5

72
71. SCR GNT Hagari 9-Jan-2009
72. SCR GNT Malikapuram 28-Feb-2009
73. SCR BZA Kakinada Port 31-Oct-2009
(Ravikampadu)
74. SCR BZA Venkatachalam Road 15-Dec-2009
(Surareddypalem)
75. SCR SC Karimnagar 6-Feb-2010
76. SECR BSL Champa 9-Jun-2000
77. SECR RAIPUR R aipur (W/S) 21-May-2001
78. SECR RAIPUR Marauda 24-Jan-2003
79. SECR RAIPUR P-Cabin Bhilai 15-May-2006
80. SECR BSL Belphar 28-Dec-2006
81. SECR NGP Tumsar Road 3-Apr-2007
82. SECR BSL Singhpur 19-Aug-2007
83. SECR RAIPUR General Stores Depot/Raipur 30-Sep-2009
84. SECR RAIPUR RSD Siding 15-Dec-2009
85. SECR RAIPUR Dadhapara Siding 22-Jan-2010
86. SER KGP Kharagpur (W/S) 24-Aug-2000
87. SER CKP B imalgarh 28-Mar-2001
88. SER RNC Muri 28-Aug-2003
89. SER CKP Dongaposi 5-Aug-2005
90. SER ADA Ramkanali 5-May-2006
91. SER CKP Joruli 26-Jun-2006
92. SER KGP Durgachak 11-Jul-2006
93. SER CKP Padmapukur 11-Jul-2006
94. SER CKP Bondamunda 8-Aug-2006
95. SER ADA Wagon Repair Shop/Adra 20-Sep-2006
96. SER CKP Bondamunda 17-Mar-2007
97. SER KGP Dalbhungarh 14-May-2007
98. SER CKP Barajamda 22-Aug-2007
99. SER CKP Jaruli 15-Dec-2009
100. SER KGP Markona 15-Dec-2009
101. SER ADRA Santaldih 10-Mar-2008
102. SR MAS Perambur (W/S) 18-Dec-1999
103. SR MAS Royapuram 15-Feb-2001
104. SR MAS Chengalpattu 18-Dec-2002
105. SR TVC Idapally 27-Dec-2002
12 3 4 5

73
106. SR MAS Attipattu 26-Nov-2004
107. SR SA Erode 15-Jun-2006
108. SR TPJ Golden Rock (W/S) 6-Jul-2007
109. SR TVC Coachin Harbour 3-Aug-2007
110. SWR UBL TV Dam 21-Dec-2005
111. SWR UBL Dharwar 24-Dec-2005
112. SWR UBL Gingeria 24-Dec-2006
113. SWR UBL Bellary 10-Jan-2006
114. SWR MYS Sesalu 27-Jun-2006
115. SWR UBL Banasandars 27-Aug-2006
116. SWR UBL Sanvordam 19-Jun-2008
117. SWR UBL Bannihatti 11-Aug-2008
118. SWR UBL Duroji 30-Oct-2009
119. WCR KOTA Sawai Madhopur 15-Jun-2001
120. WCR JBP New Katni Junction 2-May-2008
121. WCR JBP Khanna Banjari 11-May-2008
122. WCR JBP Satna 3-Jul-2008
123. WCR KOTA Kota 24-Sep-2008
124. WCR JBP Kachpura 17-Nov-2008
125. WCR JBP Jukehi 7-Jan-2009
126. WCR BPL Itarsi 25-Apr-2009
127. WCR JBP Beohari 1-Nov-2009
128. WCR JBP Gosalpur 4-Jan-2010
129. WR ADI Viramgam 1-Jul-1995
130. WR RJT Navlaki 2-Jul-2002
131. WR BCT Udhna 31-Jul-2003
132. WR ADI Gandhidham 23-Jun-2004
133. WR ADI Kankaria 13-Jan-2006
134. WR ADI Paldi 27-Apr-2006
135. WR ADI Kharaghoda 27-Apr-2006
136. WR ADI Maliya Miyana 29-May-2006
137. WR ADI Halvad 8-Sep-2006
138. WR RJT Bhatuya 29-Nov-2006
139. WR RJT Hapa 15-Dec-2006
140. WR BCT Chalthan 4-Jan-2007
141. WR RJT Lavanpur 11-Jan-2007
142. WR RJT V avaniya 11-Jan-2007
12 3 4 5

74
143. WR ADI Dharagadra 14-Feb-2007
144. WR RTM Chanderiya 16-Mar-2007
145. WR ADI Kandla Port 4-Jul-2007
146. WR RTM Mangaliagaon 4-Jul-2007
147. WR RJT W indmill 12-Mar-2009
12 3 4 5

ANNEXURE B
Electronic in-motion Weighbridges under Commissioning
Sl. No. Rly. Division Location
1 . C R Solapur Wadi
2. E R HWH Chalra
3 . E R SADH Sealdah Parcel
4. E R MALDA Sakrigali
5. E R MALDA Barharwa
6. ECR MGS Gaya
7. ECR DHN Meralgram
8. ECR SEE Semaria
9. ECR SEE Semapur
10. ECR DHN Dugda
11. ECoR JJKR Sambalpur city shifted to Jajpur
Keonjhar Road
12. NCR ALD (GMC) DN Line/ALD
13. NCR JHS Jhansi (Up Line)
14. NWR Ajmer Debari
15. NWR BKN Jamsar
16. NWR BKN Hanumangarh
17. SER CKP Bimalgarh
18. SER CKP Chaibasa
19. SER CKP Jharsuguda
20. SER ADA Adra
21. SER ADA Tupkadih
22. SER KGP ANDUL
23. SWR MYS Hasan
24. SWR MYS Chikkajajuru
25. WR BVP Ranavav
75

ANNEXURE C
Planned locations for Electronic in-motion Weighbridges
Sl. No. Rly. Division Location
12 3 4
1. CR MBPT W adalaroad
2 . C R B B Mumbai Port
3 . E R ASN Durgapur
4 . E R ASN Tapashi
5. ER ASN Surli
6. E R ASN Raniganj
7. E R HWH Bandel
8. E R HWH Talit
9 . E R HWH Bhadreswarghat
10. E R HWH Tarakeshwar
11. E R Malda Rajmohal
12. E R Malda Bakudih
13. E R Malda Dhulianganga
14. E R Malda Maharajpur
15. E R Malda Jamalpur
16. E R SADH Cassipore Road
17. E R SADH Chitpur
18. E R SADH Titapur
19. E R SADH Sodepur
20. E R SADH Budge Budge
21. SR MAS Thiruvalangadu
22. SR TVC Irumpanam
23. SR MDU Milavittan
24. SR PGT Panambur
25. SR PGT Chennai Beach (Shoranur)
26. SR PGT Kankanadi
27. SR SA Salem
76

77
12 3 4
28. SR TPJ Villupuram
29. SER CKP Rourkela
30. SER CKP Rajkharsuan
31. ECR SPJ Bagaha
32. ECR SEE Sonepuree
33. E C R SEE Nayagaon
34. ECoR WAT VSKP-1
35. ECoR WAT VSKP-2
36. ECoR WAT VSKP-3
37. ECoR SBP Lapanga
38. SWR UBL Yashwantnagar
39. SWR UBL Kariganuru
40. SWR UBL Tornagallu
41. WR ADI Chirai
42. WR ADI New Bhuj Adesar
43. WR ADI Santalpur
44. WR RTM Shambhupura
45. WR BVP Adri Road
46. WR BRC Bharuch Goods Yard

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
  NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
23 December, 2011 Chairman,
02 Pausa,  1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
78

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 21ST DECEMBER, 2011
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 21st December, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to
1545 hrs. in Chairman's Room (No. 51), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai
10. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Prakash Javadekar
14. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General (Defence Services)
2. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Principal Director (Railway Audit Board)
3. Shri V . Patwardhan — Director (Defence)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee convened to consider and
adopt the following Draft Reports.
79

80
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following Draft Reports,
one by one and adopted the same without any modifications:—
( i ) * * * * * *
(ii) * * * * * *
(iii) * * * * * *
(iv) * * * * * *
(v) Draft Report on Action Taken on 19th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of PAC on
'Freight and Wagon Management on Indian Railways' (Ministry of
Railways);
4. Thereafter, the Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports in
the light of factual verification done by the Audit and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR NINETEENTH REPORT
 (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
i Total No. of Observations/Recommendations: 21
ii Observations/Recommendations of the Committee Total : 15
which have been accepted by Government: Percentage —
Para Nos. 1-3, 8-15 and 17-20 71.43%
iii Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the T otal : Nil
replies received from Government: Percentage—0%
Para No. Nil
iv Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require T otal: 6
reiteration: Percentage—28.57%
Para Nos. 4-7, 16 and 21
v. Observations/Recommendations in respect of T otal : Nil
which Government have furnished interim replies Percentage—0%
Para No. Nil
81
GMGIPMRND—3739LS—28-02-2012.