29
UNDUE FA VOUR TO VENDOR IN ACQUISITION
OF SUBMARINES
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations
Recommendations of  the Committee contained in their
Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2010-2011
TWENTY NINTH  REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

TWENTY-NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-2011)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
UNDUE FA VOUR TO VENDOR IN ACQUISITION OF
SUBMARINES
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Tenth  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24th February, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24th February, 2011
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February  2011/Phalguna 1932 (Saka)

PAC No. 1936
Price:  `  29.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2010-11)..................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ ( V)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government ............................................................. 5
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government......................................................................... 14
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
 replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration ............................ 15
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies. ....................... 17
APPENDICES
I Minutes of the Twenty-first Stting of Public Accounts
Committee (2010-11) held on 3rd February, 2011................ 18
II Minutes of the Twenty-third Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2010-11) held on 15th February, 2011............... 20
III Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Tenth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) ......................................................................... 22

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE(2010-11)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
*16. V acant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
(iii)
* V acancy occurred  vice  Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
19th January, 2011.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2010-11), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Twenty-ninth Report (fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Undue Favour to Vendor in
Acquisition of Submarines' based on Para 2.2, Chapter - II of the C&AG Report
No.  CA-18 of 2008-09 (Defence Services— Air Force and Navy).
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 11th March, 2010. The Tenth
Report was laid in Rajya Sabha a day earlier i.e. on 10th March, 2010. Replies of the
Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were
received on 10th December, 2010. The Public Accounts Committee took up
consideration of the Twenty-ninth Report on 3rd February, 2011, but the adoption of
the Report was deferred as the Committee desired to have some additional inputs on
the Report. After the needful was done, the Committee considered and adopted the
Twenty-ninth Report at their sitting held on 15th February, 2011. Minutes of the
sittings are given at Appendices I & II.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommenda-
tions of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-III.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI,
21 February, 2011 Chairman,
02 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Undue Favour to Vendor in Acquisition of
Submarines' based on Para 2.2, Chapter - II of the Report No. CA-18 of  2008-09
(Defence Services—Air Force and Navy) of the C&AG of India.
2. The Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on
11th March, 2010 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 10th March, 2010. It contained 16
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Defence and categorized
as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 3-10, and 13-16
Total :13
Chapter - II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. 2
Total : 1
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para No. 11 and 12
Total : 2
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
Total: 0
Chapter-V
1

2
3. The Tenth Report of the Committee was based on the Audit review of the
process of acquisition and indigenous construction of state-of-the-art Submarines
for the Indian Navy. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had
revealed serious shortcomings/lapses on the part of Ministry of Defence which
inter alia included faulty process of selection of vendor, delay in the construction/
delivery of Submarines adversely impacting the operational preparedness of the
Indian Navy and resulting in huge financial losses, flaws in the monitoring mechanism
adopted by the Ministry of Defence to oversee the Defence procurement procedure,
etc. The Committee had accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in
the Tenth Report.
Gist of the Committee's Observations/Recommendations
4. Some of the important Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee
in their Tenth Report are as under:—
/head2rightFinding that the French Company TCSF was selected by the Government
despite the Company's reluctance to give a clear cut commitment of the release
of the TCM Exocet SM 39 for the two Type 1500 (HDW) Submarines until and
unless Project-75 was linked with long term naval cooperation with France,
the Committee disapproved the way the Ministry surrendered to the terms
and conditions of their French counterpart and desired that the Ministry of
Defence should not succumb to such pressure tactics in crucial defence
deals and should put across their points firmly in any future negotiations
with any country before awarding contracts for induction of force level.
/head2rightHaving observed that systemic deficiencies had played a major role in
abnormally delaying the acquisition of Submarines by the Indian Navy
whereas the Augusta 90 B Submarines were acquired at a much faster rate by
Pakistan from the same French firm, the Committee impressed upon the
Ministry to review the entire system so as to ensure strict adherence to the
prescribed time frame for each of the Defence procurement processes for
facilitation of the acquisition according to plan.
/head2rightObserving inordinate delays in the procurement procedure of acquisition of
Submarines despite oversight at various levels and finding that even after a
second Defence Procurement Procedure was promulgated in the year 2002,
following the observations of the GoM in a detailed review of the Defence
Procurement system subsequent to the Kargil War the shortcomings could
not be overcome, the Committee had desired that the Ministry should take
corrective action and improve and streamline the Defence acquisition and
procurement system.
/head2rightTaking note of huge financial losses due to delay in finalization of the contract
for Submarines and deprecating the inability expressed by the Ministry of
Defence to quantify the exact financial loss on account of the delayed
finalization of contract, the Committee asked for an explanation from the
Ministry in this regard.

3
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence to each of the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Tenth Report
have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.
A. Inadequate Monitoring System and Delay in Defence Procurement Process
(Recommendation Para No. 11)
6. In their Tenth Report the Committee had observed that despite a three tier
monitoring system reportedly evolved to oversee the Defence Procurement Process
which included a review by the Secretary, Defence Production at the Ministry level,
the Controller of Warship Production and Acquisition at the Navy level, and the
Chairman and Managing Director, MDL, at the Company level, the acquisition of
Submarines got delayed inordinately. The Committee expressed their surprise over the
fact that despite the Group of Minister's observations of several inadequacies in the
procurement procedure, post Kargil War, the same shortcomings persisted in the
acquisition of Submarines for the Indian Navy. The Committee had, therefore, impressed
upon the Ministry to take corrective action, wherever warranted,to improve and
streamline the procedure of Defence acquisitions.
7. The Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:—
"The Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) is reviewed from time to time.
Various lessons learnt during processing of procurement cases as well as their
subsequent execution are being incorporated in the DPP. The DPP 2008 has
been amended and is effective from 1st November, 2009. The amendment for
the current year is under discussion."
8. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. Their claim
that the Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) is reviewed from time to time and
various lessons learnt are being incorporated in the DPP, does not impress the
Committee. Had the DPP been properly reviewed, taking into account the lessons
learnt, the post-Kargil Observations of the Group of Ministers regarding the
shortcomings existing in the acquisition process would have been given due weightage
and the impediments in the acquisition of Submarines for Indian Navy could have
been avoided. Now that the amendment of the DPP for the current year is under
discussion of the Ministry, the Committee recommend that the shortcomings pointed
out by the Group of Ministers be taken into account with all the seriousness and
urgency that they deserve so that an integrated planning and coordinated approach
towards future defence procurements on time is ensured.
B. Time and Cost overrun of the Project
(Recommendation Para No. 12)
9. The Committee in their Tenth Report had observed that there was an escalation
in the price of Submarines by more than Rs. 2,800 crore and an additional Euro 27.05
million commitment on procurement of missiles due to delay in the finalization of the

4
contract for as long as three years i.e. from 2002 to 2005. Deprecating the Ministry's
inability to quantify the exact financial loss on account of the delayed finalization of
the contract and prolonged delivery of the Submarines, the Committee demanded an
explanation in this regard from the Ministry.
10. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:—
"The instant case being a highly complex one, it took considerable time to
resolve all relevant issues in consultation with stakeholders. Extensive scrutiny
of the proposal before seeking approval and concluding the contract also took
time. It is further submitted that escalation in price during examination and
scrutiny of acquisition proposals is difficult to quantify."
11. The Committee outrightly reject the reply of the Ministry for delayed
finalization of the contract and subsequent delay in the delivery of Submarines. Highly
complex nature of the procurement and extensive scrutiny of the proposal are no valid
excuses for delayed finalization of the contract for as long as three years. Defence
procurements are usually technical and complex in nature and every proposal ought
to be scrutinized extensively before placement of orders as the interest of the Nation
is involved therein. The Ministry's reply, being far from tenable, is not acceptable.
The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to discard their tendency of
putting across lame excuses and take necessary corrective action to ensure that
contracts are finalized within a specific time frame and defence procurements are
made according to plan so as to avoid time and cost overrun. The Committee deplore
the unwarranted stubbornness on the part of the Ministry of Defence not to quantify
the exact loss in terms of money due to delayed procurement of Submarines for
obvious reasons. The Committee, therefore, reiterate the need for quantification of
financial losses accrued due to delayed procurement of equipment and desire the
Ministry to apprise them accordingly indicating inter alia the exact losses caused
and action taken by the Ministry to recover the losses and fix responsibility with a
view to checking recurrence of such incidents.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 1
The process of acquisition and indigenous construction of state-of-the art
Submarines for the Indian Navy was given serious thought three decades ago when
the Government mooted a proposal in 1980 for induction of Shishumar Class (SSK)
Submarines in the Indian Navy. Accordingly, in March 1982 a decision was taken and
sanction accorded for procurement of four Submarines out of which two were to be
bought from HDW, West Germany and two to be indigenously built at Mazagaon
Dock Limited (MDL). The two Submarines that were bought from HDW were
commissioned in the year 1986 and out of the two indigenously built SSK Submarines,
one was commissioned in 1992 and the other was delivered in 1994. In between, a
proposal which was considered in 1935 to procure  the fifth and sixth Submarines had
to be deferred by the Government in the wake of allegations about payment of
commissions by HDW. In 1997,  a decision was taken by the Government for
construction of two indigenous SSK Submarines of Type 1500 at MDL as well as for
enlisting the collaboration of an expert foreign agency to validate the design and
development by the Submarine Design Group (SDG) of the Indian Navy. Pursuant to
that, the Letter of Intent (LOI) listing the names of four firms i.e. Thomson—CSF
(France), VSEL (UK), Kockums (Sweden) and Roosvoorouzheine (Russia) was issued
by the Naval Headquarters to MDL which in turn tendered inquiries to all the four
firms. But response  was received only from TCSF, France who were willing to participate
in the Project on the condition that their  Combat Suite was selected for the Submarines.
Amid a series of development, the Government approved in 1999 the plan for the
'Project for Series Construction of Submarines for the Indian Navy and Acquisition of
National Competence in Submarine Building'. As per the approval a fixed number of
Submarine were to be built over a certain period. The programme was to be implemented
in two phases viz. Phase I and Phase II. In Phase I some Submarines were to be built at
MDL under Project—75 and some more at another production line to be created by
absorbing technology. In Phase II some additional Submarines were to be built which
will be completely indigenous. Two options emerged to carry out of the Submarine
construction at MDL. Option I envisaged construction of some Submarines, which
would be Type (HDW) design with Combat suite of TCSF and the remaining on the
Scorpene design suitably modified to meet the Naval requirements. Option II envisaged
construction of certain number of Submarines all based on the Scorpene design. An
indigenous construction of Submarines at MDL under Porject—75 would involve
Scorpene design at one stage or the other, Naval Headquarters carried out the evaluation
of Scorpene Class submarines and ultimately Option II was preferred mainly because
of the elimination of HDW, the more advanced nature of the Scorpene Submarine than
5

6
that of the Type 1500 HDW design amortization of the Transfer of Technology (TOT)
cost over six platforms direct receipt of TOT by MDL from the designers etc. In
October 2000,  a Request for Proposal (RFP) was forwarded to TCSF, France seeking
their technical and budgetary proposal for the Submarines under Project-75. The
construction of the Submarines could commence only between December, 2006 and
July, 2009 and resultantly the delivery of the Submarines have been delayed badly. The
Committee's in depth examination of the subject  has revealed certain disquieting
aspects that led to such an inordinate delay grossly undermining the imperatives
involved, as has been pointed out in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Para 1 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken  by the Government
Paragraph 1 brings out the background that led to selection of the Scorpene
Submarine. The Committee has touched upon the process followed for the induction
of SSK (Shishumar Class) Submarines and accord of the Government approval for the
‘Project for Series Construction of Submarines for the Indian Navy and the Acquisition
of National Competence in Submarine Building'. Based on various options available,
the circumstances under which the selection of the Scorpene Design was made have
also been  brought out.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D/(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 3
As per Defence Procurement Procedure 2002, Submarine should be trial evaluated
in Indian waters or the design should be validated through Computer  simulations and
model testing before accepting the proposal for Submarine. Such evaluation is intended
to enable to gauge the performance of the Submarine with reference to the Naval Staff
Qualitative Requirement (NSQR). According to the Ministry, the Scorpene design
incorporated incremental improvements and underwent state-of-the-art validations by
the French. The Ministry have further contended that Scorpene Submarines have
already been commissioned by the Chilean  and the Royal Malaysian Navy. The
Committee also find that a delegation of Indian Navy and Joint Delegation of Indian
Navy and MDL visited France and Spain and even sailed-on-board Chilean Scorpene
in Chilean waters besides visiting Malaysian Scorpene at Kochi at different times to
conduct physical verification of the Scorpene Submarines in order to satisfy themselves
with the Sea Acceptance Trial (SA T) and Harbour Acceptance Trial (HA T). The
Commitee are, however, concerned to observe that the Ministry accepted the unproven
design of the Scorpene Submarine based on the validation of the design through
computer simulation despite the fact that the design of the Scorpene Submarine had
not proved its efficacy in other Navies. In such a scenario, deviations in respect of the
prescribed parameters such as stability, speed, endurance, noise levels, maneuvering
performances etc. of the Submarine cannot be ruled out. The Ministry have, however,
inserted specific provisions in the contract regarding corrective actions in case the
main performance parameters are not met. The Committee feel that the measures taken
by the Ministry are in the right direction and these should be persisted with more so
when the design of the Scorpene Submarine has yet to prove its efficacy elsewhere, so

7
as to compel the vendor to take corrective action whenever slightest deviations from
the original parameters are noticed. Such measures appear to be more imperative to
maintain  the requisite Defence preparedness.
[Para 3 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The observations takes note of the action taken in the right direction by the
Ministry. If there is any deviation in agreed performance parameters, it would  be
checked during Harbour Acceptance Trials (HATs)/Sea Acceptance Trials (SATs) and
the vendor would be made to take corrective actions before acceptance of the
Submarines.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No.4(5)/2010/D/(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 4
The Committee further desire that the Military should ensure transparency and
accountability by being absolutely clear in the Defence requirement as they play a
greater role and have more responsibility in Defence procurement and as most
importantly frequent deviations from Quality  Requirement (QR) may lead to an uncalled
for compromise on National Security.
[Para 4 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The Staff Qualitative Requirements (SQRs) are approved by the Service
Headquarters. The DPP 2008 has been revised in 2009 and it has now been made
mandatory that prior to formulation of the SQRs, the Service  Headquarters would
follow the procedure of 'Request for Information' (RFI) to be uploaded on the MoD
website. Subsequent to the receipt of information from capable vendors, the SQRs are
formulated so as to ensure maximum participation. Once the SQRs are promulgated
and issued as part of the Request for Proposal (RFP), no waiver of parameters is  be
granted.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No.4(5)/2010/D/(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 5
The Committee note that pursuant to the approval of the Government in April 2001
to have negotiations with TCSF and Armaris on their Scorpene offer for construction
of Submarines at MDL  under Project 75 as envisaged in the Ministry in the plan of
series construction of Submarines, the. first round of the Price Negotiation Committee
(PNC) meeting was held from November 2001 to June 2002.  But astonishingly the
Contract Negotiating Committee (CNC) could be held only in February, 2005 after  a
gap of three years and subsequently the third one in August 2005. Reasons for such
abnormal delay between holding the PNC and CNC  meeting have been attributed to
forwarding of the CCS note to the Ministry  of Finance for examination, reference to
Central Vigilance Commission in accordance with the observations of the Ministry of
Finance followed by several rounds of examination, extensive deliberations and vetting

8
by all concerned. Needless to say, the process is too cumbersome particularly the
reference of Defence proposals to CVC for such a matter relating to national security.
Notwithstanding the statement of the Defence Secretary  that only in specific cases, if
recommended, the Defence procurement decisions are sent to the CVC,  the Committee
feel the system of pre-audit of the procurement decisions of the Ministry of Defence
by the Central Vigilance Commission should be dispensed with as it is unnecessary
and totally  uncalled for  and resultantly leads to unacceptable delays, as has happened
in the instant case.
[Para 5 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
There is no system to pre-audit of the procurement proposals by the Central
Vigilance Commission. However, based on the observations of MoF during processing
of the case, the case was referred to CVC for examination from vigilance angle.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No.4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 6
The Committee are given to understand that there are three categories in the
Defence acquisition process. One is the 'Buy' category which is a straight acquisition.
The second one is the 'Make' category where Defence try to develop the technology
of complex systems within the country which they cannot source from outside or
there are other impediments in getting it. The last category is 'Buy and Make' wherein
some systems are directly bought from the foreign vendors and the balance through
Transfer of Technology (TOT) in order to enable the Defence to build those systems
indigenously within the country. And in the acquisition of Submarines, the 'Buy and
Make' method was given precedence over the other two categories as the concern of
the Government has always been to develop the indigenous capability and build the
Submarines. This concern of the Government is well founded as in many situations
in the past; the Defence have experienced that during war situation indigenous
capability is an essential requirement for maintenance of spare parts and other equally
important things. The Committee feel that while the objective of hundred percent
indigenization is laudable, the capabilities and capacities available in the country
have to be assessed realistically. That is because even if basic infrastructure is
available, the requirement of associated essentials such as equipment, technical
expertise and capacity building would still take time. Moreover, while trying to achieve
long term objective of self reliance in Defence acquisition, there is a need to achieve
a realistic balance between the existing capacity in the country, including that of the
private sector with the urgency/timelines involved in the planned acquisition. The
Committee therefore, recommend that based on a case to case urgency, a rational
and flexible approach towards 'Buy', 'Make' and 'Buy and Make' theories have to be
adopted with a view to meeting any contingencies.
[Para 6 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

9
 Action Taken by the Government
The categorisation for procurement under the category "Buy", "Buy and Make"
and "Make" is being undertaken on case to case basis (on the merits of the proposal)
whilst according Acceptance of Necessity (AoN).
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-1) dated 6th September, 2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 7
The Committee are constrained to observe that the progress of the construction
of the Submarines at MDL has been very slow as on 30 September, 2009 and resultantly
the delivery of the Submarines would be delayed significantly. That the Mazagon
Dock Limited is attempting to reduce the gap between the scheduled delivery of the
Submarines by having commenced the construction of another batch of Submarines
ahead of schedule is no consolation to the Committee. According to the Ministry,
the progress on the construction of Submarines has been slow on account of some
teething problems, time taken for absorption of technology, delays in augmentation
of industrial infrastructure and procurement of MDL Purchased Material (MPM)
items. The Committee are of the view that care should have been taken to foresee
such problems before awarding the contract and going for indigenisation. They are
particularly concerned to note that there was problem in transference and absorption
of technology which adversely impacted Project-75. However, now that the problems
of Transfer of Technology (ToT) have been reportedly fully addressed as per a
mutually agreed action plan between MDL and Armaris, the Committee hope that
the problem would not resurface so that the Project progresses satisfactorily and
Submarines are delivered within the stipulated time line.
[Para 7 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
 Action Taken by the Government
Various measures (including close monitoring) have been taken to ensure that the
project progresses without any difficulty so as to meet the revised delivery schedule.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-1) dated 6th September, 2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 8
The Committee are happy to note that MDL has been taking a number of
measures to avoid delays in the construction of Scorpene design Submarine. Such
initiatives include opening up of parallel work fronts,  revival of three new bays for
use of structural fabrication work, development of a new work shop, vigorous
pursuance of outsourcing etc. It is equally encouraging to notice that the Ministry
have taken up a massive modernization programme of the three shipyards with
particular emphasis on MDL. The Committee are of the opinion that efforts on the
part of MDL itself for augmentation of infrastructures and that of the Ministry for
embarking upon massive modernization programme of the PSUs that are engaged in
modern technology, high value and strategic importance fabrication of weapon

10
system are steps in right direction and the momentum should be maintained
uninterrupted as a national strategic imperative.
[Para 8 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
 Action Taken by the Government
V arious measures taken by MDL to avoid further delays in the construction of the
Scorpene Submarines are being closely monitored through Progress Review Meetings
held at various levels to obviate any further slippages.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 9
What concerns the Committee more is that systemic deficiencies played a greater
role than any other cause that delayed the acquisition of submarines existence of such
failings was corroborated by the Defence Secretary himself when he admitted before
the Committee that there are problems in the system, mindset and in the whole process.
The Committee acknowledge that Defence procurement is a complex process which
starts with the services qualitative requirement, proceeds through the Defence
Acquisition Council, Request For Proposals, Field Evaluation Staff, Technical
Evaluation Committee and Contract Negotiation Committee and culminates with the
approval of the Competent Finance Authority. But the Committee fail to understand
the reasons for inordinate delay in the Defence procurement when a definite time frame
has been laid down for each of the activities involved in the process. In this context,
the Committee find that Pakistan has acquired the Augusta 90 B submarines from the
same French firm at a much faster rate than their Indian counterparts. The Defence
Secretary has made an effort to defend the delay on their part on the plea of focus on
transparency in the Indian system. The Committee are well aware that transparency is
and should be the essence of Governance, particularly matters relating to the National
security. But in the name of transparency, things should not be allowed to linger on for
an indefinite period which would ultimately prove detrimental to the interest of the
Nation. Prudence, therefore, requires that an introspection be made to usher in a
paradigm shift in the entire system and the mindset of the decision makers that would
ensure strict adherence to the prescribed time frame for each of the Defence procurement
processes which in turn would facilitate the acquisition according to plan.
[Para 9 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
 Action Taken by the Government
The Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) is reviewed by the MoD from time to
time. V arious lessons learnt during processing of procurement cases as well as their
subsequent execution are being incorporated in the DPP. DPP 2008 has been amended
with effect from 1st November, 2009. The DPP-2008 (Amendment 2009) is being further
reviewed. Delay in acquisition cases is being given a focussed attention during the
review.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]

11
Observation/Recommendation No. 10
In this context, the Committee would also like to point out that due to the very nature
of the long term plans/programmes of the Defence procurement, the Competent
authority approving the procurements may not be always fully aware of the implications
of the delay and its consequential impact on the operational preparedness. Further,
since the Defence procurements, by their very nature of a long lead time, greatly
impact the country's Military preparedness as a whole, the Committee feel that it is
absolutely necessary to put in place a long term perspective plan with the approval of
an Empowered Committee of Ministers, which would certainly make the decision making
process faster and more transparent at every level.
[Para 10 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
A (15-year) Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) is already in place.
The Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff (HQ IDS), in consultation with the Services
Headquarters (SHQs), formulates the LTIPP, 5-year Defence Plans and the Annual
Acquisition Plans (AAPs). Long term and medium term modernization plans prepared
with due consideration to our security concerns, defence capabilities and equipment
profile are prioritized and approved by the Defence Acquisition Council in the light of
operational exigencies.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010)]
Observation/Recommendation No. 13
The Committee observed that in order to compensate slippages in the delivery of
contracted items on the part of the vendor due to unforeseen circumstances, a
Liquidated Damage (LD) clause has been incorporated in the contract as per the
provisions of DPP. The Committee also note that an 'Integrity Pact' in lieu of 'Agency
Commission' Clause has also been incorporated in the contract to avoid all forms of
corruption by ensuring free, fair, transparent and unprejudiced dealings before, during
and after the currency of the contract. While acknowledging the incorporation of the
Liquidated Damage Clause and the 'Integrity Pact' in the contracts, the Committee
would simultaneously like to prevail upon the Ministry to ensure that the Liquidated
Damages are invariably realized in all cases of slippages and the Integrity Pact is
followed in letter and spirit.
[Para 13 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts  Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry closely monitors procurement programmes/delivery schedules to
ensure adherence to the laid down timelines as per the contract. Further, wherever
necessary, the Ministry invokes the Liquidated Damages (LD) clause as stipulated in
the relevant contracts. Moreover, the Integrity Pact is a binding agreement between
the agency and bidders for specific contracts and any violation of the pact can be
looked into by independent monitors.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010)]

12
Observation/Recommendation No. 14
According to Audit, separate Performance Bank Guarantees are to be provided for
performance and warranty. But the vendor has provided a combined Guarantee and
thus avoided providing a warranty of 58.20 million Euros. Clarifying the position, the
Ministry of Defence have apprised the Committee that at the time of the signing of the
contract, the Ministry considered that if the deliveries are made as per the contractual
terms and conditions, one per cent of the Bank guarantee would be sufficient to cover
both performance and warranty liabilities. In this content, the Committee would like the
Ministry to consider obtaining separate Bank Guarantees in case the vendors at any
point of time deviate from the contractual obligations.
[Para 14 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The current Defence Procurement Procedure-2008 (Amendment-2009) has made it
imperative the separate Bank Guarantees are provided for performance and Warranty.
The same is being followed and included in the Request for Proposal (RFP).
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 15
The Committee note that the issue of missile delivery/extension of warranty, when
delays were expected in the construction of the first submarine, was taken up with the
OEM i.e. MBDA France. The OEM has extended warranty of the first batch of
submarines for a period of 24 months at no extra cost. As regards the extension of the
warranty of other batches of the missile, the Committee has been informed that, a
meeting is being arranged with MBDA where the issue would be taken up.  The
Committee desire that in the scheduled meeting, the Ministry should impress upon the
firm to extend warranty to other batches of missiles also as they propose to possess
adequate number of missiles in the inventory.
[Para 15 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The requirement of extension of warranty of all batches of missiles at no extra cost
was taken up by the Naval Headquarters with Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM)
during the meeting in New Delhi on 28th April, 2010. During the ongoing discussions,
the OEM has agreed to effectively extend the warranty at no extra cost for all the four
batches of missiles by 36, 30, 24 and 18 months respectively.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 16
To sum up, the Committee find that successive Governments have planned the
procurement of submarines in their Maritime Perspective Plans. This has been going
on since ages and there have been inordinate and unacceptable delays on the part of
several Governments in deciding about the essential fleet strength; total requirements

13
and thereafter on the type of Submarine to be inducted. The  question whether it
should be indigenously fabricated or a new type procured; plus the source of
procurement has always intrigued the decision makers. Such indecisiveness on the
part of the decision makers and the systemic flaws in the procurement of Submarines
have led to time and cost overrun and undue favour to the vendor besides adversely
impacting the operational preparedness of the Indian Navy. The Committee, therefore,
urge upon the Ministry to take action in accordance with their above Observations/
Recommendations.
[Para 16 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Action taken on the observations/recommendations of the PAC have been
indicated under each observation/recommendation as above.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 2
The Committee note that a limited tender was floated as the number of companies
which can manufacture conventional Submarines like Russia, Germany, France and
Spain, as reported by the Ministry of Defence. Only one company i.e. TCSF from
France responded to the tender inquires and  according to the Ministry, the  best
decision was taken to award the contract to TCSF, keeping in view the situation and
time. Here, the Committee would like to point out that TCSF was selected for Scorpene
Class of Submarines despite the Company's  reluctance to give a clear cut commitment
on the release of the Tube Launch Missiles (TLM) Exocet SM 39 for two Type 1500
(HDW)  Submarines until and unless Project 75  is linked with long  term Naval
Cooperation with France. The Committee acknowledge the fact that the US 'Harpoon'
missile was not available at that point  of time and Russian 'Klub' missile was not
compatible with the Tubes of either HDW or Scorpene design Submarines. Without
disputing  the contention of the Ministry that due to limited choice, preference was
given to the French Submarine and Missiles, the Committee  would however, like to
express their displeasure over the manner in which the Indian side succumbed to the
conditions impose  by their French counterparts in the implementation of Project-75.
Since such pressure tactics  do not gel well between two Sovereign Nations, the
Committee would like the Ministry of Defence to put across their points firmly in any
future negotiations with any country before awarding contracts for induction of force
level.
[Para 2 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Contracts for defence acquisitions are concluded in accordance with the provisions
laid down in Defence Procurement Procedures as amended  from time to time. Denial
regimes and limited choices sometimes circumscribe decisions.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]
14

CHAPTER   IV
OBSERV ATIONS/ECOMMENDATIONS INRESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation No. 11
The Committee note that a three tier monitoring system has been evolved to
oversee the Defence procurement process. This includes a review by the Secretary,
Defence Production at the Ministry level, the Controller of Warship Production and
Acquisition at the Navy level and the Chairman & Managing Director MDL at the
Company level. The Committee are surprised that despite oversight at each level, the
acquisition of Submarines got delayed inordinately. In this context, the Committee
would like to point out that pursuant to the Recommendation made in their
187th Report  (Eighth Lok Sabha), the Defence Procurement Procedure was
promulgated to streamline the process. However, subsequent to the Kargil war, a
Group of Ministers took  a detailed review of the Defence procurement system and
observed a number of shortcomings like lack of  integrated planning, cumbersome
administrative,  technical and evaluation procedures and absence of dedicated
professionally equipped procedure within the Ministry of Defence. Much to the
consternation of the Committee, although a second Defence Procurement Procedure
was promulgated in the year 2002 following  the above observations of the  GoM, yet
the same bottlenecks in the Defence procurement system appear to have resurfaced
in the acquisition of Submarines for the Indian Navy. As the Defence Secretary has
candidly admitted before the Committee that there  is still lot of scope for improvement
in the procurement system, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry
to take corrective action, wherever warranted to improve and streamline the procedure
so that Defence acquisitions do not suffer.
[Para 11 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) is reviewed  from time to time. Various
lessons learnt during processing of procurement cases as well as their subsequent
execution are being incorporated in the DPP. The DPP 2008  has been amended and is
effective from 1st November, 2009. The amendment for the current year is under
discussion.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-I) dated 6th September, 2010]
15

16
Comments of the Committee
Observation/Recommendation No. 12
The Committee note that due to delay in the finalization of the contract for as long
as three years i.e. 2002 to 2005, there has been an escalation in the price of Submarines
by more than Rs. 2,800 crore  and an additional Euro 27.05 million commitment on the
procurement of missiles. The increase in the cost of Submarine has been primarily due
to escalations of Exchange Rate Variations (ERVs) and increase in the cost of Missiles
despite a discount of 1.03 per cent by the vendor,  as  has been pointed out in detail by
the Audit. But astonishingly the Ministry of Defence  have expressed their inability to
quantify the exact financial loss on account of the delayed finalization  of the contract
and prolonged  delivery of the Submarines. As it is an established fact that time
overrun in finalization of  contracts and completion of planned projects certainly leads
to cost escalation, the Ministry owe an explanation in this regard.
[Para 12 of the Tenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee  (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The instant  case being  a highly complex one, it took considerable time to  resolve
all relevant issues in consultation with stakeholders. Extensive scrutiny of the proposal
before seeking approval and  concluding the contract also took time. It is further
submitted that escalation in price  during examination and scrutiny of acquisition
proposals is difficult to quantify.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. No. 4(5)/2010/D(N-1) dated 6th September, 2010]
 Comments of the Committee
Comments of the Committee Please see Paragraph No. 11 of  Chapter-I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS\RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF  WHICH
GOVERNMENT HA VE   FURNISHED  INTERIM   REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
21 February, 2011 Chairman,
02 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
17

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2010-11) HELD ON 3RD FEBRUARY , 2011
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3rd February, 2011 from 1130 hrs. to 1250 hrs.
in Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Ramen Deka
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Yashwant Sinha
7. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
8. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri K. Sudhakaran
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri N. Balaganga
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Kalraj Mishra
15. Shri N.K. Singh
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3.  Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
4.  Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
18

19
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri R.S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit (Central Expenditure)
2. Shri C.M. Sane — Pr. Director of Audit (Air Force & Navy)
3. Ms. Ahladini — Director (Central Expenditure)
4. Shri Bhawani Shankar — Director  (Economic Service & Ministries)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised
that the meeting was convened to consider six Draft Reports of the Committee.
Accordingly, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) ****** ****** ****** ****** ****** ******
(ii) ****** ****** ****** ****** ****** ******
(iii) ****** ****** ****** ****** ****** ******
(iv) ****** ****** ****** ****** ****** ******
(v) ****** ****** ****** ****** ****** ******
(vi) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Tenth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on "Undue Favour to Vendor in Acquisition of Submarines"
(Ministry of Defence).
3. ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** *****
4. As the Members desired to have some additional inputs on the Draft Report
mentioned at Sl. No. (vi), the consideration of that Report was deferred.
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the five Reports adopted
by them, in light of their suggestions and the factual verifications received from the
Audit and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports.
The Committee  then  adjourned.
*** Matter does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD ON 15TH FEBRUARY , 2011
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15th February, 2011 from 1130 hrs. to 1230 hrs.
in Room No. '62', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Ramen Deka
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
7. Dr. M. Thambidurai
8. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri N.K. Singh
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri K.R. Sriram — P rincipal Director of Audit (ESM)
2. Shri Subir Mallick — Principal Director (Indirect Taxes)
3. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director of Audit
(Air Force & Navy)
20

21
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the Committee. The Chairman then apprised the
Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt three Draft
Reports viz. two Original Reports and the one Action Taken Report which was deferred
adoption in the last sitting held on 3rd February, 2011. **** **** *** *
3. **** **** ****
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) Revised Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Tenth
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Undue Favour to Vendor in Acquisition of
Submarines" (Ministry of Defence);
(ii) **** **** ****
(iii) **** **** ****
5. After going through the Draft Reports one by one, the Committee adopted the
Draft Reports with some modifications/amendments. The Committee, then, authorised
the Chairman to finalise the above mentioned Reports adopted by them, in light of their
suggestions and the factual verifications received from the Audit and present the
same to the House on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports.
The Committee  then  adjourned.
**** The matter does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX III
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR TENTH REPORT
 (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations - 16
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the - T otal: 13
Committee which have been accepted by the Percentage—81.25%
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 3-10, and 13-16
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the - Total: 1
Committe do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage—6.25%
the replies received from the Government:
Para No. 2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of - Total: 2
which replies of Government have not been Percentage—12.50%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 11 and 12
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of - Total: 0
which Government have furnished interim Percentage—0%
replies: -NIL-
22
GMGIPMRND—6818LS—13-04-2011.