26
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS (2006-07)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Eightieth Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
Server 3\e\7061LS\7061LSP.p65

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND CHARGED
APPROPRIATIONS (2006-07)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Eightieth Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24 February, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 24 February, 2011
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIA T
NEW  DELHI
February, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)


P.A.C. No. 1933
Price: Rs. 72.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11)......................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... ( V)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by  Government................................................................... 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which  the Committee do
not desire  to  pursue  in  view  of  the  replies  received
from Government................................................................ 42
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of  Government  have not been accepted by  the Committee
and which require reiteration .............................................. 45
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect of   which
Government  have furnished interim replies........................ 63
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the Twenty-first  sitting of  Public   Accounts
Committee (2010-11) held on 3rd February, 2011 ............... 64
II. Analysis of  the  Action Taken by  the Government  on  the
Observations/Recommendations of   the Public  Accounts
Committee contained in their Eightieth Report  (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha).......................................................................... 66

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
*16. V acant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
* V acancy occurred vice  Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State
w.e.f. 19th January, 2011.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2010-11), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Twenty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Eightieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Excesses over Voted
Grants and Charged Appropriation (2006-07)'.
2. The Eightieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha  on
17th
  December, 2008. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the report were received  from the Ministries of Defence, Railways,
Corporate Affairs, Mines and Finance on 17th March, 2009, 31st  August, 2009,
14th October, 2009, 26th October, 2009 and on 10th February, 2010, respectively. The
Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted the Twenty-sixth Report at their
sitting held on 3rd February, 2011. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix—I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of  the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Eightieth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix—II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
21 February, 2011 Chairman,
2 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

1
CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in
their Eightieth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2006-07)."
2. The Eightieth Report (14th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha on
17 December, 2008, contained eleven Observations/Recommendations. The Action
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the
Ministries/Departments concerned and these have been categorised as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by Government:
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 1,3, 4,5, 9, 10 and 11
(Para Nos. 50, 52, 53, 54, 58, 59 and 60)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee does not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Recommendations Sl. No. 7 and 8
(Para No. 56 and 57)
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2 and 6
(Para Nos. 51 and 55)
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies/no replies:
—NIL—
Gist of the Committee's Observations/Recommendations contained in the Eightieth
Report (14th Lok Sabha)
3. The Eightieth Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha) dealt with cases of the
Grants/Appropriations where money had been spent in excess of the amount authorised
by the Parliament for specified services/purposes in the year 2006-07. The Committee's
examination of the Appropriation Accounts of Union Government for 2006-07 revealed
that an expenditure amounting to Rs. 37669.53 crore was incurred by various
Ministries/Departments of Union Government in excess of the provisions sanctioned
under 18 cases of 13 Grants/Appropriations. Out of this, Rs. 33049.27 crore excess

2
expenditure was recorded under the Appropriation No. 37 alone i.e. "Repayment of
Debt" operated by the Ministry of Finance, which accounted for over 90 per cent of
the total excess expenditure  incurred by Civil Ministries/Departments  and over 87 per
cent  of the total excess expenditure incurred. It was found that during the last seven
years, the excess expenditure of the Union  Government steeply increased from
Rs. 230.45 crore in 2000-01 to a staggering figure of Rs. 37669.53 crore in 2006-07. The
Committee's examination also revealed non-observance of prescribed financial rules
as well as lack of proper computerized accounting systems resulting in the infringement
of financial discipline. The various irregularities/deficiencies noted  by the Committee
are: (i) Recurring phenomenon and increasing trend of excess expenditure; (ii) Excess
expenditure  despite having supplementary Grants/Appropriations; (iii) Persistent excess
expenditure in the Ministry of Railways; (iv) Misclassification of expenditure by the
Ministry of Railways; (v) Delay in presentation of Appropriation Accounts—Railway;
(vi) Delay in furnishing Explanatory Notes; and (vii) Delay in presentation of Excess
Demands for Grants—Railways for Regularisation was also noticed by the Committee.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the concerned Ministries/Departments
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations made in the Eightieth Report, which needs reiteration or merit
comments.
Inordinate Delay in furnishing ATNs
5. In accordance with the time schedule prescribed  by the Committee in their
Fifth Report (Fourth Lok Sabha), Notes indicating the Action Taken by Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Eightieth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) were required  to be furnished by 16th June, 2009. An analysis of the
receipt of A TNs from  the Ministries/Departments revealed that there has been a delay
ranging between 2 months 14 days to more than 7 months in respect of submission of
replies. The delay as occured is quantified as under:—
(ATNs due on 16.06.2009)
Sl. Ministries / Date when complete Delay
No. Departments ATNs were received
1. Finance 10.02.2010 7 months 24 days
2. Defence 17.03.2009 —
3. Railways 31.08.2009 2 months 14 days
4. Mines 26.10.2009 4 months 10 days
5. Corporate Affairs 14.10.2009 3 months 28 days
6. The Committee regret to point out that despite repeated assurances given by
the various Ministries/Departments including the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure)  for timely submission of Action Taken Notes, most of the Ministries/
Departments concerned,  barring the Ministry of Defence, have not furnished the
requisite Action Taken Notes within the prescribed time limit of six months. What is
surprising is the fact that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), being

3
the nodal Ministry for monitoring the timely submission of Action Taken Notes, and
supposed  to act as a role  model for other Ministries/Departments  have also delayed
furnishing of Action Taken Notes pertaining to them by more than 7 months. The
Committee in their 54th Report (14th Lok Sabha) had observed that delays in furnishing
Action Taken Notes have  become a recurring phenomenon. The Committee deprecate
that no permission for extension of time was sought by  the Ministry of Mines and
Ministry of Corporate Affairs  when  they were not in a position to furnish replies within
the stipulated  time which tantamounts to undermining the Parliamentary authority.
The Committee desire that in future there should not be such delays and the Ministries
concerned  ought to take all possible steps to furnish the Action Taken Notes within the
stipulated time. If any delay is anticipated in furnishing the requisite Action Taken
Notes on account of any exigency, the concerned Ministry should invariably seek
permission from the Committee for such delays stating clearly the reasons thereof.
Excess Expenditure incurred despite obtaining Supplementary Grants  by Ministry
of Railways — Grant No. 16—Assets—Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—
Railway Funds.
7. The Committee in their 80th Report (14th Lok Sabha) noted that out of 18 cases,
the  excess expenditure of Rs. 37002.22 crore in 15 cases of Grants/Appropriations had
occured despite obtaining  supplementary provisions of Rs. 356599.27 crore which
proved  the failure of the Ministries/Departments to assess requirements in the
Ministries/Departments in monitoring the flow and trend of expenditure under various
Grants/Appropriations. The Committee were perturbed to note that under Appropriation
No. 34—Interest Payments and Appropriation No. 37—Repayment of Debt pertaining
to the Ministry of Finance and Grant No. 16—Assets—Acquisition, Construction and
Replacement—Railway Funds pertaining to the Ministry of Railways, the amount
obtained  as supplementary provision was higher than the excess expenditure incurred.
The Committee had  expressed concern that the excess expenditure had been incurred
despite the fact that supplementary grants were obtained. The Committee therefore
came to an inescapable conclusion that  the  concerned Ministries have failed not only
in making realistic and pragmatic Budget Estimates but even the Supplementary
Demands as projected could  not bail them out  from making excess expenditure. The
Committee expected that in future the Ministries/Departments would make all out
efforts in arresting the surging  trend  of excess expenditure by making the required
and pragmatic figures during the  stage of Supplementary Demands for Grants.  It is,
thererfore, imperative that the Ministries/Departments should keep close watch over
the  trend  of expenditure and when any need for additional funds arises they should
assess realistically their requirement of funds in advance and approach Parliament by
presenting Supplementary Demands for Grants in  time. It is not expected of any
Ministries/Departments to cross their financial limits after obtaining Supplementary
Grants as has  happened in many cases. The Committee further reiterated from their
earlier Reports that the Ministries/Departments should review the existing mechanism
and upgrade the computerization and networking system  so that the progress  of
expenditure can be strictly monitored and  timely action can be taken to ensure that
expenditure does not arise beyond the limits sanctioned by Parliament.

4
8. The Ministry  of Railways in their Action Taken Reply stated as under:
"The observations of the Committee have  been noted. While it is the endeavour
of the Ministry to make realistic assessment of the requirements, as far as possible,
and seek supplementary demands accordingly,  deviations occur because Railway
being a vast organization and  with last minute pressure on the field units where
some of the demands  may not be anticipated at the time of  compiling of their
projections. In the instant case of Demand No. 16—Assets—Acquisition,
Construction and Replacement—Railway Funds, though the reported excess  of
Rs. 325.29 cr. comes to 2.6  per cent of the total sanctioned provisions under
Railway Funds, the actual excess  recommended for regularization viz., Rs. 121.33 cr.
is less than 1% of  the total Grant. This may kindly be  considered as minor".
9. In their vetted comments on the aforesaid Action Taken Note Audit has stated
as under:
"Ministry is requested to comment on the efficacy of the existing mechanism
with it to monitor the expenditure   so as to take timely action to keep the
expenditure with in the limit sanctioned by the Parliament".
10. The Ministry of Railways in their response to the aforesaid Audit observation
has stated as under:
"The  existing mechanism for expenditure monitoring at the level of Ministry of
Railways in the context of 'Demand No. 16—Assets—Acquisition, Construction
and Replacement' broadly comprises monthly/quarterly/periodical reviews of
expenditure/progress under various plan heads. The trend of expenditure is
complied by Accounts Directorate also and discussed  in Board Meetings along
with Plan Heads-wise feedback provided by the concerned Directorates.
Whenever required necessary instructions are issued  from  the Ministry of
Railways to  the zonal railways to take effective steps to control  or step up
expenditure, as the case may be, under a particular plan head.  The efficacy of the
mechanism should be understood in the background of the scope of this demand.
The demand deals with large number of plan heads and source heads under
which grants/appropriations are obtained from the Parliament and finally these
funds are utilized to execute numerous works spread over entire geographical
area of the country. The data regarding estimates and expenditure is, therefore,
collected from multiple sites and compiled at the divisional/zonal headquarters
level before these are received in the Ministry of Railways and while advising
back these estimates/expenditure limits to the executive authorities, its reverse
route is followed. The process is bound to be very time consuming. The
expenditure limits advised on the basis of estimates drawn long back, may not
accommodate certain requirements arising late and also  miss the fluctuating
unit cost of material and labour due to which the assessed requirement in
quantitative as well as in monetary terms, thereby grant/appropriations and
supplementaries obtained from the Parliament on this basis sometime vary from
the actual cost  of execution at later date. In such a scenario, the magnitude of
excess or saving normally witnessed in the context of Demand No. 16 should be

5
treated as normal and the efforts made and monitoring mechanism in place can
be considered effective".
11. In their further vetted comments on the aforesaid Action Taken Reply, the
Audit observed as under:
"The magnitude of excesses or savings normally witnessed in the context
of Demand No. 16, even in view of the existing procedure brought out in
the reply given by the Ministry of Railways, cannot be treated as normal.
Ministry of Railways needs review of the existing mechanism and upgrade
the computerization and networking system so that the progress of
expenditure can be strictly monitored and timely action can be taken to
ensure that expenditure does not arise beyond the limits sanctioned by
Parliament".
12. The Ministry of Railways in their response to the aforesaid Audit observation
stated as under:
"The observations of the Audit have been noted. A letter has been issued from
Board to all the Zonal Railways/Units (copy enclosed) to maintain close
coordination between the zonal headquarters and its subordinate offices both in
assessing the requirement at the time of revised  Estimates/Final Estimates and
later on in disbursing fund allotted by Board based on grant approved by the
Parliament and also keep the bookings up-to-date. To achieve this, Zonal
Railways/Units have been emphasized to develop an effective computer network
with their subordinate offices to keep the expenditure within the sanctioned
limits".
13. The Committee are not inclined to accept the Ministry of Railways
contention that the excess expenditure incurred on—Demand No. 16—Assets—
Acquistion, Construction and Replacement—Railway Funds' to the tune of
Rs. 315.29 crore should be treated as normal. The Committee are of the view that
the Ministry of Railways should not merely go by the quantum of excess expenditure
involved and as a matter of principle they ought to ensure that no excess expenditure
is incurred. The Committee are constrained to observe that such a casual and inept
attitude on the part of the Railways will lead to complacency at the zonal/divisional
level and may result in further increase in the excess expenditure under this head.
Though there may be some difficulties inaccurately forecasting the expenditure
under this head, nevertheless there is always a scope for bringing down the excess
expenditure to the bare minimum level. The Committee recommend that the Ministry
of Railways should review/revamp their existing mechanism for expenditure
monitoring so as to forecast the expenditure as accurately as possible. They further
recommend that a web-based computer networking system should be developed
whereby the Railway Board and various Zones, Divisions and field units are
interconnected with each other  so that there is smooth and regular flow of
information relating to expenditure. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
initiatives/measures taken by the Railways for bringing down the excess  expenditure
within three months of presentation of this Report to Parliament.

6
Misclassification of expenditure incurred by Ministry of Railways
(Sl. No. 7, Para No. 55)
14. In their 80th Report (14th Lok Sabha) the Committee had expressed serious
concern over recurrence of large number of cases of misclassification of expenditure in
Indian  Railways Appropriation Accounts continuously over the years. The Committee
had noted that during the year under review there were five cases of misclassification
of expenditure reported under the 13 cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations.
The Committee had recommended to  avoid such mistakes and desired perfection in
the operation of accounting system of Ministry of Railways so that misclassification
should not be repeated every year. The Committee had also drawn the attention of
Ministry of Railways to their Fifty-fourth Report (14th Lok Sabha) wherein it was
recommended for a thorough review of the system in order to eliminate chances of
misclassification. Notwithstanding the earlier recommendations, the Committee had
noted that misclassification had taken place in the previous year also and the needful
was yet to be done to check the recurrence of misclassification. The Committee had
desired to know the measures taken hitherto to address the problem so that Committee's
recommendation gets due weightage and it helps Railways not only as a corrective
measure in obviating misclassification but also act as preventive measure too. They
have also recommended to fix responsibility for the negligence in duties.
15. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken reply, has stated as under:—
"Recommendations of the  Public Accounts Committee regarding misclassification
of expenditure have been noted for guidance.  This Ministry have conveyed
serious concern to the Zonal Railways for the misclassification of expenditure
during 2006-07 and have called for the Action Taken Report against the incidence
of individual item. As a result of review of the Action Taken Report received from
the Zonal Railways, it has been noticed that the cases of misclassification are
occurring due to lack of adequate attention being given at the time of preparation
of vouchers. FA&CAOs of the Railways concerned have been directed to take
urgent steps in implementation of instructions already existing for close and
concurrent review of booking of expenditure at various levels; test check of
allocations recorded on vouchers; prompt reconciliation of the subsidiary books
with the General Books and fixing up of responsibility for lapses at suitable
levels. Instructions issued to the Railways also provide for regular reporting on
punitive action taken for errors detected on this account. As a result, a number
of staff have been taken up by the Railway fixing responsibility for the laspses.
Although the total elimination of instances of misclassification will be difficult
to achieve in  practice, mainly due to the sheer volume of transactions and their
varying nature, it shall always be the endeavour of Ministry of Railways to
avoid misclassification /mistakes and minimize the same".
16. In their vetted comments on the aforesaid Action Taken Note, Audit has
stated as under:—
"Ministry of Railways is requested  to place on record the copies of instructions
issued in this regard. Ministry may place on record whether any thorough review

7
of the system, as desired by the Committee in its Fifty-fourth Report
(14th Lok Sabha), was undertaken in order to eliminate chances of
misclassification. Results of the review of the system may be placed on record".
17. The Ministry of Railways in their response to the aforesaid
Audit Observations has stated as under:—
"Thorough review of the accounting system is done by this Ministry from time
to time and instruction/guidelines are issued in order to eliminate the incidence
of misclassifications/mistakes. These instructions are reiterated from time to
time with a view to ensuring proper maintenance of accounts and more stringent
scrutiny. Instructions issued to the Railways also provide for regular reporting
on punitive action taken for errors detected on this account. However, it is
difficult to ensure complete elimination of instances of misclassification in
practice, mainly because of differences in the interpretation of the scheme of
classification and accounting rules and partly because of the errors committed
due to sheer volume and varying nature of transactions required to be handled
at various level of the Railway organization. However, it is the endeavour of
Ministry of Railways to keep the misclassification/mistakes at the minimum level".
18. In their further vetted comments on the aforesaid Action Taken Reply, the
Audit observed as under:—
"Railways need to strengthen their internal check mechanism both at pre-audit
and post audit stages, so that the cases of misclassification are detected at the
initial stage and corrective action taken before closure of the annual accounts of
the year".
19. The Ministry of Railways in their response to the aforesaid Audit
Observations stated as under:—
"Instructions already exist for ensuring correct classification and to fix up staff
for lapses in this regard. However, audit observations have been communicated
to the Railways with the directives to strengthen the systems of pre and post-
audit".
20. The Committee would like to point out that despite the contention of the
Ministry of Railways  that thorough review of accounting system is being done from
time to time besides issue of instructions/guidelines for eliminating the incidence of
misclassification of expenditure, the instances of mistakes in classification of
expenditure continue to recur unabatedly. Obviously, there is something amiss in the
whole process due to which such mistakes keep surfacing time and again. The
Committee are of the view that mere issue of instructions/guidelines to the
Zonal Railways will not suffice unless and until it is backed by sustained monitoring
and fixation of responsibility were guidelines are flouted to ensure that these
instruction are followed in letter and spirit by the field units. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Railways should set up a special cell at the Railway
Board level so that the cases of misclassification of expenditure at Zonal/Divisional
level are monitored at regular intervals, with a view to take immediate corrective

8
measures to contain the same and fix responsibility in case of negligence. They also
recommend that Railways should strengthen their internal expenditure check/
monitoring mechanism both at pre-audit and post-audit stages so that the cases of
misclassification are detected at initial stage and corrective action taken before
closure of the accounts of the year. The Ministry in conjunction with C&AG of India
should also put in a proper accounting practices and standards to obviate recurrence
of instances of misclassification. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
steps taken by the Ministry in this regard within three months of presentation of this
Report to Parliament.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 1
The scrutiny of the Appropriation Accounts of Union Government for 2006-07
by the Public Accounts Committee has revealed that during the year under review an
expenditure of Rs. 37669.53 crore has been incurred by five Ministries/Departments
of Union Government in excess of the provisions sanctioned under 18 cases entailing
13 grants/appropriations during the year 2006-07. The Committee are particularly
distressed to observe that as was the case in the preceding year also, the bulk of the
excess expenditure i.e. Rs. 36637.16 crore had occurred in two Appropriations i.e.
Appropriation No. 34 — Interest Payments (Rs. 3587.89 crore)  and Appropriation
No. 37 — Repayment of Debt (Rs. 33049.27 crore), operated by the Ministry of
Finance, which alone accounted for over 97 per cent of the total excess expenditure
incurred during the year under review i.e. 2006-07. The excess expenditure during the
year pertains to the Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministries/Departments
of Finance, Defence, Railways, Company Affairs and Mines. Whilst scrutinizing the
Appropriation Accounts, the Committee have noted that there is a surge in regard to
the excess expenditure involving Ministry of Defence and there is also a registered
excess in the remaining two Ministries under scrutiny viz. Ministry of Finance and
Ministry of Railways. Notwithstanding the fact that the excess expenditure of the
latter two Ministries mentioned above are proportionately not as high as the preceding
year i.e., 2005-06, yet the Committee view any excess expenditure as serious and
they have been recommending in this regard for past several years through their
Reports. The Committee are constrained to observe that some Ministries/Departments
of Union Government continue to display indifferent attitude towards rules laid
down for containing the expenditure within the authorized limits. While viewing this
state of affairs with grave concern, the Committee would like to emphasize and
reiterate from their past Reports that the Secretary, Department of Expenditure in the
Ministry of Finance should strongly and effectively draw the personal attention of
the concerned Secretaries in the Ministries/Departments of the Union Government
depicting excess expenditures to ensure financial discipline, which is all the more
necessary now with the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM)
Act, 2003 in operation. The Committee also desire the Ministry of Finance, being a
nodal Ministry to control the exchequer of the Government of India to impress upon
all the Ministries to ensure rigid enforcement of prescribed financial rules and
procedure so as to contain the instances of excess expenditure to the bare minimum.
It is also recommended that action should also be taken to deal sternly with cases
where any slackness is noticed in observance of prescribed financial rules.
[Sl. No. 1, Paragraph  50 of Eightieth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
9

10
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
In so far as specific instances of excesses occurred under Appropriation
No. 34 — Interest Payments and Appropriation No. 37 — Repayment of Debt are
concerned, the Action Taken Notes have already been submitted by this Ministry in
reply to recommendation Nos. 52 and 53 of the report under reference. Ministry of
Finance, being the Nodal Ministry in respect of expenditure management, has
consistently been taking effective steps to regulate the expenditure within the
sanctioned grant by line Ministries. Further, the Budget Circular 2010-11 issued on
11.9.2009 to all Ministries, in para 5 referred to the PAC's 23rd Reprt (13th Lok Sabha)
on the excesses over voted grants and charged appropriations (1998-99) and suggested
that effective co-ordination between various estimating and disbursing authorities be
put in place with the help of sound data-base and other IT facilities so that the excess
expenditure could be avoided altogether. It was emphasized that PAC's directive may
be complied with in order to avoid excess expenditure in the 'Appropriation-Interest
Payments'. Further, an Office Memorandum has been issued to all Secretaries of Govt.
of India, who are chief Accounting Authorities of their Departments advising them to
ensure rigid enforcement of prescribed financial rules and to see that no instance of
excess expenditure takes place in future for reasons which can be anticipated and
taken care of in advance either in BE or Supplementary grants. They have also been
advised that any slackness in observance of prescribed financial rules noticed in this
regard may be sternly dealt with. Further, after preparation of A TNs in respect of
recommendations in 54th Report of PAC, a series of meetings were taken with FAs of
concerned Departments to impress upon them to see that excess expenditure do not
take place. It is also relevant to mention that all secretaries to GoI were advised by
secretary, Expenditure that starting Financial year 2010-11 the position of A TNs in
respect of the important Audit observations included in the Annual Report as well as
those included in earlier Annual Reports may also be furnished in the Annexure to the
Annual Report. In order to ensure that a correct and comprehensive position of ATNs
pending and finalized, during the year in reported to the Parliament, it was also advised
that the information of pending ATNs be got vetted from the Audit before its publication
in their Annual Reports. Furthermore, in the last meeting taken by the Finance Minister
on 29.10.2009 with all Financial Advisers, he drew attention to the concern expressed
by the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament on the inordinate delay in
submission of Action Taken Reports in respect of the Paras included in the Reports of
the C&AG . Attention was drawn to the large volumes of outstanding A TNs from
Department of Revenue, Defence, Railways and Posts. All concerned Financial Advisers
were also advised to furnish a separate quarterly report on pending ATNs without fail.
This has been vetted by Audit vide U.O. No. RR/1-57/09-10/1157 dated nil.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
During the financial year 2006-07 an amount of Rs. 10 crore was sanctioned to
this Ministry under Major Head-5475-Capital outlay on other General Economic
Services. The total expenditure of Rs. 36.8040 crore was worked out towards payment
to State Government Agencies and UTI Infrastructure Limited for purchase of built up
Office space at Bangalore and Chennai and construction of Office complexes at Jaipur,

11
Cuttack and Chandigarh. Since the prescribed proforma for seeking Supplementary
Grant provided for the figures to be refected in crores of rupees, (upto two digits after
decimal) a Supplementary Grant of Rs. 26.80 crore was asked for and was agreed to by
Ministry of Finance against the estimated expenditure of Rs. 26.8040 crore which
should have been rounded off to Rs. 26.81 crore instead of Rs. 26.80 crore. Inadvertently,
the Supplementary Grant asked was Rs. 26.80 crore against which the Ministry incurred
an amount of Rs. 26.8040 crore thereby incurring an excess expenditure of
Rs. 40,000/-.
In future while seeking Supplementary Grant, if any, the projected amount will be
rounded off to the nearest higher crore of rupees to avoid any excess expenditure.
[Ministry/Department of Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. 10/2/08-IFD,
dated 14.10.09]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Mines
The proposal for regularization of excess of expenditure of Rs. 3.17 lakh occurred
in the charged portion of the revenue Section of the Grant No. 63 in respect of Ministry
of Mines has been sent to Ministry of Finance in the budget session of the Lok Sabha
for seeking necessary Parliamentary approval.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. AMG-I/V .V ./ATN/2009-10/250-252,
dated 24th August, 2009.
[Ministry of Mines, O.M. No. 3(38)/2006-IF, dated 21.10.2009]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The above para relates to excess expenditure incurred by various Ministries/
Departments of Union Government. In regard to Ministry of Defence, during the year
2006-07 excess expenditure occurred in one demand only i.e. Demand No. 22 (Army)
for Rs. 667.17 crore which is less than 2% of the total excess expenditure. The excess
expenditure under this grant has been addressed in detail in Para 13 of this Report.
The main thrust of the observation is regarding the excess expenditure
|to the tune, of Rs. 37669.53 crores that had occurred in Four Grants in Civil
(Rs. 36637.20 crore), Eight Grants in Railways (Rs. 365.16 crore) and in C:\WINDOWS\
hinhem.scr.Defence Services-Army (Rs. 667-17 crore).
The Committee desires the Ministry of Finance, being a nodal Ministry  to
control the exchequer of the Government of India to impress upon all the Ministries to
ensure rigid enforcement of prescribed financial rules and procedure so as to contain
the instances of excess expenditure to the bare minimum. It is also recommended that
action should also be taken to deal sternly with cases where any slackness is noticed
in observance of prescribed financial rules. Hence, the action in this regard is mainly to
be taken by the Ministry of Finance.
However, all the budget-estimating authorities of Defence Services have been
advised to keep strict watch on the expenditure and ensure that expenditure should be
as per the grant and in case any saving/excess in expenditure is visualized its provision
should be made at RE stage.

12
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The observations of the Committee have been noted.  While the above
recommendation is mainly directed towards Ministry of Finance, to contain the instances
of excess expenditure to bare minimum, across various Ministries of Government of
India, as referred to in the observations above, the reported excess under both charged
and voted of Ministry of Railways is Rs. 167.03 cr. While under voted part alone the
excess is Rs. 149.37 cr. Both these excesses comes to 0.1% of the total grant and thus
can be considered as minor.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 9-RA-III/2-1/2008, dated 21.4.2009 made following
observations:
The percentage variation under charged portion worked out  to 25.95 per cent
which is substantial and action needs to be taken to curb such huge variation.
Ministry's comments
The concern of the Audit has been noted. Instructions are issued from time to
time to zonal Railways to realistically assess the decretal payments likely to come up
during the financial year. However, the unpredictability of the time when exactly these
cases will be ripe for payments and slowness in finalization of the decretal proceedings
and arbitration process either results in savings of charged appropriations, if the cases
anticipated to finalize in the year do not materialize, or excess expenditure when more
cases than anticipated finalized in the year.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 36-RA-III/2-1/2008, dated 17.6.2009 have vetted the Action
Taken.
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2008-BC-PAC/XIV/80, dated 31.08.2009]
Observation/Recommendation  No. 3
"As per the extant  procedure it is impervative that explanatory notes in respect
of  the excess registering Grants/Appropriations are submitted to the Committee by
the Concerned Ministries/Departments immediately after the presentation of relevant
Appropriation Accounts to Parliament. The Committee note that explanatory notes in
respect of excess registering Grants/Appropriation during 2006-2007 pertaining to
Appropriation. Accounts Civil and Defence Services were due for submission on
7th December, 2007. However, to the utter dismay  of the Committee the explanatory
notes, regarding Appropriation Accounts—Civil in respect of Ministry of Finance, Mines,
Company Affairs were delayed by more than four, five and  seven months respectively.
The explanatory notes pertaining to Appropriations Accounts — Defence services
were received after a delay of more than nine months. The Committee   take a very
serious view of the inordinate delay in furnishing the explanatory notes to the Committee
after  they were received by them from the Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry
of Finance). These two specific cases are in regard to Appropriation No. 34 — Interest
Payments and Appropriation No. 37 — Repayment of Debt where a delay of more than
three months and almost two months was caused by Monitoring Cell (Ministry of
Finance — Department of Expenditure) and this delayed information was actually

13
received by the Committtee on 6th May 2008 and 1st May, 2008. The Committee would
like to know the specific reasons in these two cases. The Committee in their earlier
Report on the subject (54th Report — 14th  Lok Sabha) had reiterated that  as it is
incumbent upon all the Ministries to furnish the explanatory notes along  with the
Appropriation Accounts to enable the Committee to finalize their Report early for
regularization of excess  expenditure, the Ministry of Finance should ensure  that the
explanotry notes are submitted to the  Committee without any delay whatsoever. Any
deviation in this regard would be strictly viewed. The Committee also recommended
that as a  systemic check, the Ministry of Finance in consultation with Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India should  put in place  a centralized computerized networking
monitoring system to check the status of the preparation of Explanatory Notes at
every strage by verious Ministries/Departmenst so that  any delay on this count is
effectively prevented. However, it  has been noticed  that the Ministry of Finance itself
unduly delayed the  submission of their  explanatory  notes to the Committee. The
Committee therefore  recommend  that the Ministry of Finance, which also  has fully
operative Monitoring Cell in the Department of Expenditure for coordinating with
concerned Ministries/Departments, should enquire into the reasons for  the delay of
submission of explanatory notes by concerned Ministries/Departments and apprise
the Committee of the same. The Committee, in unequivocal terms recommend that, in
future, if  any delay occurs in furnishing Explanatory  Notes, the reasons for the same
should be clearly mentioned along with the notes."
[Sl. No. 3, Para 52 of 80th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
Regarding dely in furnishing the Explanatory Notes for Appropriation No. 34
(Intrest Payments) and Appropriation No. 37 (Repayment of Debt), it is stated that
Monitoring Cell had received these explanatory notes in the month of February/March,
2008. However, the same were inadvertently linked with other  Explanatory Notes and
thus got delayed which  is regretted. The official concerned has been directed to be
more vigilant in future and appropriate corrective measures have been taken to avoid
recurrence of such incidents.
Monitoring Cell forwards the explanatory notes as soon as these are received
from the Ministries/Departments. However, in some cases when the requisite enclosures
are not received from Ministries/Departments, the forwarding of Explanatory Notes
gets delayed. Monitoring Cell is impressing upon Ministries/Departments  to exercise
more caution and to ensure that all the necessary enclosures/papers have been readily
enclosed.
Regarding preparation of Centralised Computerised monitoring system for
monitoring of Explanatory Notes, it is mentioned that  such a system has already been
developed by Monitoring Cell and necessary entries are being made. Ministries/
Departments are regularly reminded to send the explanatory note as on time.
This has been vetted DGACE's vide their U.O.No. RR/1/55/09-10/1160, dated nil
[MF (EXP) U.O. No. 1/80/2009-MC, dated 5th February, 2010]

14
Action Taken by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
Strict guidelines have been issued  to follow closely the instructions issued by
the Ministry to avoid recurrence of any expenditure.
[Ministry/Department of Ministry of Corporate Affairs, O.M. No. 10/2/08-IFD,
dated 14.10.09]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Mines
The valuable recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted for
compliance in future for submitting explanatory notes in time.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No.  AMG-1/V.V ./ATN/2009-10/
250-252, dated 24th August, 2009.
[Ministry of Mines, O.M. No. 3 (38)/2006-IF, dated 21.10.2009
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
This para mainly relates to timely submission of explanatory notes in respect of
excess registering grants/appropriations immediately after presentation of relevant
Appropriation Accounts to Parliament to enable the Committee to finalise their Report
early for regularization of excess expenditure. The Committee has urged to the Ministry
of Finance being the nodal Ministry, to ensure that explanatory notes are submitted to
the Committee without any delay whatsoever.
So far as excess expenditure in Defence Services is concerned, the Ministry of
Defence has noted the observation and recommendation of the Committee and all out
efforts are made for timely submission of relevant explanatory notes after getting these
vetted by Director-General of Audit, Defence Services.
Observation/Recommendation No. 4
Scrutiny of select cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations reveals
that under Appropriation No. 37—Repayment of Debt, the Ministry of Finance had
incurred an expenditure of Rs. 1480938.37 crore  over and above the total sanctioned
provision of Rs. 1447889.10 crore, which included supplementary provisions of
Rs. 349581.44 crore obtained in March, 2007. The excess expenditure under this
appropriation is the net effect of total excess of Rs. 126066.08 crore and total savings
of Rs. 93016.80 crore under various sub-heads of this appropriation. The Committee
note with concern that given the savings under various sub-heads, the overall excess
expenditure  under this appropriation would have  been evidently higher than the
present figures. The  Committee further  note that Appropriation No. 37—Repayment
of Debt alone recorded the highest excess expenditure among the excess  registering
Grants/Appropriations during the year 2006-2007, which  accounted  for more than
90 per cent of the total excess expenditure incurred by the  Civil Ministries/Departments
and over 87 per cent of the  total excess expenditure incurred during the year. The
explanatory note furnished by the Ministry of Finance have stated that  'supplementary
provision for lower amount of Rs. 30583.46 crore was sought in view of likely  savings
under repayment of Ways and Means Advances to be taken into account for

15
re-appropriation.' The above assertion of the Ministry is unacceptable as the excess
expenditure of such large magnitude had occurred inspite of a huge amount of
Supplementary Grants having been  obtained in this case. The Committee is not oblivious
of the fact that the Ministry of Finance had been making appropriations in excess of
the budgeted figures under this appropriation repeatedly  for the past four years now.
The Committee are dismayed that this  has become a repetitive  phenomenon and the
Ministry of Finance are unable to check its recurrence. The Ministry of  Finance are
expected to display itself as role model for other Ministries as it is the nodal Ministry
for adhering to the established financial procedure  and enforcing system of checks
and balances. The Committee recommend that regularization of excess in future  would
be used only  exceptionally when the compelling circurmstances so desire. This is
possible only when  realistic  projections are made by the Ministries in the Appropriation
Accounts  as well as during the  Supplementary stage. The Committee have been
informed  through  the Explanatory Notes  furnished by the Ministry of Finance that
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has set up a Working Group  to undertake study of the
instances and reasons for inaccuracies in estimation of expenditure  pertaining to
Repayment of Debt and Interest  Payments  over last five years and to make
recommendations  to improve  the quality of the estimates and its better monitoring
during the  financial year. The Ministry have  also stated that the report in this regard
is expected to be  submitted shortly. While  taking note of this development, the
Committee would like to be intimated about the recommendations of the Working
Group set up by RBI at the earliest.
[Sl. No. 4, Para 53 of Eightieth Report of Public Accounts Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
Excess expenditure of Rs. 33049.72 crore, was the net result of total excess of
Rs. 126066.08 crore and total savings of Rs. 93016.80 crore under various sub-heads of
the Appropriation No. 37—Repayment of Debt. The excess expenditure  was mainly
due to higher investment and hence discharge in 14 days  Intermediate Treasury Bills
by State Governments, more discharge of 364 days Treasury Bills, more expenditure in
connection with encashment of securities and other related  expenditure in respect of
Asian Development Bank, preference of more claims by bond holders for redemption
relating of Special Bearer Bonds and redemption of bonds under 6.5% Savings Bonds
(Non-Taxable), 2003 by the bond holders by exercising the option of premature
encashment available in the scheme than anticipated.
2. Under 364 Days Treasury Bills excess expenditure  was Rs. 999.33 crore which
was due to more discharge  of treasury Bills anticipated. Under 14 Days Intermediate
Treasury Bills,  an excess expenditure of Rs.  124945.80 crore occurred due to higher
investment by State Governments on  account of higher availability of short term
surplus funds. However, the excess in both cases did not  involve any cash outgo as
it is netted against repayment of borrowings.
3. Estimates of expenditure in respect of repayment of 364 days Treasury Bills,
particularly 14  days Intermediate Treasury Bills are difficult to project with a high

16
degree of accuracy. 14 days  Intermediate  Treasury Bills are the main instruments used
by State Governments for parking their surplus short term cash balances and the
Central Government has no option but to accept such  investments through  issue of
14 days Intermediate Treasury Bill. In the event of persistent of surplus  cash balances,
the investments are rolled over but accounted for as expenditure and  then reinvestment.
In essence, these are cash management instruments of State Governments. Since
these  expenditure are matched by receipts, they also do not involve any cash outgo.
4. The estimates of 'Repayment of Debt' are framed on the basis of inputs furnished
by RBI, the Debt Manager of the Government of India. While every effort is made to
project estimates as accurately as possible, the need to further improve estimation
techniques is acknowledged. RBI has  been advised to review the same from time to
time, so that the variations may be kept at the  minimum given the fact that  these
estimates are difficult to access accurately.
5. Closer Coordination between RBI and the concerned divisions in the Ministry
of Finance including the office of Chief Controller of Accounts (Finance) for concurrent
synchronization of Budget Estimates with actuals is being worked out. Estimation
methodolgy is also being reviewed by adopting more suitable/appropriate models for
estimation purposes. This revision in methodolgy should more realistic forecast of the
estimates, and reduce the incidence of inaccurate estimations leading to excess
expenditure.
6. Besides regular reviews to improve the quality of estimates and monitoring of
expenditure  pertaining of Repayment of Debt, a Working Group comprising officers  of
Ministry of Finance,  Chief Controller of Accounts and Reserve Bank of India was
constituted to study  the present system for estimating expenditure  pertaining to
Repayment of Debt and Interest payments and make recommendations for improving
the quality of the estimates and its better monitoring. Relevant extracts of the
recommendation of the said Working Group are as follows:—
• The broken period Interest, premium, discount and interest on market
loans have been budgeted and accounted  for as separate streams to
enable  greater precision in the estimation and reporting process from
the Union Budget 2008-09.
• The dated securities (market loans) and their dates of issue during the
fourth quarter has been identified in advance so that coupon  payments/
premium/discount/broken period interest could be estimated based on
projections of secondary market yield from 2007-08 (Revised Estimate)
and will be continued in future also.
• To estimate the discharge of Intermediate T-Bills for the period January-
March, a new model apart from the two alternative models as
recommended by the Working Group  has been developed to eliminate
underestimation from 2007-08 (Revised Estimate).
• The amount  of discharges (BE) of Normal ITBs in the ensuing year has
been estimated at by multiplying the amount of discharges during the

17
current year (RE) with the annualized quarterly average rate of growth in
discharges  exhibited during Q4 of the previous year and Q1, Q2, and Q3
of the current year from the Union Budget 2008-09.
• New method of 3-month (quarterly)  moving averages to make estimation
of discharges of 91-days Auction Treasury Bills has been applied from
2008-09(BE).
• For better reconciliation between IDMD (which prepares the estimates)
and CAS,  Nagpur (which is the record-keeper of government transactions)
before forwarding budgetary estimates to the Government, IDMD has
furnished the requisite data in the format specified  by Central Accounts
Section, Nagpur from the year  2008.
• The discount rate on ITBs would be assumed to be equal to the prevailing
rate for RE and BE projections to arrive  at the amount of discount
payments for RE of the current year and BE for the ensuing year. The
recommendations was adopted for 2007-08 (RE) and 2008-09 (BE).
• The method suggested by the Working Group that RBI may reckon six
previous  auction results for estimation of discount rate to be applied on
ATBs (Normal) in line with ATBs (MSS) instead of three previous  auctions
results  was  adopted  for  estimation  of  discount  rate  in respect  of
2007-2008 (RE) and 2008-09 (BE).
• The quarterly average growth model was adopted for the  estimation of
BE  on issuances of ATBs in respect of 91-days T-Bills. The method as
suggested by the Working Group was suitably modified to arrive at
reasonable  estimates for  issuances of  182/364-days T-Bills. The
issuances were multiplied to the discount rate estimated by  applying the
formula as recommended by the Working Group.
• After taking into account the past trend of the cash flows and adding an
uncertainty component  as recommended by the Working Group, the BE for
2008-09 has been projected to estimate discharges and interest on W.M.A.
• From  April 1, 2008 onwards, discount on MSS Treasuy Bills is being
booked at the time of issuance only at CAS  Nagpur on the same lines as
is being done for Normal T-Bills at PAD Mumbai.
• Estimation in respect of various  Relief/Savings Bonds under
Compensation Bonds are received nomenclature-wise, as recommended
by the Working Group, from Union Budget 2008-09.
• The assumptions behind the estimation process in respect of calculation
of GFD,  share of net market borrowings in financing GFD, average coupon,
etc., are provided to the Government at the BE (2008-09) stage that may
use the information for further refinement.
• Necessary instructions have been issued to State Bank of India vide
letter No.  DGBA/CDD.12794/11.16.001/2007-08, dated June 17, 2008 for

18
submission of claims for reimbursement strictly within the same financial
year, in order to avoid delay in  settlement and booking the expenditure
in the Government account.
7. This has been vetted by Audit vide its U.O. No. RR/1-1/09-10/191,
dated June 5, 2009.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs O.M. No. 9(5)-
W&M/2009, dated 25-6-2009]
Observation/Recommendation No. 5
It is disconcerting  to note that the Ministry of Railways have incurred a
substantial excess  expenditure of Rs. 325.29 crore under Grant No. 16—Assets—
Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—Railway Funds. The Committee find
that the Ministry of Railways had actually procured supplementary grants of Rs.
1276.57 crore under this 'Grant'. Scrutiny of the explanatory notes clearly reveals that
the items under excess accounts should have been planned for in a better manner  as
it relates mainly to the ongoing projects of the Railways such as New Lines, Gauge
Conversion, Track Renewal and others. Had the Ministry  of Railways done due
diligence effectively and ensured timley implementation of projects, this excess, as the
Committee can see, could have been avoided. The Committee therefore recommend
that Ministry of Railways, in future  should do their due diligence before  making
budgetary projections, as well as  Supplementary  projections in all Grants/
Appropriations so that this stage of seeking approval for excess is obviated and
established financial practices of not exceeding the Parlimentary  approval is projectd.
[Sl. No. 5, Para No. 54  of 80th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The observations of the Committee have been noted. As already submitted in
reply to recommendation No. 51, it is the endeavour of the Ministry of Railways to seek
Supplementary  Demands  for Grants  after assessing the additional demand as
realistically as possible. In the instant case of Grant No. 16—Assets—Acquisition,
Construction and Replacement—Railway Funds, though the reported excess of
Rs. 325.29 cr. comes to 2.6 per cent of the total sanctioned provisions under Railway
Funds, the actual excess recommended  for regularization  viz, Rs. 121.33 cr. is less than
1% of the total Grant under Railway Funds. This may kindly be considered as minor.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 9-RA-III/2-1/2008, dated 21-4-2009 have vatted the
Action Taken.
[Ministry of Railways, case No. 2008-BC-PAC/XIV/80, dated 31-08-2009.]
Observation/Recommendation No. 9
According to Audit, some of the Ministries/Departments have not furnished
contributory reasons for incurring excess expenditure over voted Grants/Charged
Appropriations during 2006-2007 to them as mentioned in Paras 24 and 35 of this
Report. Specifically, the Ministry of Company Affairs, in Grant No. 16—Ministry of

19
Company Affairs, the Ministry of Defence in Grant No. 22—Defence Services—Army
and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in AppropriationNo.
37—Repayment of Debt have not furnished the contributory reasons to the Audit for
incurring excess expenditure. It is astonishing to note for the Committee that the
Ministries/Departments have not furnished the information to the Audit for inclusion
in their Report. The Committee desire that the Concerned Ministries should, atleast
now take necessary action and furnish the reasons to the Audit under intimation to the
Committee.
[Sl. No. 9, Para 58 of Eightieth Report of Public Accounts Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
The excess expenditure of Rs. 33049.27 crore, was the net result of total excess of
Rs. 126066.07 crore and total savings of Rs. 93016.80 crore under various sub-heads of
the Appropriation No. 37—Repayment of Debt. The excess expenditure was mainly
due to higher investment and hence discharge in 14 days Intermediate Treasury Bills
by State Governments (Rs. 124945.80 crore), more discharge of 364 days Treasury Bills
(Rs. 999.33) crore, more expenditure in connection with encashment of securities and
other related expenditure in respect of Asian Development Bank (Rs. 1.22 crore),
preference of more claims by bond holders for redemption relating to Special Bearer
Bonds (Rs. 2.74 crore) and redemption of bonds under 6.5% Savings Bonds (Non-
Taxable), 2003 by the bond holders (Rs. 97.54 crore) by exercising the option of premature
encashment available in the scheme than anticipated.
2. The reasons for excess expenditure as mentioned in Para 7.1 of Report of
Comptroller and Auditor General of India No. 13 of  2007. Union Government (Accounts
of the Union Government) has adequately been covered under Action Taken Note on
Para 7.3 (APPENDIX-VIIA-Sl. No. 18 to 21) mentioned in Report No. 13 of 2007 of
Comptroller and Auditor General of India and has since been furnished to the Audit
vide this Ministry's F. No. 9 (4)-W&M/2008, dated 6.02.2009.
3. This has been vetted by Audit vide its U.O. No. RR/1-1/09-10/191, dated
June 5, 2009.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs O.M. No. 9(5)-
W&M/2009, dated 25.6.2009]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
During the financial year 2006-07 an amount of Rs. 10 crore was sanctioned to
this Ministry under Major Head-5475-Capital outlay on other General Economic
Services. A Supplementary Grant of an amount of Rs. 26.8040 crore was requested from
Ministry of Finance with the approval of AS&FA and an equivalent amount was
offered as savings out of Revenue Budget. In the Main Grant of Ministry of Finance,
the Sanctioned Budget Estimates (SBE) figures were rounded off to crore of rupees as
per normal practice and the Supplementary Grant of Rs. 26.80 crore was approved.
However, the actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 26.8040 crore as per the
projections of this Ministry. This was inadvertently done under the assumption that

20
the entire projected amount of Rs. 26.8040 crore has been approved though the actual
Supplementary Grant was shown as Rs. 26.80 crore. Thus, the discrepancy to the tune
of Rs. 40.000 only was due to in advertent rounding off amount to the nearest crore.
DGACR called for Explanatory Note of the Ministry through CCA on excess
expenditure of Rs. 40.000 vide their letter dated 12.7.07 received in the Ministry on
22.08.07. A reply was sent by the Ministry to Principal Accounts Office on 21.09.07.
The Office of the DGACR returned the vetted reply to the audit para on 20.03.08. A
copy of Explanatory Note in the prescribed proforma duly signed by Addl. Secretary
was sent to DGACR on 22.05.08. DGACR vide letter dated 29.05.08 made some
corrections in the body of note. A reply after correcting the Explanatory Note was sent
to DGACR on 18.06.08. In the meantime Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch) also sent
an O.M. dated 12.06.08 to examine the chapter from C&AG Report No. 13 of  2007. The
Lok Sabha Secretariat was also provided with the detailed background note concerning
Ministry of Corporate Affairs vide letter dated 23.06.08. The Office of the DGACR
finally vetted the Action Taken Report and stated vide letter dated 11.07.08 that they
have no comments to offfer.
The excess expenditure has been regularized vide Notification dated 21st July,
2009 issued by Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division).
[Ministry/Department of Ministry of Corporate Affairs
 O.M. No. 10/2/08-IFD, Dated 14.10.09]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In so far as Ministry of Defence is concerned, the contributory reasons for
incurring excess expenditure over V oted Grants/Charged Appropriations during
2006-2007 have been given in the Appropriation Accounts 2006-2007, which have
already been placed/presented in the Parliament on 07.12.2007, elaborating the reasons
duly vetted by the Audit.
Observation/Recommendation No. 10
Summarily, the Committee note that excess expenditure has become a repetitive
occurrence inspite of the Committee's intervention through their past reports. The cases of
Ministries/Departments. Finance, Defence, Railways, Company Affairs and Mines have
evidently failed to address these unhealthy practices and the scenario has no change for
better from that of last year. These Ministries should have done their financial due diligence
at the time of initiating budgetary process as well as during the stage of supplementary
projections. In the case of Ministry of Railways, the excess could have been avoided as
most of the heads and sub-heads under which excess has occurred pertains to the ongoing
projects. The role of Ministry of Finance as the nodal agency in ensuring financial discipline
also projects a dismal scenario. The Committee will deal more specifically on the
recommendation of their earlier Reports on the subject mainly the Fifty-fourth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) whilst considering their  Action Taken Report. At this stage the Committee
would only reiterate that the instances of incurring excess expenditure are not repeated
against except for addressing rare and exceptional circumstances.
[Sl. No. 10, Paragraph 59 of Eightieth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

21
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
The recomendations of the Hon'ble Committee has been noted. As explained earlier in
reply to recommendation No. 50, an Office Memorandum has been issued to all Secretaries of
Govt. of India, who are Chief Accounting Authorities of their Departments advising them to
ensure rigid enforcement of prescribed financial rules and to see that no instance of excess
expenditure takes place in furture for reasons which can be anticipated and taken care of in
advance either in BE or Supplementary Grants. They have also been advised that any
slackness in observance of prescribed financial rules noticed in this regard may be sternly
dealt with. Further, the Budget Circular 2010-11 issued on 11.9.2009, in para. 5 referred to the
PAC's 23rd Report (13th Lok Sabha) on the excesses over voted grants and charged
appropriations (1998-99), and suggested that effective coordination between various
estimating and disbursing authorities be put in place with the help of sound data-base and
other IT facilities so that the excess expenditure could be avoided altogether. It was emphasized
that PAC's directive may be complied with in order to avoid excess expenditure in the
'Appropriation-Interest Payments'. It is also relevant to mention that all Secretaries to GoI
were advised by Secretary, Expenditure that starting Financial year 2010-11 the position of
ATNs in respect of the Audit observation included in the Annual Report as well as those
included in earlier Annual Reports may also be furnished in the Annexure to the Annual
Report. In order to ensure that a correct and comprehensive position of ATNs, pending and
finalized, during the year is reported to the Parliament, it was also advised that the information
of pending ATNs to get vetted from the Audit before its publication in their Annual Reports.
Further more, that in the last meeting taken by Finance Minister on 29.10.09 with all Financial
Advisers, he drew attention to the concern expressed by the Public Accounts Committee of
the Parliament on the inordinate delay in submission of Action Taken Reports in respect of
the Paras included in the Reports of the C&AG.. Attention was drawn to the large volumes of
outstanding ATNs from Revenue, Defence, Railways and Posts and advised to furnished a
separate quarterly report on pending ATNs by all concerned Financial Advisers without fail.
This has been vetted by Audit vide U.O. No. RR/1-57/09-10/1157, dated -Nil-
Action Taken by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
Observations/Directions of Hon'ble Committee have been noted for strict
compliance.
[Ministry/Department of Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
 O.M. No. 10/2/08-IFD,  Dated 14.10.09]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Mines
In the case of Ministry of Mines, the excess expenditure Rs. 3,16,785 had occurred
under charged portion during 2006-07. It needs to be pointed out that the excess
expenditure under charged portion has not occurred in 2007-08. V aluable
recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted by this Ministry. Efforts
are being taken to avoid repeat of any instances of incurring excess expenditure.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. AMG-I/VV/ATN/2009-10/ 250-
252, dated 24th August, 2009.
[Ministry of Mines, O.M. No.3 (38)/2006-IF, dated 21.10.2009]

22
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In this para the Committee's main observation pertains to the trend of excess
expenditure year after year. The Committee has desired that the Ministries should have
done their financial due diligence at the time of initiating budgetary process as well as
during the stage of supplementary projections. The action in this regard might be
taken by the Ministry of Finance, being the nodal agency.
So far as Ministry of Defence is concerned, instructions already exist to exercise
strict control on progress of Defence Expenditure in order to avoid any large-scale
savings or excess under any grant relating to Defence Services. Regular meeting of the
Departmental Monitoring Groups are held to monitor the progress of expenditure
effectively to achieve the objective and to ensure that the funds allocated are fully
utilized. Efforts shall be made for better implementation of various instructions issued
on monitoring of Defence Expenditure.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The position of recurring excess expenditure on the Railways has been examined
and it is submitted that in 2006-07, i.e. the year under review, while number of excess
registering Grants/Appropriations has come down from 11 in the previous year to 8,
the total excess reported also comes to 0.3 per cent of the total sanctioned provisions,
which is comparable to figures of  2001-02. This can be appreciated from the table
given below:
(Rs. in crore)
Y ear Total sanctioned Total Excess % of excess to No. of excess
provision for total provision registering Grants/
Railways Appropriations
2000-01 61826 0.14 0.0002 5
2001-02 69206 211 0.30 8
2002-03 72282 324 0.45 11
2003-04 77205 1137 1.47 9
2004-05 83543 2152 2.58 10
2005-06 98312 2322 2.36 11
2006-07 114930 365 0.32 8
Audit vide their U.O. No. 55-RA-III/2-1/2008, dated 18.8.2009 have vetted the
Action Taken with remarks "Seen Thanks''.
[Ministry of Railways' Case No. 2008-BC-PAC/XIV/80, dated 31.08.2009]
Observation/Recommendation No. 11
Subject to the observations made in the preceding paragraphs, the Committee
recommend that the expenditure referred to in Paragraph-13 of this Report be regularised
in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1) (b) of the Constitution of India.
[Sl. No. 11, Paragraph 60 of Eightieth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

23
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Demands for Excess
Grants for Expenditure of the Central Government (excluding Railways) relating to
2006-2007 were submitted to Parliament in the Budget Session, 2009. The Parliament
has passed the Excess Demands for Grants. Necessary Appropriation Bill for regularising
the money drawn in excess of the amounts authorised by the Parliament for the year
2006-2007, has also been passed and the corresponding Act published in the Gazette
of  India (Extraordinary) Part II, Section I, dated 21.07.2009 as Act No. 30 of 2009, after
obtaining assent of the President. In view of this, the excess amount drawn in 2006-
2007 stands regularised. Action taken in this regard is, therefore, completed.
This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-22/09-10/482,
dated the 10th August, 2009.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs 
(Budget Division),
 New Delhi-110 001 O.M. No. F. 7 (1)-B (SD)/2009, dated 17 August, 2009]

2006&2007 ds laca/k esa
dsUnzh; ljdkj ds O;; ds fy, vfrfjDr vuqnkuksa dh ekaxsa
¼jsyos dks NksM+dj½
DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
for
EXPENDITURE OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
(Excluding Railways)
RELATING TO
2006-2007
lafo/kku ds vuqPNsn 115 ds [k.M ¼1½ ¼[k½ ds vuqlj.k esa yksd lHkk esa izLrqr
Presented to the Lok Sabha in pursuance of clause (1) (b) of Article 115
of the Constitution
[jk"Vªifr dh flQkfj'k] tks ekaxksa dks izLrqr djus ds fy, lafo/kku ds vuqPNsn 115
ds [k.M ¼1½ ¼[k½ vkSj ¼2½ ds lkFk ifBr vuqPNsn 113 ds [k.M ¼3½ ds
v/khu vko';d gS] izkIr dj yh xbZ gS]
[The recommendation of the President, required under clause (3) of Article 113
read with clauses (1)(b) and (2) of Article 115 of the Constitution for making the
Demands has been obtained]
tqykbZ/July, 2009
24

25
ifjpk;d fVIif.k;ka
bl [k.M esa fufgr vuqnkuksa dh vfrfjDr
ekaxsa dfri; ekaxksa@fofu;ksxksa ds rgr ftuesa laln
}kjk ml o"kZ ds fy, vuqeksfnr /kujkf'k ls
vf/kd O;; gqvk] o"kZ 2006&07 ds nkSjku
okLrfod O;; dks n'kkZrh gSA
2- o"kZ 2006&07 esa 100 vuqnkuksa vkSj
5 fofu;ksxksa esa ls 3 vuqnkuksa vkSj 2 fofu;ksxksa ds
rgr ftuds fy, dqy 37]304-37 djksM+ #i,
dh jkf'k iznku dh xbZ Fkh] vf/kd O;; gqvkA
buesa ls jktLo Hkkx ds rgr 4]255-09 djksM+
#i,  vkSj iwath Hkkx ds rgr 33]049-28 djksM+
#i, dk vf/kd O;; gqvkA
3- lacaf/kr ekaxksa ds vf/kd O;; ds dkj.kksa
dk C;kSjk bl iqfLrdk esa fufgr vf/kd O;; ds
fy, ekax foojf.k;ksa esa fn;k x;k gSA
4- mi;qZDr vf/kd O;; dh ljdkjh ys[kk
lfefr }kjk tkap dh xbZ gS ftUgksaus viuh vLlhoha
fjiksVZ ¼pkSngoha yksd lHkk½ ds iSjk 13 ds lkFk
ifBr iSjk 60 esa Hkkjr ds lafo/kku ds vuqPNsn
115¼1½ ¼[k½ ds v/khu budk fofu;eu fd,
tkus dh flQkfj'k dh gSA
INTRODUCTORY NOTES
The Demands for Excess Grants
contained in this V olume represent the actual
expenditure incurred during 2006-2007 under
certain Demands/Appropriations which are
in excess of the amounts granted by the
Parliament for that year.
2. Out of 100 Grants and
5 Appropriations in 2006-2007, the excess
expenditure occurred in 3 Grants and
2 Appropriations amounting to a total of
Rs. 37, 304.37 crore. Out of this, the excess
of Rs. 4,255.09 crore occurred under
Revenue Section and Rs. 33,049.28 crore
under Capital Section.
3. The reasons for excess
expenditure in respective demands have
been explained in the Excess Demand
Statements contained in this booklet.
4. The above excess have been
scrutinised by the Public Accounts
Committee, who, vide paragraph 60 read with
paragraph 13 of their Eightieth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha), have recommended
their regularisation under Article 115 (1) (b)
of the Constitution of India.

26
2006-2007 DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
o"kZ 2006&2007 ds nkSjku laln }kjk Lohd`r vuqnkuksa@fofu;ksxksa ls gq, vfrfjDr O;; dks n'kkZus okyk fooj.k
Statement showing the expenditure incurred in excess of the Grants Voted/Appropriations made by Parliament during 2006-2007
vafre vuqnku@ okLrfod vfrfjDr i`"Bksa dk
fofu;ksx O;; O;; lanHkZ
Øe vuqnku@fofu;ksx dh Sr. No. & Title of Final Grant/ Actual Excess Ref.
lañ la[;k vkSj 'kh"kZd No. Grant/Appropriation Appropriation Expenditure Expenditure to
#i, Rs. #i, Rs. #i, Rs. pages
I. jktLo ls iwjk fd;k x;k O;; I. EXPENDITURE MET FROM REVENUE
22. j{kk lsok&Fky lsuk Lohd`r 22. Defence Services - Army V oted: 33191,04,00,000 33858,20,95,590 667,16,95,590 2
34. fofu;ksx&C;kt 34. Appropriaiton -
Hkqxrku Hkkfjr Interest Payments Charged: 150691,85,00,000 154279,73,97,248 3587,88,97,248 3
63. [kku ea=ky; Hkkfjr 63. Ministry of Mines Charged: 4,75,00,000 4,78,16,785 3,16,785 5
tksM+&jktLo ls iwjk fd;k x;k O;; Total - Expenditure met from Revenue 183887,64,00,000 188142,73,09,623 4255,09,09,623
Hkkfjr Charged: 150696,60,00,000 154284,52,14,033 3587,92,14,033
Lohd`r Voted: 33191,04,00,000 33858,20,95,590  667,16,95,590
II. iwath ls iwjk fd;k x;k O;; II. EXPENDITURE MET FROM CAPITAL
16. dEiuh dk;Z ea=ky; Lohd`r 16. Ministry of Company Affairs Voted: 36,80,00,000 36,80,40,000 40,000 1
37. fofu;ksx&_.k dh 37. Appropriation -
okilh vnk;xh Hkkfjr Repayment of Debt Charged: 1447889,10,00,000 1480938,37,17,342 33049,27,17,342 4
tksM+&iwath ls iwjk fd;k x;k O;; Total - Expenditure met from Capital 1447925,90,00,000 1480975,17,57,342 33049,27,57,342
Hkkfjr Charged: 1447889,10,00,000 1480938,37,17,342 33049,27,17,342
Lohd`r Voted: 36,80,00,000 36,80,40,000 40,000
dqy tksM+ GRAND TOTAL 1631813,54,00,00 0 16691 17,90,66,965 37304,36,66,965
Hkkfjr Charged: 1598585,70,00,000 1635222,89,31,375 36637,19,31,375
Lohd`r Voted: 33227,84,00,000 33895,01,35,590 667,17,35,590

ekax la[;k DEMAND NO. 16
dEiuh dk;Z ea=ky;
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
dEiuh dk;Z ea=ky; ds v/khu dEiuh dk;Z ea=ky; ds laca/k esa 31 ekpZ] 2007 dks lekIr gq,
o"kZ  ds fy, vuqnkuksa ls vf/kd O;; dh xbZ /kujkf'kA
Amount expended in excess of the Grants for the year ended 31st March, 2007,
in respect of the MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS under MINISTRY OF
COMPANY AFFAIRS.
Lohd`r% pkyhl gtkj #i,A
V oted: Forty thousand rupees.
Hkkx vfUre vuqnku okLrfod O;; vfrfjDr O;;
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
#i, Rs. #i, Rs. #i, Rs.
iawth Capital
Lohd`r V oted: 36,80,00,000 36,80,40,000 40,000
10]00]00]000 #i,  ds ewy vuqnku dks
ekpZ] 2007 esa izkIr 26]80]00]000 #i, ds iwjd
vuqnku }kjk c<+k;k x;kA 36]80]00]000 #i, ds
vafre vuqnku dh rqyuk esa okLrfod O;;
36]80]40]000 #i, jgk ifj.kkeLo:i 40]000
#i, dk vfrfjDr O;; gqvk ftls fd fu;fer
fd, tkus dh vko';drk gSA vfrfjDr O;;
vuqnkuksa dh iwjd ekaxksa dks ekaxrs le; djksM+
#i, ds fudVre vkadM+ksa ds iw.kk±du esa
vlko/kkuh cjrus ds dkj.k gqvkA
The original grant of Rs. 10,00,00,000
was augmented by a supplementary grant
of Rs. 26,80,00,000 obtained in March,
2007. Against the final grant of
Rs. 36,80,00,000 the actual expenditure
was Rs. 36,80,40,000 resulting in an excess
expenditure of Rs. 40,000 which requires
regularisation. The excess expenditure
was incurred due to inadvertent rounding
off figures to the nearest crore of rupees
while seeking the Supplementary Demand
for Grants.
27

ekax la[;k DEMAND NO. 22
j{kk lsok — Fky lsuk
DEFENCE  SERVICE—ARMY
j{kk ea=ky; ds v/khu j{kk lsok&Fky lsuk ds laca/k esa 31 ekpZ] 2007 dks lekIr gq, o"kZ ds
fy, vuqnku ls vf/kd O;; dh xbZ /kujkf'kA
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2007, in
respect of the DEFENCE SERVICES—ARMY under MINISTRY OF DEFENCE.
Lohd`r% Ng lkS lM+lB djksM+ lksyg yk[k iapkuos gtkj ikap lkS uCcs #i,A
V oted: Six hundred sixty-seven crore sixteen lakh ninety-five thousand five
hundred ninety rupees.
Hkkx vfUre vuqnku okLrfod O;; vfrfjDr O;;
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
#i, Rs. #i, Rs. #i, Rs.
jktLo Revenue
Lohd`r V oted: 33191,04,00,000 33858,20,95,590 667,16,95,590
33191]04]00]000 #i, ds ewy vkSj
vfUre vuqnku dh rqyuk esa okLrfod O;;
33858]20]95]590 #i, Fkk ftlds ifj.kkeLo:i
667]16]95]590 #i, dk vf/kd O;; gqvk ftls
fofu;fer fd, tkus dh vko';drk gSA bl O;;
vkf/kD; dk dkj.k izR;kf'kr egaxkbZ HkÙks ls
vf/kd dh Lohd`fr] lSU;nyksa dh xfrfof/k;ksa esa
o`f)] fons'kh lsukvksa ds lkFk la;qDr vH;kl] lsuk
eq[;ky;ksa ij vf/kdkfj;ksa dh vLFkk;h
M;wV~h@ikB~;Øeksa dh vko`fr esa o`f) rFkk izR;k'kk
ls vf/kd HkaMkjksa dk dk;kZUo;u] vkiwfrZdrkZvksa
}kjk vafre le; rd fcfyax ds dkj.k vfrfjDr
cqfdax vkSj Mhth,l,aMMh nj lafonk en] us'kuy
dSMsV dksj eq[;ky; }kjk 64 iw.kZdkfyd efgyk
vf/kdkfj;ksa dh ubZ fu;qfDr ds O;; dh ekWfuVfjax
u djuk vkSj fiNys o"kZ dh vkiwfrZ vkns'kksa dk
Hkqxrku djuk gSA
Against the original and final grant
of Rs. 33191,04,00,000 the actual
expenditure was Rs. 33858,20,95,590
resulting in an excess expenditure of
Rs. 667,16,95,590 which requires
regularisation. The excess expenditure
was incurred due to sanction of higher
Dearness Allowance vis-a-vis anticipated
Dearness Allowance, increased movement
of troops, Joint Exercises with foreign
armies, increase in frequency of courses/
temporary duty of officers at Army
Headquarters and more than anticipated
materialisation of stores, as also, excess
booking due to last minute billing by the
suppliers and DGS&D rate contract items,
non-monitoring of expenditure on fresh
appointment of 64 Whole Time Lady
Officers by Headquarter National Cadet
Core and payment of previous year's
supply orders.
28

la[;k No. 34 ¼fofu;ksx½ (APPROPRIATION)
C;kt Hkqxrku
INTEREST  PAYMENTS
foÙk ea=ky; ds varxZr C;kt Hkqxrku ds laca/k esa 31 ekpZ] 2007 dks lekIr gq, o"kZ ds fy,
fofu;ksx ls vf/kd O;; dh xbZ jkf'kA
Amount expended in excess of the Appropriation for the year ended 31st March,
2007, in respect of the Appropriation-INTEREST PAYMENTS under the MINISTRY
OF  FINANCE.
Hkkfjr % rhu gtkj ikap lkS lrklh djksM+ vBklh yk[k lÙkkuos gtkj nks lkS vM+rkyhl #i,A
Charged: Three thousand five hundred eighty-seven crore eighty-eight lakh
ninety-seven thousand two hundred forty eight rupees.
Hkkx vfUre fofu;ksx okLrfod O;; vfrfjDr O;;
Section Final Appropriation Actual Expenditure Excess
#i, Rs. #i, Rs. #i, Rs.
jktLo Revenue
Hkkfjr Charged: 150691,85,00,000 154279,73,97,248 3587,88,97,248
145822]60]00]000 #i, dh ewy fofu;ksx
dh jkf'k dks ekpZ] 2007 esa 4869]25]00]000
#i, dk iwjd fofu;ksx izkIr dj c<+k;k x;kA
150691]85]00]000 #i, ds vfUre fofu;ksx dh
rqyuk esa 154279]73]97]248 #i, dk okLrfod
O;; gqvk ftlds QyLo:i 3587]88]97]248
#i, dk vfrfjDr O;; gqvk ftls fofu;fer fd,
tkus dh vko';drk gSA Hkqxrkuksa dk vkf/kD; vkSj
cktkj _.kksa ds rgr fiNys Hkqxrkuksa vuqer cêk
ds dkj.k iqufuZxe ra= ds tfj, pqfuank izfrHkwfr;ksa
ij vf/kd C;kt Hkqxrku ds dkj.k vfrfjDr O;;
gqvkA 91@182@364 fnolh; jktdks"kh; gqafM;ksa ds
vf/kd fuxZe ij cês dk Hkqxrku( jkT; ljdkjksa
}kjk vf/kd fuos'k ds dkj.k 14&fnolh;
jktdks"kh; gqafM;ksa ij vf/kd C;kt dk Hkqxrku(
cktkj fLFkjhdj.k ;kstuk ds rgr vf/kd fnukafdr
izfrHkwfr;ksa ds fuxZe ij C;kt dk Hkqxrku( {kfriwfrZ
vkSj vU; ckW.Mksa ij vf/kd C;kt dk Hkqxrku(
The original appropriation of
Rs. 145822,60,00,000 was augmented by a
supplementary appropriation of
Rs. 4869,25,00,000 obtained in March,
2007. Against the final appropriation of
Rs.150691,85,00,000 the actual
expenditure was Rs. 154279,73,97,248
resulting in an excess expenditure of
Rs. 3587,88,97,248 which requires
regularisation. The excess expenditure
was incurred due to payment of more
interest on securities selected through re-
issue mechanism due to spill over
payments and discount allowed thereon
under Market Loans; payment of discount
on higher issuance of 91/182/364 Day
Treasury Bills; payment of more interest
on 14 Days Treasury Bills due to more
investment by State Governments;
payment of interest on issue of more dated
securities under Market Stabilisation
29

30
Qz kal vkSj teZuh ljdkj ls izkIr _.kksa ij fofue;
nj ifjorZu ds dkj.k vf/kd C;kt dk Hkqxrku(
varjjk"Vªh;  iqu£uekZ.k  vkSj  fodkl  cSad
¼vkbZchvkjMh½_.kksa dk vf/kd fudklh ij
C;kt dh nj esa c<+ksrjh ds dkj.k C;kt dk
Hkqxrku] dqMudqye ukfHkdh; fo|qr ifj;kstuk
ds fy, ^;w,l,lvkj ljdkj ls _.k* ds rgr
fuf/k;ksa dk vf/kd vkgj.k( ,f'k;kbZ fodkl cSad
ls _.kksa ij C;kt dh nj esa o`f)( vU; jkT;
Hkfo"; fuf/k esa vf/kd tekjkf'k;ksa ds dkj.k
C;kt dk Hkqxrku] Mkd chek vkSj thou okf"kZdh
dks"k( lsokfuo`Ùk gks jgs ljdkjh deZpkfj;ksa ds
fy, tek ;kstuk vkSj ,slh ;kstukvksa ds ,tsaVksa
dks deh'ku ds fiNys nkoksa dk Hkqxrku( vkS|ksfxd
dkexkjksa ds fy, dqVqEc isa'ku lg thou chek
fuf/k;ksa esa isa'ku fuf/k ds laca/k esa fu;ksDrk }kjk
vf/kd va'knku ij C;kt dk Hkqxrku] dsUnz
ljdkj deZpkjh lewg chek ;kstuk ls de vkgj.k
ds dkj.k vf/kd C;kt dk Hkqxrku( vQhe vkSj
{kkjksn voewY;u izkjf{kr fuf/k ls vf/kd O;;(
jsyos fodkl fuf/k] jsyos isa'ku fuf/k vkSj jsyos
iwath izkjf{kr fuf/k esa vf/kd vuqo`f) ij Hkqxrku
fd;k x;k C;kt( jk"Vªh; j{kk fuf/k ij vf/kd
C;kt dk Hkqxrku( o"kZ ds nkSjku rsy
foi.ku&dEifu;ksa dks fofHkUu dwiu njksa okys
fo'ks"k ckW.Mksa ds fuxZe ij C;kt dk Hkqxrku
¼852-20 djksM+ #i,½( vkSj fofu;e nj esa
ifjorZu ds dkj.k ,lMhvkj ds mi;ksx ds fy,
varjjk"Vªh; eqnzk dks"k dks vf/kd izHkkj dk
Hkqxrku djus ds dkj.k vf/kd O;; gqvkA
mijksDr of.kZr vfrfjDr O;; fofu;ksx ds fofHkUu
mi&'kh"kks± ds varxZr 5874]02]85 gtkj #i,
ds dqy vfrfjDr vkSj 2286]13]88 gtkj #i,
dh dqy cpr dk fuoy ifj.kke FkhA
Scheme; payment of more interest on
Compensation and other Bonds; payment
of higher interest on loans from
Government of France & Germany due to
exchange rate variation; payment of
interest due to increase in rate of interest
and more drawals of loan from
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (IBRD), higher withdrawal
of funds under  ‘Loans from the
Government of U.S.S.R.’ for Kudankulam
Nuclear Power Project; increase in rate of
interest on loans from Asian Development
Bank; Payment of interest on account of
higher deposits in Other State Provident
Fund, Postal Insurance and Life Annuity
Fund, Deposit Schemes for retiring
Government employees and payment of
past claims of commission to agents of
such schemes; payment of interest on
higher contribution by employer towards
pension fund in Family Pension-cum-Life
Assurance Funds for Industrial Workers,
payment of more interest due to less
withdrawals from the Central Government
Employees Group Insurance Scheme;
more expenditure from Opium and Alkaloid
Factories Depreciation Reserve Fund;
interest paid on higher accretion in
Railway Development Fund, Railway
Pension Fund and Railway Capital
Reserve Fund; payment of more interest
on National Defence Fund; payment of
interest on issue of Special Bonds to Oil
Marketing Companies, carrying different
coupon rates (Rs. 852.20 crore) during the
course of year; and payment of higher
charges to International Monetary Fund
for utilization of SDRs due to exchange
rate variation. The above mentioned
excess expenditure was the net result of
total excess of Rs. 5874,02,85 thousand
and total savings of Rs. 2286,13,88
thousand under various sub-heads of the
Appropriation.

la[;k No. 37 ¼fofu;ksx½ (APPROPRIATION)
_.k dk iquHkqZxrku
REPAYMENT  OF  DEBT
foÙk ea=ky; ds varxZr _.k ds iquHkqZxrku—fofu;ksx ds laca/k esa 31 ekpZ 2007 dks lekIr
o"kZ ds fy, fofu;ksx ls vf/kd O;; dh xbZ jkf'kA
Amount expended in excess of the Appropriation for the year ended 31st March
2007, in respect of the Appropriation—REPAYMENT OF DEBT under the MINISTRY
OF  FINANCE.
Hkkfjr% rSarhl gtkj mupkl djksM+ lÙkkbZl yk[k l=g gtkj rhu lkS c;kyhl #i,A
Charged: Thirty-three thousand and forty-nine crore twenty-seven lakh seventeen
thousand three hundred forty two rupees.
Hkkx vfUre fofu;ksx okLrfod O;; vfrfjDr O;;
Section Final Appropriation Actual Expenditure Excess
#i, Rs. #i, Rs. #i, Rs.
iwWath Capital
Hkkfjr Charged: 1447889,10,00,000 1480938,37,17,342 33049,27,17,342
1098307]66]00]000 #i, ds ewy fofu;ksx
dks ekpZ] 2007 esa 349581]44]00]000 #i, dk
iwjd fofu;ksx izkIr djds c<+k fn;k x;kA
1447889]10]00]000 #i, ds vfUre fofu;ksx
dh rqyuk esa okLrfod O;; 1480938]37]17]342
#i, gqvk ftlds QyLo:i 33049]27]17]342
#i, dk vfrfjDr O;; gqvk ftldks fofu;fer
fd, tkus dh vko';drk gSA jkT; ljdkjksa }kjk
14&fnolh; e/;orhZ jktdks"kh; gqafM;ksa esa
vf/kd fuos'k vkSj vf/kd Hkqxrku] 364&fnolh;
jktdks"kh; gqafM;ksa esa vf/kd Hkqxrku] ,f'k;kbZ
fodkl cSad ds  laca/k esa izfrHkwfr;ksa ds udnhdj.k
ij vf/kd O;; vkSj vU; lacaf/kr O;;] ckW.M/
kkjdksa }kjk fo'ks"k /kkjd ckW.M laca/kh ekspu gsrq
vf/kd nkoksa dh rjthg vkSj ckW.M/kkjdksa }kjk ;kstuk
esa miyC/k ifjiDorkiwoZ udnhdj.k ds fodYi
dk izR;k'kk ls vf/kd iz;ksx dj 6-5 izfr'kr
cpr ckW.M ¼dj&;ksX; fHkUu½] 2003 ds rgr
ckW.Mksa ds ekspu ds dkj.k ;g vf/kd O;; gqvkA
The original appropriation of
Rs. 1098307,66,00,000 was augmented by
a supplementary appropriation of
Rs. 349581,44,00,000 obtained in March,
2007. Against the final appropriation of
Rs. 1447889,10,00,000 the actual
expenditure was Rs. 1480938,37,17,342
resulting in an excess expenditure of
Rs. 33049,27,17,342 which requires
regularisation. This excess expenditure
was incurred due to higher investment and
hence discharge in 14 days Intermediate
Treasury Bills by State Governments,
more discharge of 364 days Treasury Bills,
more expenditure in connection with
encashment of securities and other related
expenditure in respect of Asian
Development Bank, preference of more
claims by bond holders for redemption
relating to Special Bearer Bonds and
redemption of bonds under 6.5% Savings
Bonds (Non-Taxable), 2003 by the bond
holders by excercising the option of
31

32
fons'kh _.k* ds rgr vf/kd O;; fofue; nj
ifjorZu] tkiku cSad vkWQ baVjus'kuy
dks&vkWijs'ku ds _.k dh iwoZ&vnk;xh vkSj
dfri; _.kksa dh vf/kd okilh vnk;xh ds dkj.k
gqvk ftldk vuqeku ds le; izR;k'kk ugha FkhA
ctV vuqeku ¼c-v-½ vkSj iwjd ekaxksa
2006&2007 ds 1447889-10 djksM+ #i, ds
eqdkcys la'kksf/kr vuqeku vkSj vafre ekax Øe'k%
1444578-10 djksM+ #i, vkSj 1444139-76
djksM+ #i, jghA rFkkfi] 1480938-37 djksM+ #i,
dk okLrfod O;; gqvk] ftlds ifj.kkeLo:i
33049-27 djksM+ #i, dk vf/kd O;; gqvkA
14&fnolh; e/;orhZ jktdks"kh; gqafM;ksa ds rgr
la'kksf/kr vuqeku vkSj vafre ekax 780000 djksM+
#i, ds ctV vuqeku ¼c-v-½ ds eqdkcys
1169311 djksM+ #i, ekuh xbZA bl izdkj]
389311 djksM+ #i, 
[vFkkZr~ 1169311 djksM+ #i,
¼&½ 780000 djksM+ #i, ] dh 'ks"k jkf'k esa ls
83507-54 djksM+ #i, dk iqufoZfu;kstu y?kq 'kh"kZ
ls rFkk 305803-46 djksM+ #i, iwjd ekax ds :i
esa fy, x,A rFkkfi] 14&fnolh;
e/;orhZ jktdks"kh; fcyksa ds varxZr 1169311-00
djksM+ #i, dh vfUre vko';drk dh rqyuk esa
1210749-26 djksM+ #i, dk okLrfod O;; gqvk
ftlds QyLo:i vdsys 14&fnolh; e/;orhZ
jktdks"kh; fcyksa ds varxZr 41438-26 djksM+ #i,
dk vfrfjDr O;; gqvkA 14&fnolh; jktdks"kh;
fcyksa  ds varxZr vfrfjDr O;; vYikof/k vf/k'ks"k
fuf/k;ksa dh mPprj miyC/krk ds dkj.k jkT;
ljdkjksa }kjk mPpÙkj fuos'k djus dh otg ls
gqvkA bl vfrfjDr O;; esa dksbZ udn O;; 'kkfey
ugha Fkk D;ksafd bls m/kkjksa dh okilh vnk;xh esa ls
?kVk;k x;k FkkA
premature encashment available in the
scheme than anticipated. Excess under
'External Debt' was due to exchange rate
variation, prepayment of loan of Japan
Bank of International Co-operation and
more repayment of certain loans which
could not be anticipated at the time of
estimation. The revised estimates and final
requirement were taken as Rs. 1444578.10
crore and Rs. 1444139.76 crore respectively
against Budget Estimates (BE) plus
Supplementary Demands 2006-2007 of
Rs. 1447889.10 crore. However, the actual
expenditure was Rs. 1480938.37 crore
resulting in an excess expenditure of
Rs. 33049.27 crore. Under 14 Days
Intermediate Treasury Bills the revised
estimates and final requirement were taken
as Rs. 1169311 crore against Budget
Estimates (BE) of Rs. 780000 crore. As
such, out of balance amount of Rs. 389311
crore [i.e. Rs. 1169311 crore (-) Rs. 780000
crore], Rs. 83507.54 crore was re-
appropriated from the minor head and
Rs. 305803.46 crore was taken as
Supplementary Demands. However, the
actual expenditure under 14 Days
Intermediate Treasury Bills was
Rs. 1210749.26 crore against final
requirement of Rs. 1169311.00 crore, as a
result of which an excess expenditure of
Rs. 41438.26 crore occurred under 14 Days
Intermediate Treasury Bills alone. The
excess expenditure under 14 Days
Treasury Bills was due to higher
investment by State Governments on
account of higher availability of short term
surplus funds. The excess did not involve
any cash outgo as it is netted against
repayment of borrowings.

Ekkax la[;k  DEMAND NO. 63
[kku ea=ky;
MINISTRY OF MINES
[kku ea=ky; ds v/khu [kku ea=ky; ds laca/k es 31 ekpZ] 2007 dks lekIr gq, o"kZ ds fy,
vuqnku ls vf/kd [kpZ dh xbZ /kujkf'k
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year  ended 31st March, 2007, in
respect of the MINISTRY OF MINES under MINISTRY OF MINES.
Hkkfjr% rhu yk[k lksyg gtkj lkr lkS ipklh #i,A
Charged: Three lakh sixteen thousand seven hundred eighty five rupees.
Hkkx vfUre vuqnku okLrfod O;; vfrfjDr O;;
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
#i, Rs. #i, Rs. #i, Rs.
jktLo Revenue
Hkkfjr Charged: 4,75,00,000 4,78,16,785 3,16,785
10]00]000 #i, ds ewy vuqnku dks ekpZ]
2007 esa izkIr 4]65]00]000 #i, ds iwjd vuqnku
}kjk c<+k;k x;kA 4]75]00]000 #i, ds vafre
vuqnku dh rqyuk esa okLrfod O;; 4]78]16]785
#i, Fkk ftlds ifj.kkeLo:i 3]16]785 #i,
dk vf/kd O;; gqvk ftls fofu;fer fd, tkus
dh vko';drk gSA ;g vf/kd O;; fofHkUu
U;k;ky;ksa ds vkns'kksa ds 'kh?kz dk;kZUo;u ds dkj.k
Hkkjrh; HkwoSKkfud losZ{k.k }kjk Hkqxrku dh tkus
okyh fof/kd {kfriwfrZ ds laca/k esa gqvkA
The original grant of Rs. 10,00,000 was
augmented by supplementary grant of
Rs. 4,65,00,000 obtained in March, 2007,
Against the final grant of Rs. 4,75,00,000
the actual expenditure was Rs. 4,78,16,785
resulting in an excess expenditure of
Rs. 3,16,785 which requires regularisation.
The excess expenditure was incurred due
to immediate implementation of orders of
various courts regarding legal
compensation paid by Geological Survey
of India.
33

34
Action Taken by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
The excess expenditure of Rupees forty thousand incurred during 2006-07 has
since been regularized through the Demands for Excess Grants relating to 2006-07
having been passed by Parliament and assented to by the President of India on
20th July, 2009 and having been published on 21st July, 2009 in the Gazette of India
(Extra ordinary) Part-II, Section-1, Act No. 30 of 2009. (Ministry of  Finance,
D/o Economic Affairs (Budget Division) letter No. 7(1)-B (SD)/2009 dated 21st July,
2009 (copy enclosed).
[Ministry/Department of Ministry of Corporate Affairs
 O.M. No. 10/2/08-IFD, Dated: 14.10.09].

No. G-20018/4/2007-BGT
Government of India
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
“A” Wing, 5th floor, Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi, the 16th April, 2009.
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject:—Excess expenditure over sanctioned grant for the year 2006-07—Reg.
During the year 2006-07, a case has come to  light wherein there has been excess
expenditure over and above the sanctioned budget (including supplementary grant)
under one of the Object Heads. Although, the excess expenditure was very nominal
and incurred inadvertently, the matter has been taken cognizance of by the Public
Accounts Committee of Parliament, who have taken a serious view of the same.  The
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) has desired that all the Ministries should ensure
rigid enforcement of prescribed financial rules and procedures, so as to contain the
instances of excess expenditure to the bare minimum. The Committee has also
recommended that action should also be taken to deal sternly with cases where any
slackness is noticed in observance of prescribed financial rules.
The above instructions of the PAC may be noted for strict compliance by all
concerned.
It may please by ensured that the sanctioned budget under various Object
Heads is not exceeded in any case, failing which, a  serious view will be taken
Sd/-
(R.C. Tully)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India.
1. All Pay & Accounts Officers, Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
2. All Regional Directors/Registrars of Companies/Official Liquidators.
3. Secretary, MRTP Commission, New Delhi.
4. Director General I&R, New Delhi.
5. Secretary, Company Law Board, New Delhi.
6. Director, SFIO, New Delhi.
7. Secretary, Competition Commission, New Delhi.
8. Deputy Secretary, NCLT, New Delhi.
9. Principal Pay & Accounts Officer, Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi.
10. IF Division, MCA.
11. All Officers /Sections at the Headquarters.
35

,Qñ 7¼1½@ch ¼,lMh½@2009
foÙk ea=ky;
vkfFkZd dk;Z foHkkx
¼ctV izHkkx½
ubZ fnYyh] fnukad 21 tqykbZ] 2009
fo"k;% 2006&2007 ls lacaf/kr vfrfjDr vuqnkuksa dh ekaxsa ¼jsyos dks NksM+dj½
v/kksgLrk{kjh dks ;g dgus dk funs'k gqvk gS fd o"kZ 2006&2007 dh vfrfjDr vuqnkuksa dh
ekaxas ¼jsyos dks NksM+dj½ yksd lHkk us ikfjr dj nh gaSA laln us lacaf/kr fofu;ksx ¼la[;k&2½ fo/ks;d]
2009 Hkh ikfjr dj fn;k gS vkSj Hkkjr ds jk"Vªifr us blds fy, fnukad 20 tqykbZ] 2009 dks viuh
Lohd`fr ns nh gS vkSj ;g vf/kfu;e Hkkjr ds jkti= ¼vlk/kkj.k½ Hkkx&
II, [k.M&I, fnukad 21
tqykbZ] 2009 esa o"kZ 2009 ds vf/kfu;e la[;k 30 ds :i esa izdkf'kr fd;k x;k gSA
Sd/-
¼ohñ izdk'k½
mi funs'kd ¼ctV½
F-7(1)—B (SD)/2009
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
***
New Delhi, the 21st July, 2009
Subject: Demands for Excess Grants (Excluding Railways) relating to 2006-2007.
The undersigned is directed  to state that the Demands for Excess Grants
(Excluding Railways)  relating to 2006-2007 have been passed  by the Lok Sabha.
The connected Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2009 has also been passed by Parliament
and assented  to by the President of India on the 20th July, 2009 and the Act has
been published  in the Gazette of India (Extra-ordinary) Part II, Section I dated the
21st July, 2009 as Act No. 30 of 2009.
Sd/-
(V. PRAKASH)
 Deputy Director (Budget)
1. All financial  Advisers in the Ministries/Departments.
2. The Finance Library (Publication Section) (10 Copies), It is requested that
copies of the Gazette of India (Extra-ordinary) Part II, Section 1 dated the
21st July 2009 as Act No.  30 of 2009  may be obtained from the Manager of
Publication and supplied to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India,
10 - Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi- 110 002.
36

37
3. The Parliament Library, Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001 (10 Copies).
4 . The Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch), Parliament Annexe,
New Delhi-110 001 (10 Copies).
5. The Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 10 - Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
6 . The Director General of Audit, Central Revenues, AGCR Building,
New Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
7. The Director General of Audit, Posts & Telecommunications, Old  Secretariat,
Delhi-110 054 (10 Copies).
8. The Director General of Audit, Defence Services,New Delhi-110 001 (10 Copies).
9. The Controller General of Accounts, Lok Nayak Bhawan,New Delhi (10 Copies).
10. The Ministry of Planning, Planning  Commission, Y ojana Bhawan,
New Delhi — 110 001.
11. The Adviser FR, Planning Commission, Yojana Bhawan, New Delhi-110 001
12. The Member FR, Planning Commission, Yojana Bhawan, New Delhi-110 001
13. Finance Secretary.
14. Secretary (Expenditure).
15. Secretary (Revenue).
16. Joint Secretary (Budget).
17. Joint Secretary (PF-I).
18. Joint Secretary (PF-II).
19. Director (SSB)/CAAA & Director (DD)/ Director (VS)/ DS (FRBM)/DS (NMJ)/
DS (RKS).
20. Director (OL) (10 Copies).
21. All USs/DDs DD (Hindi)/Sr. A.O./PAO/SOs (including PF- I & II) Budget
Division.

2006&2007 ds laca/k esa
dsUnzh; ljdkj ds O;; ds fy, vfrfjDr vuqnkuksa dh ekaxsa
¼jsyos dks NksM+dj½
DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
for
EXPENDITURE OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
(Excluding Railways)
RELATING TO
2006-2007
lafo/kku ds vuqPNsn 115 ds [k.M ¼1½ ¼[k½ ds vuqlj.k esa yksd lHkk esa izLrqr
Presented to the Lok Sabha in pursuance of clause (1) (b) of Article 115 of the
Constitution
[jk"Vªifr dh flQkfj'k] tks ekaxksa dks izLrqr djus ds fy, lafo/kku ds vuqPNsn 115 ds [k.M ¼1½ ¼[k½
vkSj ¼2½ ds lkFk ifBr vuqPNsn 113 ds [k.M ¼3½ ds v/khu vko';d gS] izkIr dj yh xbZ  gS]
[The recommendation of the President, required under clause (3) of Article 113
read with clauses (1)(b) and (2) of Article 115 of the Constitution for making
the Demands has been obtained]
tqykbZ/July, 2009
38

39
vfrfjDr vuqnkuksa dh ekaxas]  2006-2007 DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS (iii)
o"kZ 2006&2007 ds nkSjku laln }kjk Lohd`r vuqnkuksa@fofu;ksxksa ls gq, vfrfjDr O;; dks n'kkZus okyk fooj.k
Statement showing the expenditure incurred in excess of the Grants Voted/Appropriations made by Parliament during 2006-2007
vafre vuqnku okLrfod vfrfjDr i`"Bk— dk
fofu;ksx O;; O;; lanHkZ
Øe vuqnku@fofu;ksx dh Sr. No. & Title of Final Grant/ Act ural Excess Ref.
lañ la[;k vkSj 'kh"kZd No. Grant/Appropriation Appropriation Expenditure Expenditure to
#i, Rs. #i, Rs. #i, Rs. pages
1- jktLo ls iwjk fd;k x;k O;; 1. EXPENDITURE MET FROM REVENUE
22- j{kk lsok&Fky lsuk Lohd`r 22 Defence Serive — Army V oted: 33191,04,00.000 33858,20,95,590 667,16,95,590 2
34- fofu;ksx&C;kt 34 Appropriation —
Hkqxrku ikfjr Intrest Payments Charged: 150691,85,00,000 154279,73,97,248 3587,88,97,248 3
53- [kku ea=ky; Hkkfjr 63 Ministry of Mines Charged: 4,75,00,000 4,78,16,785 3,16,785 5
tksM+ jktLo ls iwjk fd;k x;k O;; Total - Expenditure met from Revenue 183887,64,00,000 188142,73,09,623 4255,09,09,623
Hkkfjr Charged: 150696,60,00.000 154284,52,14,033 3587,92,14,033
Lohd`r Voted: 33191,04,00,000 33858,20,95,590 667,16,95,590
II. iwath ls iwjk fd;k x;k O;;  II. EXPENDITURE MET FROM CAPITAL
16- dEiuh dk;Z ea=ky; Lohd`r 16 Ministry of Company Affairs Voted: 36,80,00,000 36,80,40,000 40,000 1
37- fofu;ksx&_.k dh  okilh vnk;xh Hkkfjr 37 Appropriation —
Repayment of Debt Charged: 14 47889,10,00,000 1480938,37,17,342 33049,27,17,242 4
tksM+&iwath ls iwjk fd;k x;k O;; Total - Expenditure met from Capital 1447925,90,00,000 1480975,17,57,342 33049,27,57,342
Hkkfjr Charged: 14 47889,10,00,000 1480938,37,17,342 33049,27,17,342
Lohd`r Voted: 36,80,00,000 36,80,40,000 40,000
dqy tksM+ GRAND TOTAL 1631813,54,00,00 0 16691 17,90,66,965 37304,36,66,965
Hkkfjr Charged: 15 98585,70,00,000 1635222,89,31,375 36637,19,31,375
Lohd`r Voted: 33227,84,00,000 33895,01,35,590 667,17,35,590

ekax la[;k Demand No. 16
dEiuh dk;Z ea=ky;
MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS
dEiuh dk;Z ea=ky; ds v/khu dEiuh dk;Z ea=ky; ds laca/k esa 31 ekpZ] 2007 dks lekIr gq,
o"kZ ds fy, vuqnkuksa ls vf/kd O;; dh xbZ /kujkf'k
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2007  in
respect of  the  MINISTRY OF COMPANY AFFAIRS  under   MINISTRY OF COMPANY
AFFAIRS.
Lohd`r pkyhl gtkj #i,
V oted Forty Thousand Rupees
Hkkx vafre vuqnku okLrfod O;; vfrfjDr O;;
Sections Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
#i, Rs. #i, Rs. #i, Rs.
iwath Capital
Lohd`r Voted 36,80,00,000 36,80,40,000 40,000
10]00]00]000 #i, ds ewy vuqnku dks
ekpZ] 2007 esa izkIr 26]80]00]000 #i, ds iwjd
vuqnku }kjk c<+k;k x;kA 36]80]00]000 #i,
ds vafre vuqnku dh rqyuk esa okLrfod O;;
36]80]40]000 #i, jgkA ifj.kkeLo:i
40]000 #i, dk vfrfjDr O;; gqvk ftls fd
fu;fer  fd, tkus dh vko';drk gSA vfrfjDr
O;; vuqnkuksa dh iwjd ekaxksa dks ekaxrs le;
djksM+ #i, ds fudVre vkadM+ksa esa iw.kk±du esa
vlko/kkuh  cjrus ds dkj.k gqvkA
The Original grant of
Rs. 10,00,00,000 was augmented by a
supplementary grant of Rs. 26,80,00,000
obtained in March, 2007. Against  the final
grant of Rs. 36,80,00,000 the actual
expenditure  was Rs. 36,80,40,000 resulting
in an excess expenditure of  Rs. 40,000
which requires regularisation. The excess
expenditure was incurred due to
inadvertent rounding off figures to the
nearest  crore of rupees while  seeking the
Supplementary Demand for Grants.
40

41
Action Taken by the Ministry of Mines
This Ministry  has already taken  steps in this regard. The proposal  for
regularization of excess of expenditure  of  Rs. 3.17 lakh occurred in the charged portion
of the Revenue Section of the Grant No. 63 in respect of Ministry of Mines has been
sent to Ministry of Finance in the budget  session of the Lok Sabha for seeking
necessary Parliamentary  approval.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. AMG-I/V .V./A TN/2009-10/250-
252 dated 24th August 2009.
[Ministry of Mines O.M. No. 3(38)2006-IF dated, 21.10.2009]
Action Taken by the Ministry of  Defence
The Government, in the Ministry of Defence, has no comments to offer on this
recommendation of the Committee
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The excess for the year 2006-07 will be got regularized in the forthcoming Budget
Session of the Parliament.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 9-RA-III/2-1/2008 dated 21.4.2009 have vetted the
Action Taken.
Ministry's Comments
The Excess for the year 2006-07 has since been regularized in this year's Budget
Session of the Parliament.
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2008-BC-PAC/XIV/80 dated, 31.08.2009]

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH  THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation  No. 7
The Ministry of Railways have incurred excess expenditure  aggregating to
Rs. 2317 crore under 'V oted' portion of Grant No. 4,6,10 & 16 (Capital) and Rs. 5.29 crore
under Charged Appropriation  No. 3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,13 & 16 (Railway Funds) during
2005-06. The Public Accounts Committee (2007-08), vide para 60 in their Fifty-fourth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses Over  V oted Grants and Charged  Appropriations
(2005-06)", which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 24.8.2007
(Monsoon Session) had recommended its regularization. As per the extant procedures
the Demands for Excess Grants (Railways) for 2005-06 should be taken up in the House
in the session in which the Public Accounts Committee  presents its report or in the
following Session. However,  the demands for Excess Grants (Railways) for 2005-06
have been presented to Lok Sabha  in the subsequent Session i.e. Budget Session on
05.3.2008. Consequently, the present Excess Demands were  not in conformity with the
procedure laid down by the Public Accounts Committee. The Committee  desire  the
Ministry of Railways to examine  into the circumstances leading to this delay and
inform  the Committee thereof. They also recommend that necessary action should
also be taken to avoid such recurrence in future.
[Sl. No. 7 Para No. 56 of 80th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of  Railways
The observations of the Committee have been noted. 54th Report of PAC was
obtained from Lok Sabha Secretariat on 15.11.2007. The issue remained under
correspondence with Audit till 25.9.2008. The finalized ATN was sent to PAC/Monitoring
Cell on 06.10.2008 and the delay, though inordinate, is regretted.
Audit vide their U.O.No. 36-RA-III/2-1/2008 dated 17.6.2009 have  observed that
the following Audit observations and comments of Ministry of  Railways vide U.O.
No. 2008-BC-PAC/XIV/80 dated 03 June,  2009 may be appended to the Action Taken
Note:
Audit observations
The explanations given by the Ministry are  not in conformity with the points
raised by the PAC. The committee  presented its report in the Parliament on  24.8.2007.
As per laid down procedure, Excess Grants (Railways) for 2005-06 should be presented
in the same session (Monsoon Sessison) or in the following  Winter Session. However,
it was presented in subsequent Budget Session on 05.3.2008. Instead of explaining
this delay, Ministry has given  clarification for delay in presenting ATN to PAC.
42

43
As such, Ministry of Railways may clarify the delay in presenting Excess Grants
(Railways) for 2005-06 to the Parliament on 05.03.2008 after presentation of PAC's
Report on "Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriation (2005-06)" on
24.8.2007.
Comments of the Ministry of Railways
54th Report of PAC was presented to Parliament on 24.8.2007 but the same was
not received in this office. It was only after getting a reminder from Ministry of Finance
that a copy of the Report was obtained from Lok Sabha Secretariat on 15.11.2007 when
the Winter Session was in progress. This hardly left any time with Ministry to prepare
the book on Excess Demand for Grants, completing various formalities involving
consultation with Ministry of Law, seeking business with Lok Sabha Secretariat,
recommendation from President of India etc. Therefore, the Excess was got regularized
in the following Budget Session of Parliament.
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2008-BC-PAC/XIV/80 dated 31-08-2009]
Observation/Recommendation (No.8)
It was found that the Appropriation Accounts—Railways (2006-07)  have been
presented to Parliament on 24-10-2008 (Monsoon Session). However, the Appropriation
Accounts relating to Civil, Defence Services and Postal Services for the year (2006-07)
were presented to Parliament on 07-12-2007 (Winter Session). As per the procedure,
the Public Accounts Committee examines the explanatory notes furnished by the
Ministries/Departments after the presentation of the Appropriation Accounts and
presents a Report thereon to Parliament recommending regularization of the excesses
under Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution. It was found that the presentation of
Indian Railways Appropriation Accounts for the year 2006-07 was delayed by more
than ten months after 07-12-2007 which in turn resulted into delay in regularization of
excess expenditure of the Ministries of Finance, Defence and Railways should examine
the reasons for such delay and intimate the same to the Committee. It is needless to
point out at this stage that such a delay would not take place in future and the eventual
delay in fulfilling Constitutional obligation is not repeated.
[Sl No. 8 Para No. 57 of 80th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The schedule for laying the Appropriation Accounts in Parliament exists in the
“Budget Session of Parliament” as laid down in Para 1.5 of the 88th Report of PAC
(10th Lok Sabha). Ministry of Railways was not aware with any subsequent revision
for pre-ponement of the schedule for presentation of Appropriation Accounts to
Parliament in the month of December (Winter Session). Now that the new schedule has
been indicated in the instant PAC report, the same will be followed.
Initially the date for laying Appropriation Accounts—2006-07 was fixed 06.05.2008
(in Budget Session). However, one day before the presentation of Appropriation
Accounts, the Lok Sabha was adjourned and the Appropriation Accounts could not
be presented to Parliament on 06-05-2008. Thereafter, in the next Session of Parliament,

44
the date for presentation was fixed on 24-10-2008 and the same were finally laid down
in both the Houses of Parliament on 24-10-2008.
However, the revised schedule for laying the Appropriation Accounts has now
been noted and sincere effort would be made to observe this schedule while compiling
future Appropriation Accounts.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 9-RA-III/2-1/2008 dated 21-4-2009 made following
observations:
A TN is returned as verified. However, Ministry is requested to put in place a
suitable mechanism for watching and effective monitoring the progress of preparation
and finalization of Appropriation Accounts so that these can be presented in the
Parliament in the Winter Session with the Appropriation Accounts of Civil, Defence
and Posts Services.
Ministry's Comments
Ministry of Railways is aware of the revised schedule of Appropriation Accounts
fixed by the Public Accounts Committee for its presentation in Parliament during Winter
Session. Accordingly, the instruction/schedule programme for finalization of various
statements of Appropriation Accounts to various Zonal Railways/Pus have been
circulated on 23.4.2009.
This has also been reiterated to GMs of the Zonal Railways/Pus to ensure that
the Audit observations are promptly replied to and settled by holding discussions
among the Audit and Accounts and if necessary, at the higher level, in such a way that
prescribed schedule is not disturbed.
By taking concerted efforts we hope that Appropriation Accounts 2008-09 could
be finalized in the last week of October, 2009 and we will be able to table these accounts
in Parliament during Winter Session.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 36-RA-III/2-1/2008 dated 17-6-2009 have vetted the
Action Taken.
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2008-BC-PAC/XIV/80 dated 31.08.2009.]

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation ( No. 2)
The Committee note with grave concern that out of 18 cases, the excess
expenditure of Rs. 37002.22 crore in 15 cases of Grants/Appropriations had occurred
despite obtaining supplementary provisions of Rs. 356599.27 crore. This proves the
failure of the Ministries/Departments to assess requirement of additional funds but
also the inadequacies in the institutional arrangements in the Ministries/Departments
in monitoring the flow and trend of expenditure under various Grants/Appropriations.
The Committee are also perturbed to note that under Appropriation No. 34—Interest
Payments and Appropriation No. 37—Repayment of Debt pertaining to the Ministry
of Finance and Grant No. 16—Assets-Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—
Railway funds pertaining to the Ministry of Railways, the amount obtained as
supplementary provision was higher than the excess expenditure incurred. The
Committee further note that the excess expenditure in the two appropriations operated
by the Ministry of Finance  i.e. in the "Appropriation-Interest Payments" persisted
during the years 2005-2006 to 2006-2007 and in the "Appropriation-Repayment of
Debt" persisted during the past four years i.e. 2003-2004 to 2006-2007. It is onerous
duty of the Committee to point out in this Report that it is evident from the
Appropriation Accounts under scrutiny that the excess expenditure have been
incurred despite the fact that supplementary grants were obtained. The Committee
therefore come to an inescapable conclusion that the concerned Ministries have
failed not only in making realistic and pragmatic Budget Estimates but even the
Supplementary Demands as projected could not bail them out from making excess
expenditure. The Committee expect that in future the Ministries/Departments would
make all out efforts in arresting the surging trend of excess expenditure by making
the required and pragmatic figures during the stage of Supplementary Demands for
Grants. The Committee do not expect the Ministries/Departments to fall into excess
expenditure even after obtaining Supplementary Grants which is seen to have been
repeatedly happening in many cases. It is, therefore, imperative that the Ministries/
Departments should keep close watch over the trend of expenditure and when any
need for additional funds arises they should assess realistically their requirement of
funds in advance and approach Parliament by presenting Supplementary Demands
for Grants in time. It is not expected of any Ministry/Department to cross their
financial limits after obtaining Supplementary Grants as has happened in many cases.
The Committee further reiterate from their earlier Reports that the Ministries/
Departments should review the existing mechanism and upgrade the computerization
and net working system so that the progress of expenditure can be strictly monitored
45

46
and timely action can be taken to ensure that expenditure does not arise beyond the
limits sanctioned by Parliament.
[Sl. No. 2,  Paragraph 51 of Eightieth Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken by the  Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
The recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee have been noted.
Repayment of Debt
2. The provisions relating to 'Repayment of Debt' are for repayment of internal as
well external debt on their due dates. The estimates for repayment of Internal Debt are
framed on the basis of inputs furnished by RBI, the Debt Manager of the Government.
Similarly, the estimates for repayment of external debt are furnished by the office of the
Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit.
3. Estimates of expenditure in respect of repayment of 91 days Treasury Bills,
particularly 14 days Intermediate Treasury Bills are difficult to project with a high
degree of accuracy. 14 days Intermediate Treasury Bills are main instruments used by
State Governments for parking their surplus short term cash balances and the Central
Government has no option but to accept such investments through issue of 14 days
Intermediate Treasury Bill. In the event of persistent surplus cash balances, the
investments are rolled over but  accounted for as expenditure and then reinvestment.
In essence, these are cash management instruments of State Governments. Since
these expenditures are matched by receipts, they also do not involve any cash outgo.
4. The excess under 6.5% Savings Bonds, 2003 (Non-Taxable) was due to higher
encashment of bonds than anticipated by the bond holders by exercising the option of
premature encashment available in the scheme. Similarly, the excess was on account of
more than anticipated discharge of 364 days treasury bills.
Interest Payments
5. The entire expenditure included in the Appropriation—Interest Payments is
classified as ‘Charged’on the Consolidated Fund of India under article 112(3)(c) of the
Constitution of India. The Appropriation — Interest Payments is centralized
appropriation which provides for interest charges on Central Government's debt
obligations, both internal and external, interest payable on provident funds, special
deposits with the Government besides depreciation and other reserve funds of
commercial departments, like  Railways. Provisions for management of debt and other
liabilities of the Central Govenment are also included in this Appropriation. The excess
expenditure, during the financial year 2006-2007, was largely due to payment of more
interest on various instruments under internal debt and few cases under external debt
in Appropriation No. 34—Interest Payments.
6. The estimates of interest payments are framed based on inputs from a number
of agencies including Ministries/Departments and Reserve Bank of India. Estimates of
repayment of internal debt and interest payments thereon are made by Reserve Bank
of India. While every effort is made to project estimates as accurately as possible, the
need to further improve estimation techniques is acknowledged. Since the bulk of the

47
estimates of repayment of debt and interest payments are on ‘internal debt’, Reserve
Bank of India has been advised to review the same from time to time, so that the
variations may be kept at the minimum given the fact that these estimates are difficult
to assess accurately.
7. In order to improve the quality of estimation of Repayment of Debt and Interest
Payments, Reserve Bank of India was requested to constitute a 'Working Group' with
representation from the Budget Division and the Office of Chief Controller of Accounts
(Finance). Among the steps being taken to improve quality of estimation under these
Appropriations based on recommendations of the 'Working Group' includes web-
based connectivity between RBI, Budget Division and CCA (Finance), Ministry of
Finance and periodic updation of the estimates during the year so as to seek
supplementary demands for grants when required. Relevant extracts of the
recommendations of the 'Working Group' are as follows:
• The broken period interest, premium, discount and interest on market loans
have been budgeted and accounted for as separate streams to enable greater
precision in the estimation and reporting process from the Union Budget
2008-09.
• The dated securities (market loans) and their dates of issue during the
fourth quarter has been identified in advance so that coupon payments/
premium/discount/broken period interest could be estimated based on
projections of secondary market yield and will be continued in future also.
• To estimate the discharges of Intermediate Treasury Bills for the period
January-March, a new model apart from the two alternative models as
recommended by the Working Group has been developed to eliminate
underestimation.
• The amount of discharges (BE) of Normal Intermediate Treasury Bills in the
ensuing year has been estimated at by multiplying the amount of discharges
during the current year (RE) with the annualized quarterly average rate of
growth in discharges exhibited during Q4 of the previous year and Q1, Q2
and Q3 of the current year from the Union Budget 2008-09.
• New method of 3-month (quarterly) moving averages to make estimation of
discharges of 91-day Auction Treasury Bills has been applied from 2008-09
(BE).
• For better reconciliation between Internal Debt Management Department
(IDMD) (which prepares the estimates) and Central Accounts Section (CAS),
Nagpur (which is the record keeper of Government transactions) before
forwarding budgetary estimates to the Government, IDMD has since noted
the requisite data in the format specified by Central Accounts Section,
Nagpur from the year 2008.
• The discount rate on Intermediate Treasury Bills would be assumed to be
equal to the prevailing rate for RE and BE projections to arrive at the amount
of discount payments for RE of the current year and BE for the ensuing year.
The recommendation was adopted for 2008-09 (BE).

48
• The method suggested by the Working Group that RBI to reckon six previous
auction results for estimation of discount rate to be applied on Auction
Treasury Bills (Normal) in line with Auction Treasury Bills (Market
Stabilisation Scheme) instead of three previous auctions results was adopted
for estimation of discount rate in respect of 2007-08 (RE) and 2008-09 (BE).
• The quarterly average growth model was adopted for the estimation of BE
on issuances of Auction Treasury Bills in respect of 91-day Treasury Bills.
The method as suggested by the Working Group was suitably modified to
arrive at reasonable estimates for issuances of 182/364-days Treasury Bills.
The issuances were multiplied to the discount rate estimated by applying
the formula as recommended by the Working Group.
• After taking into account the past trend of the cash flows and adding an
uncertainty component as recommended by the Working Group, the BE for
2008-09 has been projected to estimate discharges and interest on Ways &
Means Advance.
• From April 1, 2008 onwards, discount on Market Stabilisation Scheme
Treasury Bills is being booked at the time of issuance at Central Accounts
Section, Nagpur on the same lines as is being done for Normal Treasury
Bills at Public Accounts Department, Mumbai.
• Estimation in respect of various Relief/Savings Bonds under Compensation
Bonds is received nomenclature-wise, as recommended by the Working
Group, from Union Budget 2008-09.
• The assumptions behind the estimation process in respect of calculation of
GFD, share of net market borrowings in financing Gross Fiscal Deficit, average
coupon, etc., are provided to the Government at the BE (2008-09) stage that
were used for further refinement.
• Necessary instructions have been issued to State Bank of India for
submission of claims for reimbursement strictly within the same financial
year, in order to avoid delay in settlement and booking the expenditure in
the Government account.
8. The estimates for the year 2007-08 were worked out in respect of Appropriation
'Repayment of Debt' and 'Interest Payments' on the basis of Working Group
recommendations and there has been no excess in these Appropriations in 2007-08.
9. This has been vetted by the Audit vide U.O. No. RR/1-18/09-10/335, dated
13.07.2009.
[File No. F.6(1)-B(AC)/2009 dated 28.07.2009]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
As far as the Ministry of Corporate Affairs is concerned, the amount of
Supplementary Grant required was Rs. 26,8040 crore. While seeking Supplementary
Grant the figure in the prescribed proforma was inadvertently shown as Rs. 26,80 crore
after rounding off the figure of Rs. 26,8040  crore (upto two digits after decimal) instead

49
of Rs. 26.81 crore, thereby, incurring an excess expenditure of Rupees forty thousand
against the allocated Supplementary Grant.
Budget Module already exists in the system. The implementation process is
under progress.
[Ministry/Department of Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
O.M. No. 10/2/08-IFD dated: 14.10.09]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Mines
This Ministry has noted and implemented the suggestions of the Hon'ble
Committee through monitoring the expenditure periodically and taking constant efforts
for avoiding any excess expenditure.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. AMG-I/V .V./A TN/2009-10/250-
252 dated 24th August, 2009.
[Ministry of Mines O.M.NO. 3(38)/2006-IF dated 21.10.2009]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The observations of the Committee have been noted. While it is the endeavour
of the Ministry to make realistic assessment of the requirements, as far as possible,
and seek supplementary demands accordingly, deviations occur because Railway
being a vast organization and with last minute pressures on the field units where some
of the demands may not be anticipated at the time of compiling of their projections. In
the instant case of Demand No. 16 - Assets — Acquisition, Construction and
Replacement — Railway Funds, though the reported excess of Rs 325.29 cr. comes to
2.6 per cent of the total sanctioned provisions under Railway Funds, the actual excess
recommended for regularization viz., Rs. 121.33 cr. is less than 1% of the total Grant.
This may kindly be considered as minor.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 9-RA-III/2-1/2008 dated 21-4-2009 made following
observations:
Ministry is requested to comment on the efficacy of the existing mechanism with
it to monitor the expenditure so as to take timely action to keep the expenditure within
the limit sanctioned by the Parliament.
Ministry's comments
The existing mechanism for expenditure monitoring at the level of Ministry of
Railways in the context of 'Demand No. 16- Assets - Acquisition, Construction and
Replacement' broadly comprises monthly/quarterly/periodical reviews of expenditure/
progress under various plan heads. The trend of expenditure is compiled by Accounts
Directorate also and discussed in Board Meetings alongwith Plan Heads-wise feedback
provided by the concerned Directorates. Whenever required necessary instructions
are issued from the Ministry of Railways to the zonal railways to take effective steps to
control or steps up expenditure, as the case may be, under a particular plan head. The
efficacy of the mechanism should be understood in the background of the scope of
this demand. This demand deals with large number of plan heads and source heads

50
under which grants/appropriations are obtained from the Parliament and finally these
funds are utilised to execute numerous works spread over entire geographical area of
the country. The data regarding estimates and expenditure is, therefore, collected from
multiple sites and compiled at the divisional/zonal headquarters level before these are
received in the Ministry of Railways and while advising back these estimates/
expenditures limits to the executive authorities, its reverse route is followed. The
process is bound to be very time consuming. The expenditure limits advised on the
basis of estimates drawn long back, may not accommodate certain requirements arising
late and also miss the fluctuating unit cost of material and labour due to which the
assessed requirement in quantitative as well as in monetary terms, thereby grant/
appropriations and supplementaries obtained from the Parliament on this basis sometime
vary from the actual cost of execution at later date. In such a scenario, the magnitude
of excess of saving normally witnessed in the context of Demand No. 16 should be
treated as normal and the efforts made and monitoring mechanism in place can be
considered effective.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 36-RA-III/2-1/2008 dated 17-6-2009 have observed that
the following observations may be appended to the Action Taken Note:
The magnitude of excesses or saving normally witnessed in the context of Demand
No. 16, even in view of the existing procedure brought out in the reply given by the
Ministry of Railways, cannot be treated as normal. Ministry of Railways needs review
of the existing mechanism and upgrade the computerization and networking system so
that the progress of expenditure can be strictly monitored and timely action can be
taken to ensure that expenditure does not arise beyond the limits sanctioned by
Parliament.
Ministry's comments
The observations of the Audit have been noted. A letter has been issued from
Board to all the Zonal Railways/Units (copy enclosed) to maintain close coordination
between the zonal headquarters and its subordinate offices both in assessing the
requirement at the time of revised Estimates/Final Estimates and later on in disbursing
funds allotted by Board based on grant approved by the Parliament and also keep the
bookings up-to-date. To achieve this, Zonal Railways/Units have been emphasized to
develop an effective computer network with their subordinate offices to keep the
expenditure within the sanctioned limits.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 55-RA-III/2-1/2008 dated 18-8-2009 havetretted the
Action Taken with the remarks "Seen Thanks".
[Ministry of  Railways, case No. 2008-BC-PAC/XIV/80 dated 31.08.2009]

D.O.No. 2008-B-142 New Delhi, dated 28-07-2009
My dear
Sub: Excess over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2005-06 & 2006-07).
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) and Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(C&AG) have been severely critical of the instances of excess expenditure over the
grants approved by the Parliament and appropriations authorized. In the context of
2005-06 and 2006-07, the PAC has raised question on the efficacy of the existing
monitoring mechanism to control/restrict the expenditure within the limits sanctioned
by the Parliament. Both Revenue and Works Grants/Appropriations have received
attention of the PAC wherein excess has occurred. The position of the Railways was
explained to the PAC through Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on 84th Report and 80th
Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on "Excess over V oted Grants and Charged
Appropriations' (2006-07 and 2005-06 respectively)", highlighting the vastness of the
railway network spread over the entire geographical area from were the data is collected
& communicated back, and the gap between the time when the estimates of expenditure
are prepared at the initial level and when the grants/appropriations are sought from
Parliament and communicated back, and also the escalation in the cost of material and
labour etc. due to this time gap. The PAC has, however, not been impressed with this
stand and categorically asked for review of the existing mechanism and upgrade the
computerization and networking system to mitigate the inherent flaws so that the
progress of expenditure can be strictly monitored and timely action taken to ensure
that expenditure does not arise beyond the limits sanctioned by Parliament.
Ministry of Railways also feel need for an effective change in the existing
mechanism both for timely and accurate assessment of the requirement leading to
request to the Parliament for grant of the demand and also for monitoring the expenditure
against the allotment made to them by Railway Board. Experience shows that bookings
made by zonal railways/units during the first three quarters of the year are relatively
very low as compared to that at the end of the last quarter which jump drastically at the
fag end of the financial year. It undoubtedly, indicates some laxity in the existing
booking practice. Also, it is seen that the actual expenditure varies substantially from
the allotments fixed by Board in Revised Estimates (RE) and Final Modification (FM).
Needless to mention that the allotments made in the RE forms the basis for the amount
of Supplementary Grants/Appropriations to be obtained from Parliament in final session
of the financial year. The Final Modification Estimates are normally received after the
final supplementary has already been presented to the Parliament, hence no opportunity
Hkkjr ljdkj jsy ea=ky;] ¼jsyos cksMZ½
ubZ fnYyh&110001
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AYS BOARD)
NEW DELHI-110001
M.S. Khan
Additional Members (Budget)
51

52
is left at this juncture to obtain another supplementary. Heavy demand in FM for
additional allotment over the RE, and spending more funds in anticipation of allotment,
or in disregard of the available allotment, is unwarranted.
In view of the above, I may emphasis upon a close coordination between the
Zonal headquarters and its subordinate offices/authorities both in assessing the
requirement at the time of RE/FM, and later on in disbursing/spending of the funds
allotted  by Board based against the grant approved by the Parliament and also keep
the booking up-to-date.
The Railways/Units may take concrete steps to comply with the concerns of the
PAC to review the existing requirement of assessment and expenditure monitoring
mechanism and develop an effective computer network to keep the expenditure within
the sanctioned limits.
With best wishes,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(M.S. Khan)
The Financial Advisor & Chief Accounts Officers,
All Indian Railways/Units

53
Observation/Recommendation (Sl. No. 6)
It is also disconcerting to note that the instances of misclassification of expenditure
continue to recur unabatedly in Indian Railways Appropriation Accounts. This is an
oft-repeated concern expressed by the Committee. A large number of cases of
misclassification of expenditure had been noticed continuously over the years. During
the year under review, there were five cases of misclassification of expenditure  reported
under the 13 cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations. Recurrence of
misclassification is unacceptable to the Committee and the Committee strongly
recommend to avoid such mistakes and desires that perfection in the operation of
accounting system is displaced by Ministry of Railways so that misclassification
should not be repeated every year. Here the Committee would also like to draw attention
of Ministry of Railways that in their Fifty-fourth Reports (14th Lok Sabha) had
categorically recommended for a thorough review of the system in order to eliminate
chances of misclassification. Notwithstanding  the earlier recommendations, the
Committee note that  misclassification has  taken place in the current year also. The
needful is yet to be done to check the recurrence of misclassification, the Committee
would like to know the measures taken  hitherto to address the problem so that
Committee's recommendation gets due weightage and it helps Railways not only as a
corrective measure in obviating misclassification but also act as preventive measure
too. The Committee also recommend to fix responsibility for the negligence in the
duties of care.
[Sl. No. 6 Para No. 55 of 80th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee regarding misclassification
of expenditure have been noted for guidance. This Ministry have conveyed serious
concern to the Zonal Railways for the Misclassification of expenditure during 2006-07
and have called for the Action Taken Report against the incidence of individual item.
As a result of review of the Action Taken Reports received from the Zonal Railways, it
has been noticed that the cases of misclassifications are occuring due to lack of
adequate attention being given at the time of preparation of vouchers. FA&CAOs of
the Railways concerned have been  directed to take urgent steps in implementation of
instruction already existing for close and concurrent review of booking of expenditure
at various levels; test check of allocation recorded on vouchers; prompt reconciliation
of the subsidiary books with the General Books and fixing up of responsibility for
lapses at suitable levels. Instructions issued to the Railways also provide for regular
reporting on punitive action taken for errors detected on this account. As a result, a
number of staff have been taken up by the Railway fixing responsibility for the lapses.
Although the total elimination of instances of misclassification will be difficult
to achieve  in practice, mainly due to the sheer volume of transactions and their
varying nature, it shall always be the endeavour of Ministry of Railways to avoid
Misclassifications/Mistakes and minimize the same.
Audit vide their U.O.No. 9-RA-III/2-1/2008 dated 21-4-2009 made following
observations:

54
Ministry  of Railways is requested to place on record the copies of instructions
issued in this regard. Ministry may place on record whether any thorough review of
the system, as desired by the Committee in its Fifty-forth Report (14th Lok Sabha), was
undertaken in order to eliminate chances of misclassification. Results of the review of
the system may be placed on record.
Ministry's Comments
Thorough review of the accounting system is done by this Ministry from time to
time and instruction/guidelines are issued in order to eliminate the incidence of
misclassifications/mistakes (copy enclosed). These instructions are reiterated from
time to time with a view to ensuring proper maintenance of accounts and more  stringent
scrutiny. Instructions issued  to the Railways also provide for regular reporting on
punitive action taken for errors detected on this account.
However, it is difficult to ensure complete elimination of instances of
misclassification in practice, mainly because of differences in the interpretation of the
scheme if classification and accounting rules and partly because of the errors  committed
due to sheer volume and varying nature of transactions required to be handled at
various level  of the Railway organization. However, it is the endeavour of Ministry of
Railways to keep the Misclassification/Mistakes at the minimum level.
Audit vide their U.O.No. 36-RA-III/2-1/2008 dated 17-6-2009 have observed that the
following observations may be appended to the Action Taken Note:
"Railways need to strengthen their internal check mechanism both at pre-audit
and post-audit stages, so that the cases of misclassification are detected at the initial
stage and corrective action taken before  closure of the annual accounts of the year".
Ministry's Comments
Instructions already exist for ensuring correct classification and to fix up staff
for lapses in this regard. However, audit observations have been communicated to the
Railways with the directives to strengthen the systems of pre and post-audit.
This has been seen and vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No. 55-RA-III/2-1/2008
dated 18-8-2009 with the remarks "Seen Thanks".
Sd/-
(B.N. MOHAPATRA)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2008-BC-PAC/XIV/80, dated 31-08-2009]

M.S. Khan
Additional Member (Budget)
D.O. No. 2008 APP/4-12/2007-08 Dated 29.01.2009
My dear/Dear Ms.   **   ,
Sub.:— Misclassification of expenditure
—
The Public Accounts Committee has commented adversely on the lapses that
had occurred by way of misclassification of expenditure in the Accounts of the Railways
for the year 2006-07. The Committee have further stressed the need to probe such
lapses and fix responsibility.
The persistence of the problem has resulted not only in adverse written
communication from PAC to the Ministry, but also exposes the Board to repeated
embarrassment during oral evidence.
In this regard your attention is invited towards FC (Rlys.'s D.O. letter No. 2004/
APP/4-12/2003-04 dated 07.03.2005, addressed to the General Managers of all Zonal
Railways/PUs/Units & copy endoresed to FA&CAOs, expressing concern over the
increasing trend of the items of misclassifications and mistakes in accounting as
reflected in Annexure 'J' of Appropriation Accounts. It was advised that the machinery
may be tightened up at various levels to restrict the factors contributing to these items
and a copy of Railway Board's letter suggesting certain measures to arrest the recurring
incidence of misclassifications and other mistakes was attached along with D.O. ibid.
While reviewing the Appropriation Accounts—2006-07 Annexure 'J' — Statement
of Misclassifications and Other Mistakes detected, it has been observed that the
position is quite unsatisfactory. The number of items figuring in Annexure 'J' for the
2002-03 to 2007-08 years of your Railway is given as under:—
Rlys. 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08
 (as advised by Rlys.)
ER 13 14 08 11 13
NR 12 17 21 19 28
NC 18 16 09 13 15
SR 17 25 25 20 15
SC 08 15 14 13 18
SW 10 15 12 16 25
WR 07 04 02 05 04
From the above, it is clear that the instructions/guidelines issued by the Railway
Board from time to time have not borne the desired results. Instead of eliminating/
55

56
minimizing the number of incidence of misclassifications, their trend appears to have
increased year after year, which is a matter of grave concern.
The increasing trend ot misclassifications and other mistakes reflected in the
Annual Appropriation Accounts of the railways has reached such a stage that it
requires your personal attention. It is, therefore, advised that the matter may be given
serious attention. A detailed report on the subject may please be furnished to the
Board at the earliest.
Kindly acknowledge receipt.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(M.S. Khan)
**FA&CAOs,
S. Shri/Smt. Arjun Rakshit/ER, Gurdeep Singh/NR, Vandana Singhal/NC, Vijaya Kanth/
SR, S. Chandrasekaran/SC, Radha V ariyar/S.W . and S. Ananthanarayanan/W.
Railways.

Vijayalakshmi Viswanathan
Ph: 23382754
D.O. No. 2004.APP/4-12/2003-04 New Delhi, dated 7.03.2005
Dear Shri  ** ,
Sub:— Statement of Misclassifications and Other Mistakes detected—
 Annexure 'J'—2003-04.
————
As you are aware, Public Accounts Committee takes a very serious view on
items of Misclassifications/Mistakes reflected in the Appropriation Accounts of the
Ministry of Railways. Persistence/deterioration in this regard not only results in adverse
written communication to the Ministry, but also exposes Board to repeated
embarrassment during Oral Evidence.
In this regard, your personal attention is invited to the then Addl. Member
(Budget)'s D.O. letter No. 2000 APP/7-2/PAC/Para 15 dated 13.10.2000 addressed to the
General Managers/C.A.Os of All Indian Railways and a letter dated 11.02.2002 to
General Managers an copy endorsed to FA&C.A.Os (copy enclosed), vide which the
guidelines/instructions for curbing the increasing trend of Misclassifications and  Other
Mistakes were circulated for strict adherence.
In spite of the above instructions, a very large number of items of
Misclassifications and Other Mistakes detected have  again been included in Annexure
'J'—2003-04 and submitted by the various Zonal Railways/Units and the position has
deteriorated as  compared to last year, which is matter of grave concern.
A review of items reveals that some of the items requiring adjustments were
pertaining to periods prior to 2003-04, but were not adjusted during 2003-04. Also,
there are some items of misclassification between Minor-head/Sub-head/Detailed-
head of grant not effecting the grant as a whole which do not merit inclusion in
Annexure 'J' in terms  of para 8.1  of  Railway Board's  letter No.  2004.APP/6-1/2003-04
dated 27-05-2004, however,  these are also to be rectified. Moreover, the items which
have previously appeared in Annexure 'J' due to misclassifications and are subsequently
appearing due to non-rectification could have been avoided, if timely action had been
taken as per the provision laid down in Para 922 of Indian Railway Financial Code
(V ol.I)
As a result of detailed discussions held with audit at the Railway Board's level,
some of these items could be dropped from Annexure 'J' for 2003-04, subject to reiteration
of the existing instructions regarding booking of expenditure and earnings.
In order to curb the increasing trend of Misclassifications and Other Mistakes,
there is an urgent need to reiterate the above instructions and tighten the machinery at
57

58
various  levels. Concerted efforts need to be made to restrict the factors contributing
to these items of misclassifications and mistakes in accounting.
Enc./As above
With best wishes,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Vijaylakshmi Viswanathan)
**General Managers/C.A.Os.,
S. Shri  S.B. Ghosh Dastidar/CR, Shyam Kumar/ER, R.R. Jaruhar/NR, J.P. Batra/
NE,  A.K. Sanwalka/NF, Ramesh Chandra/SR, T.N. Perti./SC, R.R. Bhandari/SE, M.Z.
Ansari/WR, J.P. Batra/EC, S.R.  Choudhuri/E.Co, I.P.S. Anand/NC, S.B. Bhattacharya/
NW, T.N. Perti/SW, D.K. Gupta/WC, A.K.  Jain. NF (Const.), Pramod Kumar/SEC,
R. Sivadasan/CLW, R. Sharma/DLW, Shivendra Kumar/ICF, MD. Sirazuddin/RCF,
A.K. Gupta/DMW, Shivendra Kumar/RWF, Budh Prakash/CORE/ALD, P. Sudhakar/
Metro/Kol., C.K  /MTP/Ch. and S.P. Vatsa/MTP/Mumbai.
Copy to FA&CAOs, All Indian Railways along  with a copy of letter No. 2000 APP/7-2/
PAC/Para 15 dated 13.10.2000 and 11.02.2002 for immediate action.
Encl./As above
Sd/-
(Sudhir Mathur)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
RAILW AY BOARD
No. 2000 APP/7-2/PAC/Para 15 Dated 11.02.2002
The General Managers /C.A.Os.,
All Indian Railways.
Sub.:—Misclassification of expenditure.
----
Reference Para 1 of the then Additional Member (Budget)'s D.O. letter of even
number dated 13-10-2000 (a copy enclosed for ready reference), the following
instructions for curbing the increasing trend of Misclassifications and Other Mistakes
are required to be strictly adhered to. These instructions are in addition to the
instructions which have already been circulated earlier from time to time.
• Test check of at least 25% of vouchers, bills, pay orders etc. by the officers
of Executive offices before its submission to Accounts office may be done
as a regular measure.
• Complete check of allocation by the Accounts office staff, 25% check at the
level of Section Officers and 10% check at the level of Gazetted Officers may
be conducted. Failure to provide correct allocation by doing necessary
corrections can form a performance rating factor for Finance and Bills passing
section staff.
• The adjustments of transfer of materials from one unit to another do not
materialise for want of funds during the year which results in the belated
adjustments. This can be avoided if the transaction is adjusted in the same
year's account and the material is collected/received where funds are actually
available.
• The executives should plan out for the materials to be received during the
financial year and provision of funds to release the bills. In case funds are
not available, necessary arrangement like re-appropriation of funds may be
planned so that the bills are not carried over to the next financial year.
• All stores transactions from one unit to other unit must be completed during
the financial year itself.
• A set of proper allocation is advised to each dealer for his portion through
ready concordance card showing the charges and allocation. Other
allocations should be frozen for the year.
59

60
• Periodical workshops may be conducted in order to increase general
awareness amongst the staff dealing with the allocation of charges in all
Executive departments including Accounts.
• In view of the computerisation of Accounts and Executive offices the
allocation can be computer generated as per activities of the units so as to
avoid manual interference in allocating the expenditure.
• Since the accounts are computerised, the user should be made to enter the
details of activity and the allocations generated by the software using the
master data to eliminate the chances of misclassification of expenditure.
Kindly acknowledge receipt.
Sd/-
(R. Sivadasan)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
Copy to F.A & C.A. Os, All Indian Railways for immediate action.
Sd/-
(R. Sivadasan)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board

P . Rajagopalan
Additional Member (Budget)
D.O. No. 2000 APP/7-2/PAC/Para 15 Dated 13-10-2000
Dear Shri   **   ,
Sub:— Misclassification of expenditure
————
The Public Accounts Committee has taken a serious view of the recurring
misclassifications that arise in the Annual Accounts of the Railways and has called for
a comprehensive review of accounting systems in this regard. The increasing trend of
misclassifications and other mistakes reflected in the Annual Appropriation Accounts
of the railways does indicate the need for improvement through changes in our system
of working and better monitoring mechanisms.
All pay orders, pay bills, stores/works bills, adjustment vouchers etc., are initially
accorded a classification by the office that originates the transaction. This may be the
office of an AEN, DPO, PWI/IOW, Stores Officer etc. Thus the first check on
misclassifications must be exercised at the point of origin. For this it is necessary to
introduce certain stringent measures for supervision and improvement in accuracy.
Besides this, accountability of persons recording and checking the allocation of
expenditure needs stricter monitoring. A few areas requiring urgent action are given
below.
(1) A review of the nature of misclassifications that arise in the annual accounts
highlights one specific area that needs in depth examination. This is accountal of
transactions where an individual consignee is required to allocate expenditure on
labour/material between two or more grants/minor heads. For eg:
• APWI may receive sleepers meant for maintenance under grant 4 as well as
CTR works under Gt. 16. Allocation on the adjustment memos, should be
based on quantity used in each work. Instead, very often, there is a tendency
to book the entire quantity to one head.
• Material used for Wagons received in work shops for modification is often
charged to POH cost.
A study may be conducted jointly by officers of the Accounts and other departments
(Engineering, Electrical, Mechanical etc.), to determine measures that can be taken
to prevent misclassification of expenditure in such cases. The report of the Railway
may be sent to Board by 03-11-2000 so that a suitable P.O.O. may be prepared for
uniform implementation on all railways.
(2) The budget allotment and related classification of expenditure for each unit
61

62
where transactions originate-cash/adjustment should be corelated arid identified. This
may be frozen for the year and stamps prepared for the limited classifications that can
be operated by that unit. In a computerised environment this can be taken care of by
the application software to limit the classification of expenditure that can be operated.
For eg:- classification of expenditure indicated on issue notes for stores would
be corelated to the consignee and the range of choice can be limited and predetermined.
(3) All purchase orders/agreements/pay orders should carry correct classification
of expenditure. This will be the responsibility of the agreement signing and vetting
officers.
(4) Training modules and practical workshops must be held for both accounts
and executive staff on correct allocation of expenditure.
(5) A list of relevant classification of expenditure details must be given to each
member of staff in the transaction originating unit and bill passing/voucher processing
staff in the Accounts Office, under clear acknowledgement.
(6) At present most vouchers are given an allocation at clerical levels in the
executive offices and these are rarely reviewed by the Executive Officers. Test checks
on allocation of expenditure may be made mandatory at gazetted level in the executive
offices.
(7) Errors detected in the test check carried out at gazetted level must be brought
to the notice of the controlling FA&CAO/PHOD and a report on the punitive measures
taken may be sent quarterly to Board (EDA).
Please arrange to issue suitable instructions to your officers for ensuring that
errors in classification of expenditure, delay in adjustment and other mistakes are
prevented through better monitoring and training of staff. A feed back on the action
taken on the areas highlighted above may be sent to me at the earliest so that Board
may report compliance to the Public Accounts Committee.
Kindly acknowledge receipt.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(P. Rajagopalan)
**General Managers/CAOs.
S. Shri Rajendra Nath/CR, Rana/ER, Mehta/NR, Garg/NE, Bisht/NF, Ajit Kishore/SR,
Krithivasan/SC, Thoopal/SE, V .D. Gupta/WR, Rana/Metro/Cal, O.P. Gupta/DLW,
Malhotra/ICF, Ojha/RCF, Wadhwa/DCW, Ramachandran/W&AP, Sharma/CLW, Amar
Singh/MTP/Ch., Goyal/MTP/MB.
Copy to F.A. & C.A. Os for immediate action on items mentioned at 1 to 7 above.
Sd/-
(Anjali Goyal)
Director Finance (CCA)
Railway Board

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
21 February, 2011 Chairman,
2 Phalguna 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
63

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD ON 3RD FEBRUARY , 2011
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 3rd February, 2011 from 1130 hrs. to 1250
hrs. in Room No. '62' , First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Ramen Deka
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Yashwant Sinha
7. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
8. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri K. Sudhakaran
10. Dr. M. Thambidurai
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri N. Balaganga
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Kalraj Mishra
15. Shri N.K. Singh
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
64

65
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri R.S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit (Central
Expenditure)
2. Shri C.M. Sane — Pr. Director of Audit (Air Force & Navy)
3. Ms. Ahladini — Director (Central Expenditure)
4. Shri Bhawani Shankar — Director (Economic Service & Ministries)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised
that the meeting was convened to consider six Draft Reports of the Committee.
Accordingly, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) ***** ***** ***** *****
(ii) ***** ***** ***** *****
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eightieth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2006-07)”;
(iv) ***** ***** ***** *****
(v) ****** ***** ***** *****
(vi) ***** ***** ***** *****
3.   After some discussions, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports mentioned
at Sl. Nos. (i) to (v) with some modifications/amendments. While considering the Draft
Reports mentioned at Sl. Nos. (iv) and (v), the Committee desired that the C&AG
should conduct thorough audit of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes by devising a
suitable mechanism in consultation with the Ministry of Finance so as to assure that
the funds released by the Union to the States are spent in the prescribed manner to
meet the intended objectives. The Committee also underlined the need for another
audit of the Mid Day Meal Scheme in the six defaulting States namely Kerala, Jharkhand,
Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Nagaland and Bihar. The Chairman requested the
Members to give their respective suggestions to the Audit in this regard.
4 . ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** *****.
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the five Reports adopted
by them, in light of their suggestions and the factual verifications received from the
audit and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports.
The committee then adjourned.
*****Matter does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide para 5 of  Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR EIGHTIETH REPORT
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No of Observations/Recommendations — 11
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the — Total: 7
Committee which have been accepted by the Percentage-63.60%
Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10 and 11
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the — Total: 2
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage-18.20%
The replies received from the Government
Sl. Nos. 7 and 8
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of — Total: 2
Which replies of Government have not been Percentage-18.20%
Accepted by the Committee and which require
Reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 2 and 6
(v) Observations/Recommendations inrespect of — Total: 0
Which government have furnished interim Percentage-0%
Replies:
-NIL-
GMGIPMRND—7061LS—18.05.2011.
66