SEVENTIETH  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
FIFTEENTH  LOK SABHA
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS
AND CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS
(2008-09)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Twenty-second Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.03.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)


P.A.C. No. 1997
Price:  ` 88.00
© 2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government
of  India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ ( V)
CHAPTER I Report ...................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ...........................................
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government......................................................................
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration..........................
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies......................
APPENDICS
I. Minutes of the Twenty-seventh sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 19th March, 2013................
 II. Statement of Observations/Recommendations ................
III. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Twenty-second Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha).......................................................
12
69
70
74
75
77
83
(i)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
  3. Dr. Baliram
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
  6.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
 †13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri  Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri  Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri  Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri  D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
†   Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice  Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Seventieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Twenty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Excesses over
V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2008-09)'.
2. The Twenty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha
on 31st  August, 2010. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received from the Ministries of Finance, Home Affairs,
Defence and Railways. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted
Seventieth Report at their sitting held on 19th March, 2013. Minutes of the sitting are
given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix-II.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on  the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-III.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the  Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Twenty-second Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Excesses over Voted Grants and
Charged Appropriations (2008-09)'.
2. The Twenty-second Report (15 th Lok Sabha) which was presented to
Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 31st August, 2010 contained 15 Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations
have been received from the Ministries/Departments concerned and are categorized
as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1—7 and 9—15
Total: 14
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
—NIL—
Total: NIL
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph No. 8
Total: 01
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
—NIL—
Total: NIL
Chapter-V

2
I. Delay in submission of Action Taken Notes
3. In accordance with the time limit prescribed by the Committee, Notes indicating
the Action Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained
in their Reports are required to be furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned
within six months of the presentation of the Reports. But an analysis of the receipt of
the Action Taken Notes from the Ministries/Departments concerned has revealed that
there  has been a delay of six months by the Ministry of Finance beyond the stipulated
period in the submission of the Action Taken Notes.
4. The Committee are deeply concerned to observe that the import of their
oftrepeated recommendations to make concerted efforts for timely finalization and
submission of Action Taken Notes by the prescribed time schedule is yet to be fully
realized. Persistent delay in furnishing of Action Taken Notes on the part of the
Ministry of Finance is all the more distressing. Since delay in explaining financial
irregularities/deficiencies/aberration fuel public distrust, the Committee, therefore,
reiterate it would be in their own interest, if ATNs are furnished within the prescribed
time to the Committee for their appraisal. As additional responsibility rests with the
Ministry of Finance, being the nodal agency, not only in finalising/submitting their
own Action Taken Notes but in respect of other Ministries/Departments also, the
Committee desire that a time schedule should be laid down for taking action at various
stages involved in the finalization/vetting of the Action Taken Notes, which would go
a long way in eliminating delay in submission of these Notes to the Committee. The
Committee trust that necessary steps would be taken in this direction and they be
apprised.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries/Departments concerned
to the Committee's Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twenty-second
Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee
will now deal with action taken by Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.
II. Percentage of Excess Expenditure over total Grants/Appropriations
(Recommendation Para No. 4)
6. In their Twenty-second Report, the Committee had observed that in 6 cases,
the percentage of excess expenditure was more than 5 per cent over the Original Grant
viz. 7.95 per cent in respect of Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of the Ministry of
Home Affairs; 5.40 per cent in Grant No. 23—Defence Services—Air Force; 11.93 per
cent in Grant No. 24—Defence Ordnance Factories; 12.30 per cent in Appropriation
No. 3—General Superintendence and Services; 5.20 per cent in Appropriation No. 5—
Working Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Power; and 99.34 per cent  in
case of Appropriation No. 16—Assets—Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—
Capital  respectively. The Committee had further  observed that incurring excess
expenditure of more than 5 per cent of the Total Grant despite obtaining Supplementary
Grant/Appropriation was a pointer towards the total failure of the Ministries concerned
in the anticipating the funds required for which special efforts were needed in future to

3
avoid  recurrence of such instances. They had, therefore, recommended that in future
the Ministries concerned should ensure that under no circumstances the excess over
final Grants should exceed more than 5 per cent.
7. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) in their Action
Taken Note have stated as under:—
“Ministry of Finance has been reiterating the need for strict expenditure
control and close monitoring of expenditure by the Financial Advisers of
various Ministries/Departments. Emphasis has also been laid upon the need
to  strengthen the institutional  arrangements; so that the progress of
expenditure is strictly monitored and timely action is taken to ensure that
expenditure is incurred within the limits authorized by Parliament.
All the Ministries/Departments have been instructed to consider taking the
following  immediate remedial measures with a view of minimize/eliminate the
incidence of such irregularities in the judicious management of budgetary
provisions and to ensure that expenditure is with the original/supplementary
appropriation or valid re-appropriation as the case may be. All the Ministries/
Departments have been suggested to take following steps:—
(a) Preparation and circulation of Monthly Financial Review Analysis
to the Administrative Heads for monitoring the progress of
expenditure, and  also to enable them to take remedial action where
required;
(b) Convening regular internal meetings with all spending units for
effecting expenditure control;
(c) Ensuring realistic projection of Budget Estimates/Supplementary
Estimates and also ensuring that expenditure  incurred is within the
Budget as envisaged in General Financial Rules, 2005 so that there
is no occasion for incurring excess expenditure;
(d) Putting in place/reviewing/strengthening systems for monthly
monitoring of the flow/trends of expenditure so as to avoid recurrence
of excess expenditure; and
(e) The above measures will be monitored through the periodical
meetings of Financial Advisors with Secretary (Expenditure), to
achieve the desired result to curtailing the incidence of excess
expenditure.”
8. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation, the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—Budget Division) have instructed all
the Ministries/Departments to take immediate remedial measures, as suggested by
them above, to ensure judicious management of budgetary provisions. However, the
Committee find that the Ministry had issued instructions on 11.07.2011 i.e. after
eleven months of the presentation of their Twenty-second Report. Further, instructions
so issued appear to be routine in nature and no stringent measures have apparently

4
been prescribed against the defaulting Ministries, to avoid excess expenditure. What
is further disquieting is that despite the oft-repeated concern expressed by the
Committee and issuing of necessary instructions from time to time by the Ministry of
Finance, Parliament is being  presented with a fait accompli of unremitting excess
expenditure phenomenon. The fact that no concrete results have  been achieved despite
issuance of routine instructions, the situation warrants bold and stringent measures
including provision for penal action against the officers responsible for not detecting
and reporting timely the excess expenditure to overcome the recurring problem of
the excess expenditure over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations. The Committee
would like the Government to take this issue with utmost seriousness so that excess
expenditure is reduced to the barest minimum.
III. Reasons for Excess Expenditure
(Recommendation Para No. 5)
9. In their Twenty-second Report, the Committee had observed that the major
contributory factors for the excess expenditure incurred by the Civil Ministries were
receipt of more claims due to implementation of the Sixth Central Pay Commission
recommendations,  more payments made for settlement of claims of displaced persons,
additional payments of dearness allowance to freedom fighters/pensioners etc. In
case of excess expenditure  incurred by the Defence Ministry, the major causes were
increase in security related expenditure and foreign exchange variations, issue of
operating platform for CRN-91 guns, higher supply to DRDO etc. Further, according to
the Ministry of Railways the reasons for excess expenditure were taking up of more
activities relating to the repair and maintenance of rail infrastructure, operating expenses
of rolling stock and equipment, more expenditure towards staff cost due to
implementation of recommendations of the Sixth Central Pay Commission, higher
payment of dividend to General Revenues on account of higher  booking in capital as
compared  to Budget Estimates etc. Having observed that the Ministries had not
accorded due importance  to the guiding force of budgeting, the Committee had urged
upon the Ministry  of Finance to find innovative steps for ushering in the next level of
budgeting and financial management in the country, whereby the exercise was not
only made more accurate, logical and practicable but also eliminate major budgetary
and financial  irregularities so that the scarce financial resources were utilized
appropriately, judiciously and productively on the laid down targets thus facilitating
economy, efficiency and efficacy in the financial transactions.
10. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) in their Action Taken
Note have inter alia stated as under:—
“... ...with the help of IT initiative taken  by office  of the Controller General of
Accounts, a closer watch on the expenditure position has now been enabled
and Budget Division of Ministry of Finance reviews them very closely towards
the  close of financial year, particularly with a view  to include cases where
there is likelihood of excess expenditure, to include them in the last batch of
Supplementary Demands for Grants, so that instances of excess expenditure
are reduced. Further, the Ministry of Finance requests other Ministries/

5
Departments at the time of final batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants
to assess the  expenditure position with reference to approved Revised
Estimates which may result in excess expenditure  and come up with suitable
Supplementary Demands for Grants so that excess expenditure is avoided in
any grant or appropriation. Details of steps taken  by Ministry of Finance in
this regard were explained in the  ATN on the Observations/Recommendations
contained in para 51 of 80th Report of PAC (2008-09) (14th Lok Sabha) on
‘Excess Over V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2006-07)’;
Owing to the attention accorded to this issue and the Government efforts in
reducing the excess expenditure over the years, the excess expenditure has
been brought down from `  97,205 crore in 2005-06 to ` 1012.82 crore in
2008-09. This  was  possible due to the concerted efforts and continued
monitoring of the expenditure by the Government. In fact, the excess
expenditure after excluding  Defence and Pensions is only ` 79.39 crores, and
refers to a single grant relating to other payments of MHA. Even in the
Demands relating to  Ministry of Defence  and Centralised Grant Pensions,
the excess expenditure  was largely due to implementation of the
Recommendations of 6th Central Pay Commission. This position indicates
that with the concerted efforts made, the seriousness  impressed upon the
Ministries over a period and other measures taken, the problem of excess
expenditure is in control and, perhaps, is within an acceptable margin. It is
further assured that this tempo will be maintained and will not be allowed to
lose focus. It is, therefore, submitted that the present system is sufficient and
adequate, coupled with the additional measures already taken.”
11. The Committee are informed that due to the Ministry of Finance's concerted
efforts and continued monitoring, the excess expenditure has been brought down
from ` 97,205 crore in 2005-06 to ` 1012.82 crore in 2008-09. The Ministry  have
asssured the Committee that this tempo would be maintained by them and would not be
allowed to lose focus. However, the Committee  find that during 2009-10, the excess
expenditure has increased to ` 14575.08 crore i.e. more than ` 13,500 core vis-a-vis
the excess expenditure in the preceding year. The Committee view this dismal picture
with grave concern  and are the firm view that the present system of budgetary control
is far from “sufficient and adequate”.  Therefore, there is an imperative need to
devise an effective mechanism with a view to imposing financial discipline on all the
Ministries/Departments to avoid excess expenditure. The Committee recommend
the Ministry of Finance to impress upon the Departmental Heads of all the Ministries/
Departments to carry out periodical checks for strict application of the prescribed
Financial Rules and deal sternly with cases of aberration noticed so that recurrence
of huge excess expenditure is avoided.

6
IV . Delay in submission of Explanatory Notes
(Recommendation Para No. 8)
12. Upon noticing delay in submission of Explanatory Notes on excess expenditure
by various Ministries/Departments which impeded the examination of excess
expenditure, direct consequence of which was delay in the regularization of the
unauthorized expenditure by Parliament, the Committee in their earlier Report desired
the Ministry of Finance to put in place a centralized monitoring network to check the
status of the preparation  and submission of Explanatory Notes at every stage by
various  Ministries/Departments so that any delay on this count was eliminated. The
Committee  had also recommeded that in future the contributory reasons for delay in
submission of Explanatory Notes should invariably be appended in the relevant
Explanatory Notes submitted for the purpose.
13. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) in their Action Taken
Note have, inter-alia, stated as under:—
“In compliance of PAC Recommendations, necessary instructions have
been  issued to the Secretaries of the Government of India  vide  CGA's
DO letter dated 05/08/2010 to ensure that the contributory reasons for delay
in submission of Explanatory Notes should invariably be mentioned in the
relevant Explanatory Notes. Further, in pursuance of PAC's Recommendations
for computerized monitoring of the submission of Explanatory Notes, a
computerized web based monitoring system known as Audit Para Monitoring
System (APMS) has been recently developed in the office of CGA in
consultation with National Informatics Centre (NIC) and is presently being
tested prior to installation at the regular Server at NIC data center  at Hyderabad.
The scope of  this software is proposed  to be expanded  to cover computerized
monitoring of submission of PAC paras and Explanatory Notes by Ministries/
Departments in the second phase. PAC will be apprised later on with the
progress of development/commissioning of the system for computerized
monitoring of submission of Explanatory Notes by Ministries/Departments."
14. The Committee are  pleased to note that in pursuance of their
recommendation, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) have developed
Audit Para Monitoring System (APMS) in the Office of Controller General of
Accounts (CGA) for computerized monitoring of submission of replies to the Audit
Paras and Explanatory Notes on excess expenditure by the Ministries/Departments
to the Public Accounts Committee. The Committee trust that with the development of
APMS, the Ministry of Finance would be able to keep a strict vigil over processing of
Audit Paras/Explanatory Notes so that the same  could be made available to the
Committee within the prescribed time limit. The Committee would, like to be apprised
of the latest status of the development/commissioning of the system and specific
improvements brought in after the introduction of the system.

7
V . Excess Expenditure incurred under Grant No. 39—Pensions
(Recommendation Para No. 9)
15. In their earlier Report the Committee had noted  that during the year 2008-09,
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) incurred an excess expenditure of
` 163.18 crore under Revenue Section (V oted) of Grant No. 39—Pensions. The excess
was mainly due to higher expenditure than estimated, the receipt  of more scrolls from
the authorized banks and clearance of outstanding scrolls. The Committee also found
that there was lack of comprehensive network amongst pension account related offices
across the country and the prevailing pensions data management and accounting
information systems were not in order and marked by lack of precise information
regarding region/cricle-wise number of  pensioners Upon noticing that Central Pension
Accounting Office in the Ministry had introduced e-scroll system which  would help in
checking the expenditure, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the efficacy of
the e-scroll system and its impact on correctly assessing the expenditure  on pensions.
They had also impressed upon the Ministry of Finance to adopt e-governance model
and utilize the Information Technology Services/tools thereby establishing a centralized
database of the  pensioners and networking of all the banks so as to arrive at a correct
estimation of pension liability and expenditure in a particular year.
16. The Ministry  of Finance (Department of Expenditure) in their Action taken
Note  have stated as follows:—
“The observations of the Public Accounts Committee have  been noted and
corrective actions in the interim are in hand, in the longer  run a project to
revamp the system  of budget formulation and execution in respect in being
envisaged.
In the interim two measures are being adopted. The e-scroll project is being
finalized to enable an early rolling out to all banks who act  as pension
disbursing  agencies  and account for more than half of the disbursements
under  the Grant. Simultaneously, it is envisaged  to institute an electronic
mechanism  of budget formulation and execution through a common portal,
connecting the accounting  circles of the Government  of India that operate
on the Grant directly and account for a little less than half the pensions
disbursed. This project is being formulated by CPAO in consultation with the
office  of the Controller General  of Accounts.  Commensurate enhancement
of manpower in under the anvil.
The project on e-scroll has since been finalized. The delay was due to
prolonged stakeholders consultations in the Technical Committee to enable
systems integration between CPAO and the participating banks. It has not
been feasible to implement a system where debit to Government account
would be authorized only on post certification of e-scrolls received by CPAO
due to a variety of reasons. However, the banks are being asked to shift to a
system of Central Pension Processing Centre (CPPC) and claim reimbursement
through a single focal point branch. This would enable the banks to sent to
the CPAO e-scrolls simultaneously with the memo seeking reimbursement

8
from RBI. It would also enable implementation of a closely coordinated system
between the banks, Central Accounts Section of RBI and the Central Pension
Accounting Office.
The project document is being issued to the concerned banks and pilot
testing of the project is presently slated to commence from June 2011 and is
expected to conclude by August 2011. The results of the testing would,
thereafter, be incorporated in the software and the same shall also be sent for
security and systems certification. It is, accordingly, expected that Phase-I of
the e-scroll project, comprising all banks presently on a centralized pension
processing platform, shall commence in the last quarter of 2011-12. The
transition to the CPPC platform is being pursued in respect of remaining
banks. Phase II of the project, comprising remaining banks, shall roll out in
FY 2012-13.
The efficacy of the E-scrolls systems and its impact on correctly assessing
the expenditure on pensions are described below:
(a) The system envisages that the E-scrolls be sent to the CPAO
simultaneously with the memo seeking reimbursement from RBI.
The accounting of CPAO of pensions disbursed by banks will
therefore be simultaneous with the debit to the Government Cash
Balance. As the Banks disburse more than half of the quantum
provided for in this composite Grant,  the availability of this
information on a timely basis will, if necessary, enable interventions
to supplement budget within the fiscal.
(b) This project will enable the initial master date reconciliation by banks,
check of payments claimed by the bank and incorporate on-going
change information into the database.
(c) Change information will be incorporated through this system into
the data base enabling a scientific budget  forecasting of pension
disbursements likely in a year. The status on payments will be made
available to the pensioner to enable timely corrections. Lags
between authorization by CPAO and credit to pension accounts by
banks will be known both for corrective measures and for proper
budget estimation.”
17. Subsequent to the Audit's vetting comments on the above reply, the Ministry
have further stated as under:—
“The 'database' referred to in the ATN is the 'centralised database of pensioners
in Central Pension Accounting Office' containing records pertaining to over
nine lakh pensioners, including authorizations issued by CPAO as well as
data collected on pre-1990 pensioners So far as the completion of database of
pre-1990 pensioners is concerned, as mentioned in Para 6 of the ATN, the
initial reconciliation of the master database of Central Pension Accounting

9
Office with that of the bank will lead to incorporation of residual pre-1990
pensioners into the database. Thereafter, all payments made by the banks will
be verified by the Central Pension Accounting Office against this master
database.”
18. The Committee note that with a view to obviate excess expenditure under the
Grant No. 39—Pensions, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) have
finalised e-scroll project to enable an early rolling out to all Banks. The Ministry
expected that the Phase I of the project comprising all Banks presently on the
centralized pension processing platform would commence in the last quarter of F.Y.
2011-12 and the IInd Phase thereof comprising remaining Banks shall roll out in
F.Y. 2012-13.The Committee hope that such project will be effectively implemented
and regularly monitored so as  to revamp the system of budget formulation and
execution as well as to avoid excess expenditure in future under this Grant. Taking
note that the Ministry are yet to establish a centralized database of the pensioners
and compile the database of pre-1990 pensioners, the Committee also desire that in
the larger interest of correct estimation of pension liability and in order to achieve a
sound fiscal discipline under this Grant in future, the Ministry should make concerted
efforts to complete the database by compiling the information at the earliest and
apprise the Committee of the final outcome in the matter including the progress of
the e-scroll project.
VI. Excess Expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Defence
(Recommendation Para No. 11)
19. The Committee in their Twenty-second Report had noted that excess
expenditure to the tune of  `. 610.37 crore and  ` 132.25 crore had been incurred both
under Revenue Section (voted) of Grant No. 23-Defence Service-Air Force and Grant
No. 24—Defence  Ordnance Factories respectively during the year 2008-09. The
committee had also found that the Ministry of Defence had incurred excess expenditure
amounting to  ` 27.50 crore and  ` 13.33 lakh respectively under Grant No. 19—
Ministry of Defence and Grant No. 20—Defence Pensions pertaining to Civil Sector
but operated by them. These altogether put the total excess expenditure to ` 770.25
crore incurred by the Ministry during the year 2008-09. Having found that the Ministry
had failed to take necessary steps to check or minimize excess expenditure under the
Grants operated by them, the Committee had recommended that apart from re-circulation
of their old instructions which had proved ineffective in rectifying the loopholes and
deficiencies responsible for incurring of  excess expenditure  under the Grants operated
by them, the Ministry of Defence should introspect the inadequacies of the existing
arrangements for checking excess expenditure and devise some concrete ways and
means in consultation with the Ministry of Finance to overhaul their budgeting
mechanism so that incurring of excess expenditure was either avoided altogether or
minimized drastically.
20. The Ministry of Defence, in their Action Taken Notes have stated as follows:—
"In order to have strict control on Civil Estimates and Defence Pensions
Budget and to check large scale savings/excess, the Ministry have issued

10
instructions from time to time to all the budget holding authorities and asked
for proper implementation of these instructions. Such instructions were issued
on 28.6.2010 in respect of Civil Estimates and 29.06.2010 in respect of Defence
Pensions whereby while reiterating the instructions already issued earlier, it
was instructed that in order to ensure even flow of expenditure and to avoid
any excess expenditure/savings in any Grant, concrete remedial action must
be taken. The utmost caution and accuracy should be adopted while estimating
requirement of funds after taking into account all the instruction issued by
Ministry of Finance from time to time".
21. The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry of Defence have not
taken any tangible steps in consultation with the Ministry of Finance for
implementation of their recommendation for devising ways and means to overhaul the
existing budgetary mechanism, except issuing routine instructions to all the budget
holding authorities. Notably, despite issuing instructions the instances of excess
expenditure under Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of Defence
continued to recur during the years 2009-10 and 2010-11. Obviously, the existing
budgeting mechanism of the Ministry is ineffectual as excess expenditure continues
to recur. The Committee feel that mere issuing of instructions would not serve the
purpose unless the progress of expenditure is strictly monitored and timely action
taken to ensure that expenditure is incurred within the limits authorized by Parliament
and individual responsibility assigned. They, therefore, desire the Ministry of Defence
to thoroughly review their  budgetary mechanism so that necessary corrective action,
wherever warranted, could be taken to overcome the systemic lacunae/loopholes for
elimination of the perennial problem of excess expenditure. The  Ministry should
also put in place a robust mechanism for monthly monitoring of the flow/trend of
expenditure by the Administrative Heads so as to avoid recurrence of excess
expenditure.
VII. Excess Expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways
(Recommendation Para No. 12)
22. In their Twenty-second Report, the Committee had found that during the
year 2008-09 the Ministry of Railways incurred a total excess expenditure of ` 519.81
crore in 9 cases of  8  excess registering Grants/Appropriation, which was 10 times
more than the excess expenditure of ` 51.22 crore incurred by them during the year
2007-08 . The contributory factors for this excess expenditure were reported to be
implementation of the recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission, more
drawal of stores from stock, materialization of more contractual obligations; more
direct purchase than anticipated; more adjustment of wages and materials on periodical
overhauling etc. The Committee concluded that the Ministry of Railways had either
failed to undertake proper homework before finalizing their budgeting estimates or did
not possess correct data regarding the number of officers and staff on their payroll,
purchase record etc. Unon noticing that the Ministry had paid scant regard to enforcing
fiscal discipline while incurring excess expenditure during the year 2008-09, the
Committee had desired the Ministry of Railways to strive earnestly for ensuring realistic
estimation of their budgetary requirements under various sub-heads of the

11
Grants/Appropriations operated by them so that the existing lapses/loopholes were
properly arrested.
23. In their Action Taken Notes, the Minsitry of Railways have stated as
follows:—
"The concern of the committee is noted and this Ministry has already urged
recently the spending units under its control, viz the zonal Railways, the need
to adhere to the fiscal discipline as desired by the Committee.”
24. In response to the Audit observation on the above reply, the Ministry have
inter alia further stated as under:—
"The Railways do have a well-set budgetary and monitoring mechanism of
expenditure as a result of which the incidence of excess could gradually be
brought down to 0.03% in 2007-08 despite the vast spectrum and  spending
units of railway network spread along the length and breadth of the country.
However, in 2008-09 and 2009-10, the excess expenditure has risen mainly due
to the  difficulty in assessing the impact of implementing the recommendations
of 6th CPC. Ministry of Railways, nonetheless would take steps to strengthen
the system  and procedures that will help in controlling the expenditure  within
the sanctioned Appropriation/Grants. Due care will also  be taken in seeking
Supplementary Demands, if necessary, in time.”
25. Deploring the steep rise in excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of
Railways during the year 2008-09, the Committee in their earlier Report had urged
the Ministry of Railways to strive earnestly for ensuring realistic estimation  of their
budgetary requirements under various sub-heads of the Grants/Appropriations
operated by them. However, the Ministry have given a tepid response thereto that the
concern of the Committee has been noted and the Ministry had urged the zonal
railways to adhere to the fiscal discipline. No mention has been made in the reply
regarding measures taken to review the existing mechanism for realistic estimation
of budgetary requirements. Keeping in view the magnitude of the recurring excess
expenditure in case of Grants/Appropriations operated by the Ministry of Railways,
the Committee are of the firm opinion that the extant budgetary exercise and the
monitoring mechanism is far from sound and adequate. While reiterating their earlier
recommendation, the Committee desire the Ministry of Railways to revisit their
budgetary and expenditure control system so as to ensure strict financial discipline.

12
CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations No.1
The Committee's examination of the four Appropriation Accounts of the Union
Government relating to the Civil, Defence Services, Postal services and Railways for
the financial year 2008-09 has revealed that a total excess expenditure of ` 1532.63
crore was incurred in 15 cases under 14 Grants/Appropriation in the fiscal year
2008-09. The defaulting Ministries are — Ministry of Finance (Grant No. 39—Pensions);
Ministry of Home Affairs  (Grant No. 54 — Other Expenditure of the Ministry of Home
Affairs); Ministry of Defence (Grants i.e. Grant No. 19 — Ministry of Defence (Civil),
Grant No. 20 — Defence Pensions, Grant No. 23—Defence Services—Air Force, and
Grant No. 24—Defence Ordnance Factories); and Ministry of Railways (9 cases under
8 Grants/Appropriation i.e. Grant No. 4—Repairs and Maintenance of Permanent Way
and Works; Grant No. 5—Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Power; Grant No. 6—
Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons; Grants No. 7—Repairs and
Maintenance of Plant and Equipment; Grant No. 8—Operating Expenses—Rolling
Stock and Equipment; Grant No. 15—Dividend to General Revenues, Repayment of
Loans taken from General Revenues and Amortisation of Over-capitalization;
Appropriation No. 3—General Superintendence and Service; Appropriation No 5—
Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Power; and Appropriation No. 16—Assets
Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—Capital). This amount of excess
expenditure incurred during the financial year under review showed a steep increase
over  the preceding year, wherein a total excess expenditure of about ` 223.58 crore in
16 cases of 14 Grants/Appropriations was recorded. The Committee feel that incurring
such huge amounts of  excess expenditure over and above the budgetary provisions
sanctioned by the Parliament at different stages of budget do not augur well for
ensuring proper and judicious utilization of public funds besides undermining the
Parliamentary financial control. The unabated large excess expenditure by these
Ministries is self-manifestation of the fact that they are still far from taking  any
noteworthy and suitable remedial measures to ensure proper budgeting  and subsequent
monitoring of the expenditure flow. This is deplorable considering the fact that the
Committee have been emphasizing over the years for plugging the existing loopholes
and dificiencies with a view to restricting the quantum of excess expenditure to the
barest minimum in future.
[Para 1 of the 22nd Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of  Expenditure)
The observations of the Public Accounts Committee on excess expenditure
incurred in 2008-09 in Grant No. 39—"Pensions" have been noted. The corrective
actions in the interim are in hand; in the long run a  project to revamp the system of
budget formulation and execution is envisaged.

13
In the interim, two measures are being adopted. The E-scroll project has been
finalized and the project document has been prepared and issued to the three pilot
banks. This pilot is underway. All banks have been directed to shift to a system of
Central Pension Processing Centres (CPPCs). The electronic mechanism of budget
formulation and execution for the accounting circles of Government of India is being
devised.
The centralized database of pensioners in CPAO contains records pertaining to
more than 9,70,000 pensioners Reconciliation of master data by banks for the pilot
project is underway and pre 1990 data pertaining to these pilot banks/CPPCs provided
during this process are also being incorporated.
Vetted by Director General of Audit (Central Expenditure) vide their U.O. No. RR/
I-35/11-12/374 dated 11-8-2011.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor
Ministry of Finance
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
It has already been stated  in the 'Detailed Explanatory Note for Excess', submitted
to the Public Accounts Committee (copy enclosed), that excess expenditure under
Grant No. 54 — Other Expenditure of Ministry of Home Affairs during the financial
year 2008-09 was due to over-booking of expenditure under 'Swatantrata Sainik Samman
Pension Scheme'. It is reiterated that there is no direct control of this Ministry on the
said scheme and the role of this Ministry (Ministry of Home Affairs) is limited to
making budgetary provision under the scheme, on the basis of the expenditure trends
of the previous years, the making re-imbursement of the amount booked by Central
Pension Accounting Office, functioning under the administrative control of Ministry
of Finance, on this count. Hence, any unexpected increase in the amount of pensions
of the freedom fighters or their dependents by the Government of India, during a
financial year, leads to over-lapping of the budgetary provision under this scheme, as
it did happen during the financial year 2008-09. Since this Ministry comes to know
about the exact amount of the expenditure booked under the scheme long after close of
a financial year, leaving no scope to augment the provision at any stage of budgeting,
the excess expenditure incurred under Revenue Section (V oted) of Grant No. 54—Other
Expenditure of Ministry of Home Affairs during the financil year 2008-09 may not be
attributed to the cause of failure of this Ministry either on account of budget formulation
or restricting expenditure over the budgetary provision.
Sd/-
(Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' have been vetted by O/O DGACE vide their U.O. No.
RR/6-30/10-11/814 dated 01.11.2010).
[Ministry of Home Affairs' O.M. No. 28/15/2010-Bgt.I dated 25.11.2010]

14
 Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In so far as Ministry of Defence (Civil) & Defence Pensions are concerned, the
Committee's main observation in this paragraph is that under Grant No. 19 — Ministry
of Defence (Civil)—an axcess expenditure of ` 27.50 Cr. and under Grant No. 20—
Defence Pensions - an excess expenditure of  ` 27.50 Cr. and under Grant No. 20—
Defence Pensions — an excess expenditure of  ` 13.33 lakh were incurred during the
year 2008-09. The Committee has expressed that the Ministry is still far from taking any
noteworthy and suitable remedial measures to ensure proper budgeting and monitoring
of expenditure flow although the Committee have been emphasizing over the years for
plugging the existing loopholes and deficiencies  to restrict the quantum of excess
expenditure to the barest minimum in future.
The excess expenditure of ` 27.50 Cr. under Grant No. 19—Ministry of Defence
(Civil) was mainly due to revised salaries & allowances of troops on account of
Implementation 6th CPC and higher trend of booking due to increase in rate of Kerosene,
POL & provisions etc. in r/o JAKLI, and implementation of 6th CPC in r/o MoD
Secretariat. The excess expenditure is also supplemented by enhanced recruitment
drive to fill vacancies against Government Sanctions and enhanced operational
deployment of ships post 26/11 in r/o Coast Guard Organisation. The excess expenditure
of  ` 13.33 lakh under Grant No. 20— Defence Pension was incurred due to impact of
payment of arrears of pensions on account of 6th CPC. In this regard it is mentioned
that payment of Pension is obligatory expenditure and has to be fulfilled. Further, it is
submitted that the excess is under prescribed permissible limit i.e. 5% as the variation
is upto 0.33% under Grant No. 19— Ministry of Defence (Civil) and upto 0.0007%
under Grant No. 20—Defence Pensions over final Grants.
However, as a measure of control, the Govt. of India in the Ministry or Defence
have  been advising all the budget estimating authorities of Civil and Defence Pensions
to keep strict watch on the expenditure and ensure that expenditure should be as per
the grant and in case any excess is visualised, its provision should be made at RE
stage. Keeping in view these instructions, as well as the recommendations of PAC in
their Seventh Report (Para No. 47), this office has issued the instructions to Departments
and IFA concerned in r/o Civil and Defence Pensions to keep strict watch on expenditure
flow to avoid recurrences of excess expenditure in future. Necessary monitoring and
follow up action in this regard would be ensured.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (R)

15
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The above recommendation is general in nature and takes into account the
excess expenditure incurred by  various Central Ministries as a whole. The observation
of the Committee is, nonetheless, noted.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 122-RA-III/2-1/10 dated 10.11.2010 have vetted the
Action Taken Note with the following comments:
"Seen".
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/22, dated 15.02.2011].
(Observation/Recommendation No. 2)
"The Committee find that out of the total excess expenditure of  ` 1532.63 crore
incurred during the 2008-09 fiscal year, the bulk of the excess was registered by the
Defence Services and Railways, which respectively accounted for ` 48.45 per cent
(` 742.61 crore under 2 Grants) and 33.92 per cent ( ` 519.81 crore under 6 Grants
and 3 Appropriation Accounts) of the total excess disbursement. The remaining
17.63 per cent of the total excess expenditure ( ` 270.21 crore under   4 Grants) was
incurred in the Civil sector. The Committee's scrutiny has revealed that in 6 cases,
there was misclassification of expenditure in the Grants/Appropriations operated
by the Ministry of Railways viz.— ` (+) 2,51,65,892 under Grant No. 4 — Working
Expenses —Repairs and Maintenance of Permanent Way and Works; ` (+)
7,84,14,221 under Grant No. 5 — Working Expenses — Repairs and Maintenance
of Motive Power; ` (+) 7,55,63,115 under Grant No. 6 — Working Expenses  —
Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons; ` (-)  2,86,37,475 under Grant
No. 7 — Working Expenses — Repairs and Maintenance of Plant and Equipment;
` (-) 2,75,51,187 under Grant No. 8 —Operating Expenses — Rolling Stock and
Equipment; and ` (+) 1,25,662 under Appropriation No. 3 — Working Expenses —
General Superintendence and Services. Taking into account the effect of these 6
cases of misclassification, the  actual excess expenditure relating to the Ministry
of Railways comes to ` 532,12,06,588 instead of  ` 519,81,26,360 as indicated in the
Indian Railways Appropriation Accounts (2008-09). Accordingly, the total amount
of actual excess expenditure incurred during the financial year 2008-09, which has
to be regularized by Parliament un der Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution, is of the
order of  ` 1544.94 crore."
[Para 2 of the 22nd Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

16
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
It is submitted that there was no excess expenditure under any of the Grants
controlled by this Ministry on account of misclassification of expenditure. Hence, no
action on the part of this Ministry seems necessary in this regard. However,
observation/recommendation of the Committee has been noted with consideration
and will be taken care of to avoid such situations in respect of the Grants controlled by
this Ministry.
Sd/-
(Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/O DGACE vide their U.O. No. RR/6-30/
10-11/814 dated 01.11.2010).
[Ministry of Home Affairs' O.M. No.28/15/2010-Bgt. I dated  25.11.2010]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In this paragraph, the Committee has recommended that the amount of actual
excess expenditure incurred during the financial year 2008-09 has to be regularized  by
Parliament under Article 115(1) (b) of the Constitution.
The Demand for Excess Grants for ` 27,49,86,122 under Demand No. 19 — Ministry
of Defence (Civil) and for ` 13,32,985 under Demand No. 20 — Defence Pensions
relating to the financial year 2008-09 have already been passed by the Lok Sabha and
the connected Appropriation Bill (No. 6), 2010 have also been passed by the Parliament
and assented to by the President of India on December 11, 2010 and the Act has been
published in the Gazette of India (Extra-ordinary) dated December 13, 2010 as Act
No. 45 of 2010.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (R)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The excess expenditure of ` 532.12 cr incurred by Ministry of Railways during
2008-09 will be got regularized by Parliament in its ensuing winter session (2010).
Audit vide their U.O. No. 122-RA-III/2-1/10 dated 10.11.2010 have vetted the
Action Taken Note with the following comments:
"Seen".
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/22 dated 15-2-2011]

17
Observation/Recommendation No. 3
Scrutiny of the cases of excess registering Grants and Appropriation for the
financial year 2008-09 indicate that there are huge variations in the quantum of excess
expenditure incurred in 14 Grants/Appropriations with the bulk of the excess registering
in the Grants relating to Defence Services, so much so that 82.19% i.e. ` 610.37 crore
of the total excess expenditure pertaining to Defence Services was disbursed
under Grant No. 23 — Defence Services—Air Foroce alone. The remaining 17.81%
i.e. ` 132.25 crore was incurred under Grant No. 24 —Defence Ordnance Factories. As
regards the Railways, while 93.06% of the total excess was incurred under four Grants
i.e. (i) ` 106.58 crore under Grant No. 4—Working Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance
of Permanent Way and Works; (ii) ` 103.09 crore under Grant No. 5—Working
Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Power; (iii) ` 157.25 crore under Grant
No. 6—Working Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and Wagons; and
(iv) ` 128.30 crore under Grant No. 8 — Operating Expenses — Rolling stock and
Equipment, the remaining amount was registered under 2 Grants and 3 Appropriation
Accounts (` 13.07 crore under Grant No. 7 — Working Expenses — Repairs and
Maintenance of Plant and Equipment; ` 6.71 crore under Grant No. 15 — Dividend to
General Revenues, Repayment of loans taken from General Revenues and Amortization
of Over Capitalization;  ` 2.30 lakh under Appropriation No. 3 — Working Expenses —
General  Suprintendence and Services; ` 1.20 lakh under Appropriation No. 5—Working
Expenses — Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Power and ` 17.09 crore under
Appropriation No. 16 — Assets — Acquisition, Construction and Replacement —
Capital). In so far as Civil Ministries are concerned, out of the total excess expenditure
incurred, 60.42% i.e. ` 163.18 crore was under Grant No. 39 — Pensions operated by
the Ministry of Finance, 29.40% i.e. ` 79.39 crore was under Grant No. 54 — Other
Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs; and the remaining 10.18% was registered
under 2 Grants i.e. `  27.50 crore under Grant No. 19 — Ministry of Defence (Civil); and
` 13.33 lakh under Grant No. 20 — Defence Pensions.
[Para 3 of the 22nd Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (D/o Expenditure)
The observations of the Public Accounts Committee on excess expenditure
incurred in 2008-09 in Grant No. 39 — "Pensions" have been noted. Remedial measures
being taken have been explained in details in A TN on Para 9 (copy enclosed) of the
22nd report of Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha).
Vetted by Director General of Audit (Central Expenditure) vide their U.O. No. RR/
I-35/11-12/374 dated 11.8.2011.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor
Ministry of Finance

18
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
The Ministry is very much concerned about the excess expenditure that occurred
under Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs during the
financial year 2008-09.
This Ministry cannot restrict expenditure under 'Swatantrata Sainik Samman
Pension Scheme', a cause for excess booking of expenditure under the above-stated
Grant during the financial year 2008-09.   The concerned Divisional Head has been
requested (copy enclosed — D.O. No. 28/12/2010-Bgt. I dated 21st June 2010) to
look into this matter personally, by taking it up with the highest authorities of the
organizations involved in the whole process of booking of expenditure under the said
scheme, to fix the problem. In the year 2010-11, internal audit of this scheme is also
being undertaken.
Sd/-
(Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/O DGACE vide their U.O. No. RR/6-30/
10-11/814 dated 01.11.2010).
[Ministry of Home Affairs' O.M. No. 28/15/2010-Bgt. dated 25.11.2010]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
(a) In this paragraph, the Committee has observed that in so far as Civil Ministries
are concerned, out of  60.42 per cent 10.18 per cent was registered under 2 Grants
i.e. ` 27.50 crore under Grant No. 19 — Ministry of Defence (Civil) and ` 13.33 lakh
under Grant No. 20 — Defence Pensions. The excess under Grant No. 19 — Ministry of
Defence (Civil) was mainly due to 6th CPC implementations and enhanced recruitment
drive and operation exploitation of ships and aircrafts post 26/11. Accordingly, the fuel
consumption and expenditure thereof, has increased in r/o Coast Guard Organisation.
The excess under Grant No.—20 Defence Pension were incurred due to higher rate of
payment of pensions and dearness relief due to implementation of 6th CPC
recommendations and payment of pension which is an obligatory expenditure and has
to be fulfilled.
The observation made by PAC has been noted by the Ministry of Defence
(Civil) for future guidance and for compliance.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (R)

19
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The para brings out the Grant-wise  factual position  of excess expenditure
incurred by various Central Ministries including  the Railways. In case of Railways, the
bulk of excess of `  532.12 cr. has been incurred in four Grants i.e. 4, 5, 6 and  8. Most
of this excess has occurred  due to steep rise in the staff cost consequent upon
implementation of the  recommendations of the 6th Central Pay Commission (6th CPC).
Since the implementation of the recommendations of 6th CPC started from the latter
part of 2008-09 in piece-meal manner, an accurate assessment of the impact thereof was
quite difficult resulting in excess expenditure in these Grants.
Audit vide their U.O.144 RA-III/2-1/10 dated 11.2.2011 desired that their comments
dated 10.11.2010 may be appended below audit observations along with Ministry's
comments:
"Seen. However, with the proper assessment of staff cost based on number of
staff/officers on roll and monitoring of expenditure of salary, etc., the magnitude of
excess expenditure due to hike in staff cost under these grants could have minimized."
Ministry's Comments
The impact of the implementation of  6th CPC has been much larger than expected.
There certainly is always a scope  for better assessment. All efforts were made to make
sufficient provision for implementation of  6th CPC in 2008-09. However, the provision
made was found short in some of the Demands, particularly in light of the multiplicity
of the recommendations of 6th CPC further modified by the Government, the
implementation of which began only in the latter part of 2008-09 with orders coming in
piece-meal manner. Despite this and the fact that recommendations of  6th CPC involved
benefit accruing to about 14 lakh serving employees and more than 11 lakh pensioners,
the excess expenditure in 2008-09 was contained within ` 532 cr. limited only to a few
Demands for Grants.
The Railways do have a well-set budgetary and monitoring mechanism of
expenditure as a result of which the incidence of excess could gradually be brought
down to 0.03% in 2007-08 despite the vast spectrum and spending units of railway
network spread along the length and breadth of the country. However, in 2008-09 and
2009-10, the excess expenditure has risen mainly due to the difficulty in assessing the
imapct of implementing the  recommendations of 6th CPC. Ministry of Railways,
nonetheless, would take  steps to strengthen the system and procedures that will help
in controlling the expenditure within the sanctioned appropriation/grants. Due care
will also be taken in seeking Supplementary Demands, if necessary, in time.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/22 dated 15.2.2011]

20
Observation/Recommendation No. 4
An analysis  of the Appropriation Accounts and Explanatory Notes furnished
by the defaulting Ministries shows that the percentage of excess expenditure over the
Total Grant ranged from 0.0007 per cent (Grant No. 20—Defence Pensions) to—
76.96 per cent (Appropriation No. 16— Assets—Acquisition, Construction and
Replacement —Capital). In 6 cases, the percentage was more than 5 per cent over the
Original Grant viz., 7.95 per cent in respect of Grant No. 54—Other expenditure of the
Ministry of Home Affairs; 5.40 per cent in Grant No. 23—Defence Services—Air Force;
11.93 per cent in Grant No. 24—Defence Ordnance Factories; 12.30 per cent in
Appropriation No. 3—General Superintendence and Services; 5.20 per cent in
Appropriation No. 5—Working Expenses-Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Power;
and 99.34 per cent in case of Appropriation No. 16—Assets—Acquisition,
Construction and Replacement—Capital, respectively. The Committee express their
displeasure over incurring such huge amount of excess expenditure over the Total/
Original Grants, which is a clear indication of poor budgeting on the part of Ministries
concerned. The Committee feel that incurring excess expenditure of more than 5 per
cent of the Total Grant despite obtaining Supplementary Grant/Appropriation is a
pointer towards the total failure of the Ministries concerned in anticipating the funds
required for which special efforts are needed in future to avoid recurrence of such
instances. They also recommend that in future the concerned Ministries should ensure
that under no circumstances the excess over  Final Grants should exceed more than
5 per cent.
[Para 4 of 22
nd Report of PAC (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (D/o Economic Affairs—Budget Division)
Ministry of Finance has been reiterating the need for strict expenditure control
and close monitoring of expenditure by the Financial Advisers of various Ministries/
Departments. Emphasis has also been laid upon the need to strengthen the institutional
arrangements; so that the progress of expenditure is strictly monitored and timely
action is taken to ensure that expenditure is incurred within the limits authorized by
Parliament.
2. All the Ministries/Departments have been instructed (Annexure-A) to consider
taking the following immediate remedial measures with a view to minimize/eliminate the
incidence of such irregularities in the judicious management of budgetary provisions
and to ensure that expenditure is within the original/supplementary appropriation or
valid re-appropriation as the case may be. All the Ministries/Departments have been
suggested to take following steps:—
(a) Preparation and circulation of Monthly Financial Review Analysis to the
Administrative Heads for monitoring the progress of expenditure, and also to
enable them to take remedial action wherever required;
(b)  Convening regular internal meetings with all spending units for effecting
expenditure control;

21
(c) Ensuring realistic projection of Budget Estimates/Supplementary Estimates
and also ensuring that expenditure incurred is within the Budget as envisaged
in General Financial Rules, 2005 so that there is no occasion for incurring
excess expenditure;
(d) Putting in place/reviewing/strengthening systems for monthly monitoring of
the flow/trends of expenditure so as to avoid recurrence of excess expenditure.
3. The above measures will be monitored through the periodical meetings of
financial Adviser with Secretary (Expenditure), to achieve the desired result of curtailing
the incidence of excess expenditures.
4. This has been vetted by Audit vide its U.O. No. DGACR's/RR/1-33/11-12/352
dated August 03, 2011.
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs O.M. No. F. 7(3)-B(SD)/2010
dated August 30, 2011]

ANNEXURE  A
F.7 (3)-B (SD) 2010
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
New Delhi, dated the 11th July, 2011
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Control of expenditure against the sanctioned grant/appropriation—
Observations of the Public Accounts Committee.
The Public Accounts Committee in their 22nd Report (15th Lok Sabha) relating
to 'Excess Expenditure over the Voted Grants and Charged Appropriation (2008-2009)'
have taken a serious view of expenditure incurred in excess of the provisions authorised
by the Parliament. It has been observed therein that the percentage of excess expenditure
over the Total Grant ranged from 0.0007 per cent (Defence-Pension) to 76.96 per cent
(Railways Appropriation No. 16—Assets—Acquisition, Construction and
Replacement—Capital). In six cases, the percentage was more than 5 per cent over the
Original Grant. The Committee has expressed their displeasure over incurring such
huge amount of excess expenditure over the Total/Original Grants, which is a clear
indication of poor budgeting on the part of Ministries concerned. Further, the Committee
feels that incurring excess expenditure of more than 5 per cent of the Total Grant
despite obtaining Supplementary Grant/Appropriation is a pointer towards the total
failure of the Ministries concerned in anticipating the funds required for which special
efforts are needed in future to avoid recurrence of such instances. It has also been
recommended that in future the concerned Ministries should ensure that under no
circumstances the excess over Final Grants should exceed more than 5 per cent.
2. Ministry of Finance has been issuing instructions in the past emphasising the
need of control of expenditure with reference to the sanctioned Grant/Appropriation.
Keeping in view the observations of the Public Accounts Committee and the extant
rules/instructions, it is once again emphasised that strict watch should be kept over
the flow of expenditure against the sanctioned grant by regular monitoring as provided
in Rules 54, 58, 59, 60 and 61, Chapter 3 of General Financial  Rules, 2005 so that the
expenditure does not exceed the amounts authorised by the Parliament.
22

23
3. All the Ministries/Departments may consider taking necessary measures with
a view to minimize/eliminate the incidence of excess expenditure by having in place
judicious management of budgetary provisions and also ensure that expenditure is
within the original/supplementary appropriation or valid re-appropriation as the case
may be. Some of the steps suggested are:—
(a) Preparation and circulation of Monthly Financial Review Analysis to the
Administrative Heads for monitoring the progress of expenditure, and also to
enable them to take remedial action wherever required;
(b) Convening regular internal meetings with all spending units for effecting
expenditure control;
(c) Ensuring realistic projection of Budget Estimates/Supplementary Estimates
and also ensuring that expenditure incurred is within the Budget as envisaged
in General Financial Rules, 2005 so that there is no occasion for incurring
excess expenditure;
(d) Putting in place/reviewing/strengthening systems for monthly monitoring of
the flow/trends of expenditure so as to avoid recurrence of excess expenditure.
4. The above instructions if implemented are expected  to achieve the desired
result of curtailing the incidence of excess expenditures.
5. This issues with the approval of Secretary (Expenditure).
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
To
All Financial Advisers
Ministries/Departments
(as per standard mailing list)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
It is stated that the percentage of excess expenditure of 7.95%, as shown above
in respect of Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of Ministry of Home Affairs, is with
reference to the Original Grant of ` 999.03 and comes to 5.52% of the Total/Final Grant
of ` 1437.58 crore, if the Supplementary Grant of ` 438.55 crore is also taken into
account. Though it is still slightly more than 5% of the Total/Final Grant, the maximum
limit of excess expenditure the Committee have desired the Ministries/Departments to
ensure not to exceed under any circumstances.
In this regard, it will be pertinent to mention here that sometimes funds proposed
at different stages of budgeting for various projects/schemes do not get the nod of
Ministry of Finance and reduced substantially. In such cases, where there is a committed
liability of the Government, the excess booking of expenditure cannot be ruled out
completely.

24
As mentioned erstwhile, the excess expenditure during the financial
year 2008-09 under Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs
was due to over-booking of expenditure under 'Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension
Scheme'. Had this over-booking not happened, the Grant would not have exceeded
the budgetary provision. The Division concerned of the Ministry has been requested
to find a solution to this problem. An internal audit of this scheme is also being
undertaken during the year 2010-11.
Sd/-
(Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This  'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/O DGACE vide their U.O. No. RR/6-
30/10-11/814 dated 01.11.2010).
[Ministry of Home Affairs'  O.M. No. 28/15/2010-Bgt.I dated 25.11.2010]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In this paragraph, the Committee has observed that the percentage of excess
expenditure over the Total Grant ranged from 0.0007 per cent in Grant No. 20—Defence
Pensions to 79.96 per cent in Appropriation  No. 16 Assets—Acquisition, Construction
and Replacement-Capital. The Committee express their displeasure over incurring such
huge amount of excess expenditure over the Total/Original Grants, which is a clear
indication of poor budgeting on the part of the Ministries concerned. The Committee
also recommends that in future the concerned Ministries should ensure that under no
circumstances the excess over Final Grants should exceed more than 5 per cent. In this
regard it is to mention that the percentage of excess over final Grants under both the
Grants are below 5 per cent  i.e. 0.33 per cent under Grant No. 19—Ministry of Defence
(Civil) and 0.0007 per cent under Grant No. 20—Defence Pensions. However, instructions
have been issued to the budget utilizing authorities and IFAs concerned to avoid
recurrence of excess expenditure in future.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS&Addl.FA(R)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
Even though the excess has been high in terms of percentage in a few
appropriations of the Railways, the amounts involved are not much. However, the
recommendation of the Committee that Ministries should ensure that under no
circumstances the excess over Final appropriations should exceed more than 5 per
cent is noted.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 112-RA-III/2-1/10 dated 10.11.2010 have vetted the
Action Taken Note with the following comments:
"Seen".
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/22 dated 15.2.2011]

25
Observation/Recommendation No.  5
The Committee note that the major contributory factors for the excess expenditure
according to the Civil Ministries where on account of receipt of more claims due to
implementation of the VI Central Pay Commission recommendations, more payments
made for settlement of claims of displaced persons, additional payments of dearness
allowance to freedom fighters/pensioners etc. In respect of Defence Ministry, the
major causes of excess expenditure are stated to be increase in security related
expenditure and foreign exchange variations, issue of operating platform for CRN-91
guns, higher supply to DRDO etc. Likewise, the Ministry of Railways attributed the
reasons for excess expenditure to taking up of more activities relating to repair and
maintenance of rail infrastructure, operating expenses of rolling stock and equipment,
more expenditure towards staff cost due to implementation of the recommendations of
the VI Central Pay Commission, higher payment of dividend to General Revenues on
account of higher booking in Capital as compared to Budget Estimates etc. Though
the Committee appreciate difficulties faced by the Ministries in exactly estimating the
likely expenditure due to the exigencies arising out of unforeseen circumstances,
nevertheless, incurring huge amount of excess expenditure to the tune of thousands
of crore year after year is totally inexplicable and cannot be attributed to unforeseen
factors or the extraordinary situations alone. This is endemic of system failure arising
out of lack of proper attention and alacrity in budgetary estimations and failure to
ensure observance of strict fiscal discipline etc. Further, the instances of recurring
excess expenditure of large sums by the Union Ministries particularly Finance, Defence
and Railways indicate that they have not accorded due importance to the guiding
force of budgeting  i.e. to ensure judicious and equitable distribution of scarce financial
resources for achieving all round growth of different sectors and instead continued to
persist with their flawed budgeting mechanism besides giving scant respect to the
Rules/Provisions put in place for containing the expenditure within the authorized
limits. The Committee once again urge upon the Ministry of Finance to find innovative
steps for ushering in the next level of budgeting and financial management in the
country, whereby the exercise is not only made more accurate, logical and practicable
but also able to eliminate mojor budgetary and financial irregularities and the scarce
financial resources are utilized appropriately, judiciously and productively on the laid
down targets thus facilitating economy, efficiency and efficacy in the financial
transactions which are also the guiding tenets of budgeting.
[Para 5 of 22nd Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
In so far as specific instances of excesses occurred in Ministry of Defence
(4 grants i.e., Grant No. 19 — Ministry of Defence (Civil), Grant No. 20 — Defence
Pensions, Grant No. 23 — Defence Services — Air Force, and Grant No. 24 — Defence
Ordnance Factories) and Ministry of Railways (9 cases under 8 Grants and Appropriation
i.e., Grant No. 4 — Repairs & Maintenance, of Permanent Way & Works, Grant No. 5 —
Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Power, Grant No. 6 — Repair and Maintenances
of Carriages and Wagons,Grant No. 7 — Repair and Maintenance of Plant and
Equipment, Grant No. 8 — Operating Expenses — Rolling stock and Equipment, Grant

26
No. 15, — Dividend to General Revenues, Repayment of Loans taken from General
Revenues and Amortisation of over-capitalization, Appropriation No. 3 — General
Superintendence and Services, Appropriation No. 5 — Repairs and Maintenance of
Motive power and Appropriation No. 16 — Assets —Acquisition, construction and
replacement — Capital) are concerned, while the primary responsibility is discharged
by the respective Departments, Ministry of Finance, being the nodal Ministry in respect
of Expenditure Mangement has consistently taken effective steps to regulate the
expenditure within the sanctioned grant by line Ministries. Further, the Budget circular
of 2010&11 issued on 11.9.2009 to all Ministries in Para 5 referred to the PAC's
23rd report (13th Lok Sabha) on the Excesses Over V oted Grants and the Charged
Appropriations (1998-99), and suggested that effective coordination between various
estimating and disbursing authorities be put in place with the help of sound data-base
and other IT facilities so that the excess expenditure could be avoided altogether.
Futher, an Office Memorandum has been issued on 25th January, 2010 to all Secretaries
of Govt. of India, who are Chief Accounting Authorities of their Department advising
them to adhere to Rule 64 of GFR and ensure rigid enforcement of prescribed financial
rules and to see that no instance of excess expenditure takes place in future for reasons
which can be anticipated and taken care of in advance either in BE or Supplementary
grants. Further, after preparation of ATRs in respect of recommendations in 54th Report
of PAC, a series of meetings were taken with FAs of concerned Departments to impress
upon them to see that excess expenditure does not take place. All Secretaries to GoI
were also advised by Secretary, Expenditure that (i) starting Financial year 2010&11
the position of ATNs in respect of the important Audit observations, included in the
Annual Report, as well as those included in earlier Annual Reports, may also be
furnished in the Annexure to the Annual Report.
The excess expenditure under Grant No. 39 (Pensions) was incurred mainly due
to the following reason:—
"Pension, a committed liability, is authorized to bank branches across the
country through Pension Payment Orders for disbursing monthly pension
without any pre-check by Pay and Account Offices; delayed receipt of scrolls
from these authorized banks; delayed receipt of claims; and unforeseen cases
of voluntary retirement/death. The main constraint for augmenting budget,
given the extant system of disbursement of pension and retirement benefits
through Banks without pre check control, the absence of connectivity and
current reporting."
There used to be heavy excess expenditure on the appropriations “Repayment
of Debt” and “Interest Payments”. Effective steps have been taken to improve the
quality of estimation of "Repayment of Debt" and "Interest Pyament" in consultation
with RBI resulting in zero excess expenditure during the year 2007-08 and 2008-09.
In addition, it is stated that with the help of IT initiative taken by office of the Comptroller
General of Accounts, a closer watch on the expenditure position has now been enabled
and Budget Division of Ministry of Finance reviews them very closely towards the
close of financial year, Particularly with a view to include cases where there is likelihood
of excess expenditure, to include them in the last batch of supplementary demands for

27
grants, so that instances of excess expenditure are reduced. Further, the Ministry of
Finance requests other Ministries/Departments at reduced. Further, the Ministry of
Finance requests other Ministries/Departments at the time of final batch of
Supplementary Demands for Grants to assess the expenditure position with reference
to approved Revised Estimates which may result in excess expenditure and come up
with suitable Supplementary Demands for Grants so that excess expenditure is avoided
in any grant or appropriation. Details of steps taken by Ministry of Finance in this
regard were explained in the ATN on the observations/recommendations contained in
para 51 of 80th report of PAC (2008-09) (14th Lok Sabha) on Excess Over Charged
Grants and Charged Appropriations (2006-07).
Owing to the attention accorded to this issue and the Government efforts in
reducing the excess expenditure over the years, the excess expenditure has been
brought down from `  97,205 crore in 2005-06 to ` 1012.82 crore in 2008-09. This was
possible due to the concerted efforts and continued monitoring of the expenditure by
the Government. In fact, the excess expenditure after excluding Defence and Pensions
is only `  79.39 crores, and refers to a single grant relating to Other Payments of MHA.
Even in the Demands relating to Ministry of Defence and Centralized Grant-Pensions,
the excess expenditure was largely due to implementation of the recommendations of
6th Central Pay Commission. This position indicates that with the concerted efforts
made, the seriousness impressed upon the Ministries over a period and other measures
taken, the problem of excess expenditure is in control and, perhaps, is within an
acceptable margin. It is further assured that this tempo will be maintained and will not
be allowed to lose focus. It is, therefore, submitted that the present system is sufficient
and adequate, coupled with the additional measures already taken.
This has been vetted by Audit vide U.O. No. RR/1-88/10-11/2 dated 01.04.2011
Sd/-
(H. Pradeep Rao)
Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
It is evident from the 'Detailed Explanatory Note for Excess', submitted to the
Public Accounts Committee (copy enclosed), that expenditure under certain heads of
account was incurred in excess of the Original Budget Provision (BE) as requirement of
additional funds under these heads of account had arisen after commencement of the
financial year 2008-09. The expenditure under all these heads of account, barring the
sub-head 2235.60.107.03 — Central Government Pension (Swatantrata Sainik
Samman Pension Scheme), was, however, covered with adequate means available
under the rules for meeting additional requirements of funds, like obtaining
Supplementary Grants from the Parliament through Ministry of Finance/Re-
appropriation of funds with the due approvals of the Competent Authorities. As regard
the sub-head 2235.60107.03 — Central Government Pension (Swatantrata Sainik
Samman Pension Scheme), the position of the Ministry has already been made clear
in the preceding replies of this Ministry.

28
It is also submitted that excess expenditure under Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure
of Ministry of Home Affairs is not a recurring phenomenon. There has not been any
excess expenditure under this Grant during the last few years, which is indication of
the fact that there is no system failure arising out of lack of proper attention and
alacrity in budgetary estimations and failure to ensure observance of strict fiscal
discipline. As desired by the Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs will scrupulously
follow all the instruction/directions issued in this regard.
Sd/-
(Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/O DGACE vide their U.O. No. RR/6-30/
10-11/814 dated 01.11.2010).
[Ministry of Home Affairs' O.M. No. 28/15/2010-Bgt. I dated 25.11.2010]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In this paragraph, the Committee have urged upon the Ministry of Finance to
find innovative steps for ushering in the next level of budgeting and financial
management in the country in order to eliminate major budgetary and financial
irregularities.
Necessary action in this regard is to be taken by Ministry of Finance. Ministry of
Defence would take follow up action on the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (R)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The recommendation is particularly addressed to Ministry of Finance. However,
concern of Committee is noted. Ministry of Railways has already urged recently the
spending units under its control, viz., the zonal Railways, the need to adhere to the
fiscal discipline as desired by the Committee. A copy of each of the letters is enclosed
Annexure  I.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 144 RA-III/2-1/10 dated 11.2.2011 desired that their
comments dated 10.11.2010 may be appended below audit observations along with
Ministry's comments:
"Seen. Though the Committee urged upon Ministry of Finance to find
innovative steps for better budgetary and financial regularities, it does not
absolve Ministry of Railways, which is presenting a separate budget for
Railways, of its responsibilities of controlling expenditure within the
authorized allocations. Mere issue of instructions would not serve the purpose
as incurring expenditure over and above the sanctioned allocations is a

29
recurring phenomenon in Railways. Ministry of Railways needs to take
corrective action both while assessing the requirements at various stages
and controlling the expenditure so that expenditure remains within the
sanctioned allocations. Strengthen the procedure of constant monitoring
through computerization and networking both at zonal railways level and at
Ministry's level would help in controlling the expenditure."
Ministry’s Comments
The impact of the implementation of 6th CPC has been much larger than expected.
There certainly is always a scope for better assessment. All efforts were made to make
sufficient provision for implementation of 6th CPC in 2008-09. However, the provision
made was  found short in some of the Demands, particularly in light of the multiplicity
of the recommendations of 6th CPC further modified by the Government, the
implementation of which began only in the later part of 2008-09 with orders coming in
piecemeal manner. Despite this and the fact that the recommendations of 6th CPC
involved benefit accruing to about 14 lakh serving employees and more than 11 lakh
pensioners, the excess expenditure in 2008-09 was contained within ` 532 cr. limited
only to a few Demands for Grants.
The Railways do have a well-set budgetary and monitoring mechanism of
expenditure as a result of which the incidence of excess could gradually be brought
down to 0.03% in 2007-08 despite the vast spectrum and spending units of railway
network spread along the length and breadth of the country. However, in 2008-09 and
2009-10, the excess expenditure has risen mainly due to the difficulty in assessing the
impact of implementing the recommendations of 6th CPC. Ministry of Railways,
nonetheless, would take steps to strengthen  the system and procedure that will help
in controlling the expenditure within the sanctioned appropriation/grants. Due care
will also be taken in seeking Supplementary Demands, if necessary, in time.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Advisor Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/22 dated 15.2.2011]

ANNEXURE  I
Hkkjr ljdkj@Government of India
jsy ea=ky;@Ministry of Railways
¼jsyos cksMZ@Railway Board)
lañ 2010&ch&343 ubZ fnYyh@ New Delhi, rkjh[k dated 21-06-2010
egkizcU/kd The General Managers,
lHkh {ks=h; jsysa lfgr esVªks jsy@dksydkrk
All Zonal Railways including metro Railway/Kolkata.
fo"k;@Subject: fu;a=d egkys[kk ifj{kk dk fjiksVZ lañ CA 11 of 2009-10 ¼jsyos½@&AG's
Report No. CA II of 2009-10 (Railways)
While commenting on the Appropriation Accounts for 2008-09, the Audit in its
subject report vide Para No. 1.12.6 pointed out to the following instances of unnecessary/
excessive/inadequate supplementary provisions:—
(` in cr.)
Grant/Appropriation Supplementary Year -end-excess(+)/ Remarks
taken Savings(-)
Grant No. 10 567.37 (-) 301.30 53%      of       the       Supplementary
taken remains unutilized
Grant No. 12 353.57 (-) 501.33 Supplementary  taken  remains   fully
unutilized
Grant No. 13 3065.36 (-)1320.47 43%  of   the   Supplementary   taken
remains unutilized
Appropriation No. 7 0.02 (-)0.06 Supplementary   taken   remains  fully
unutilized
Appropriation No. 10 39.23 (-)30.05 77%   of   the   Supplementary   taken
remains unutilized
Appropriation No. 11 0.16 (-)0.45 Supplementary   taken   remains  fully
unutilized
Appropriation No. 12 34.32 (-)15.58 45%   of  the   Supplementary   taken
remains unutilized
Appropriation No. 13 0.05 (-)0.13 Supplementary       taken       remains
unutilized
Grant No. 4 432.51 (+ )104.05 In   sufficient    Supplementary  taken
Grant No. 6 845.19 (+ )149.69 In   sufficient   Supplementary   taken
Grant No. 8 540.28 (+)131.06 In     sufficient   Supplementary      taken
30

31
The above table indicates the negligent manner in which the Railways have
projected their requirement at supplementary stage leading to huge savings/excess
over the supplementary obtained. The Railways are cautioned to asses their requirement
accurately in their Final Modification Estimates so that the last batch of supplementary
grants can be based on the realistic requirement to avoid the possibility of any excess/
savings.
The Audit, vide Para No. 1.12.9, has also pointed out to incurring excess
expenditure without any provision in the original estimates/supplementary demands
and without any re-appropriation to this effect. The details are given below:—
(` in lakh)
Appropriation Railway involved Expenditure incurred
No. without any provision
4 South Western Railway 11.31
5 Southern Railway 1.20
12 South Western Railway 18.58
(` in Lakh)
Grant No. 16—Assets—Acquisition, Construction and Replacement
Source Plan head Railway/Unit Expenditure Ministry of Railways' Remarks
involved incurred
Doubling East Central 97.94 Wrong booking as Doubling was
financed through only Capital fund
in 2008-09
Capital Bridge works South Western 1.80 Expenditure booked without
provision
Miscellaneous Central Organisation 1.87 Expenditure booked without
Advances— for Railway provision
Capital Electrification
Track Renewal W estern 2.47 Wrong booking as per rules of
allocation
Open Line Bridge works W estern 3.85 Expenditure booked without
Works—Revenue provision
Staff Quarters South Western 4.11 Wrong booking as per rules of allocation
Amenities for Staff North Central 2.74 Expenditure booked without provision
The Zonal Railways concerned may examine the reasons for not projecting the
above expenditure in time in Revised/Final Modification stages to enable allotment
through re-appropriations in these stages or for inclusion in the supplementary
demands, otherwise. They are also cautioned not to incur any expenditure without
provision of funds.
Sd/-
latho tSu
funs'kd foÙk ¼ctV½
jsyos cksMZ
(Sanjeev Jain)
Director, Finance (Budget)
Railway Board.

32
Observation/Recommendation No. 6
The Committee note with concern that out of the total 15 cases of excess
registering Grants/Appropriations, an excess expenditure of ` 1544.92 crore was incurred
in as many as 14 cases even after obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations to
the extent of ` 13938.19 crore. The percentage of excess expenditure over the
Supplementary Grants in respect of these 14 Grants/Appropriations ranged from 0.003
per cent (Grant No. 20—Defence Pensions) to 341.72 per cent (Appropriation No. 16—
Assets—Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—Capital) and in 7 cases, this
percentage was more than 18 per cent. To give the Ministry-wise details Supplementary
Grants to the tune of above ` 8349.17 crore, ` 3061.15 crore and ` 2527.87 crore
pertaining to the Civil, Defence and Railways Ministries respectively fell short of the
actual expenditure by ` 270.21 crore, ` 742.61 crore and ` 532.12 crore in that order. The
excess registering Grants/Appropriations operated by the Civil Ministries  i.e. Grant
No. 19—Ministry of Defence (Civil), Grant No. 20—Defence Pensions, Grant No. 39—
Pension, and Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs obtained
a Supplementary Grant each of ` 606.25 crore, ` 4669.20 crore, ` 2635.17 crore and
` 438.55 crore respectively. However, in all these Grants, excess expenditure was
incurred, the respective amounts being ` 27.50 crore ` 13.33 lakh, ` 163.18 crore and
` 79.39 crore. Similarly, the excess registering Grants pertaining to Defence Service i.e.
Grant No. 23—Defence Services—Air Force, and Grant No. 24—Defence Ordinance
Factories obtained a Supplementary Grant each of ` 1345.39 crore and ` 1715.76 crore
respectively. Still then the actual expenditure on these two Grants exceeded the
budgetary provisions by ` 610.37 crore and ` 132.25 crore respectively. In respect of
the Railways, out of the total 9 excess registering cases, 8 were such cases where large
sums of Supplementary Grants proved inadequate to meet the actual requirement of
funds. A Supplementary Grant each of ` 432.51 crore, ` 258.62 crore, ` 845.19 crore,
` 371.08 crore, ` 540.28 crore, ` 75.08 crore, ` 10.89 lakh and ` 5 crore was allocated
under Grant No. 4—Working Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of Permanent Way
and Works; Grant No. 5—Working Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of Motive
Power; Grant No. 6 — Working Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of Carriages and
Wagons; Grant No. 7—Working Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of Plant and
Equipment; Grant No. 8—Operating Expenses—Rolling Stock and Equipment; Grant
No. 15—Dividend to General Revenues, Repayment of Loans Taken from General
Revenues and Amortisation of Over-Capitalizations; Appropriation No. 5—Working
Expenses—Repairs and Maintenance of motive Power; and Appropriation No. 16—
Assets—Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—Capital, respectively. In spite
of allocating these additional funds, the abovementioned Grants/Appropriations
registered excess expenditure amounting to ` 106.58 crore; ` 103.09 crore; ` 157.25
crore; ` 13.07 crore; ` 128.30 crore; ` 6.71 crore; ` 1.20 lakh; and ` 17.09 crore
respectively. The Committee deplore the tendency of these Ministries in resorting
to excess expenditure despite obtaining huge sums of Supplementary Grants in
a routine manner. What is more perplexing is that in 10 cases, most of the Supplementary
Grants were obtained in February-March 2009 i.e. just 1 or 2 months before the end
of the financial year. This is a clear indication of not only bad budgeting but
also deep malaise in the extant budgeting method/mechanism, which

33
has failed to ensure proper assessment and accurate projection of the fund requirement
at all the stages of budgeting. It also exposes the failure of the Ministries concerned to
monitor their expenditure flow and trend. The persistence of this lapse would only
render the entire budgeting exercise a mere guess work without any objective or
vision. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the concerned Ministries particularly
the Ministry of Finance have to probe into the causes of this chronic problem and find
novel ways and means to make the mechanism of estimating Supplementary Grants
more realistic and pragmatic to ensure accurate projection and utilization of the
Supplementary Grants so that no subsequent excess expenditure is incurred and fiscal
discipline is maintained.
[Para 6 of 22nd Report of PAC (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs—Budget
Division)
During the year 2008-09, excess expenditure occurred in 6 Grants (Other than
Ministry of Railways) as follows:—
(` in crore)
No. and name of Grant Total Grant Actual Excess Percentage of
Expenditure Expenditure excess over
Total Grant
19-Ministry of Defence (Civil) 8363.22 8390.72 27.50 0.33
20-Defence Pensions 20232.95 20233.08 0.13 0.0007
39-Pensions 10565.93 10729.11 163.18 1.54
54-Other Expenditure of the 1437.58 1516.97 79.39 5.52
Ministry of Home Affairs
23-Defence Services—Air Force12632.21 13242.58 610.37 4.83
24-Defence Ordnance Factories 2824.75 2957.00 132.25 4.68
Total 1012.82
• Percentage of excess over Total Grant of the Ministry/Department ranges
from 0.0007% to 5.52%, which is very low given the overall Budgeted
Expenditure;
• Ministry of Finance issues Budget Circular every year bringing out various
Government instructions and also steps to be undertaken to formulate the
Budget. While seeking proposals for Supplementary Demands for Grants
also, instructions are issued to make realistic projections, so that neither
there is an occasion for huge surrender of Budget provisions nor there are
huge excesses. The Budget circular is followed up by meetings with the
Financial Advisers of various Ministries/Departments, so that a micro review
is undertaken at the apex level of Ministry of Finance for realistic Budget
requirement;

34
• During the pre-budget discussions held by Ministry of Finance, review of
expenditure is done Scheme-wise in respect of all Ministries/Departments, so
that realistic budget is framed and approved by the Parliament. Ministry of
Finance during the three batches of Supplementary Demands for Grants, also
take an opportunity to frame realistic assessment of the expected expenditure
for the year;
• Trend of excess Grants for the past five years reveal that the incidence of
excess expenditure has reduced considerably in respect of Ministries/
Department other than Railways from ` 42,227.20 crore in FY
2003-2004 to ` 1,012.82 crore in FY 2008-09;
• In para 4 of the present report, PAC themselves have recommended that
concerned Ministries should ensure that under no circumstances the excess
over Final Grants should exceed more than 5 per cent . In all the cases
brought out above except the  ‘Other Expenditure of the Ministry of Home
Affairs', the excess is less than 5 percent. Even in respect of the 'Other
expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs', the excess is slightly above
5 percent at 5.52%; and
• Given the complex nature and variety of Government spending, it is not
feasible to precisely estimate in advance all the expenditure requirements for
the financial year, as well as the requirements arising out of the unanticipated/
unforeseen developments during the course of the year. However, Ministry
of  Finance is taking proactive action for precisely estimating the expenditure
and will continue to do so in future also, so that the incidence of excess is
kept at the minimum and below 5 per cent of the Final Grant as recommended
by the PAC, if not nil.
This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-68/10-11/875 dated
the November 12, 2010.
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
O.M. No. F7(3)-B(SD)/2010 dated the November, 2010]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
It is stated that out of the total Supplementary Grant of ` 438.55 crore obtained
under Revenue Section (V oted) of Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of the Ministry of
Home Affairs during the financial year 2008-09, an amount of ` 84.35 crore (19.23% of
the total Supplementary Grant) was obtained in the 1st batch and the rest of the
amount i.e. ` 354.20 crore (80.77% of the total Supplementary Grant) in the 3rd and
Final Batch of the Supplementary Demands for Grants for the year 2008-09.

35
In this context, it is submitted that there were only two cases where the
expenditure exceeded the Total Grant, even after obtaining Supplementary Grants.
These cases were—2235.60.107.03—Central Government Pension (Swatantrata
Sainik Samman Pension Scheme) and 3601.01.343.06—Jammu and Kashmir Relief
& Rehabilitation. It has already been explained erstwhile that it is very difficult to
exactly anticipate the expenditure under the first scheme. As regards the second scheme
i.e. 3601.01.343.06—Jammu and Kashmir Relief & Rehabilitation, it is stated that
an additional requirement of ` 100.00 crore was felt under this scheme during the
financial year 2008-09 in the wake of Assembly Elections in the State. It was decided to
meet this additionalily partly (` 70.00 crore) by obtaining a Supplementary Grant in the
3rd & Final Batch and partly ( ` 30.00 crore) by re-appropriation of funds. Hence,
although the expenditure under this scheme exceeded the Total Grant (Original +
Supplementary) by an amount of ` 29.99 crore,  it was well covered with adequate re-
appropriation of funds of ` 30.00 crore, which was carried out with the due approval of
Secretary expenditure, Ministry of Finance.
In view of the above stated facts, it may not be concluded that projections of this
Ministry for the Supplementary Grants were not on realistic basis, but a mere guess.
Sd/-
(Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/O DGACE vide their U.O. No. RR/6-30/
10-11/814 dated 01.11.2010)
[Ministry of Home Affairs' O.M. No. 28/15/2010-Bgt.I dated 25.11.2010]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In this paragraph, the Committee have noted that in most of the excess registered
in grants, the excess took place despite the Ministries obtaining huge sums of
Supplementary Grants. The excess registering Grants pertaining to Civil Ministries
i.e. Grant No. 19—Ministry of Defence (Civil), and Grant No. 20-Defence Pensions
obtained a Supplementary Grant each of ` 606.25 crore and ` 4669.20 crore respectively.
Even then the actual expenditure on these two Grants exceed the budgetary provisions
by ` 27.50 crore and ` 0.13 crore respectively. The Committee deplores the tendency
of the Ministries in resorting to excess expenditure despite obtaining huge sums of
Supplementary Grants in a routine manner. The Committee have, therefore,
recommended that the concerned Ministries, particularly the Ministry of Finance
have to probe into the causes of this chronic problem and find novel ways and
means to make the mechanism of estimating Supplementary Grants more realistic and
pragmatic to ensure accurate projection and utilization of the Supplementary Grants
so that no subsequent excess expenditure is incurred and fiscal discipline is
maintained.
In this regard the Ministry of Defence has issued, from time to time instructions
to exercise strict control on progress of Expenditure in order to avoid any large-scale
savings or excess under any grant relating to Civil Estimates and Defence Pensions.

36
In so far as putting in place novel ways and means to make the mechanism of
estimating Supplementary Grants more realistic and pragmatic is concerned, this
Ministry would take follow up action on the instructions of Ministry of Finance in this
regard.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA(R)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The recommendation is particularly addressed to Ministry of Finance. However,
it may be mentioned that most of the excess incurred by Ministry of Railways during
2008-09 was mainly under staff cost because the implementation of the recommendations
of the 6th CPC started from the latter part of 2008-09 in piece-meal manner, the accurate
assessment of the impact whereof was quite difficult resulting in excess expenditure
under most of the Railway Grants.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 144 RA-III/2-1/10 dated 11-2-2011 desired that their
comments dated 10.11.2010 may be appended below audit observations along with
Ministry's comments:
"Seen. As brought out against Recommendation no. 5, steps may be taken for
accurate budgeting constant monitoring the flow and trend of expenditure at all level
and seeking, Supplementary Demands, in time, based on accurate projections to minimize
the cases of excess expenditure."
Ministry's Comments
The impact of the implementation of 6th CPC has been much larger than expected.
There certainly is always a scope for better assessment. All efforts were made to make
sufficient provision for implementation of 6th CPC in 2008-09. However, the provision
made was found short in some of the Demands, particularly in light of the multiplicity
of the recommendations of 6th CPC further modified by the Government, the
implementation of which began only in the later part of 2008-09 with orders coming in
piecemeal manner. Despite this and the fact that the recommendations of 6th CPC
involved benefit accruing to about 14 lakh serving employees and more than 11 lakh
pensioners, the excess expenditure in 2008-09 was contained within ` 532 cr. Limited
only to a few Demands for Grants.
The Railways do have a well-set budgetary and monitoring mechanism of
expenditure as a result of which the incidence of excess could gradually be brought
down to 0.03% in 2007-08 despite the vast spectrum and spending units of railway
network spread along the length and breadth of the country. However, in 2008-09 and
2009-10, the excess expenditure has risen mainly due to the difficulty in assessing the
impact of implementing the recommendations of 6th CPC. Ministry of Railways,

37
nonetheless, would take steps to strengthen the system and procedures that will help
in controlling the expenditure within the sanctioned, appropriation/grants. Due care
will also be taken in seeking Supplementary Demands, if necessary, in time.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PZC/XV/22 dated 15-2-2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 7
The Committee are constrained to observe that the two key Ministries viz. Finance
and Railways had been persistently incurring huge sums of excess expenditure during
the financial years 2001-02 to 2008-09 while the Ministry of Defence had been spending
much above the authorized   expenditure during each of the financial years 2003-04 to
2008-09. To elucidate, the Ministry of Finance incurred an excess expenditure of
` 759.75 crore in 2 cases in  2001-02, ` 1793.26 crore in 2 cases in  2002-03,
`  42184.73 crore in 2 cases in  2003-04, `  33783.55 crore  in  a single case in 2004-05,
`  96874.09 crore in 3 cases in  2005-06, `  36637.16 crore in 2 cases in  2006-07, `  98.24
crore in a single case in   2007-08, and `  163.18 crore in  single 9 case in   2008-09.
Similarly, the Ministry of Railways incurred excess expenditure of — ` 349.40 crores in
cases in 1998-99, ` 56.76 crores in 8 cases in 1999-2000,  ` 0.14 crore in 5 cases in
2000-01, ` 210.71 in crores in 10 case in 2001-02,  ` 323.65 crores in 11 case in 2002-03,
` 1136.92 crores in 13 case in 2003-04, `2151 .99 in crores in 13 cases in 2004-05,
` 2322.46 crores in 15 cases in 2005-06, `365.16 crores in 13 case in 2006-07, ` 51.22
crores in 10 cases in 2007-08, and ` 532.12 crores in 9 cases in 2008-09. The Committee
also find that the Ministry of Defence incurred an excess expenditure of  ` 37.50 crore
in a single case in 2003-04, ` 41.99 crore in 2 cases in 2004-05,` 44.84 crore in 2 cases in
2005-06, ` 667.17 crore in a single  case  in 2006-07, ` 71.19 crore in a single case in
2007-08 and ` 770.25 crore in 4 cases (2 cases under Defence Services and 2 cases
pertaining to Civil sector) in 2008-09.
This recurring phenomenon of wide variations between the budgetary provisions
and the actual expenditure by these important Ministries over such long periods has
led the Committee to arrive at the conclusion that the Ministry of Finance, which has
been entrusted with the responsibility of preparing the Union Budget, have not yet
made any concerted efforts to overhaul their own budgeting and accounting system.
Apparently, the estimation of requirement of funds is still done without any definite
vision leading to variations between the budgetary provisions projected and the actual
expenditure incurred under various Grants/appropriations. The Committee finds it
surprising that the Ministry of Finance, which ought to be a role model for  other
Ministries, have once again been found wanting in fiscal discipline and the prescribed
financial rules besides failing to act upon the Committee's considered suggestions for

38
avoiding or at least minimizing the persistent excess expenditure especially after
obtaining Supplementary Grants. Needless to say the  existing budgeting mechanism
still suffers from various loopholes and lacunae, which are nullifying the attempts of
the Government to enhance  accuracy level of their  budgetary projections to achieve
the desired improvements. The continuance of this situation is bound to encourage
further deterioration in maintaining fiscal discipline even to the point of taking many
ad hoc financial decisions without any concrete aim and objective. The Committee,
therefore, impress upon the Ministry of Finance to overhaul their budgetary  mechanism
in a practicable and tangible manner so that other Ministries/Departments take a cue
from it and  effectively replicate the same in their respective sphere of activities. While
urging the Government to shed their tendency of leaving things to take their own
course in regard to incurring excess expenditure in various  forms, the Committee
would appreciate a proactive role in monitoring the expenditure flow vis-à-vis the
physical and financial progress of various schemes/projects at fixed intervals in order
to arrive at a precise and accurate estimation of requirements of funds at a various
stages of budgeting exercise.
[Para 7 of  22nd Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)].
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs—Budget Division)
The following table indicates the Grant/Appropriation-wise details of excess
expenditure occurred in the Grant/Appropriations controlled by the Ministry of Finance:
( ` in crore)
Appropriation
Y ear Interest Repayment of Others Grants of Total
Payments Debt Ministry of Finance
1 2 3    1+2+ 3
2001-02 28.39 .. 731.36 759.75
2002-03 1792.90 .. 0.36 1793.26
2003-04 .. 42182.74 1.99 42184.73
2004-05 .. 33783.55 .. 33783.55
2005-06 3343.02 93529.22 1.85 96874.09
2006-07 3587.89 33049.27 .. 36637.16
2007-08 .. .. 98.24 98.24
2008-09 .. .. 163.18 163.18
2. As may be seen from the table above the recurring excess expenditure were
reported  mainly during the period from 2001-02 to 2006-07 in Appropriation—Interest

39
Payments and Appropriation—Repayment of Debt, the Centralized Appropriation
controlled by Ministry of Finance. The excess expenditure occurring in these
two appropriations is due to the reasons unique to these appropriations, which
are not applicable to other Grants and Appropriations of other Ministries/
Departments.
3. Based on the recommendations of 'Working Group' constituted with
representatives from Budget Division, Ministry of Finance, office of the Chief Controller
of Accounts, Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank of India, Government has taken
concrete steps to bring improvement in the quality of estimation of Repayment of Debt
and Interest  Payments. As a result of implementation of the some of the measures,
there has been no excess expenditure in these two Appropriations viz., Interest Payments
and Repayment of Debt for the years 2007-08 and 2008-09.
4. Of the excess expenditure of ` 98.24 crore and ` 163.18 crore reported in
2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively, the  excess expenditure was incurred in Demand—
Pensions, the Centralized Grant of Ministry of Finance . The occurrence of excess
expenditure was largely due to more  pension and other retirement claims of Civil
Pensioners than anticipated in 2007-08 and attributed to unforeseen cases of voluntary
retirement and death than anticipated in 2008-09. This being a centralized Grant and
since the  expenditure depends on cases of retirements, voluntary retirements, death,
implementation of the recommendations of  6th Central Pay  Commission, timely reporting
of expenditure by authorized banks, etc., precise estimation is not possible in such
cases. However, the excess expenditure as percentage of authorized amount in this
Centralized Grant works out to 1.14% and 1.54% only in 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively.
Considering the huge amounts of funds provided in the Centralized Grants—Pensions,
the variations of this magnitude may require to be assumed as normal. In fact, as a
result of concerted efforts of Ministry of Finance and other remedial measures, there
has been no excess expenditure occurred in Centralized Grant—Pensions in the year
2009-10.
5. As regards the Committee's observation on the role of Ministry of Finance in
overhauling the budgetary mechanism, it may be mentioned that this Ministry has
been issuing instructions time and again to line Ministries/Departments impressing
upon the need to avoid excess expenditure in the grants/appropriations controlled by
them. Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure had vide its Office Memorandum
dated 25.1.2010, issued instructions to the  Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments
inviting the observations of the Public Accounts Committee (2008-09) and advising
them to ensure rigid enforcement of prescribed financial rules and to see that no
instance of excess expenditure takes place in future for reasons which can be  anticipated
and taken care of in advance either in Budget Estimates or Supplementary Grants,
except in case of exceptional circumstances. A copy of the O.M. Dated 25.1.2010

40
issued by this Ministry is enclosed. These steps will continue to be taken by Ministry
of Finance and adequate  mechanism for monitoring  of Government expenditure are
put in place to arrest the recurrence of excess expenditure over appropriations authorized
by Parliament.
6. Ministry of Finance has also been reviewing the expenditure of Ministries/
Departments through mid-year review and additional sums are provided through
supplementary demands for grants wherever necessary.
7. This has been vetted by Audit  vide their U.O. No. RR/1-3/11/12/50 dated
7.6.2011.
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
F.No. 7(7)-B(R)/2010 dated 30.6.2011

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
New Delhi, dated the 25th January, 2010
Office Memorandum
Subject: Excess expenditure over voted grants—regarding.
In its Eightieth Report, the Public Accounts Committee (2008-09) has observed
in Paras 50 and 59 that some Ministries/Departments of Union Government continue
to display indifferent attitude towards rules laid down for containing the expenditure
within the authorized limits. While viewing the state of affairs with grave concern,
the Committee emphasised and reiterated from their past Reports that the Secretary,
Department of Expenditure in the Ministry of Finance should strongly and
effectively draw the personal attention of the concerned Secretaries in the
Ministries/Departments of the Union Government depicting excess expenditures
to ensure financial discipline, which is now all the more necessary with the Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 in operation. The
Committee also desired the Ministry of Finance, being a nodal Ministry to control
the exchequer of the Government of India to impress upon all the Ministries to
ensure rigid enforcement prescribed financial rules and procedure so as to contain
the instances of excess expenditure to the bare minimum. It has been recommended
that action should also be taken to deal sternly with cases where any slackness is
noticed inobservance of prescribed financial rules.
2. In terms of Rule 52(1) of the GFRs, Departments of the Central Government
shall be  responsible for the control of expenditure against the sanctioned grants and
appropriations placed at their disposal. The control shall be exercised through the
heads of Departments and other controlling officers, if any, and disbursing officers
subordinate to them. Rule 52(23) further provides that no expenditure shall be incurred
which may have the effect of exceeding the total grant or appropriation authorized by
Parliament by law for a financial year, except after obtaining a supplementary grant or
appropriation or an advance from the contingency fund. The GFRs also lay down
detailed instructions on the procedure for effective control over expenditure by the
Department controlling and disbursing officers. The ultimate responsibility of control
of expenditure against the grant/appropriation lies with the authority administering a
grant/appropriation.
3. Instructions have already been issued to all Financial Advisers on 26th October
2009 to forward separate reports on a quarterly basis on pending A TNs in respects of
paras selected by PAC. It is now advised that necessary steps may be taken by
Secretaries to Government of India, being the Chief Accounting Authorities as per
41

42
Rule 64 of GFR, to ensure rigid enforcement of prescribed financial rules and to see
that no instance of excess expenditure takes place in future for reasons which can be
anticipated and taken care of inadvance either in BE or supplementary grants, except in
rare or exceptional circumstances. Special attention of Deptt. of Economic Affairs,
M/o Defence, M/o Railways, Company Affairs and M/o Mines is invited to ensure that
the phenomena of excess expenditure is not repeated.
Sd/-
(Sushama Nath)
Secretary (Expenditure)
1. All Secretaries to Government of India.
2.  All Financial Advisers.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
(b) In view of the persistence recurrence of excess expenditure in the Ministry of
Finance, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Defence etc., the Committee have in this
paragraph impressed upon the Ministry of Finance to overhaul their budgetary
mechanism in a practical and tangible manner so that other Ministries/Departments
take a cue from it and effectively replicate the same to check incurring of excess
expenditure. In this context, it is to mention that excess under Ministry of Defence
(Civil) estimate and Defence pension is not a recurring instance and excess under both
of these Grants has not been registered for earlier financial years till 2008-09.
Necessary action in this regard would need to be taken by Ministry of Finance.
Any instruction issued by Ministry of Finance in this regard would be followed by this
Ministry.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA(R)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The para is mainly on persistent excess expenditure from 2001-02 to 2008-09 by
Ministry of Railways. In this regard, it may be mentioned that the excess on Ministry
of Railways has consistently decreased after 2005-06 and was a meagre 0.03% of the
total grant in 2007-08. But due to implementation of 6th CPC, the impact of which has
been quite difficult to be accurately assessed, a higher excess has occurred in 2008-09.
Audit vide their U.O. No.144 RA-III/2-1/10 dated 11.2.2011 desired that their
comments dated 10.11.2010 may be appended below audit observations along with
Ministry's comments:
"Seen. However, the facts remains that the incurrence of expenditure more
than the sanctioned grants/appropriations indicates that budget estimations

43
are not being prepared accurately based on future projections. Further, system
of monitoring the expenditure at different levels keeping in view the physical
and financial progress of the various projects etc. is not sound enough to
contain the expenditure within the sanctioned provisions."
Ministry's Comments
The impact of the implementation of 6th CPC has been much larger than expected.
There certainly is always a scope for better assessment. All efforts were made to make
sufficient provision for implementation of 6th CPC in 2008-09. However, the provision
made was found short in some of the Demands, particularly in light of the multiplicity
of the recommendations of 6th CPC further modified by the Government, the
implementation of which began only in the later part of 2008-09 with orders coming in
piecemeal manner. Despite this and the fact that the recommendations of 6th CPC
involved benefit accruing to about 14 lakh serving employees and more than 11 lakh
pensioners, the excess expenditure in 2008-09 was contained within `532 cr. limited
only to a few Demands for Grants.
The Railways do have a well-set budgetary and monitoring mechanism of
expenditure as a result of which the incidence of excess could gradually be brought
down to 0.03% in 2007-08 despite the vast spectrum and spending units of railway
network spread along the length and breadth of the country. However, in 2008-09 and
2009-10, the excess expenditure has risen mainly due to the  difficulty in assessing the
impact of implementing the recommendations of 6th CPC. Ministry of Railways,
nonetheless, would take steps to strengthen the system and procedures that will help
in controlling the expenditure within the sanctioned appropriation/grants. Due care
will also be taken in seeking Supplementary Demands, if necessary, in time.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance,
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/22 dated 15.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 9
 Scrutiny of select cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations reveals
that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) incurred an excess expenditure
of  `163.18 crore under Revenue Section (Voted) of Grant No. 39-Pensions, which was
the net effect of total excess of  `350.30 crore and total savings of  `187.12 crore under
various sub-heads of this Grant during the financial year under review. This Grant
along accounted for about 60.39 per cent of the total excess expenditure incurred in the
civil sector. The Explanatory Note furnished by the Ministry of Finance
inter-alia states that the excess was mainly due to higher expenditure than estimated,
the receipt of more scrolls from the authorized banks and clearance of outstanding
scrolls. The Ministry have also informed the Committee that pensions are a committed
liability of Government and are disbursed by more than 40 thousand branches of

44
Public and Private Sector banks in 63 accounting circles of the Central Pension
Accounting Office direct to the pensioners residing across the country. As the banks
are not under the administrative control of pension sanctioning authorities unlike the
departmental DDOs in the Ministries, pension payment is not subject to a pre-check
system of payment, which is otherwise applicable for other expenditure transactions.
The Committee's examination has revealed that this Grant had also registered an excess
expenditure of  `98.24 crore during the previous financial year 2007-08. An analysis of
the causes of the excess expenditure on account of pension payments especially
during the last two fiscals suggests that there is lack of a comprehensive network
amongst pension account related offices across the country and the prevailing pensions
data management and accounting information systems are not in order and marked by
lack of precise information regarding region/circle-wise number of pensioners. This
clearly shows that the Ministry has not taken any concrete measures to revamp the
system so that the pension liability can be correctly forecast and factored into the
budgetary estimations, which is regrettable. Consequently, when the recommendations
of the 6th Central Pay Commission were implemented, the flow of funds was thrown
out of gear. As a remedial measure to improve the  situation, the Committee has been
informed by the Ministry that the Central Pension Accounting Office has now
introduced e-scroll system, which will help in checking the expenditure. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the efficacy of the e-scroll system and its impact on
correctly assessing the expenditure on pensions. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry of Finance should look into all aspect for taking necessary corrective action
so that the existing deficiencies and shortcomings in the pension payment are rectified
and recurrence of excess expenditure is either avoided or greatly minimized in future.
The Ministry should also adopt e-governance model and utilize the information
Technology services/tools so as to establish a centralized data base of the pensioners
and networking of all the banks so as to arrive at a correct estimation of pension
liability and expenditure in a particular year.
[Para 9 of the 22nd Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)].
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
The observations of the Public Accounts Committee have been noted and
corrective actions in the interim are in hand; in the longer run a project to revamp the
system of budget formulation and execution in respect is being envisaged.
2. In the interim two measures are being adopted. The e-scroll project is being
finalised to enable an early rolling out to all banks who act as pension disbursing
agencies and account for more than half of the disbursements under the grant.
Simultaneously it is envisaged to institute an electronic mechanism of budget formulation
and execution through a common portal, connecting the accounting circles of the
Government of India that operate on the Grant directly and account for a little less than
half the pensions disbursed this project is being formulated by CPAO in consultation
with the office of the Controller General of Accounts. Commensurate enhancement of
manpower is under the anvil.

45
3. In response to the observations of the Public Accounts Committee at para 54
of the 7th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha) on "Excesses
over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2007-08)", it had been stated in our
Action Taken Note that—
"While noting the observations of the Hon'ble Committee with regard to
taking necessary corrective action to avoid/minimize the recurrence of Excess
Expenditure, it is submitted that as pension is a commitment, budget control
in a dispersed payment system may not be presently possible. Therefore,
timely budget revision based on concurrent inputs seems to be the best
option available and the Central Pension Accounting Office is working towards
strengthening the same. In this regard, the system of getting manual scrolls
from authorized banks is limiting the efforts of CPAO towards better budget
and expenditure management. In the current practice of banks getting
reimbursement first from RBI and thereafter sending scrolls to CPAO, there is
no disincentive for not submitting the scrolls to CPAO. Hence, banks are
being pursued to submit electronic scrolls in place of manual scrolls to ensure
better budget and expenditure management. The pilot project on e-scrolls is
being sought to be initiated with three banks namely, SBI, Axis Bank and
Bank of Baroda all of which are on Centralized Pension Payment System at
present. A Technical Committee has already been constituted with
representatives of NIC (CPAO); the above mentioned banks and RBI, CAS,
Nagpur to study the technical and system interfaces, and changes thereto
between the participating entities. Given the complexity of the exercise it may
not be possible to stipulate a fixed deadline for the pilot. However, it shall be
CPAO's endeavour to have the pilot completed during the current fiscal.
Further sealing up will depend on the result of the pilot. The project once
rolled out and stabilized, will provide more efficient control in respect of
budgeting and accounting arising out of.
(i) Receipt of electronic scrolls on daily basis; and
(ii) Debit to Government Account being authorized only post certification of
e-scrolls received by CPAO".
4. The project on e-scroll has since been finalized. The delay was due to
prolonged stakeholder consultations in the Technical Committee to enable systems
integration between CPAO and the participating banks. It has not been feasible to
implement a system where debit to Government account would be authorized only on
post certification of e-scrolls received by CPAO due to a variety of reasons. However,
the banks are being asked to shift to a system of Central Pension Processing Centres
(CPPC) and claim reimbursement through a single focal point branch. This would
enable the banks to send to the CPAO e-scrolls simultaneously with the memo seeking
reimbursement from RBI. It would also enable implementation of a closely coordinated
system between the banks, Central Accounts Section of RBI and the Central Pension
Accounting Office.

46
5.  The project document is being issued to the concerned banks and pilot
testing of the project is presently slated to commence from June, 2011 and is expected
to conclude by August, 2011. The results of the testing would, thereafter, be incorporated
in the software and the same shall also be sent for security and systems certification.
It is, accordingly, expected that Phase-I of the e-scroll project, comprising all banks
presently on a centralized pension processing platform, shall commence in the last
quarter of 2011-12. The transition to the CPPC platform is being pursued in respect of
remaining banks. Phase-II of the project comprising remaining banks, shall roll out in
FY 2012-13.
6. The efficacy of the e-scrolls system and its impact on correctly assessing the
expenditure on pensions are described below:—
(a) The system envisages that the e-scrolls be sent to the CPAO simultaneously
with the memo seeking reimburesement from RBI. The accounting in CPAO of
pensions disbursed by banks will therefore be simultaneous with the debit to
the Government Cash Balance. As the banks disburse more than half of the
quantum provided for in this composite Grant, the availability of this
information on a timely basis will, if necessary, enable interventions to
supplement budget within the fiscal.
(b) This project will enable the initial master data reconciliation by banks, check
of payments claimed by the bank and incorporate on-going change
information into the database.
(c) Change information will be incorporated through this system into the data
base enabling a scientific budget forecasting of pension disbursements likely
in a year. The status on payments will be made available to the pensioner to
enable timely corrections. Lags between authorisation by CPAO and credit to
pension accounts by banks will be known, both for corrective measures and
for proper budget estimation.
Audit Comments
Ministry has not included any comment in the A TN on establishing a centralized
database of the pensioners. This point has been raised time and again by audit also
and CPAO, in its ATN on para 8.3 of Report No. I of 2008-09 had replied that 'while
CPAO, established in 1990 has a robust database of post 1990 pensioners, the same is
not continuously updated because a lack of receipt of change information from banks
and information on the pre-1990 pensioners'. Ministry may include a comment on how
it proposes to overcome these deficiencies especially in case of pre-1990 pensioners
and establish a comprehensive database of pensioners.
Reply of Ministry of Finance
The "database" referred to in the ATN is the "Centralised database of pensioners
in Central Pension Accounting Office" containing records pertaining to over nine lakh
pensioners, including authorisations issued by CPAO as well as data collected on
pre-1990 pensioners. So far as the completion of database of pre-1990 pensioners is

47
concerned, as mentioned in Para 6 of the ATN, the initial reconciliation of the master
database of Central Pension Accounting Office with that of the bank will lead to
incorporation of residual pre-1990 pensioners into the database. Thereafter, all payments
made by the banks will be verified by the Central Pension Accounting Office against
this master database.
As also mentioned in Para 6 the project will enable incorporation of the ongoing
changes into the database. Therefore, the database will be T comprehensive after the
stabilization of e- scroll project.
V etted by Director General of Audit (Central Expenditure ) vide their U.O. No.
RR/1-92/10-11/27 dated 07/04/2011
Sd/-
Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser
Ministry of Finance
Observation/Recommendation No.10
During the financial year under review, the Ministry of Home Affairs incurred
an excess expenditure of `79.39 crore under Revenue Section (V oted) of Grant
No. 54—Other Expenditure of the Ministry of Home Affairs. This was the net effect
of total excess of  `186.91 crore and total savings of  `107.52 that occured under
various sub-heads of the Grant. Scrutiny of the Explanatory Note furnished by the
Ministry shows that the excess expenditure was mainly due to requirement of
additional funds towards settlement of claims of displaced persons, making payment
of increased dearness allowance on the pensions under the 'Swatantrata Sainik
Samman Pension Scheme’ and other security related expenditure. The Committee
have been informed that expenditure in the Ministry is reviewed periodically at the
highest level with the Heads of the Budget Controlling Authorities so that remedial
action could be taken timely. Considering that considerable amount of excess
expenditure had been incurred despite the prevalence of this system, the Committee
are skeptical  of the efficacy of the current expenditure review system of the Ministry
specially when it comes to managing funds under such a wide covering and
encompassing Grant as Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of the Ministry of Home
Affairs which, by its very nature, can be evoked for funding various miscellaneous
and emergent activities of the Ministry. The Committee urge upon the Ministry to
overhaul their prevailing expenditure review system whereby a system is evolved
and enforced to provide sufficient checks and balances against any possible wanton
sanction and utilization  of funds under this Grant and the requisite transparency
and accountability is maintained. The Committee, therefore, desire that precise action
should be taken in this regard at the earliest."
[Sl. No. 10,  Appendix-II, Para 1 of the twenty-second Report of
Public  Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

48
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
It is stated that out of the total excess of  ` 186.91 crore under Revenue Section
(Voted) of the Grant No. 54—Other Expenditure of Ministry of Home Affairs during the
financial year 2008-09, an amount of  ` 79.39 crore can only stated to be as 'Unauthorized'
as the rest of the excess was either covered with adequate
re-appropriations of funds or was set off against the available savings. It will be
pertinent to mention here that the exact amount of excess booking under the 'Swatantrata
Sainik Samman Pension Scheme' was ` 109.73 crore, which was partly set off by the
available savings of  `  30.34 crore. Hence, it cannot by said that the prevailing
expenditure review system in the Ministry totally failed to ensure fiscal discipline. It
has repeatedly been said barring the above stated scheme, that the expenditure did not
exceed the available budgetary provision under any other scheme controlled by this
Ministry and if any additional requirement of funds was there, it was met through the
available means i.e.  either by obtaining Supplementary Grants or through
re-appropriations of funds with the due approval of the Competent Authority. The use
of available means to meet additional requirements of funds for some unforeseen
expenditure does not fall under the category of 'unauthorized' expenditure. As regards
the excess booking of expenditure under the scheme of 'Swatantrata Sainik Samman
Pension Scheme', it is reiterated there are some limitations of this Ministry, details of
which have already been explained to the Committee in earlier replies. This Ministry
alone is not in a position to reach some concrete solution in this matter as other
Government Departments are also involved in it. Inspite of this, the concerned Divisional
Head has been requested to look into the matter and find some suitable remedy to this
problem.
Sd/-
(Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/O DGACE vide their U.O. No. RR/
6-30/10-11/814 dated 01.11.2010)
[Ministry of Home Affairs, O.M. No.28/15/2010-Bgt.I, dated 25.11.2010]
Observation/Recommendation No. 11
The Committee note that huge quantum of excess expenditure to the tune of
` 610.36 crore and ` 132.25 crore had been incurred both under Revenue Section
(V oted) of Grant No. 23—Defence Services—Air Force and Grant No. 24—Defence
Ordnance Factories respectively during the year under review. The excess in respect
of the Grant No. 23 was the net effect of total excesses of  ` 666.70 crore and total
savings of  ` 56.34 crore under various minor heads of the Grant. Similarly, the excess
incurred under Grant No. 24 was also the effect of total excesses of  ` 237.48 crore and
total savings of ` 105.3 crore under various sub-heads of the Grant. The excess
expenditure under both the Grants were incurred despite obtaining a Supplementary

49
Grant of  ` 1345.39 crore and ` 1715.76 crore respectively. In respect of the Grant No. 23,
the contributory reasons, according to the Ministry of Defence were—higher
expenditure due to implementation of the VI Central Pay Commission recommendations,
higher booking on Travelling Allowance/Dearness Allowance, emergent requirement
for operational maintainablility of the fleet, exchange rate variations in foreign payment,
more payment due to increase in prices of Aviation Turbine Fuel/supplies, more drawal
of supplies due to fluctuation of troops etc. As regards, the Grant No. 24, the main
contributory reasons adduced were higher booking in Defence Security Corps,
non-matching of expenditure with the projected figures, foreign exchange rate
variations, issue of operating platform for CRN-91 guns and higher supply to Defence
Research and Development Organisation. The Committee do not consider these reasons
for incurring excess expenditure to be convincing, as many of these could have been
anticipated well in advance and factored into at the time of finalisation of Grants.
Further, the quantum of unauthorized excess expenditure could have been greatly
reduced with proper care and attention to detail, which is highly expected of a Ministry
dealing with defence personnel whose spirit and character are supposed to be the
epitome of professionalism and discipline. In this context, the Committee also find that
the Ministry of Defence had also incurred excess expenditure amounting to ` 27.50
crore and ` 13.33 lakh respectively under Grant No.19—Ministry of Defence and Grant
No.20—Defence Pensions pertaining to the Civil sector but operated by them. These
altogether put the total excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry during the 2008-09
fiscal year at ` 783.44 crore. This sudden spurt in the quantum of excess expenditure
proves that the Ministry has failed to take necessary steps to check or minimize excess
expenditure under the Grants operated by them. Thus, apart from
re-circulation of their old instructions which has proved ineffective in rectifying the
loopholes and deficiencies responsible for incurring of excess expenditure under the
Grants operated by them, it is imperative for the Ministry of Defence to introspect the
inadequacies of their current arrangement for checking excess expenditure and devise
some concrete ways and means in consultation with the Ministry of Finance to overhaul
their budgeting mechanism and incurring of excess expenditure is either avoided
altogether or minimized drastically. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
specific corrective measures taken by the Ministry in this direction.
[Para No. 11 of 22nd Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In view of the sudden spurt in the quantum of excess expenditure, the Committee
have in this paragraph recommended that apart from re-circulation of their old
instructions, it is imperative for the Ministry of Defence to introspect the inadequacies
of their current arrangement for checking excess expenditure and devise some concrete
ways and means in consultation with the Ministry of Finance to overhaul their budgeting
mechanism and incurring of excess expenditure is either avoided altogether or minimized

50
drastically. The Committee have also desired to be apprised of the specific corrective
measures taken by the Ministry in this direction.
In order to have strict control on Civil Estimates and Defence Pensions Budget
and to check large scale savings/excess, the Ministry have issued instructions from
time to time to all the budget holding authorities and asked for proper implementation
of these instructions. Such instructions were issued on 28.06.2010 in r/o Civil Estimates
and 29.06.2010 in r/o Defence Pensions whereby while reiterating the instructions
already issued earlier, it was instructed that in order to ensure even flow of expenditure
and to avoid any excess expenditure/savings in any Grant, concrete remedial action
must be taken. The utmost caution and accuracy should be adopted while estimating
requirement of funds after taking into account all the instructions issued by Ministry
of Finance from time to time.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (R)
Observation/Recommendation No. 12
Examination of the Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Railways) for
the financial year 2008-09 has revealed that the Ministry of Railways incurred a total
excess expenditure of ` 519.81 crore in 9 cases of 8 excess registering Grants/
Appropriations. This excess expenditure was 10 times more than the preceding
financial year's total of ` 51.22 crore incurred by the Railways in 10 cases of 8
excess registering Grants. The total Railways' expenditure of ` 28073.67 crore
during the fiscal under review exceeded the approved provisions by ` 502.70 crore in
six Revenue Voted Grants while in respect of three charged Appropriations (two in
Revenue and one in Capital), expenditure of ` 39.74 crore was in excess of the
sanctioned provisions by ` 17.11 crore. Scrutiny of the Explanatory Note revealed
that out of the total excess expenditure of ` 519.81 crore, the bulk of the excess
expenditure i.e. `  480.05 crore constituting about 92.35 per cent was incurred under
4 Grants only i.e. Grant No. 4—Repairs and Maintenance of Permanent way and
Works (` 104.05 crore); Grant No. 5—Repairs and Maintenance of Motive Power
(` 95.25 crore); Grant No. 6—Repairs and Maintenance of Carriage and Wagons
(` 149.69 crore); and Grant No. 8—Operating Expenses—Rolling Stock and
Equipment (` 131.06 crore). According to the Ministry, the excess expenditure and
occurred mainly due to implementation of the recommendations of the VI Central Pay
Commission; more drawal of stores from stock, materialization of more contractual
obligations and more direct purchases than anticipated; more adjustment of wages
and materials on Periodical Overhauling and also due to materialization of more
contractual payments than anticipated; etc. The Committee observe that while
anticipating the requirements of funds by the Railways, estimations for various
Sub-heads could have been projected more realistically by analysing properly the
total monetary effect of salary hike, prevailing expenditure trail, upcoming demands/

51
requirements, rising cost etc. The Committee cannot but conclude that the Ministry
of Railways have not taken any timely corrective measures to improve their budgeting
mechanism with a view to avoiding such a huge unauthorized expenditure. It indicates
that they have either failed to undertake proper homework before finalizing their
budgetary estimates or do not possess correct data regarding the number of officers
and staff on their payroll, purchase records etc. Deplorably, there is no mention in the
Explanatory Notes about the specific remedial measures taken by the Ministry to
contain this persisting excess expenditure. It is apparent that the Ministry has paid
scant respect to enforcing fiscal discipline while incurring excess expenditure, which
is anything but regrettable. The Committee take a serious note of lack of concern and
sustained efforts on the part of the Ministry in observing fiscal discipline and they,
therefore, desire the Ministry of Railways to strive earnestly for ensuring realistic
estimation of their budgetary requirements under various sub-heads of the Grant/
Appropriations operated by them so that their existing lapses/loopholes are properly
addressed and huge amounts of public fund are not spent without prior authorization.
[Para No. 12 of 22nd Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The concern of the Committee is noted and this Ministry has already urged
recently the spending units under its control, viz., the zonal Railways, the need to
adhere to the fiscal discipline as desired by the Committee. A copy of each of the letters
is enclosed in Annexure II.
Audit vide their U.O.No.144 RA-III/2-1/10 dated 11.2.2011 desired that their
comments dated 10.11.2010 may be appended below audit observations along with
Ministry's comments:
"Seen. However, as brought out against Recommendation No.5, mere issue
of instructions to the spending units would not absolve the Ministry of its
responsibilities to control the expenditure within the sanctioned allocations.
Corrective measures to improve the budgeting mechanism need to be taken
to avoid expenditure in excess of sanctioned allocations."
Ministry's Comments
The impact of the implementation of 6th CPC has been much larger than expected.
There certainly is always a scope for better assessment. All efforts were made to make
sufficient provision for implementation of 6th CPC in 2008-09. However, the provision
made was found short in some of the Demands, particularly in light of the multiplicity
of the recommendations of 6th CPC further modified by the Government, the
implementation of which began only in the later part of 2008-09 with orders coming in
piecemeal manner. Despite this and the fact that the recommendations of 6th CPC

52
involved benefit accruing to about 14 lakh serving employees and more than 11 lakh
pensioners, the excess expenditure in 2008-09 was contained within ` 532 cr. limited
only to a few Demands for Grants.
The Railways do have a well-set budgetary and monitoring mechanism of
expenditure as a result of which the incidence of excess could gradually be brought
down to 0.03% in 2007-08 despite the vast spectrum and spending units of railway
network spread along the length and breadth of the country. However, in 2008-09 and
2009-10, the excess expenditure has risen mainly due to the difficulty in assessing the
impact of implementing the recommendations of 6th CPC. Ministry of Railways,
nonetheless, would take steps to strengthen the system and procedures that will help
in controlling the expenditure within the sanctioned appropriation/grants. Due care
will also be taken in seeking Supplementary Demands, if necessary, in time.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/22, dated 15-2-2011]

ANNEXURE II
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No.2009-B-342 New Delhi, dated 11 .02.2010.
The General Managers,
All Indian Railways.
Subject: — Excess over V oted Grants/ Charged Appropriations — 2007-08
In 2007-08,  Railways incurred an excess expenditure of ` 51.22 cr. in the
following Demands:—
(` in thousands)
Demand No. Grant Appropriation Total
5 .. 3,04 3,04
6 .. 2,79 2,79
8 .. 12,93 12,93
10 .. 6,98,48 6,98,48
12 22,32,95 .. 22,32,95
13 .. 9,67 9,67
15 20,80,86 .. 20,80,86
16 .. 81,08 81,08
Total 43,13,81 8,07,99 51,21,80
The above 'Excess' has been viewed seriously by the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha) vide 7th Report. The Committee, while expressing serious concern
has made the following observations/recommendations:—
1. The Committee observe that Ministry of Railways had been persistently
incurring huge sums of excess expenditure during the financial year 2001-02 to
2007-08. The continuous wide variations between the budgetary provision and the
actual expenditure leads the Committee to a conclusion that the various remedial
measures reported to have been implemented by them for overhauling their budgetary
53

54
mechanism, financial transaction etc. with the central motive of enhancing accuracy
level of their budgetary projections and performance are yet to generate the desired
improvements.
2. The Committee feel that incurring of excess expenditure despite obtaining
Supplementary Grants, is yet another indication of the fallibility of the extant budgeting
method and mechanism evolved to ensure proper assessment and accurate projection
of the fund requirement even at the revised estimate stage. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the mechanism of estimating Supplementary Grants be made more
realistic and pragmatic to ensure accurate projection and utilization of the
Supplementary Grants so that no subsequent excess expenditure is incurred and fiscal
discipline is maintained.
3. The Committee find that out of the excess expenditure of ` 51.22 crore incurred
by the Ministry of Railways during the financial year 2007-08, the bulk of the excess
expenditure (` 22.23 crore) were incurred under 'Grant No. 12' Miscellaneous Working
Expenses. Railways have been incurred persistent excess under Demand
No. 12. This trend has flown in 2008-09 also. The Committee observe that while
anticipating the requirement of funds under this Grant estimations for various Sub-
Heads could have been projected more realistically by analyzing properly the prevailing
expenditure trail, upcoming demands/requirements, rising cost etc.
4. The Committee are not happy with such lack of concern on the part of the
Ministry for observing fiscal discipline and they therefore desire the Ministry of
Railways to strive earnestly for ensuring realistic estimation of their budgetary
requirements under various Sub-Heads of the Grants/Appropriations operated by
them so that money irrespective of quantum are not spent without prior authorization.
In view of the above observations, the Railways are required to take immediate
action to curb the excess expenditure especially under Demand No.12. They are
requested to assess their requirement accurately in their Final Modification Estimates
for 2009-10 so that the last batch of supplementary grants can be based on the realistic
requirement to avoid the possibility of any excess/savings.
Sd/-
(Jagmohan Gupta)
Executive Director, Finance (Budget)
Railway Board
Observation/Recommendation No. 13
The Committee are concerned to note that despite their repeated exhortations
the Ministry of Railways have not been able to contain the instances of misclassification
of expenditure in the accounts of the Ministry of Railways. During the last 11 financial
years, the Committee have come across 51 cases of misclassification of expenditure,
the details being 5 in 1998-99, 3 in 1999-2000, 1 in 2000-01, 5 in 2001-02, 3 in 2002-03,
5 in 2003-04, 9 in 2004-05, 6 in 2005-06, 5 in 2006-07, 3 in 2007-08 and 6 in 2008-09. This
unabated trend of persistent misclassification of expenditure in endemic of system
failure, which indicates the Ministry's failure to even eliminate the basic mistakes such

55
as misclassification of expenditure as also their inability to revamp the budgetary
mechanism to check the recurring problem of  misclassification of expenditure. It is
quite apparent that no action has been taken by the Ministry either to fix responsibility
for avoidable errors leading to misclassification or to remove any ambiguity in defining
and classifying different forms of expenditure under a particular heading or sub-heading.
The Committee recommend that the existing budgetary mechanism in the Railways
needs to be thoroughly reviewed and revamped so that necessary corrective action,
wherever, warranted could be taken to overcome systemic lacunae/loopholes and
progressive elimination of the perennial misclassification syndrome. The persons
responsible for this malady should be identified and responsibility fixed. Necessary
corrective should also be put in place in order to avoid misclassification of expenditure
in future.
[Para No. 13 of 22nd
 Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The concern expressed by the PAC on the need for stringent measures to prevent
misclassifications in expenditure has been noted for adherence of the above
recommendation. Further, it is submitted that existing budgetary mechanism over Indian
Railways is robust and detailed instructions already exist on internal checks of
accounting transactions. Necessary directions are also issued to the Railways from
time to time to scrupulously follow the existing guidelines and also strengthen/tighten
their internal check mechanism including classification of expenditure, both at
pre-audit and post audit stages and to take corrective action wherever warranted.
Efforts are also on to minimize the instances of misclassification through concurrent
reviews and computerizations of accounting activities to the extent possible.
Instructions issued to the Railways also provide for regular reporting on action taken
for errors detected on this account. The cases, which arise as a result of lack of care,
are viewed seriously and responsible staff/officials are taken up for lapses.
It shall be the endeavour of Ministry of Railways to minimize the incidences of
misclassification.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 142-RA-III/2-1/10 dated 03.2.2011 have desired that
their observations dated 12.1.2011 may be appended below the Action Taken Note
along with Ministry's comments:—
"Instances of misclassification of expenditure, despite repeated instructions
from the Ministry  of Railways, still persist. Railways need to strengthen its internal
check mechanism and speed up the computerization with inbuilt control to eliminate
the cases of misclassification of expenditure."
Ministry's Comments
The instructions have been reiterated to the Zonal Railways for strengthening/
tightening the internal check on classification of expenditure, both at the pre-audit and
post-audit stages. Efforts are being taken to expedite the computerizations process

56
and it is hoped that a significant reduction in the incidence of misclassification will be
achieved in the ensuing years.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railways Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/22, dated 15-2-2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 14
To sum up, the Committee note with concern that no appreciable remedial measures
have been taken as yet by the Government to avoid or minimize the quantum as well as
number of cases of excess expenditure in the entire budgetary exercise orchestrated by
the Ministry of Finance and followed by the other Ministries/Departments. This
inaction has led the Ministries/Departments to indulge in indiscreet financial transaction
with impunity on the notion that the Parliamentary regularization thereof is only a
matter of formality. The Committee take a serious view of the casual approach on the
part of the Ministries/Departments, which if left unchecked, would derail the entire
budgetary exercise and lead to unhealthy budgetary practices. The Committee, therefore,
would like the Ministry of Finance to introduce and implement immediate remedial
measures to check this chronic malady.
[Paragraph 14 of 22nd Report of PAC (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs-Budget
Division)
During  the year 2008-09, excess expenditure occurred in 6 Grants (Other than
Ministry of Railways) as follows:—
(` in crore)
No. and Name of Grant Total Grant Actual Excess Percentage of
Expenditure Expenditure excess over
Total Grant
19-Ministry of Defence (Civil) 8363.22 8390.72 27.50 0.33
20-Defence Pensions 20232.95 20233.08 0.13 0.0007
39-Pensions 10565.93 10729.11 163.18 1.54
54-Other Expenditure of the 1437.58 1516.97 79.39 5.52
 Ministry of Home Affairs
23-Defence Services-Air Force 12632.21 13242.58 610.37 4.83
24-Defence Ordnance Factories 2824.75 2957.00 132.25 4.68
Total 1012.82

57
• Percentage of excess over  Total Grant of the Ministry/Department ranges
from 0.0007% to 5.52%, which is very low given the overall Budgeted
Expenditure;
• Ministry of Finance issues Budget Circular every year bringing out various
Government instructions and also steps to be undertaken to formulate the
Budget. While seeking proposals for Supplementary Demands for Grants
also, instructions are issued to make realistic projections, so that neither
there is an occasion for huge surrender of Budget provisions nor there are
huge excesses. The Budget circular is  followed up by Meetings with the
Financial Advisers for various Ministries/Departments, so that a micro review
is undertaken at the apex level of Ministry of Finance for realistic Budget
requirement;
• During the pre-budget discussions held by Ministry of Finance, review of
expenditure  is done Scheme-wise in respect of all Ministries/Departments,
so that realistic budget is framed and approved by the Parliament. Ministry of
Finance during the three batches of Supplementary Demands for Grants, also
take  an opportunity to frame realistic assessment of the expected expenditure
for the year;
• Trend of excess Grants for the past five years reveal that the incidence of
excess expenditure  has reduced Considerably in respect of Ministries/
Departments other than Railways from `  42,227.20 crore in FY 2003-2004
to ` 1,012.82 crore in FY 2008-2009;
• In para 4  of the present report, PAC themselves  have recommended that
concerned Ministries should ensure that under no circumstances the excess
over Final Grants should exceed more than 5 percent. In all the cases brought
out above  except the  'Other Expenditure of the Ministry of  Home Affairs' the
excess is less than 5 percent. Even in respect of the 'Other expenditure of the
Ministry of Home Affairs',  the excess is slightly above 5 percent at 5.52%;
and
• Given the complex nature and variety of Government spending, it is not
feasible to precisely estimate in advance all the expenditure requirements for
the financial year, as well as the requirements  arising out of the unanticipated/
unforeseen developments during the course of the year. However, Ministry
of Finance is taking proactive action for precisely estimating the expenditure
and will continue to do so in future also, so that the incidence of excess is
kept at the minimum and below 5 percent of the Final Grant as recommended
by the PAC, if not nil.
This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-68/10-11/875 dated the
November 12, 2010.
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Joint Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division),
O.M.  No. F.7 (3)-B (SD)/2010 dated the November, 2010]

58
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
This Ministry is very much concerned about an excess expenditure, if it occurs
under any of the Grants controlled by this Ministry. It will not be out of place to
mention here that this Ministry controls 10 Demands for Grants and a very large
number of Budget Controlling Authorities/Expenditure Booking Units (PAOs) are
involved under these 10 Demands of Grants. Although efforts are made to ensure that
all the budgetary provisions are strictly followed, it sometimes becomes beyond the
control of the Ministry, as it happened in the present case of excess expenditure. But
from such instances, it may not be concluded that the Ministry have a very casual
approach to such serious lapses. The budgetary provisions, as prescribed under
various rules of the Government of India, are also brought to the notice of all concerned
from time to time for strict compliance. After completion of the financial year 2008-09
also, necessary instructions to all concerned were issued this regard, which inter alia
included to have a check on the expenditure trends so as to avoid any excess
expenditure under any of the Grants of the Ministry. A copy of these instructions (U.O.
No. 10/29/2009-Bgt. I dated 6th May 2009) is enclosed.
If the Ministry of Finance, being the nodal Ministry, introduces some effective
remedial measures in this regard, as desired by the Committee, all the guidelines/
instructions issued thereunder would be followed scrupulously.
Sd/-
(Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/O DGACE vide their U.O.  No. RR/6-
30/10-11/814 dated 01.11.2010).
[Ministry of Home Affairs' O.M. No. 28/15/2010-Bgt. I, dated 25.11.2010]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In this paragraph, the Committee have taken a serious view of casual approach
on the part of the Ministries/Departments, which it left unchecked, would derail the
entire budgetary exercise and lead to unhealthy budgetary practices. The Committee,
therefore, have desired the Ministry of Finance to introduce and implement immediate
remedial measures to check this chronic malady.
Necessary action in this regard would need to be taken by Ministry of Finance.
This Ministry would take necessary follow up action on the instructions issued by the
Ministry of Finance to check the menace of  excess expenditure.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (R)

59
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The recommendation is particularly addressed  to Ministry of Finance.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 122-RA-III/2-1/10 dated 10.11.2010 have vetted the
Action Taken Note with  the following comments:
"Seen".
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' Case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/, dated 15.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation No. 15
Subject to the observations made in the preceding paragraphs, the Committee
recommend that the expenditure referred to in paragraph 14 of Part-I of this Report  be
regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1)(b) of the Constitution of India.
[Para 15 of 22nd  Report of PAC (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs-Budget
Division)
As recommended  by the Public Accounts Committee,  the Demands  for
Excess Grants for Expenditure of the Central Government (excluding Railways) relating
to 2008-09 were submitted  to Parliament in the Winter Session,  2010. The Parliament
has passed  the Excess  Demands for Grants. Necessary  Appropriation Bill for
regularising the money drawn  in excess of the  amounts  authorised  by the Parliament
for the year 2008-09, has also been  passed  and the corresponding Act published  in
the Gazette  of India (Extraordinary)  Part II,  Section I dated December 13, 2010 as Act
No. 45 of 2010, after obtaining assent  of the President. In view of this, the excess
amount drawn in 2008-09 stands regularised. Action  taken in this regard is, therefore,
completed.
This Note has  been  vetted  by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/I-84/10-11/1123
dated the January 27, 2011.
Sd/-
(Shaktikanta Das)
Joint Secretary  (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economc Affairs (Budget Division),
O.M. No. F.7 (3)-B (SD)/2010 dated February 02, 2011]

F. 7(3)-B(SD)/2010
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET  DIVISION)
New Delhi, the December, 13, 2010
Subject: Demands  for Excess Grants relating to 2008-2009
The undersigned is directed to state  that the Demands  for Excess Grants
relating to 2008-2009 have been passed by the Lok Sabha. The connected Appropriation
Bill (No. 6) 2010 has also  been passed by  Parliament and assented to by the President
of India  on December 11,  2010 and the Act has been published  in the Gazette  of
India (Extraordinary) Part II,  Section  I dated December 13, 2010 as Act No. 45 of
2010.
1. The Secretary  Defence (Finance) (Smt. Nita Kapoor), (Demand Nos.
19-Ministry of Defence, 20-Defence Pensions, 23-Defence Services-Air Force
& 24-Defence Ordnance Factories), Ministry of Defence (Finance),  South
Block, New Delhi-110 001 (4 copies).
2. Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser (Shri H. Pradeep Rao), (Demand No.
39-Pensions) Ministry of Finance, North Block, New Delhi-110 001.
3. Additional Secretary and Financial Adviser, (Shri Vishwapati Trivedi),
(Demand No. 54-Other Expenditure of MHA) Ministry of Home Affairs, North
Block, New Delhi-110 001.
4. The Finance Library (Publication Section), (10 copies) with the request that
copies of the Gazette of India (Extraordinary) Part-II, Section I dated December
13, 2010 as Act No. 45 of 2010 be obtained from the Manager of Publication
and supplied to Comptroller & Auditor General of India, 10-Bahadur Shah
Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110 002.
5. The Parliament Library, Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi (5 Copies).
6. The Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch), Parliament Annexe, New Delhi-
110 001 (5 Copies).
7. Director General of Audit, Central Revenues (R-I), AGCR Building, New Delhi-
110 002 (10 Copies).
8. Director General of Audit, Posts & Telecom, Sham Nath Marg, Civil Lines,
Delhi-54 (10 Copies).
60

61
9. The Director General of Audit, Defence Services, New Delhi-110 001 (5 Copies).
10. Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 10-Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New
Delhi-110 002 (10 Copies).
11. Finance Library, North Block, New Delhi-110 001 (10 Copies).
12. Joint Secretary (PF-I), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, North
Block, New Delhi.
13. Joint Secretary (PF-II), Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, North
Block, New Delhi.
14. The Controller General of Accounts, Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi
(10 Copies).
15. The Adviser FR/Member FR, Planning Commission, Yojana Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001 (2 Copies).
16. Finance Secretary.
17. Secretary (Expenditure).
18. Secretary (Revenue).
19. Secretary (Financial Services).
20. PS to JS (Budget).
21. Director (NMJ), Deputy Secretary (BN), Deputy Secretary (RP), Deputy
Secretary (PS).
22. Director (OL), DD (Hindi).
23. Manager (Budget Press).
24. All USs/Deputy Directors in Budget Division.
25. All Sections in Budget Division and PF-I & PF-II Divisions.

2008-2009
ds laca/k esa
dsUnzh; ljdkj ds O;; ds fy, vfrfjDr vuqnkuksa dh ekaxsa
¼jsyos dks NksM+dj½
DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
for
EXPENDITURE OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
(Excluding Railways)
RELATING  TO
2008-2009
lafo/kku ds vuqPNsn 115 ds [k.M ¼1½¼[k½ ds vuqlj.k esa yksd lHkk esa izLrqr
Presented to the Lok Sabha in pursuance of clause (1) (b) of Article 115 of the
Constitution
[jk"Vªifr dh flQkfj'k] tks ekaxksa dks izLrqr djus ds fy, lafo/kku ds vuqPNsn 115
ds [k.M ¼1½¼[k½ vkSj ¼2½ ds lkFk ifBr vuqPNsn 113 ds [k.M ¼3½ ds
v/khu vko';d gS] izkIr dj yh xbZ gS]
[The recommendation of the President, required under clause (3) of Article 113
read with clauses (1)(b) and (2) of Article 115 of the Constitution for making the
Demands has been obtained]
uoEcj@November, 2010
62

63
INTRODUCTORY NOTES
The Demands for Excess Grants contained in this Volume represent the actual
expenditure incurred during 2008-2009 under certain Demands which are in excess of
the amounts granted by the Parliament for that year.
2. Out of 100 Grants and 5 Appropriations in 2008-2009, the excess expenditure
occurred in 6 Grants amounting to a total of `1,012.82 crore under Revenue Section.
3. The reasons for excess expenditure in respective demands have been explained
in the Excess Demand Statements contained in this booklet.
4. The above excess have been scrutinised by the Public Accounts Committee,
who, vide paragraph 15 read with paragraph 14 of Part-I of their Twenty-Second Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha), have recommended their regularisation under Article 115(1)(b)
of the Constitution of India.
2008-2009 DEMANDS FOR EXCESS GRANTS
Statement showing the expenditure incurred in excess of the Grants Voted made by
Parliament during 2008-2009
Sl. No. & Title of Final Actual Excess Ref. to
No. Grant Grant Expenditure Expenditure pages
`` ` `
I. EXPENDITURE MET
FROM REVENUE
19 Ministry of Defence V oted: 8363,22,00,000 8390,86,71,122 2749,86,122 1
20 Defence Pensions V oted:20232,95,00,000 20233,08,32,985 13,32,985 2
23 Defence services -
Air Force V oted:12632,21,00,000 13242,57,59,389 610,36,59,389 3
24 Defence Ordnance
Factories V oted: 2824,75,00,000 2956,99,87,268 132,24,87,268 4
39 Pensions V oted:10565,93,00,000 10729,11,09,424 163,18,09,424 5
54 Other Expenditure
 of the Ministry of
Home Affairs V oted:1437,58,00,000 1516,97,22,929 79,39,22,929 6
GRAND TOTAL 56056,64,00,000 57069,45,98,117 1012,81,98,117
Charged: .. . . . .
V oted: 56056,64,00,000 57069,45,98,117 1012,81,98,117
DEMAND  NO. 19
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2009, in
respect of the MINISTRY OF DEFENCE under MINISTRYOF DEFENCE.

64
V oted: Twenty-seven crore forty-nine lakh eighty-six thousand one hundred
twenty two rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Revenue `` `
V oted: 8363,22,00,000 8390,71,86,122 27,49,86,122
The Original grant of `  7756,97,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary
grant of  `  354,39,00,000 obtaind in October, 2008 and ` 251,86,00,000 obtained in
February, 2009. Against the final grant of ` 8363,22,00,000  the actual expenditure
was ` 8390,71,86,122 resulting in an  excess expenditure of ` 27,49,86,122 which
requires regularization. The excess expenditure was incurred due to implementation
of the Sixth Central Pay Commission recommendations; operational requirement of
enhanced deployment of ships; spill-over of expenditure incurred during 2007-
2008 by Coast Guard Organization (CGO); and higher trend of bookings due to
increase  in rate of Kerosene, POL, Provisions, etc. by Jammu & Kashmir Light
Infantry (JAKLI). The excess of ` 27,49,86,122 was the net effect of total excess of
` 105,28,01,122 less total savings of ` 77,78,15,000 under various sub-heads of the
Grant.
DEMAND NO. 20
DEFENCE  PENSIONS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2009, in
respect of the DEFENCE PENSIONS under MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
V oted: Thirteen lakh  thirty-two thousand nine hundred eighty five rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Revenue `` `
V oted: 20232,95,00,000 20233,08,32,985 13,32,985
The Original grant of ` 15563,75,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary
grant of ` 1941,00,00,000 obtained in October, 2008 and ` 2728,20,00,000 obtained in
December, 2008. Against the final grant of  ` 20232,95,00,000   the actual expenditure
was ` 20233,08,32,985 resulting in an excess expenditure of  ` 13,32,985 which requires
regularization. The excess expenditure was incurred due to revision of Pension at
higher rate on implementation of the Sixth Central Pay Commission recommendations;
payment of arrears of Pension; and the increase in the balance of Earned Leave at
credit than assessed.

65
DEMAND NO.  23
DEFENCE  SERVICES—AIR FORCE
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2009, in
respect of the DEFENCE SERVICES—AIR FORCE under MINISTRY OF DEFENCE.
V oted: Six hundred ten crore thirty-six lakh fifty-nine thousand three hundred
eighty nine rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Revenue `` `
V oted: 12632,21,00,000 13242,57,59,389 610,36,59,389
The Original grant of ` 11286,82,00,000  was augmented by a supplementary
grant of ` 1120,79,00,000 obtained in October, 2008 and ` 224,60,00,000 obtained in
February, 2009.  Against the final grant of ` 12632,21,00,000 the actual expenditure was
` 13242,57,59,389  resulting in an excess expenditure of ` 610,36,59,389 which requires
regularization. The excess expenditure was incurred due to implementation of the Sixth
Central Pay Commission recommendations; higher bookings under Travelling
allowance; emergent requirement of certain critical items of operational maintainability
of fleet; exchange rate variation in foreign payment of Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL); fluctuation in strength of troops drawing ration, coal, firewood and LPG;
fluctuation in price of ration commodities and Aero Turbine Fuel(ATF); unconfirmed
supplies received from Director General Ordnance Factories (DGOF);  heavy bookings
during the month of March, 2009 at two stages, (i) 4th week of March and
(ii) supplementary compilations.
DEMAND NO. 24
DEFENCE  ORDNANCE  FACTORIES
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2009, in
respect of the DEFENCE ORDNANCE  FACTORIES under MINISTRY OF
DEFENCE.
V oted: One hundred thirty-two crore twenty-four lakh eighty-seven thousand
two hundred sixty eight rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Revenue `` `
V oted: 2824,75,00,000 2956,99,87,268 132,24,87,268

66
The Original grant of ` 1108,99,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary grant
of ` 100,00,00,000 obtained in October, 2008 and ` 1615,76,00,000 obtained in February,
2009. Against the final grant of ` 2824,75,00,000 the actual expenditure was
` 2956,99,87,268 resulting in an excess expenditure of ` 132,24,87,268 which requires
regularization.  The excess expenditure was incurred due to  higher bookings than
estimated after February, 2009 in Defence Security corps; foreign exchange rate variation;
issue of operating platform for CRN-91; and higher supply to Defence Research and
Development Organisation (DRDO).
DEMAND NO.  39
PENSIONS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2009, in
respect of the PENSIONS under MINISTRY OF FINANCE.
V oted: One hundred Sixty-three crore eighteen lakh nine thousand four hundred
twenty four rupees.
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Revenue `` `
V oted: 10565,93,00,000 10729,11,09,424 163,18,09,424
The Original grant of  ` 7930,76,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary grant
of  ` 2050,00,00,000 obtained in October, 2008 and ` 585,17,00,000 obtained in February,
2009. Against the final grant of ` 10565,93,00,000 the actual expenditure was
` 10729,11,09,424 resulting in an excess expenditure of  ` 163,18,09,424  which requires
regularization.  The excess expenditure was incurred due to  disbursing monthly pension
without any pre-check by Pay and  Accounts Offices; delayed receipt of scrolls from
the authorized banks; delayed receipt of claims; and unforeseen cases of voluntary
retirement and death.
DEMAND NO. 54
OTHER EXPENDITURE OF THE  MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Amount expended in excess of the Grant for the year ended 31st March, 2009, in
respect of the OTHER EXPENDITURE OF THE  MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
under MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS.
V oted: Seventy-nine crore thirty-nine lakh twenty-two thousand nine hundred
twenty nine rupees.

67
Section Final Grant Actual Expenditure Excess
Revenue `` `
V oted: 1437,58,00,000 1516,97,22,929 79,39,22,929
The Original grant of ` 999,03,00,000 was augmented by a supplementary grant
of ` 84,35,00,000 obtained in October, 2008 and ` 354,20,00,000 obtained in February,
2009. Against the final grant of ` 1437,58,00,000 the actual expenditure was
` 1516,97,22,929 resulting in an excess expenditure of ` 79,39,22,929  which requires
regularization.  The excess expenditure was incurred due to  Settlement of Claims of
Displaced Persons From Pak-occupied Kashmir (` 47.00 crore); increased Dearness
Relief payment under Swatantrata Sainik  Samman  Pension Scheme (` 109.73 crore);
and security related expenditure (` 29.99 crore) on Assembly Elections in the state of
Jammu & Kashmir. The excess of  ` 79.39 crore (rounded) was the net effect of total
excess of  ` 186.91 crore (rounded) which was partially set off by savings of  ` 107.52
crore (rounded) under various sub heads of the Grant.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
The regularization of excess expenditure from the Parliament, as recommended
by the Committee, would be carried out by Ministry of Finance in respect of all the
Ministries/Departments in a consolidated form. The information/documents to required
by Ministry of Finance in this regard would be made available to them as per their
requirements.
Sd/-
 (Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/o.DGACE vide their U.O. No. RR/6-30/
10-11/814, dated 01.11.2010).
[Ministry of Home Affairs' O.M. No. 28/15/2010-Bgt. I, dated 25.11.2010]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The Committee has recommended that the excess expenditure referred to in the
preceding paragraphs be regularized in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1)(b) of
the Constitution of India.
As stated in Action Taken Note on Para No. 2, the Demand for Excess Grants for
` 27,49,86,122 under Demand No. 19—Ministry of Defence (Civil) and for  ` 13,32,985
under Demand No. 20—Defence Pensions relating to the financial year 2008-09 have
already been passed by the Lok Sabha and the connected Appropriation Bill (No. 6),
2010 have also been passed by the Parliament and assented to by the President of

68
India on December 11, 2010 and the Act has been published in the Gazette of India
(Extraordinary) dated December 13, 2010 as Act No. 45 of 2010.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA(R)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The excess expenditure of ` 532.12 cr. incurred by Ministry of Railways during
2008-2009 will be got regularized by Parliament in the ensuing winter session (2010).
Audit vide their U.O. No. 122-RA-III/2-1/10 dated 10.11.2010 have vetted the
Action Taken Note with the following comments:
"Seen".
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/22, dated 15.2.2011]

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE  REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
69

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation No. 8
The Committee find that the Explanatory Notes pertaining to the excess
registering Grants as highlighted in the Appropriation Accounts (Civil) and the
Appropriation Accounts (Defence Services) were due for submission to the Committee
on or before 7th May, 2010. However, the Ministries of Finance and Home Affairs
furnished their Explanatory Notes after a delay of 1 month and 18 days and 2 month
respectively while the Ministry of Defence could submit their Explanatory Notes relating
to Defence Services after a delay of 2 month and 24 days. Not finding any valid
justification for the delay in submission of Explanatory Notes by various Ministries/
Departments, the Committee are surprised to find that even the Ministry of Finance,
despite being the nodal Ministry in the matter, delayed forwarding of their Explanatory
Notes to the Committee. The Committee would like to impress upon all the Ministries
that delay in submission of Explanatory Notes by them impedes the Committee's
examination of excess expenditure, a direct consequence of which is delay  in the
regularization of the unauthorized expenditure by the Parliament. The Committee regret
to observe that despite their oft-repeated suggestions for the Ministries/Departments
to make concerted efforts to ensure timely collection and compilation of the requisite
information for facilitation of submission of the Explanatory Notes to the Committee
by the prescribed time schedule, some Ministries/Departments are paying little heed
to it. The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry of Finance to evolve a proper
procedure in this regard and put in place a centralized monitoring network to check the
status of the preparation and submission of Explanatory Notes at every stage by
various Ministries/Departments so that any delay on this count is eliminated. The
Committee further recommend that in future the contributory reasons for delay in
submission of Explanatory Notes should invariably be appended in the relevant
Explanatory Notes submitted for the purpose.
[Para 8 of the 22nd Report of the PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
As per extant procedure prescribed by the Controller General of Accounts,
Explanatory Notes for saving of Rs. 100 crore or more and for all excesses are to be
submitted with the head-wise Appropriation Accounts Stage-III to the Directorate
General of Audit (Central Revenues).
70

71
2. Accordingly, the said Explanatory Note in respect of Grant No. 39—Pensions
was prepared and submitted to Directorate General of Audit (Central Revenues) on
07/11/2009 i.e. on the day of submission of Appropriation Accounts Stage III to them.
The Directorate General of Audit (Central Revenues), however, intimated that vetting
of Excess Note would be done only after finalization of Appropriation Accounts (Final
Stage).
3. As per time schedule issued by office of the Controller General of Accounts
vide  O.M. No. G25018/CGA-AA/Time Schedule/2008-09 /667, dated
15/01/2009 Appropriation Accounts Stage IV was to be submitted after clearance of
condensed Accounts by C&AG of India and further communication from CGA office
(copy enclosed). The clearance from CGA office was received in CPAO on 22/04/2010
vide Joint CGA D.O. letter No. G-25018/CGA-AA/Stage-IV/2008-09/26, dated 20/04/
2010 (copy enclosed). Immediately thereupon the Final Stage (IVth Stage) of the
Appropriation Accounts was submitted to the Controller General of Accounts on
23/04/2010; concomitantly the Excess Note was again forwarded to Audit for vetting,
as per their advice received earlier (Chronological sequence of events is enclosed at
Annexure).
4. The Excess Note, duly vetted, was received back in CPAO only on 03/06/2010
and immediately thereafter forwarded for Hindi translation on 07/06/2010. After
complying with the necessary procedural formalities, the Excess Note was finally
submitted to the Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure on 24/06/2010.
5. It would be seen from the chronological sequence of events annexed that the
delay was because of the involvement of the multiple agencies of Government. In
future, it shall be our endeavour to adhere to the timelines prescribed by the Public
Accounts Committee through close coordination by escalation to higher authorities
where necessary.
6. In compliance of PAC recommendations, necessary instructions have been
issued to the Secretaries of the Government of India vide CGA's DO letter dated 05/08/
2010 (copy enclosed) to ensure that the contributory reasons for delay in submission
of Explanatory Notes should invariably be mentioned in the relevant Explanatory
Notes. Further, in pursuance of PAC's recommendations for computerized monitoring
of the submission of Explanatory Notes, a computerized web based monitoring system
known as Audit para Monitoring System (APMS) has been recently developed in the
office of CGA in consultation with National Informatics Center (NIC) and is presently
being tested prior to installation at the regular Server at NIC data center at Hyderabad.
The scope of this software is proposed to be expanded to cover computerized
monitoring of submission of PAC Paras and Explanatory Notes by Ministries/
Departments in the second phase. PAC will be apprised later on with the progress of
development/commissioning of the system for computerized monitoring of submission
of Explanatory Notes by Ministries/Departments.

72
Vetted by Director General of Audit (Central Expenditure) vide their U.O. No. RR/
1-70/10-11/1266, dated 09.03.2011.
Sd/-
(Signature of Joint Secretary)
Action Taken by the Ministry of Home Affairs
It is stated that the required 'Explanatory Note for Excess', for the excess
expenditure that occurred under Revenue Section (V oted) of Grant No. 54—Other
Expenditure of Ministry of Home Affairs for the year 2008-09, was sent to Office of the
DG (Audit) on 14th October 2009 by the Principal Accounts Office of this Ministry
alongwith Stage-III of Head-wise Appropriation Account of the Grant for vetting, as
per the established procedure. A copy of the letter sent by Principal Accounts Office,
MHA to Office of the DG (Audit) is enclosed [(No. 11-9/Pr. A.O. (A/Cs)MHA/AA-54/
2008-09/2291 to 2292 dated 14.10.2009]. On 7th December 2009, the Budget Division of
the Ministry sent a reminder to Office of the DG (Audit) requesting them to vet the
'Explanatory Note for Excess' at an early date (copy enclosed — MHA U.O. No. 28/16/
2009-Bgt.I dated 7th December 2009). The Office of the DG (Audit), in turn, informed
the Ministry vide its U.O. No. RR/6-79/09-10/1077 dated 7th January 2010 (copy
enclosed) that the 'Explanatory Note for Excess' would be vetted after finalization of
the 'Head-wise Appropriation Accounts (Final stage) of the Grant, which was yet to be
finalized by that time. The Budget Division remained in constant touch with Principal
Accounts Office of the Ministry to know when the Head-wise Appropriation Account
of the Grant was finalized. As soon as the Budget Division came to know about
finalization of the Head-wise Appropriation Account of the Grant, Office of the DG
(Audit) was requested (copy enclosed—O.M. No. 28/16/2009-Bgt. I dated 12th May
2010) to carry out the required vetting of the 'Explanatory Note for Excess' so that it
could be made available to the Public Accounts Committee as early as possible. Another
reminder to Office of the DG (Audit) was sent on 31st May 2010 to expedite the matter
(copy enclosed—O.M. No. 28/16/2009-Bgt. I dated 31st May 2010). The Officer of the
DG (Audit), vide its U.O. No. RR/6-79/09-10/34 dated 26th May 2010, received in the
Ministry on 2nd June 2010 (copy enclosed), sought a revised 'Explanatory Note for
Excess' after adopting some pencil corrections made by them on the body of the
'Explanatory Note'. The revised 'Explanatory Note for Excess' was sent to the Office of
the DG (Audit) on 4th/7th June 2010 (copy enclosed—O.M. No. 28/16/2009-Bgt. I
dated 4th/7th June 2010). The Office of the DG (Audit), vide its U.O. No. RR/6-79/09-
10/203 dated 15th June 2010 (copy enclosed) cleared the 'Explanatory Note for Excess'
paving way to submit the same to the Public Accounts Committee. The Ministry, after
getting the 'Explanatory Note' translated into Hindi, furnished it, with prescribed number
of copies in English and Hindi Version to Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure
(Monitoring Cell) on 30th June 2010 (copy enclosed—O.M. No. 28/16/2009-Bgt. I
dated 30th June 2010) for onward transmission to Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch).
It may be seen from the above that the Ministry did not take the issue of
submission of 'Explanatory Note for Excess' to the Public Accounts Committee in a
casual way. At no time, the Ministry was reluctant in making available the 'Explanatory

73
Note for Excess' to the Committee as early as possible. Hence, it may be said that
whatever delay occurred in furnishing the 'Explanatory Note for Excess' to the Public
Accounts Committee, was totally procedural and not intenational.
If the Ministry of Finance evolve a proper procedure in this regard and put in
place a centralized monitoring network to check the status of the preparation and
submission of Explanatory Note at every stage to eliminate any delay on this count, as
desired by the Committee from Ministry of Finance, this Ministry (Ministry of Home
Affairs) will not be an exception to the newly developed system.
The recommendation of the Committee that in future the contributory reasons
for delay in submission of Explanatory Notes should invariably be appended in the
relevant Explanatory Notes submitted for the purpose, has been noted and will be
complied with.
Sd/-
(Vishwapati Trivedi)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser (Home)
(This 'Action Taken Note' has been vetted by O/o. DGACE vide their U.O. No. RR/6-
30/10-11/814, dated 01.11.2010).
[Ministry of Home Affairs' O.M. No. 28/15/2010-Bgt. I, dated 25.11.2010]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In this paragraph, the Committee has urged upon the Ministry of Finance to
evolve a proper procedure and put in place a centralized monitoring network to check
the status of the preparation and submission of Explanatory Notes pertaining to excess
registering Grants at every stage by various Ministries/Departments so that any delay
on this count is eliminated. The Committee have further recommended that in future
the contributory reasons for delay in submission of Explanatory Notes should
invariably be appended in the relevant Explanatory Notes submitted for the purpose.
In this regard it is to state the Explanatory notes regarding excess in Financial Year
under review in r/o Grant No. 19—Ministry of Defence (Civil) and Grant No. 20—
Defence Pensions were submitted to MoF (Monitoring cell) on 12.01.2010 and 19.12.2009
respectively. Further, aforesaid Explanatory notes have been submitted by MoF to the
Committee on 19.01.2010 and 01.01.2010, four months earlier to due date i.e. 07.05.2010
for submission of the same.
Further, necessary action in this regard would need to be taken by Ministry of
Finance. This Ministry have however noted the Committee's recommendation for future
compliance.
Sd/-
(Ramesh Kumar)
JS & Addl. FA (R)

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
74

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 19TH MARCH, 2013
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th March, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shir Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
7. Shri Ashok Tanwar
8. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri Prakash Javadekar
11. Shri J.D. Seelam
12. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
6. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
75

76
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
2. Shri Venkatesh Mohan — Director General of Audit
3. Ms. Anim Cherian — Principal Director (ST)
4. Shri Rajiv Kumar Pandey — Principal Director of Audit
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then,
apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider the following Draft Reports
of the Committee:
(i) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Twenty-second Report (15th Lok Sabha)
on ‘Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2008-09)’.
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
(vii) *** *** ***
(viii) *** *** ***
(ix) * * * * * * * * *
( x ) *** *** ***
3. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/suggestions
of the Members.
4. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to Parliament
on a convenient date.
5. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Reports.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Matter not related to this Report.

APPENDIX  II
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/Department Observations/Recommendations
No. No.
12 3 4
1. 4 Finance (Department of The Committee are deeply concerned to
Economic Affairs) observe that the import of their oft-
repeated recommendation to make
concerted efforts for timely finalization
and submission of Action Taken Notes
by the prescribed time schedule is yet to
be fully realized. Persistent delay in
furnishing of Action Taken Notes on the
part of the Ministry of Finance is all the
more distressing. Since delay in
explaining financial irregularities/
deficiencies/aberration fuel public
distrust, the Committee, therefore,
reiterate it would be in their own interest,
if ATNs are furnished within the
prescribed time to the Committee for their
appraisal. As additional responsibility
rests with the Ministry of Finance, being
the nodal agency, not only in finalizing/
submitting their own Action Taken Notes
but in respect of other Ministries/
Departments also, the Committee desire
that a time schedule should be laid down
for taking action at various stages
involved in the finalization/vetting of the
Action Taken Notes, which would go a
long way in eliminating delay in
submission of these Notes to the
Committee. The Committee trust that
necessary steps would be  taken in this
direction and they be apprised.
2. 8 Finance (Department of The Committee note that in pursuance
Economic Affairs) of their recommendation, the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Economic
77

78
Affairs — Budget Division) have
instructed all the Ministries/Departments
to take immediate remedial measures, as
suggested by them, to ensure judicious
management of budgetary provisions.
However, the Committee find that the
Ministry had issued instructions on
11.07.2011 i.e. after eleven months of the
presentation of their Twenty-second
Report. Further, instructions so issued
appear to be routine in nature and no
stringent measures have apparently
been prescribed against the defaulting
Ministries, to avoid excess expenditure.
What is further disquieting is that despite
the oft-repeated concern expressed by
the Committee and issuing of necessary
instructions from time to time by the
Ministry of Finance, Parliament is being
presented with a  fait accompli  of
unremitting excess expenditure
phenomenon. The fact that no concrete
results have been achieved despite
issuance of routine instructions, the
situation warrants bold and stringent
measures including provision for penal
action against the officers responsible
for not detecting and reporting timely
the excess expenditure to overcome the
recurring problem of excess expenditure
over V oted Grants and Charged
Appropriations. The Committee would
like the Government to take this issue
with utmost seriousness so that excess
expenditure is reduced to the barest
minimum.
3. 11 Finance (Department of The Committee are informed that due to
Economic Affairs) the Ministry of Finance's concerted
efforts and continued monitoring, the
excess expenditure has been brought
down from ` 97,205 crore in 2005-06 to
` 1012.82 crore in 2008-09. The Ministry
have assured the Committee that this
tempo would be maintained by them and
12 3 4

79
would not be allowed to lose focus.
However, the Committee find that during
2009-10, the excess expenditure has
increased to ` 14575.08 crore i.e. more
than ` 13,500 crore  vis-à-vis the excess
expenditure in the preceding year. The
Committee view this dismal picture with
grave concern and are of the firm view
that the present system of budgetary
control is far from "sufficient and
adequate". Therefore, there is an
imperative need to devise an effective
mechanism with a view to imposing
financial discipline on all the Ministries/
Departments to avoid excess
expenditure. The Committee recommend
the Ministry of Finance to impress upon
the Departmental Heads of all the
Ministries/Departments to carry out
periodical checks for strict application
of the prescribed Financial Rules and deal
sternly with cases of aberration noticed
so that recurrence of huge excess
expenditure is avoided.
4. 14 Finance (Department of The Committee are pleased to note that
Expenditure) in pursuance of their recommendation,
the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) have developed Audit Para
Monitoring System (APMS) in the Office
of Controller General of Accounts (CGA)
for computerized monitoring of
submission of replies to the Audit Paras
and Explanatory Notes on excess
expenditure by the Ministries/
Departments to the Public Accounts
Committee. The Committee trust that with
the development of APMS, the Ministry
of Finance would be able to keep a strict
vigil over processing of Audit paras/
Explanatory Notes so that the same
could be made available to the Committee
within the prescribed time limit. The
Committee would, like to be apprised of
12 3 4

80
the latest status of the development/
commissioning of the system and
specific improvements brought in after
the introduction of the system.
5. 18 Finance (Department of The Committee note that with a view to
Expenditure) obviate excess expenditure under the
Grant No. 39—Pensions, the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
have finalised e-scroll project to enable
an early rolling out to all Banks. The
Ministry expected that the Phase I of
the project comprising all Banks
presently on the centralized pension
processing platform would commence in
the last Quarter of F.Y. 2011-12 and the
IInd Phase thereof comprising remaining
Banks shall roll out in F.Y. 2012-13. The
Committee hope that such project will
be effectively implemented and regularly
monitored so as to revamp the system
of budget formulation and execution as
well as to avoid excess expenditure in
future under this Grant. Taking note that
the Ministry are yet to establish a
centralized database of the pensioners
and compile the data-base of pre-1990
pensioners, the Committee also desire
that in the larger interest of correct
estimation of pension liability and in
order to achieve a sound fiscal discipline
under this grant in future, the Ministry
should make concerted  efforts to
complete the database by compiling the
information at the earliest and apprise
the Committee of the final outcome in
the matter including the progress of the
e-scroll project.
6. 21 Defence The Committee are concerned to note
that the Ministry of Defence have not
taken any tangible steps in consultation
with the Ministry of  Finance for
implementation of their recommendation
for devising ways and means to overhaul
12 3 4

81
the existing budgetary mechanism,
except issuing routine instructions to all
the budget holding authorities. Notably,
despite issuing instructions the
instances of excess expenditure under
Grants/Appropriations operated by the
Ministry of Defence continued to recur
during the years 2009-10 and 2010-11.
Obviously, the existing budgeting
mechanism of the Ministry is ineffectual
as excess expenditure continues to recur.
The Committee feel that mere issuing of
instructions would not serve the
purpose unless the progress of
expenditure is strictly monitored and
timely action taken to ensure that
expenditure is incurred within the limits
authorized by Parliament and individual
responsibility assigned. They, therefore,
desire the Ministry of Defence to
thoroughly review their budgetary
mechanism so that necessary corrective
action, wherever warranted, could be
taken to overcome the systemic lacunae/
loopholes for elimination of the perennial
problem of excess expenditure. The
Ministry should also put in place a
robust mechanism for monthly
monitoring of the flow/trend of
expenditure by the Administrative Heads
so as to avoid recurrence of excess
expenditure.
7. 25 Railways Deploring the steep rise in excess
expenditure incurred by the Ministry of
Railways during the year 2008-09, the
Committee in their earlier Report had
urged the Ministry of Railways to strive
earnestly for ensuring realistic
estimation of their budgetary
requirements under various sub-heads
of the Grants/Appropriations operated
by them. However, the Ministry have
given a tepid response thereto that the
12 3 4

82
concern of the Committee has been noted
and the Ministry had urged the Zonal
Railways to adhere to the fiscal
discipline. No mention has been made in
the reply regarding measures taken to
review the existing mechanism for
realistic estimation of budgetary
requirements. Keeping in view the
magnitude of the recurring excess
expenditure in case of Grants/
Appropriations operated by the Ministry
of Railways, the Committee are of the
firm opinion that the extant budgetary
exercise and the monitoring mechanism
is far from sound and adequate. While
reiterating their earlier recommendation,
the Committee desire the Ministry of
Railways to revisit their budgetary and
expenditure control system so as to
ensure strict financial discipline.
12 3 4

APPENDIX III
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations: 15
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government: T otal: 28
Para No.1
Percentage-93.34%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government: Total: 0
—Nil—
Percentage-0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations  in  respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para No. 8
Total: 01
Percentage-6.66%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:
—Nil— T otal: 0
Percentage-0%
83
GMGIPMRND—60LS—16.07.2013.

84
PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. N ame of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006.
(A.P)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co. Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28 Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2621,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P)
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.