39
FUNCTIONING OF A.D.G.E.S.
RADAR, PROCUREMENT OF
SPECIAL CLOTHING AND
MOUNTAINEERING EQUIPMENT
AND DELAY IN EXECUTION/
RENEWAL OF LEASE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Twelfth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2011-2012
THIRTY NINTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
FUNCTIONING   OF   A.D.G.E.S.  RADAR, PROCUREMENT OF
SPECIAL CLOTHING AND MOUNTAINEERING EQUIPMENT
AND DELAY IN EXECUTION/RENEWAL OF LEASE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Twelfth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23 March, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23 March, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
August, 2011/Sravana, 1933 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1946
Price:  ` 53.00
© 2011  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
CHAPTER I Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been
accepted by Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee
do  not desire to pursue in view of  the replies received
from Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
replies  of  Government   have  not  been  accepted   by
the Committee and which require reiteration  . . . . . . . . . 41
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies  . . . . . . . . . . 42
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of   the Second Sitting  of  the Public   Accounts
Committee (2011-12) held on 28th June, 2011  . . . . . . . . . . . 44
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee  contained  in  their  Twelfth  Report  (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
(i)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri  Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
21. *V acant
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Sh. Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
(iii)
* V acancy occurred vice  Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan has been appointed as Minister of State
w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Thirty-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Functioning of A.D.G.E.S.
Radar, Procurement of Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment and Delay
in Execution/Renewal of Lease' based on C&AG Report No. PA 5 of 2008 (Air Force
and Navy), Para No. 3.1 o f C&AG Report No. CA 4 of  2008 (Army) and Para No. 2.1 of
C&AG Report No. 4 of 2007 (Army) respectively relating to Ministry of Defence.
2. The Twelfth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on
29th April, 2010. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 23rd December, 2010, 27th January, 2011 and
7th April, 2011 respectively. The Public Accounts Committee considered and adopted
the Thirty-ninth Report at their sitting held on 28th June, 2011, Minutes of the sittings
are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and  convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
2 August, 2011 Chairman,
11 Sravana, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on  'Functioning of ADGES Radar,
Procurement of Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment and Delay in
Execution/Renewal of Lease'.
 2. The Twelfth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 29 April, 2010, had dealt with various issues contained in Chapter 1 of C&AG
Report No. PA 5 of 2008 (Air Force and Navy), Para No. 3.1 of C&AG Report
No. CA 4 of 2008 (Army) and Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 4 of 2007 (Army)
respectively relating to the Ministry of Defence. The Report contained
21 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes received from the
Ministry of Defence have been categorised as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20 and 21
Total: 18
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
—Nil—
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 1 and  17
Total: 02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Para No. 18
Total: 01
Chapter-V

2
3. The Public Accounts Committee, having taken cognizance of the inordinate
delay on the part of various Ministries/Departments in furnishing the Action Taken
Notes on  the Non-selected Audit Paragraphs within the stipulated time, selected
Chapter 1 of C&AG Report No. PA 5 of 2008 (Air Force and Navy), Para No. 3.1 of
C&AG Report No. CA 4 of 2008 (Army) and Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 4 of
2007 (Army) respectively on 'Functioning of ADGES Radar, Procurement of Special
Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment and Delay in Execution/Renewal of Lease'
for detailed examination. A Sub-Committee of the PAC was specially constituted for
the purpose. The detailed examination of the subject by the Sub-Committee revealed
several deficiencies/shortcomings on the part of the Ministry of Defence, which inter
alia included, inordinate delay in submission of Remedial Action Taken Notes along
with certain discrepancies such as a serious mismatch between availability and  IAF's
requirements of Radar system, systemic deficiencies in non-sanctioning of the ADGES
Plan and the procedures of procurement of Radars, non-streamlining of procedure
for formulation of technical specifications, evaluation of offers and selection of
vendors etc. In addition, procurement process was fraught with serious delays at
every stage impacting on the timely availability of clothing and equipment. Glaring
inaction was noticed on the part of the Director General Defence Estates (DGDE)
causing delays ranging from 6 to 36 years in renewal of leases of Defence lands and
the resultant non-recovery of substantial amount  of rent and premium of several
crores of rupees and loss of interest thereon. Moreover, there was lack of systemic
mechanism for streamlining their lease execution and renewal process.
4. The Committee in their Twelfth Report on the subject had made the following
important Observations/Recommendations:—
(i) Noting the mismatch in the  figures supplied by the Ministry of Defence
and the pending paragraphs with the Department of Expenditure
(Monitoring Cell) and Audit, the Committee desired that the discrepancy
in the number of pending audit paragraphs should be settled by the
Ministry of Defence in consultation  with the Audit and the Monitoring
Cell and correct figures may be intimated to the Committee whilst
furnishing the action taken replies on this Report.
(ii) Observing the absence of coordination within the three wings of the
Ministry of Defence in regard to the furnishing of A TNs, the Committee
recommended immediate and effective action to be taken by the Ministry
to streamline the process to deal with Audit Reports/Paras within the
Ministry. The Ministry was asked to reply to all audit observations within
the timeframe laid down for the purpose. The Committee also desired that
reasons for the delay in furnishing ATNs to Audit should be investigated
and accountability fixed. The Committee also desired to be intimated about
a specific timeframe by which the backlog of the pending A TNs would be
cleared by the Ministry.
(iii) T aking note of the absolute necessity for the existence of formulated and
approved plans for timely acquisition, maintenance and replacement of
existing assets for the full satisfaction of the critical needs of the Defence

3
establishment, the Committee recommended the advance planning of
acquisitions and deployment of Air Defence radars in a manner that would
ensure timely purchase as per procurement plan and also take care of
emergency requirements so that critical requirements of the armed forces
are always satisfied consistent with the need to ensure transparency of
procurement procedures.
(iv) Observing that signing of contracts was only the first step in ensuring
the meeting of Air Defence related security requirements, the Committee
recommended that procurement of the Radars and equipments for which
contracts have been signed, are completed within the stipulated time frame
and without delays.
(v) Noting the frequent break downs of the existing old radars and non-
availability of spares etc. the Committee had recommended that utilization
of radars in terms of watch hours may be enhanced through timely
replacements, upgradations and efficient product support. The Ministry
was also recommended to ensure watch hours as prescribed by the
Government and adhered to once new acquisitions were materialised and
the IAF would not operate with any shortfalls as on date, thereby
eliminating any compromise with security considerations.
(vi) Observing the obsolescence of Air Defence radars and the urgent need
for their upgradation/modernization, the Committee recommended that the
Ministry should ensure that all upgradation programme of AD system
are taken up without any further delay to avoid cost escalation and to
ensure that operational efficiency is maintained at all times.
(vii) Noting the requirement of spares for Aircraft on Ground (AoG) to be
mandatorily met within 24 hours, the Committee recommended that the
provisioning reviews to be put in place for spares should be made more
efficient so that delays in overhauls, servicing and clearing Aircraft on
Ground (AoG) are completely eliminated.
(viii) Taking note of the fact that several discrepancies were existing in the
procurement of special clothing and mountaineering equipment, the
Committee found that the procurement process was fraught with serious
delays at every stage impacting on the timely availability of adequate
clothing and equipment each time during deployment of troops to Siachen.
(ix) T aking into account all the shortcomings in the procurement process, the
Committee recommended that the entire procurement procedures be
revised so that from the time of recognizing the need for procuring clothing
and mountaineering equipment etc. till these are finally delivered to the
end users is minimized to the maximum extent consistent with ensuring
transparency in procurement process and quality of equipment needed.
(x) Noting with concern that Army HQ has not formulated any General Staff
Quality Requirement (GSQR) for special clothing and mountaineering

4
equipments, the Committee urged upon the Ministry to take appropriate
steps within a timeframe to formulate GSQR as well as important qualifying
specifications of all items of special clothing and equipments for ensuring
purchase of quality items required for protection of troops deployed in
hostile climatic conditions. The Committee also recommended that
domestic production capabilities be strengthened at least in the public
sector, even if the Indian private sector is not forthcoming ostensibly due
to lack of economic viability considerations.
(xi) Noting with concern the high rate of rejection of defence equipment/
spares, the Committee recommended that the trend of pre-dispatch
inspection should invariably be followed and enforced and in case of
rejections, recovery of payment should be made. The Committee, therefore,
desired that efforts for recoveries should now be made in all cases of
rejected stocks and action taken thereon be reported to the Committee.
(xii) Dismayed to learn that a country which is capable of successfully
launching satellites, manufacturing missiles, tanks and other state-of-the
art defence equipments, the Committee desired that the Ministry should
explore all possibilities to enhance domestic manufacturing capabilities
in the area so that the defence of the country is not compromised in
matters of socks, jackets, boots etc. and other requisite equipment required
for the troops at high altitudes.
(xiii) Noting with concern that prevailing system of lease execution of defence
land is afflicted with systemic loopholes, the Committee observed that
the Ministry of Defence have not yet put in place a systematic mechanism
for  streamlining their lease execution/renewal process. Viewing this to be
a serious lacunae requiring immediate/urgent attention of the Ministry,
the Committee urged upon the Ministry to furnish detailed information
regarding follow-up action taken on all the cases where the request for
lease renewal was received and also the action taken in respect of the
remaining cases alongwith the reasons for non-initiation of any
appropriate action wherever necessary.
(xiv) Noting the importance of strengthening the lease execution and renewal
system in the Ministry of Defence, the Committee desired that the
Ministry needs to evolve an effective mechanism to ensure that all field
offices of Director General of Defence Estates (DGDE) prepare a proper
record of the details regarding execution of defence lease deeds and
maintain a calendar for disposal of cases of lease renewal to help
identifying leases which will become due for renewal in the near future
and timely action for renewal. The Committee further recommended that
the Ministry to identify all cases of lease of defence land or other
properties pending for more than six months and prescribe a time frame
within which such long pending lease agreements should be finalized by
the Ministry.
(xv) Dismayed at the huge difference between the annual rent received by the
Ministry from their leased out land and the market value of the same, the

5
Committee recommended the Ministry to adopt a policy of renewing the
leases on due dates with an inbuilt clause for reasonable enhancement of
rates every five year.
5. The Committee deplore that the Ministry of Defence took almost eleven months
in furnishing the complete replies against the stipulated time frame of six months.
Obviously, such an inordinate delay constitutes a sad reflection on the functioning
of the Ministry of Defence.
6. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence in respect of all
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the following paragraphs, the
Committee deal with the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations made in the Original Report which need reiteration or merit
comments.
A. Fixing of  Responsibility in Procurement Procedures
(Recommendation Para No. 17)
7. While scrutinizing the subject in detail in their Twelfth Report, the Committee
had observed that fixing of responsibility is a very important step for correcting the
acts of omission and commission. Accordingly, the Committee desired that the
Ministry should fix the responsibility on all concerned who were found to be
responsible for flaws in procurement procedures, technical evaluations and rejection
of ordered clothing and equipment. Further, the Ministry was urged to inform the
Committee about the steps taken in this regard within a period of six months
alongwith the corrective measures initiated thereon.
8. Elaborating on the action initiated in this regard, the Ministry of Defence has
inter alia  stated as under:—
"Procurement of Special Clothing and Mountaineering equipment were done
taking steps in vogue that time to ensure safety of the troops and meet
operational requirements. Over the years, continuous efforts have been made
to improve and fast-track the procurement procedures ensuring transparency
in procurement process and quality of items needed. In any case, items those
did not meet the technical specifications and user's requirements had to be
rejected. In view of such rejection of items in India, policy has been formulated
for Pre Dispatch Inspection in supplier's country. It has no financial implications
as all required inspections and tests are undertaken before dispatch in the
seller's country.
Moreover, rejection of items on Pre Dispatch Inspection/Joint Receipt
Inspection throw a light on the robust functioning of the system put in place
for quality assurance and is not necessarily a flaw in the system. However, the
Ministry has been taking appropriate action against any deviation from the
procedures laid down. Besides, several remedial steps for quality and timely
availability of items have been taken by Ministry of Defence to streamline the
procurement procedure one of which is constituting an Empowered Committee

6
on Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment in 2007. The same has been
acknowledged by the Committee in Paras 13 and 15 of part II of its report."
9. With regard to the steps initiated to streamline the process of procurement of
special clothing and mountaineering equipment, the Committee has been apprised
by the Ministry that over the years, continuous efforts have been made to improve
and fast track the procurement procedures ensuring transparency in procurement
process and quality of items procured. Further, the Ministry has inter alia stated
that rejection of items on Pre-Dispatch Inspection/Joint Receipt Inspections 'throws
light on the robust functioning of the system put in place' for quality assurance
and denied any systemic flaw. The Committee, however, note with concern that the
Ministry has not mentioned any specific remedial measures taken after the
constitution of an Empowered Committee in 2007. The Committee find the reply of
the Ministry vague and evasive as it is totally silent on the aspect of fixing
responsibility for the evident flaws in procurement procedures, technical evaluations
and approvals of ordered clothings and equipment. The said Empowered Committee
on special clothings and mountaineering equipment was constituted in 2007 whereas
the 12th Report of the Committee was presented to Parliament on 29th April, 2010.
Worse, the Committee note with distress that the reply of the Ministry is
conspicuously silent on fixing the responsibility for the flaws/violations already
brought out in the 12th Report. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that responsibility be fixed on all concerned for the violations of
procurrement procedures, technical evaluation procedures etc. They would also like
to be informed of the steps taken in this regard within the next six months.
B. Renewal of Leases of Defence lands
(Recommendation Para No. 18)
10. While scrutinizing the subject in detail, the Committee noted that the Director
General of Defence Estates (DGDE) is entrusted with the responsibility to manage the
defence lands (about 17 lakh acres) both inside and outside the Cantonments. The
vacant or unused land is leased out by the Ministry of Defence to various public and
private users at different locations. The Committee had found glaring inaction on the
part of the Director General of Defence Estates with regard to the lease of Defence
lands causing delays ranging from six to thirty six years (as on December 2006) in
renewal of leases of Defence lands occupied inter alia by Madras United Club at
Chennai, Indian Oil Corporation at Jabalpur, State Bank of India at Avadi, Indian Oil
Corporation and Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. at Belgaum. This resulted in
non-recovery of substantial amount of rent and premium of several crores of rupees
and loss of interest thereon, the exact value of which was yet to be assessed. In all
these four cases, the lease period had already expired and the lessees have been
occupying the defence land without paying any rent or with valid lease. The Committee
had also observed that after the expiry of the original lease period, the lessees had
requested for extension of the lease period but due to serious procedural delays and
a rather casual approach on the part of the authorities concerned in initiating the
finalization of renewal of the leases, inordinate delays had occurred in renewal of the
leases. In this regard, the Committee have been informed that the Ministry issued
instructions on 25.06.2007, 12.09.2007 and 15.01.2008 for renewal of leases following

7
which leases in respect of Madras United Club, IOC Jabalpur, IOC Belgaum and HPCL
Belgaum, had been renewed upto 31.12.2007, 04.11.2006, 20.06.2011 and 05.12.2010
respectively, while the case pertaining to SBI Avadi is still under renewal process. No
further renewals have been executed in the cases of Madras United Club and IOC
Jabalpur though these entities continue to occupy the plots of defence land
unauthorisedly. The Committee had also observed that the much belated execution of
lease renewal cannot be condoned and the inexplicable delays/inaction/lapses on the
part of the concerned officials have to be accounted for.
11. Enumerating the various steps taken in this regard, the Ministry of Defence
in their Action Taken Notes has stated as under:—
"DGDE is responsible for management of defence lands which are specifically
placed under the management of Cantonment Boards and Defence Estates
Officers and other user agencies of the Ministry. A-1 defence land is placed
under the management of AHQ. All vacant or unused land is not leased out
by the Ministry of Defence. Only some of such land is thus leased out and
that too in public interest. Further, renewal of leases is done in consultation
with service HQ and after the approval of Ministry of Defence. DGDE is
authorised to grant lease only in respect of Petrol Pumps of IOC etc. and
Director DE the Commandants are competent to renew certain leases providing
for a renewal clause. Renewal of leases is a complex procedure involving
extensive consultation among the lessee, Cantonment Boards, DEO's, LMA's,
HQ Commands, Dte. DE Commands, DGDE, Service HQrs and Ministry of
Defence which leads to delay. Further, there are variety of factors contributing
to delay such as the lessee not making application for renewal, disputes among
legal heirs of deceased lessees, breach of terms of the lease, mutation not
being carried out due to defects in transfer documents, sub division of sites,
etc. These factors cumulatively cause delays. Such delays cannot be attributed
to any inidividual or organisation in isolation. However, there is no loss to
the State as arrears of rent are recovered upon renewal of lease. Instructions
have been issued by the DGDE vide letters No. 723/A/2/L/DE/2007 dated
25.06.2007, 12.09.2007 & 15.01.2008 (Annexure-I) to streamline the above
procedure and to eliminate such delays wherever possible. The lease in respect
of Madras United Club has expired on 31.12.2007 and rent etc. recovered. It
has been decided by the Ministry in April 2010 not to renew the same further
as the land is required by the Army for Married Accommodation Project,
Phase-II. The matter regarding fixing of annual rent for execution of fresh lease/
agreement is being negotiated with SBI, Avadi by Heavy V ehicle Factory. Lease
in respect of IOC at Jabalpur has been renewed upto 03.11.2011. Lease of three
sites in respect of IOC at Belgaum have been renewed upto 22.01.2010,
24.10.2010 and 20.06.2011. Lease of two sites in r/o HPCL at Belgaum has been
renewed upto 22.07.2009 and 05.12.2010."
12. With regard to the management of defence lands, the Committee have been
informed, inter alia, that there are several factors which cumulatively cause delays
and such delays cannot be attributed to any individual or organisation in isolation.

8
The contention of the Ministry that there was no loss to the State as arrears of rent
were recovered upon renewal of lease is not acceptable to the Committee as the
Ministry had recovered only the arrears of rent but not the cumulative interest
accrued thus causing loss to the public exchequer. The Ministry informed that the
lease in respect of Madaras United club was not renewed as the land was required
by the Army for its Married Accmmodation project. The Ministry further informed
that the leases of IOC at Belgaum & Jabalpur have already been renewed and with
regard to the SBI, Avadi the annual rent for execution of fresh lease/agreement
was being negotiated by the Heavy Vehicles Factory. The Committee therefore
recommend that the Ministry expedite the process of fresh lease/agreement in
regard to the SBI, Avadi, streamline and overhaul their systems and procedures
and remove structural bottlenecks in order to ensure prompt/timely renewal of
leases in the future to avoid pecuniary loss to the Government.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
 The Committee note that the figures supplied by the Ministry of Defence in regard
to number of audit paragraphs pending with Ministry does not tally with the figures
supplied by the Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) and Audit. While the
Monitoring Cell had indicated the number of pending paras as 202, the Ministry of
Defence stated it to be 212. Audit, has, however, shown this figure as 229. The
Committee desire that this discrepancy in the number of pending audit paragraphs
should be settled by the Ministry of Defence in consultation with the Audit and the
Monitoring Cell and correct figures intimated to the Committee whilst furnishing the
action taken replies on this Report.
[Para 3 of the Part II of 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 2009-2010
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The total number of pending paras of Ministry of Defence is 173 as on date. This
is in conformity with the Audit and Monitoring Cell.
 The Committee note with concern that the Ministry of Defence did not have a
clear idea on the methodology to be followed by them in furnishing the Action Taken
Notes to the Committee. This is evident from the fact that the Special Secretary and
Director General Acquisition candidly admitted before the Committee that in the
opinion of the Ministry, A TNs were not required to be sent to the Committee that in
regard to the Audit Chapter on 'Functioning of ADGES Radar in Signals Units in the
Indian Air Force' as the Committee had selected this Subject for examination in 2009.
Although,  it is a fact that Committee had selected this  Audit Chapter/Para in January,
2009 and a questionnaire was issued to the Ministry, but the reply to this
questionnaire was received only in December, 2009. Here,it is pertinent to note that
the Performance Audit Report on the subject was tabled in Parliament in October,
2008. This subject was subsequently dropped by the Committee and no evidence
was taken. The Ministry cannot be absolved of this responsibility on the ground
that the subject was selected by the Committee and so no ATNs were required to be
furnished. The Committee feel that even though, the replies sent in response to the
Committee's questionnaire were not the proper ATNs but even in case these were to
be treated as substantive A TNs. These were substantially delayed and were furnished
by the Ministry after 14 months, which is unacceptable.
[Para 4 of the Part II of 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 2009-2010
(15th Lok Sabha)]
9

10
Action Taken
The confusion in the Ministry due to processing by different wings has now been
resolved. The delay caused on account of this is regretted. Corrective steps have
now been taken to avoid recurrence of such errors leading to delays.
The Committee are constrained to observe at the absence of coordination within
the Ministry in regard to the furnishing of A TNs. In his own admission, the Special
Secretary and Director General, Acquisition stated that their Department has sent
the A TNs upto May, 2008 to the Ministry of Defence probably implying that the
wing which is supposed to collect and furnish ATNs from all the wings of the Ministry
of Defence and that their Department cannot furnish them directly to the Committee.
Furnishing the ATNs in respect of Audit Paragraph on 'Procurement of Special
Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment' apparently demonstrate a casual approach
on the part of the concerned officials of the Ministry of Defence as is evident from
the fact that the audit para on this subject was received in the last week of March,
2008 and the draft ATN was sent to the DGADS on 10.11.2008, after a lapse of eight
months. Eventually, this paragraph was sent to audit on 12.2.2010 i.e. after 23 months,
whereas the procedure stipulates that these are to be sent within four months. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that immediate and effective action to be taken by
the Ministry to streamline the process to deal with Audit Reports/paras within the
Ministry. The Ministry should endeavour to reply to all audit observations within
the timeframe laid down for the purpose and should not spare any effort to furnish
the A TNs to the Audit as prescribed. It is imperative that the Ministry view the A TNs
not as a mere formality and submit proper explanations on the remedial measures
taken with the timeframe of four months. The Committee, in this regard desire that
reasons for the delay in furnishing ATNs to Audit should be investigated and
accountability ensured. The Committee would also like to be intimated about a specific
timeframe by which the backlog of the pending ATNs would be cleared.
[Para 5 of the Part II of 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 2009-2010
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Ministry takes observations of the Committee with all seriousness with regard to
furnishing ATNs. Whenever lapses occurred, systemic steps are being taken to correct
the lapses. However, sometimes delays have resulted due to coordination between
different wings of the IAF and within MoD leading to delays and inability to meet
the timeframe laid down. The Ministry have also been sending A TNs to Audit at
regular basis. The pendency of audit paras as on 31.3.11 from Air side is 42 (30 from
revenue procurement side and 12 from air acquisition side). A total of 14 (11 revenue
+ 3 acquisition) audit paras were settled finally in the year 2010-11 by the MoD Air
wing. A total of 9 paras (6 Revenue and 3 Plan) have already been finalised and are
awaiting Hindi translation.

11
The Committee observe that the Air Defence is critical to the nation's security.
Even so, IAF possess less than the adequate number of surveillance radars needed
for providing efficient and reliable detection. The Committee are surprised to note
that none of the Air Defence Ground Environment System (ADGES) Plans prepared
after 1971 received approval of the Government although some components have
been sanctioned on a piece meal basis. In totality, a serious mismatch exists between
availability and IAF's requirements of Radars System. Although the Ministry have
intimated that a long term perspective plan which includes ADGES Plan for the period
covering upto 2022 has been formulated but it is not clear whether the plan is as yet
operational or not. The Committee are seized of the fact that several contracts for
different type of radars have been signed and several cases for procuring the Radars
are under process. This includes a project on Integrated Air Command Control
System, which would become operational by 2010. The Committee are constrained
to point out that even though contracts have been signed in this regard, the officials
could not provide scheduled dates of delivery for the Radars and also by when these
would be eventually commissioned and to what extent do these procurements fill
the existing gap in the Air Defence system and how will the present threat perception
be addressed.
[Para 6 of the Part II of 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 2009-2010
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In the past, different studies on assessment of requirement and deployment of
Air Defence Assets were conducted by Committees formed by the IAF. On the basis
of the recommendations of these Committees, plans for procurement of Air Defence
Assets were finalized and projected in Long Term Perspective Plans. The approvals
for procurement of Air Defence Radars from Government are sought as per the Long
Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP). The procurements of ADGES radars is being
done as per approved LTIPP. The scheduled dates for delivery and commissioning
of radars could not be provided during Oral Evidence as the information was not
readily available at that time. The schedules for delivery and commissioning of radars
always find place in the contracts. Information pertaining to delivery schedules of
radars of the finalized contracts is as follows:—
(i) Medium Power Radar — Apr. 11 to Dec. 2012
(MPR) (Qty-15)
(ii) Low Level Transportable Radar — Feb. 12 to Mar. 2015
(LLTR) (Qty-19)
(iii) Rohini (07) — Delivered (Aug. 08 to April 2010)
(iv) Rohini (30) — Feb. 11 to Sept. 2015
(v) Low Level Light Weight — Jun. 10 to Feb. 11 (delivery of two
Radar (LLLWR) (Qty 15) radars will be completed by Apr. 2011)

12
(vi) Integrated Air Command — IACCS nodes at Barnala and Jodhpur
Control System (IACCS) operational w.e.f. 04 Nov. 2010 and 05
Mar. 2011 respectively.
Wadsar—Site Acceptance
Test in progress.
Ayanagar—PDC May 11
Following the receipt of the systems at designated consignee port, acceptance
inspection and testing is undertaken before commissioning. It takes approximately
10 to 45 days to complete the commissioning process, depending upon the complexity
of the system, location of installation site, weather conditions etc.
Acquisition of Air Defence Systems to meet the current and projected threat
perceptions has been adequately planned till 2027. These acquisitions are phased
out across different plan periods based upon the deployment plans.
The Committee are of the view that existence of formulated and approved plans
for timely acquisition, maintenance and replacement of existing assets is absolutely
essential to ensure full satisfaction of the critical needs of the Defence establishment.
The Committee recommend that Planning of acquisitions and deployment of AD radars
be done well in advance, in a manner that would ensure timely purchase as per
procurement plan and also take care of emergency requirements so that critical
requirement of the armed forces are always satisfied consistent with the need to ensure
transparency of procurement procedures. The gap in the Air Defence System in the
past is a matter of concern. Non-sanctioning of the ADGES Plan and the procedures
of procurement of radars etc. indicate systemic deficiencies which need to be rectified
by the Ministry. The Committee, accordingly, feel that the Ministry should review its
planning/procurement processes to address the concerns raised here above.
[Para 7 of the Part II of 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 2009-2010
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Air Defence (AD) is a complex mix of Radars, Weapons, UA Vs and other airborne
surveillance. It has been maintained at all the times in a manner that AD requirements
of the country are not compromised. Air Defence assets are replaced, modernized
and enhanced as per the dynamics of threat perceptions. In order to enhance our Air
Defence, a number of projects have been initiated towards procurement of various
radars. These procurements are an integral part of the Long Term Planning.
The radards that are being procured by the IAF include Mountain Radars, Long
Range Surveillance Radars, Medium Power Radars, Low Level Transportable Radars,
3D Rohini radars, Low Level Light Weight Radars and Aerostats. These radars have
the potential and capability to increase detection ranges and hence would enhance
AD capability. In order to ensure timely availability, radars are procured from different
sources. The Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP) has been revised from time to

13
time to make defence procurements more efficient and to match processes with
requirement of the forces. The DPP has been recently revised and DPP-2011 is being
followed. While noting the concerns of the Committee, it is conveyed that
requirements and processes to meet these requirements are constantly reviewed in
order to streamline the planning and procurement process.
The Committee observe that signing of contracts is only the first step in ensuring
that Air Defence related security requirements are met. The Committee recommend
that procurement of the Radars and equipments for which contracts have been signed
are completed within the stipulated time frame and without delays. To be specific,
the Committee would like to emphasize that Commissioning/installation of Medium
Power Radars (MPRs)/Low Level Transportable Radars (LLTRs) and completion of
associated civil and development projects be expedited so that gaps in provision of
AD assets can be avoided. The Committee would also like to be kept informed about
the necessary steps taken in this regard.
[Para 8 of the Part II of 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 2009-2010
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Induction and operationalisation of radars has been done successfully as per the
procedures by the IAF. The induction of 15 Medium Power Radar (MPR) and
19 Low Level Transportable Radars (LLTRs) will commence from April 2011 and
February 2012 respectively. The commissioning and installation of MPR and LLTRs
would be done expeditiously, following the inspection and testing procedures
mentioned in DPP. The work services and other preparations for induction of first
four MPRs have already been completed. At other locations it is being progressed
expeditiously. Induction of LLTRs are also being progressed simultaneously to
complete before commencement of delivery of the system.
The Committee have learnt of the frequent break downs of the existing old radars
and non-availability of spares etc. They also note that hours of watch allocated to
the units of all types of radars are much below the hours prescribed for these units.
The fact that additional radars are being procured itself indicates that the present
position regarding planned hours versus what is actually being achieved by existing
radars is not adequate for proper air defence coverage of the country. The Committee
recommend that utilization of radars in terms of watch hours may be enhanced
through timely replacements, upgradations and efficient product support. It may be
ensured that watch hours as prescribed by Government are adhered to once new
acquisitions materialise and the IAF does not operate with any shortfalls as on date,
thereby eliminating any compromise with security considerations.
[Para 9 of the Part II of 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 2009-2010
(15th Lok Sabha)]

14
Action Taken
The serviceability percentage of the radar is being kept as high as 98%. This
indicates optimum availability of the systems for operational exploitation excluding
break down and maintenance hours. As the serviceability of radar have been 98%,
the break down/maintenance time for only 2% is considered highly satisfactory for
a radar system. This also suggests that adequate spare support was available to
maintain the system. Watch hours/utilization of radar is decided on the basis of threat
perception in the area of operation. The issues of upgradation of system, product
support and serviceability have never come in the way of utilization of radars.
The Committee also observe that Air Defence radars are facing obsolescence and
need urgent upgradation/modernization. The response of the Ministry that the
Defence Procurement Procedure is being followed and time taken in processing
acquisition cases has been reduced does not satisfy the Committee given the hostile
environment in which we live. The fact remains that the need for defence preparedness
and capability was never so acute as it is today. It is, therefore, essential that the
purchases are timed and so sequenced that the armed forces are never short of their
requirements. In this context, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should
ensure that all upgradation programme of AD system are taken up without any further
delay to avoid cost escalation and to ensure that operational efficiency is maintained
at all times.
[Para 10 of the Part II of 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 2009-2010
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry concurs with the concern of the Committee on Air Defence. The
nation's preparedness in terms of Air Defence has always been kept high. However
the threat perception is dynamic in nature. Accordingly, upgradation programs for
AD System are planned and executed in advance, keeping in view the envisaged
lead time for procurement of the systems. The upgradation programmes are accorded
top priority to avoid cost escalation and to ensure maximum operational efficiency at
all times.
New acquisitions for upgradation of Air Defence systems are included in Long
Term Perspective Plan (LTPP)/ Long Term Intergrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) and
are taken up as per schedule to avoid cost escalations with main focus on operations.
The upgradation of existing old sub-systems are taken up according to the
requirement and feasibility. Accordingly, following sub-systems have been
upgraded:—
(i) Few sub-assemblies of Thomson Houston Design (THD), Thomson Radar
Series (TRS) and Pulse S band Mobile (PSM) Radar.

15
(ii) Data handling system of PSM, TRS and THD radars using Commercially Off
The Shelf (COTS) items.
(iii) Integration of Friend or Foe (IFF) system of THD Radars.
(iv) Few select sub-subassemblies like display consoles, cooling system, data
processing etc.  of Indian Dopper Radar (INDRA) radar.
The Committee note that against the requirement of spares for Aircraft on Ground
(AoG) which are mandatorily to be met within 24 hours so that the equipment is
repaired and made serviceable at the earliest, only 0.4 per cent of AoG demands were
met within 2 to 30 days. The Committee are informed that provisional reviews were
being carried out by the Ministry to cater to spares for Aircraft on Ground for a
period of 21 months and a lead time of 18 months for the supply. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the provisioning reviews put in place for spares should be made
more efficient so that delays in overhauls, servicing and clearing Aircraft on Ground
(AoG) are completely eliminated.
[Para 11 of the Part II of 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 2009-2010
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
IAF has both old and new radars in its inventory. However, due to rapid changes
in technologies resulting in obsolescence, the lead time for procurement of spares
for old radars is considerably high. However, efforts are being made to reduce it to
the minimum.
Since ADGES radars are old, at times the spares for these radars are not available
with BEL (GAD) due to obsolescence. BEL (GAD) is the only supplier for ADGES
radars and these items are not readily available in the local market. This has lead to
longer time delays in some cases, despite the best efforts.
Provisioning Reviews (PRs) are carried out to cater for requirement of spares for
21 months. These reviews are based on the past consumption pattern. The PRs also
take into consideration that non-moving inventory is not created by over
provisioning. At times, due to various unforeseen reasons like unpredictable failure
pattern, no fixed life of electronic items, no fixed time between overhaul etc., there
are changes in the requirement of spares over and above the forecasted stock of
spares. However, efforts are always made to keep such changes in the requirements
to bare minimum. In such situations, items on Aircraft on Ground (AoG) demand are
progressed on fast track process. At times, these items have long lead times, resulting
in delay of meeting the AoG demands. Around 91% of AoGs were met in 6 months.
A firm plan for the MOH and IRAN servicing for the ADGES radars have been put
in place. The contracts/supply orders with M/s BEL (GAD) have already been signed
and are in various stages of implementation for following radars:—
(i) Inspection Repair As Necessary (IRAN) of INDRA I
(ii) Inspection Repair As Necessary (IRAN) of INDRA II

16
(iii) Major Overhaul (MOH) of TRS
(iv) Inspection Repair As Necessary (IRAN) of THD
To avoid processing delays, a Government sanction has been given to take up
repairs costing less than 30% with BEL (GAD) for a three year period.
Several steps have been put in place to overcome the non-availability of essential
spare due to obsolescence. The process of Life Time Buy (LTB) is initiated well in
advance. In addition, wherever feasible, the indigenisation/development through local
vendors are also been undertaken. In addition the concept of Limited Urgent Repair
(LURE) has been introduced. The concept is aimed towards retrieving the critical
systems at the earliest with readily available resources. To ensure availability of spares
at the fields units and depot, regular Provisioning Review (PR) and Special Review
(SR) are being undertaken.
Integrated Material Management On Line System (IMMOLS) has been
commissioned to provide the Visibility at all levels for all stakeholders to intervene
for early materialisation of any pending demand. The IMMOLS network has helped
the field units in meeting their critical requirement at a faster pace. It enables the
global view of all the spares required at critical time and materialised through the
allocation system at higher formations. It ensures all the inventories are accurate
and materialise all the demands at a fast pace. This has ensured proper spare
management at the system level.
Ministry of Defence
Observation/Recommendation
A close scrutiny of the examination of the subject on "Procurement of Special
Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment" has revealed several deficiencies which
merit the attention of the Committee. The Committee learn that the special clothing
and mountaineering equipment are provided to the troops posted in the extreme cold
climate conditions in Siachen, Kargil, Sikkim etc. to cater to the needs of forces at
high altitudes. Out of 55 items authorized, 19 critical items such as down feather
jackets, trousers, sleeping bags, multipurpose boots, woolen socks, rucksack etc.
were being imported as no indigenous source was available. Special clothing is a
vital requirement of the troops deployed in extreme cold climatic conditions like in
Siachen Glacier. The Committee are dismayed to learn that despite the fact that
Army HQ has been procuring these clothing items for over two decades, the
procedure for formulation of technical specifications, evaluation of offers and
selection of vendors have not been streamlined so far. The whole approach towards
procurement of such supply appears casual so that neither quality nor timely
availability of critical items could be ensured thereby comprising safety as well as
comfort of the troops deployed in harsh climatic conditions. The Committee also
learnt that there were 388 casualties reported due to cold injuries such as frost
bite, chill-blinds etc. The examination of the subject revealed that out of ten contracts

17
concluded during 2002-06 valuing  Rs. 28.81 crore (59%) were rejected either in
receipt inspection or by end users. The committee find that the procurement process
was fraught with serious delays at every stage impacting on the timely availability
of adequate clothing and equipment each time during deployment of troops to Siachen.
From the time of raising of demand to the delivery of items to the troops, it took 32
months. This was mainly because of the server delay in trial evaluation, finalization
of specifications by DGQA, tendering and signing the contract.
[Para 12, Part II of the 12th of the Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Procurement process of items of special clothing and mountaineering equipments
require to meet quality conditions as per requirements and therefore, has to follow
the certain laid down procedures including formulation of technical specifications,
evaluation of offered technical specifications, trial-evaluation of selected samples,
selection of vendors, negotiations with the L-1 vendor, Pre-dispatch Inspection of
stores etc. Accordingly, QRs as per the safety and operational requirements of the
items of Special Clothing and Mountaineering equipment have been formulated by
Army Headquarters. Broad technical specifications in respect of 13 items of Special
Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment out of 19 items being procured ex import
have been formulated by DGQA. Specification for the remaining 6 items have still
not been formulated mainly because of the fact that these items are being procured
on single vendor basis based on specifications formulated in consultation with
technical literature provided by the vendor and by reverse engineering of their
product. As only one vendor is supplying the product, sufficient data for technical
parameters are not available to formulate a generic specification. Moreover, preparing
generic specification based on data of the lone vendor may lead to legal complications
later. As such, preparation of generic specification in respect of the remaining 6 items
is kept in abeyance till vendor base for these items are expanded and sufficient data
become available for different technical parameters.
Evaluation of technical specifications is conducted by DGQA(S). The samples
from the prospective firms are trial evaluated by users in field. DGQA makes
specification of trial evaluated samples of those stores which are found acceptable
by user, based on broad technical requirement. This process ensure that troops
deployed in Siachen Glacier would get only such items which can withstand the
extreme climatic conditions prevailing there.
With the change in technology and threat perception, review of the specifications
are done and various equipments which are already in service, need to be replaced
by newer variants or offered by vendors to incorporate advancements in technology.
This includes validation trials/testing.
A systematic and transparent system for identification of vendors is followed.
Samples of special clothing obtained by publishing an expression of interest are trial

18
evaluated under actual condition. The manufacturer, whose product is recommended
after an elaborate system of trial evaluation, is included in the Approved V endor list.
We now have vendors from almost all the countries listed in CAG report like Norway,
Sweden, Germany in addition to USA and Italy.
With the view to fast-track the procurement of special clothing items, an
'Empowered Committee' has been constituted under the chairmanship of MGO in
August, 2007 to procure the critical items of Special Clothing of fast track basis. The
Empowered Committee follows the collegiate vetting route to reduce the time required
for processing the cases. Special dispensation has been given by the MoD in July,
2010 in respect of exercising 'Repeat Order'/'Option Clause' to procure upto 100% of
the original quantity contracted. This will lead to better flexibility of source of supply
and will contribute to streamlining of procurement procedures.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that for streamlining the
procedure, the time limits have now been compressed from 32 months to 14 or
15 months. Taking into account all the shortcomings in procurement process, the
Committee recommend  that the entire procurement procedures be revised so that
from the time of recognizing the need for procuring clothing and mountaineering
equipment etc. till these are finally delivered to the end user is minimized to the
maximum extent consistent with ensuring transparency in procurement process
and quality of equipment needed.
[Para 13, Part II of the 12th of the Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
To ensure safety of the  troops and quality of the items as per operational
requirements certain procedures had to be followed and inspection/trials of the items
as per the required norms had to be done. Previously the user trials were done only
in peak winter months  to completely meet the performance  parameters resulted in a
very limited trial window in a year. In case, of delay in supply of samples by the
vendor/non receipt due to inclement weather by the troops, the trials would be
delayed  by a complete year. Further, in case of non-passing of user's trial of stores
the entire lot had to be rejected which led to delay in procurement of the item.
In order to fast-track the procurement process and shorten the procurement
process to the permissible limit, the following steps have been taken:—
(i) An Empowered Committee has been constituted under the Chairmanship of
MGO, to meet  emergent requirements of Special Clothing and
Mountaineering equipment. The committee procures the critical items of
Special Clothing on fast track basis and is following the collegiate vetting
route to reduce the time rquired for processing the cases.

19
(ii) Instructions have now been passed to conduct user trials throughout the
year in the areas where snow cover and temperature conditions meet  the
user requirements as against the earlier system of trials only in peak winter
months.
(iii) a Pre-dispatch Inspection (PDI) team carries out evaluation of technical
specifications in vendor's premises in internationally accredited laboratories.
Rejection in bulk supply has reduced considerably since the system of PDI
has been adopted. The supplier ensures a high standard of adherence to
qualitative requirement as the financial loss due to rejection of stores on
technical evaluation in the Supplier's country is born by him.
(iv) Special dispensation has been given by the MoD in July, 2010 in respect of
exercising ‘Repeat Order’ ‘Option Clause’ to procure up to 100% of the original
quantity contracted. This will lead to better flexibility of source of supply
and will contribute to steamlining of procurement procedures.
(v) Periodic review of the procurement system is being carried out to streamline
it and make it as short as possible within the requirement of quality,
transparency and provisions of DPM.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note with concern the high rate of rejection of defence equipment/
spares as brought out in the earlier paragraphs. The Committee find that in majority
of cases, technical specifications had been worked out based on the sample accepted
by the user at the time of bulk supply. Accordingly, the vendor deviated from the
given specifications on several occasions. Of these deviations, even if it was one
parameter out of several odd parameters on which that were to be tested, the item
was rejected as having not met with the laid down specifications. In this regard the
Committee have been informed that as of now, the Ministry are carrying out a pre-
despatch inspection (PDI) as against a joint receipt inspection (JRI) which was in
force earlier, prior to 2007. In addition to pre-despatch, stage inspection could also
be carried out. Since the Pre-despatch Inspection is being carried out from 2007,
rejection also takes place in the host country itself, the stocks are not delivered
and there are no payments made. In this connection, the Committee can at this stage
only recommend that the trend of pre-dispatch inspection should invariably be
followed and enforced and in case of rejections, recovery of payments should be
made. The Committee, therefore, desire that efforts for recoveries should now be
made in all cases of rejected stocks and action taken thereon be reported to the
Committee.
[Para 15, Part II of the 12th of the Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

20
Action Taken
Pre-Dispatch Inspection—The trend of Pre-Dispatch Inspection is being strictly
followed for all procurements. The list of cases in which recoveries imposed for
rejected items is as follows:—
Sl. Contract Quantity Cost Details
No. Number and and
Date Stores
1          2       3       4 5
1. B/82253/2/TD Down EURO The stores were received without a
/MGO/EM Trousers 306238.74 PDI  and  rejected  by  JRI  due  to
(GS&C)/PPO-3 Qty. 4999 uneven filling of goose down in
dated 10 Apr. various compartments of the trousers
2006 to the extent that it would adversely
affect the thermal insulation property
of the stores.
A quality claim was raised and
pursued with the firm. The firm
opened a workshop in Faridabad to
repair the stores and has since repaired
the rejected items. However, for the
delay incurred, Liquidated Damages
for an amount of EURO 3,871.63 have
been imposed on the firm and
recovered from them.
The matter now stands resolved.
2. B/82253/2/JD Down EURO The stores were received without a
/MGO/EM(GS Jacket 426533.75 PDI  and  rejected  by  JRI  due  to
&C)/PPO-3 Qty. 5945 uneven filling of goose down in
dated 10 Apr. various compartments of the trousers
2006 to the extent that it would adversely
affect the thermal insulation property
of the stores.
A quality claim was raised and
pursued with the firm. The firm
opened a workshop in Faridabad to
repair the stores and has since repaired
the rejected items. However, for the
delay incurred, Liquidated Damages
for an amount of EURO 7,501.46

21
have been imposed on the firm and
recovered for them.
The matter now stands resolved.
3. B/82253/2/SB Sleeping USD Sleeping Bags supplied by the firm
/MGO/EM(GS Bags 4365786.97were not as per the sealed sample.
&C)/DO(CPS)/ Qty The Bags  had been trial evaluated
2004 dated 06 35580 and the same were found not suitable
Jan. 2006 for use at Siachen during winter
months. MoD did not agree with the
proposal to accept the Sleeping Bags
for use at lower altitudes after
imposing a penalty on the vendor.
Army HQ was advised to direct the
vendor to replace the Sleeping Bags
failing which legal/arbitration
proceedings would be initiated against
the firm.
4. B/82253/2/Proc/ Rucksacks USD The complete consignment was
RUCK/MG 70 Ltrs 536520.60 received in seven lots from 29 May
O/EM(GS&C)/ Qty 2002 to 09 July 2002 without PDI.
PPO-3 dated 17,380 Of these 16,635 pairs were accepted
05 Apr. 2002 in JRI and 745 pairs rejected for the
reason "Height variation from 704-705
mm against 730+10mm specified.
The quantity claim for qty. 05 and
quality claim or qty. 740 was raised
and pursued with the firm. The firm
has since replaced the rejected items.
However, for the delay incurred,
Liquidated Damages for an amount of
USD 713.10 have been imposed on the
firm and recovered from them.
The matter now stands resolved.
5. B/82253/2/Socks/ Socks USD The  complete  consignment  was
MGO/EM/ W oolen 1,89,000.00received  in  five  lots  from  12  Mar.
GS&C/PPO-3 Special 2004 to 06 Nov. 2004 without PDI.
dated 24 Dec. Qty Out  of  these  qty.  1,59,242  pairs
2003 4,27,833 were  accepted  in  JRI  and  2,68,59
pairs pairs  rejected  by  the  JRI  for  the
reason "Less percentage of wool and
1          2       3       4 5

22
lighter percentage of rubber in
composition test than that specified".
A quantity claim for 441 pairs and
quality claim for 2,68,150 pairs was
raised and pursued with the firm. The
firm has since replaced the rejected
items. However, for the delay incurred,
Liquidated Damages for an amount of
USD 591.57 have been imposed on the
firm and recovered from them.
The matter now stands resolved.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are dismayed to learn that a country which is capable of
successfully launching satellites,manufacturing missiles, tanks and other State-
of-the-art defence equipments is still struggling with the problem of a narrow
vendor base in the procurement of special clothing mountaineering equipment
and Boots. In the opinion of the Committee there are several Public Sector
Undertakings, the Ordnance Factories and Defence Research and Development
Organization (DRDO) who could be encouraged to manufacture these items even
if there is no profit to be made on some on the items. The decision of the Ministry
to produce them in Ordnance Factories under Transfer of Technology (ToT) is
the right step in this direction but the underlying emphasis must be to ensure
the creation of domestic capabilities whereby essential equipment can be produced
in the country as per request. The Committee also, therefore, desire that the
Ministry explore all possibilities to enhance domestic manufacturing capabilities
in the area so that the Defence of the country is not compromised in matters of
socks, jackets, boots etc. and other requisite equipment required for the troops
at high altitudes.
[Para 16, Part II, of the 12th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It has been the endeavour of the Ministry to indigenise the maximum number of
items provided to the troops in the high altitude areas. 36 out of the 55 items have
already been indigenised and only 19 items are procured ex-import. Ordnance Factories
Board (OFB) has undertaken development through in-house development/ToT of
1          2       3       4 5

23
7 of these items viz., Sleeping bags, Jacket Down, Trouser Down, ECWCS(Gore-tex
Suit), Gloves Outer (Modular gloves), Gloves Inner (Modular gloves) and Rucksacks
(70Ltr.) and they are in various stages of development.
[Ministry of Defence, O.M. No. 526/DS(O)/2010, dated 02-12.2010]
Observation/Recommendation
Further, the Committee find that prevailing system of lease execution of
defence land is affilicted with systemic loopholes. This perception is
substantiated by the fact that out of 3780 total number of expired leases
involving defence land of an area of about 2500 acres, requests for renewals
were received in respect of 899 cases but no proper follow up action has been
initiated. In 1800 cases where no request for lease renewal was received, the
cases have not been pursued vigorously for eviction of the lessees who have
since become trespassers in defence land. Further, in respect of the remaining
1081 cases, no status report has been submitted by the Ministry. The Committee
are constrained to note that the Ministry of Defence have not yet put in place
a systematic mechanism for streamlining their lease execution/renewal
process. The Committee view this to be a serious lacunae requiring immediate/
urgent attention of the Ministry. The Committee would also like the Ministry
to furnish detailed information regarding follow up action taken on all the
cases where the request for lease renewal was received and also the action
taken in respect of the remaining cases along with the reasons for non-
initiation of any appropriate action wherever necessary.
[Para 19 of the 12th Report of  the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The grant of lease, their renewal and execution is a complex procedure involving
extensive consultation among the Lessee, Cantt. Boards, DEOs, LMAs, HQ
Commands, Dte. DE Commands, DGDE, Service HQrs. and Ministry of Defence. It is
often beset with problems such as the lessee not coming forward for renewal, dispute
among legal heirs of a decreased lessee, mutation not being carried out due to defects
in transfer documents, breach of term of the lease, sub-division of sites etc. which
cause delay in renewal. Instructions have been issued by Ministry and DGDE to
streamline the above procedure and to eliminate such delays wherever possible. The
Ministry/DGDE is seized of the issue and necessary corrective action is being taken.
It is also intimated that 446 number of leases have been renewed/granted involving
358 acres and a sum of Rs. 58891418  (Rs. Five crore eighty eight lakh ninety one
thousand four hundred and eighteen only) has been recoverd on account rent and

24
premium, since the issue of instructions on 25.06.2007 in the jurisdiction of Dte.'s
Southern, Eastern, South Western, Northern and Central Commands. In respect
of Directorate of Western Command 53 number of leases for an area admeasuring
16.315 acres have been renewed/granted from 25.06.2007 to 30.06.2010 and rent
and premium of Rs. 1,94,17,103/- (Rupees one crore ninety four lakhs seventeen
thousand one hundred and three only) has been collected. Further, DGDE has
issued fresh instructions vide letter No. 723/A/3/L/DE/2007 dated 26.11.2010
(Annexure-II) to all Directorates, Defence Estates to personally monitor the
progress of renewal of leases and complete the same in respect of cases which
can be renewed by Directorate/Cantonment Boards within two months. They have
also been advised to depute officers who are well conversant with the cases
along with relevant records to DGDE for finalising cases requiring sanction of
MOD/DGDE.
Observation/Recommendation
 As an essential  part of strengthening the lease execution and renewal system
in the Ministry of Defence, the Committee desire that the Ministry need to evolve
an effective mechanism to ensure that all field offices of  DGDE prepare a proper
record of the details regarding execution of defence lease deeds and maintains a
calendar  for disposal  of cases of lease renewal to help identifying leases which
will become due for  renewal in the near future and timely action for renewal.
This will help in monitoring  timely finalization/renewal  of  each and every lease
before expiry of the previous lease. Besides, the unjustified delays in renewal of
lease would  be easily identifiable to enable early fixation of responsibility for
such lapses and would serve as a deterrent for others. This would also prevent
the unauthorized  lessees from occupying defence  land for long periods without
valid lease agreements and the wastage of public money would be minimized
drastically. The Committee further  recommend the Ministry  to identify all cases
of  lease of defence land or other properties pending for more than six months
and prescribe a time frame within which such long pending lease agreements
should be finalized by the Ministry.
[Para 20 of the 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Instructions have been issued by Ministry/DGDE for adopting a calendar  for
monitoring renewal of leases. As a result of this exercise, identification of such cases
has been done and leases renewed  wherever possible. Leases  which could not be
renewed for various reasons such as disputes among  legal heirs of decreased  lessees,
mutation not  being  carried out due to defects  in transfer documents, sub-division
of sites, breach of terms, etc. are being monitored and efforts are being made to
remove impediments in their renewal. The efficacy of this exercise will become fully

25
known in due course of time and the system may be further improved upon based
on the input received from the field offices.
Observation/Recommendation
 The Committee are dismayed  to note that while the annual  rent received by the
Ministry from their leased out land was Rs. 213 crore, the market value of the land
stood Rs. 11,033 crore. Long term lease rentals must be  such as to give reasonable
returns  to the Government  on the value of their assets. The Committee would like
the Ministry to adopt a policy of renewing the leases on due dates with an inbuilt
clause for reasonable enhancement of rates every five year.
[Para 21 of the 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Rent payable under leases are governed by the terms of the existing lease
themselves. While some provide for a fixed rent, others provide for enhancement  of
rent at periodic intervals the amount of enhancement is also provided in the same. In
existing leases, therefore, enhancement of rent every five years may not  be feasible.
However, the Ministry  being seized of the matter  that rent should be commensurate
with various factors viz.  market value of land, purpose of which lease is granted,
revenue generated by the land to the lessee etc. is attempting  in cases of fresh
grant of lease, to link  the rent payable  to the gross income of the lessee such as in
the case of Royal  Calcutta Turf Club (RCTC) and Cricket  Association of Bengal
(CAB). The suggestion of the Committee  for renewal of leases  with an inbuilt clause
for reasonable enhancement of rates every five years will be examined in respect of
grant of fresh leases.

ANNEXURE I
TIME  BOUND/PAC  MATTER
No. 732/A/3/L/DE/2007
Government of India, Ministry of Defence
Dte. General of Defence Estates
Raksha Sampada Bhawan
Palam Road, Delhi Cantt.-110010
Dated: 25 June, 2007
To
The Principal  Director, DE,
Ministry of Defence,
Southern/Northern/Eastern/Western/Central Command,
Pune/Jammu/Kolkata/Chandigarh/Lucknow.
Subject: Regarding  calendar  for monitoring of expired leases: Renewable
and non-renewable
Reference: DGDE letter of even no. dt. 18.06.2007.
2. With reference to letter under reference it is necessary that a Time Bound
programme  is chalked out for completing   the exercise  for renewal  of leases where
renewal sanction is to be accorded by the PDDE/Cantonment Board. While all attempts
should be made to complete the exercise at the earliest, however, the same should in
any case be completed in 6 months. Special monitoring of the renewals should be
done both at the CB/DEO level and in the concerned Directorates to ensure
compliance.
3.  Regarding leases  where renewal  is to be carried out under orders of the MoD/
DGDE, in the first instance, kindly furnish all necessary details under which proposals
have been initiated  seeking orders of the competent  authority. In respect of cases
where the proposals are yet to be initiated, it may be ensured that the exercise is
completed within the next 3 months. Cases where a policy  decision is required e.g.
Cantt. Code leases, we have taken up the matter with MoD for issue of necessary
policy guidelines which will be intimated as soon as they are finalised.
 4. But the important  thing is to ensure that all  leases expiring in the next six
months are immediately identified  and necessary action taken for their renewal well
in time so that defence land is not allowed to be occupied without due authority and
payment of appropriate rent/premium. For this purpose it is proposed that a rolling
calendar may be adopted by each Cantonment Board/DEO identifying all such leases
expiring  within the next 6 months, fixing the time frame for completing the actions
26

27
required to be taken for their renewal  immediately on expiry of the leases.  In
respect  of leases to be sanctioned under orders of the DGDE/PDDE/Cantonment
Boards the following calendar may be adopted:
CALENDAR  FOR RENEWAL OF LEASES
1. 6 months before expiry Identification of leases and lessees be asked
for their  willingness to renew the leases
2. 5 months before expiry Proposals initiated to the PDDE/DGDE for
orders
3. 2 months  before expiry Sanctions accorded
4. Within 1 month of expiry Execution of lease agreements
5. The above calendar should be a rolling Calendar  reflecting the position of
every ensuing 6 months' spell so that all leases are renewed in time. Cases where
there are problems  like ongoing litigation, non-availability of lessees, etc. etc. special
efforts be made in such cases to overcome the problems. If necessary, such cases
may be referred to the higher authorities for advice/directions well in  time. Similarly
cases of breach of lease terms have to identified separately and cases initiated for
condonation/regularisation of the breach or determination if warranted, well in time
so that all action can be completed in the time frame given above.
6. Leases which do not have a renewal clause would require orders of  the Ministry
of  Defence  either for continuation of the lease or for determination of the  lease and
taking back the leased land.  Some of these cases may require prior Cabinet approval
as per the PMO's instructions. These cases involving grant of  fresh leases, would
therefore have to be identified separately, so that orders of the Govt. for grant of
fresh leases can be obtained before the leases expire. Proposals in such cases
should  be initiated at least a year before the expiry.
7. To ensure that the  leases  are renewed in time, a suitable  proforma, working as
well as monitoring  may be devised at the Directorate under intimation  to this
Dte. General. The monitoring of leases should be an essential part of the inspection
of the concerned Inspecting Officers. A monthly report separately in respect of cases
of leases that are expired  and  those that are due to expire giving the status of their
renewal and action taken as per the above calendar may be furnished to this Directorate
General  by the 10th of each month by FAX.
8. The performance  of the field  officers in this matter should be one of the criteria
in evaluating  their overall performance.

TIME  BOUND/PAC  MATTER
No. 723/A/3/L/DE/2007
Dte. General of Defence Estates
Government of India, Ministry of Defence,
Raksha Sampada Bhawan
Palam Road, Delhi Cantt.-110010
Dated 12 September, 2007.
To
The Principal  Director, DE,
Ministry of Defence,
Western/Eastern/Central/Northern/Southern Command,
Chandigarh/Kolkata/Lucknow/Jammu/Pune
Subject: Renewal of expired leases.
Reference DGDE letter of even no. dated 25.06.2007.
2. Instructions were issued vide letter under reference for carrying out a time bound
exercise for the renewal of expired leases. From the data of expired leases received
with reference to the Audit Para under examination by the PAC it would  appear  that
necessary cognisance has not been taken of the above instructions as no  feed back
in the form of monthly reports has been received about the progress  achieved.
3. Guidelines have already been issued to expedite renewal of the leases. While
reiterating  the said guidelines and instructions for renewal of leases, the necessity
for  taking  all necessary and practical  steps for the same is  again emphasised. The
attempt should be to ensure that minor breaches of the lease terms or such lacunae
do not stand  in the way of the renewal of the lease  wherever options have been
exercised according  to the terms of the lease. However, it has to be kept in mind that
liabilities  on the  existing lessees on account of any statutory or administrative orders
being violated would continue to be operative  even after renewal of the lease. These
too, should therefore not be allowed to become an obstacle for renewal. If the
circumstances so require, a specific  mention may be made while according the
sanction for renewal  about continuation  of such liabilities  and that the mutations/
breaches would not  be deemed to have been condoned on account of such sanction
for renewal.
4. The following actions may please be taken and the  personally supervised by
the  PDDEs:—
(i) All leases in Sch. VIII of CLAR 1937 and Sch. VI of CLAR 1925 which
are pending for renewal be taken up immediately for finalisation. For this
purpose the PDDEs may visit the DEOs/Cantonment Boards where large
number of cases are pending to facilitate early completion of the task. In
the case of remaining Cantonment Boards/DEOs, they may be directed
to report to the Directorate with all necessary documents so that the
28

29
exercise can be completed. The above exercise may be completed
within 3 months and a fortnightly report furnished to this Directorate
General, Cantonment-wise and DEO-wise indicating details of leases
which are expired and those in which renewal sanctions have been
accorded and the present stage of implementation of the sanctions. It
may be ensured that the reports are received in the Dte. General within
2 days of each fortnight without fail.
(ii) A similar review of agricultural leases and leases of a commercial type
like Petrol outlets, Cinemas, Banks, etc. should also be carried out and
necessary proposals for further continuance wherever warranted be
forwarded within one month.
(iii) Instructions had been issued that inspection of the Offices of the
Cantonment Boards and the DEOs should be carried out regularly.
Monitoring of renewal of leases is one of the items in the inspection
proforma of each of the offices. Progress achieved in renewal of leases
vis-a-vis the last inspection may be examined and a report in this regard
may be furnished within a week in respect of each office.
(iv) It may also be brought to the notice of all concerned that the performance
of the individual officers, including the supervisory officers at the
Command level, relating to clearance of the pending renewal of leases
cases would be specifically mentioned in the annual confidential reports.
For this purpose, necessary targets may be fixed starting from the current
year.

PAC  MATTER/TIME  BOUND
No. 723/A/2/L/DE/2007
Government of India, Ministry of Defence,
Dte. General of Defence Estates,
Raksha Sampada Bhawan,
Palam Road, Delhi Cantt.-110010
Dated: 15 January 2008.
To
The Principal Director, DE,
Ministry of Defence,
Western Command,
Chandigarh.
Subject : Audit Para 2.1 Selected for Examination by the Public Accounts
Committee (2007-08): Delay in Renewal of Leases.
Reference your Dte. Letter No. 33/LC/Lease/DE/WC, dated 18.12.2007.
2. Based on the information received in respect of your Dte. regarding the Advance
Questionnaire in the subject matter, it transpired that a total of about 360 leases were
pending for renewal pertaining to various offices under jurisdiction of your Command.
From the reports received the letters under reference it is seen that a total of only 09
leases have been renewed in the last 6 months or so.
3. Keeping in view the explicit instructions issued and guidelines provided to
expedite the renewal of leases, this state of affairs is highly regrettable. Since you
were also informed that a time bound programme had to be undertaken to complete
the exercise as per assurance given to the MoD/PAC, the progress achieved is
extremely unsatisfactory.
4. As a further report is now required to be submitted indicating the status of
renewal of the expired leases, following action may be taken forthwith amongst others
in respect of leases renewable at the option of the lessee:
(i) A special drive be conducted immediately for the purpose.
(ii) Specific officers in the Dte. be earmarked for the purpose.
(iii) Schedule be drawn up field office-wise for taking up cases.
(iv) The PDDE should personally monitor the progress.
It should be ensured that the exercise is completed by 31.01.2008 in respect of
all cases under your jurisdiction. A report giving summary of the progress achieved
may be furnished by fax on 01.02.2008. A detailed report DEO/CEO-wise with details
of the cases by submitted later so as to reach this Dte. General by 08.02.2008.
30

31
If any cases are still pending thereafter, details of the same be provided alongwith
reasons for non-renewal and action required to be taken.
5. Please note that failure to comply would be viewed adversely and each officer
would be held personally responsible for any lapses. Also, no delay would be
acceptable on any account.
6. This has DGDE's approval.

PAC  MATTER/TIME  BOUND
No. 723/A/2/L/DE/2007
Government of India, Ministry of Defence,
Dte. General of Defence Estates,
Raksha Sampada Bhawan,
Palam Road, Delhi Cantt.-110 010
Dated: 15 January, 2008
To
The Principal Director, DE,
Ministry of Defence,
Central Command,
Lucknow
Subject: Audit Para 2.1 Selected for Examination by the Public Accounts
Committee (2007-08): Delay in Renewal of Leases.
Reference your Dte. Letter No. 49749/Gen/OS Land dated 04.01.2008.
2. Based on the information received in respect of your Dte. regarding the Advance
Questionnaire in the subject matter, it transpired that a total of about 1800 leases
were pending for renewal pertaining to various office under jurisdiction of your
Command. From the reports received the letters under reference it is seen that a total
of only 24 leases have been renewed in the last 6 months or so.
3. Keeping in view the explicit instructions issued and guidelines provided to
expedite the renewal of leases, this state of affairs is highly regrettable. Since you
were also informed that a time bound programme had to be undertaken to complete
the exercise as per assurance given to the MoD/PAC, the progress achieved is
extremely unsatisfactory.
4. As a further report is now required to be submitted indicating the status of
renewal of the expired leases, following action may be taken forthwith amongst others
in respect of leases renewable at the option of the lessee:
(i) A special drive be conducted immediately for the purpose.
(ii) Specific officers in the Dte. be earmarked for the purpose.
(iii) Schedule be drawn up field office wise for taking up cases.
(iv) The PDDE should personally monitor the progress.
It should be ensured that the exercise is completed by 31.01.2008 in respect of
all cases under your jurisdiction. A report giving summary of the progress achieved
may be furnished by fax on 01.02.2008. A detailed report DEO/CEO wise with details
of the cases be submitted later so as to reach this Dte. General by 08.02.2008. If
any cases are still pending thereafter, details of the same be provided alongwith
reasons for non-renewal and action required to be taken.
32

33
5. Please note that failure to comply would be viewed adversely and each officer
would be held personally responsible for any lapses. Also, no delay would be
acceptable on any account.
6. This has DGDE's approval.

PAC  MATTER/TIME  BOUND
No. 723/A/2/L/DE/2007
Government of India, Ministry of Defence,
Dte. General of Defence Estates
Raksha Sampada Bhawan
Palam Road, Delhi Cantt.-110 010
Dated: 15 January, 2008
To
The Principal Director, DE,
Ministry of Defence,
Southern Command,
Pune.
Subject : Audit Para 2.1 Selected for examination by the Public Accounts
Committee (2007-08): Delay in Renewal of Leases.
Reference this office letter of even no. dt. 05.12.2007.
2. Based on the information submitted in response to the Advance Questionnaire
received in the subject matter it transpired that a total of about 1123 leases were
pending for renewal pertaining to various offices under jurisdiction of your Command.
3. As the matter was under examination by the PAC, explicit instructions were
issued and guidelines provided to expedite the renewal of leases. It was also requested
that reports be submitted periodically about the progress achieved. On account of
non receipt of these reports, vide DGDE letter of even no. dt. 05.12.2007, the same
were required to be submitted by 31.12.2007 alongwith details of leases renewed. We
are yet to receive the same from your Directorate. This state of affairs is highly
regrettable. Moreover, since you were also informed that a time bound programme
had to be undertaken to complete the exercise as per assurance given to the MoD/
PAC, it reflects a very casual approach in such an important matter.
4. As a further report is now required to be submitted indicating the status of
renewal of the expired leases, the following action may be taken forthwith amongst
others in respect of the leases renewable at the option of the lessee:—
(i) A special drive be conducted immediately for the purpose.
(ii) Specific officers in the Dte. be earmarked for the purpose.
(iii) Schedule be drawn up field office wise for taking up cases.
(iv) The PDDE should personally monitor the progress.
(v) Submit a report by return fax about leases already renewed between
01.7.2007 to 31.12.2007.
It should be ensured that the exercise is completed by 31.01.2008 in respect of
all cases under your jurisdiction. A report giving summary of the progress achieved
34

35
may be furnished by fax on 01.02.2008. A detailed report DEO/CEO wise with details
of the cases be submitted later so as to reach this Dte. General by 08.02.2008. If
any cases are still pending thereafter, details of the same be provided alongwith
reasons for non-renewal and action required to be taken.
5. Please note that failure to comply would be viewed adversely and each officer
would be held personally responsible for any lapses. Also no delay would be
acceptable on any account.
6. This has DGDE's approval.

PAC  MATTER/TIME  BOUND
No. 723/A/2/L/DE/2007
Government of India, Ministry of Defence,
Dte. General of Defence Estates
Raksha Sampada Bhawan
Palam Road, Delhi Cantt.-110 010
Dated: 15 January, 2008
To
The Principal Director, DE,
Ministry of Defence,
Eastern Command,
Kolkata.
Subject: Audit Para 2.1 selected for examination by the Public Accounts
Committee (2007-08): Delay in Renewal of Leases.
Reference your Dte. letter No. 361972/LC-4/Vol-VI/16 dated 05.11.2007.
2. Based on the information received in respect of your Dte. regarding the Advance
Questionnaire in the subject matter, it transpired that a total of about 126 leases were
pending for renewal pertaining to various office under jurisdiction of your Command.
From the reports received the letters under reference it is seen that no leases have
been renewed in the last 6 months or so.
3. Keeping in view the explicit instructions issued and guidelines provided to
expedite the renewal of leases, this state of affairs is highly regrettable. Since you
were also informed that a time bound programme had to be undertaken to complete
the exercise as per assurance given to the MoD/PAC, the progress achieved is
extremely unsatisfactory.
4. As a further report is now required to be submitted indicating the status of
renewal of the expired leases, following action may be taken forthwith amongst others
in respect of leases renewable at the option of the lessee:
(i) A special drive be conducted immediately for the purpose.
(ii) Specific officers in the Dte. be earmarked for the purpose.
(iii) Schedule be drawn up field office wise for taking up cases.
(iv) The PDDE should personally monitor the progress.
It should be ensured that the exercise is completed by 31.01.2008 in respect of
all cases under your jurisdiction. A report giving summary of the progress achieved
may be furnished by fax on 01.02.2008. A detailed report DEO/CEO-wise with details
of the cases be submitted later so as to reach this Dte. General by 08.02.2008. If
any cases are still pending thereafter, details of the same be provided alongwith
reasons for non-renewal and action required to be taken.
36

37
5. Please note that failure to comply would be viewed adversely and each officer
would be held personally responsible for any lapses. Also, no delay would be
acceptable on any account.
6. This has DGDE's approval.

ANNEXURE-II
20/A
FAX/SPEED POST/MOST IMMEDIATE/PAC MATTER
No. 723/A/3/L/DE/2007
Government of India, Ministry of Defence,
Dte. General Defence Estates
Raksha Sampada Bhawan
Ulaanbaatar Marg, Delhi Cantt.-10
Dated:   26 November, 2010
To
The  Principal Director/Director, DE,
Ministry of Defence,
Central/Southern/Western/Eastern/Northern/South Western Command,
Lucknow/Pune/Chandigarh/Kolkata/Jammu/Jaipur.
Subject: 1. Regarding Calendar for monitoring of expired Leases:
Renewable and Non-Renewable.
2. Renewal of expired Leases.
3. Audit Para 2.1 selected for examination by the Public Accounts
Committee (2007-08): Delay in Renewal of Leases.
Reference this Dte. General letter No. 723/A/3/L/DE/2007 dated 25.06.2007 and letter
of even number dated 12.09.2007 and 15.01.2008.
2. It may be recalled that the C&AG in its report for the period ending 31.03.2006
had commented adversely on the delay in renewal of leases of defence land.
Instructions were therefore issued vide our letter dated 25.06.2007 referred above as
under:—
(i) to complete renewal of all expired leases within six months ( i.e. upto 12/
2007) were sanction for such renewal was to be accorded by the PDDE/
Cantonment Boards;
(ii) initiation of proposals for renewal of expired leases within three months
(i.e. upto 09/2007) where such renewal was to be accorded by MoD/
DGDE;
(iii) identification of all leases which were to expire in the next six months
(i.e. upto 12/2007) & taking necessary action for their renewal well in
time;
(iv) adoption of a rolling calender; and
(v) initiation of proposals, atleast one year before expiry, in respect of leases
38

39
which do not have a renewal clause, for orders of MoD for either
continuation or determination of lease;
(vi) monitoring the renewal of leases by devising a suitable proforma,
inspection of field officer rendering a monthly report by 10th of each
month, and evaluation of performance of field officers on the basis of
progress made by them for renewal of lease.
3. Further, the Directorates were advised vide our letter dated 12.08.2007 referred
above as under:—
(i) to take up renewal of all leases in Schedule VIII of CLAR 1937 &
Schedule VI of CLAR 1925 within three months;
(ii) to review agricultural leases and leases of commercial nature within one
month;
(iii) inspection of offices of Cantonment Board & DEO's, monitoring the
renewal of leases therein and examination of progress achieved
thereof; and
(iv) fixing of targets relating to clearance of pending cases of renewal of leases
during performance appraisal of all officers.
Based on the progress achieved on the above issues, further instructions were
issued vide our letter dated 18.01.2008 referred above to complete the following
exercise for renewal of leases by 31.01.2008:—
(i) to conduct a special drive;
(ii) to earmark specific officers in the Directorate for the purpose;
(iii) to draw up a schedule for taking up cases field office-wise; and
(iv) that PDDE should personally monitor the progress.
4. The PAC has since presented their 12th Report to the Parliament. Relevant
extracts from the same are enclosed. It may be observed there from that the PAC has
expressed strong dissatisfaction at the delays in renewal of expired leases. It is
therefore necessary, that the PDDE's/DDE may personally monitor the progress of
such cases on the basis of guidelines issued earlier and complete the renewal of all
expired leases which can be renewed by Directorates/Cantt. Boards within two months.
They may also in consultation with Additional DG(Land), depute an officer, well
conversant with the cases alongwith relevant records, to this Dte. General for finalising
cases requiring sanction of the MoD/DGDE.
5. This has the approval of DGDE.
Kindly acknowledge receipt.
Encl.: As above.

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM GOVERNMENT
—Nil—
40

CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Fixing of responsibility is seen as a very important step for correcting the acts of
omissions and commissions. Hence, the Committee would like the Ministry to fix
responsibility on all concerned who were found to be responsible for flaws in
procurement procedures, technical evaluations and rejection of ordered clothing and
equipments. The Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken in this regard
within a period of six months. More importantly, corrective measures should be
initiated forthwith.
[Para 17, Part II of the 12th of the Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Procurement of Special Clothing and Mountaineering equipment were done taking
steps in vogue that time to ensure safety of the troops and meet operational
requirements. Over the years, continuous effort has been made to improve and fast-
track the procurement procedures ensuring transparency in procurement process and
quality of items needed. In any case, items those did not meet the technical
specifications and user's requirements had to be rejected. In view of such rejections
of items in India, policy has been formulated for PDI in supplier's country. It has no
financial implications as all required inspections and tests are undertaken before
dispatch in the seller's country.
Moreover, rejection of items on PDI/JRI throw a light on the robust functioning
of the system put in place for quality assurance and is not necessarily a flaw in the
system. However, the Ministry has been taking appropriate action against any
deviation from the procedures laid down. Besides, several remedial steps for quality
and timely availability of items have been taken by MoD to streamline the procurement
procedure one of which is constituting an Empowered Committee on Special Clothing
and Mountaineering Equipment in 2007. The same has been acknowledged by the
Committee in Para 13 and 15 of part II of its report.
41

CHAPTER V
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that the Director General of Defence Estates (DGDE) is
responsible for management of the defence lands (about 17 lakh acres) both inside
and outside the Cantonments. The vacant or unused land is leased out by the
Ministry of Defence to various public and private users at different locations. An
Audit scrutiny of renewal of leases concerning defence land has revealed glaring
inaction on the part of the Director General of Defence Estates causing delays ranging
from six to thirty six years (as on December 2006) in renewal of leases of Defence
lands occupied inter-alia by Madras United Club at Chennai, Indian Oil Corporation
at Jabalpur, State Bank of India at Avadi, Indian Oil Corporation and Hindustan
Petroleum Corporation Ltd. at Belgaum. This resulted in non-recovery of substantial
amount of rent and premium of several crores of rupees and loss of interest thereon,
the exact value of which was yet to be assessed. In all these four cases, the lease
period had already expired and the lessees have been occupying the defence land
without paying any rent or with valid lease. It is found that after the expiry of the
original lease period, the lessees had requested for extension of the lease period but
due to serious procedural delays and a rather casual approach on the part of the
concerned authorities in initiating processing and finalization/according renewal of
the leases, inordinate delays had occurred in renewal of the leases. In this regard,
the Committee have been informed that the Ministry issued instructions on 25.06.2007,
12.09.2007 and 15.01.2008 for renewal of leases following which leases in respect of
Madras United Club, IOC Jabalpur, IOC Belgaum and HPCL Belgaum, the leases had
been renewed had been renewed upto 31.12.2007, 04.11.2006, 20.06.2011 and 05.12.2010
respectively, while the case pertaining to SBI Avadi is still under renewal process.
No further renewals have been executed in the cases of Madras United Club and
IOC Jabalpur though these entitites continue to occupy the plots of defence land
unauthorisedly. The Committee observes that the much belated execution of lease
renewal cannot be condoned and the inexplicable delays/inaction/lapses on the part
of the concerned officials have to be accounted for.
[Para 18 of the 12th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
DGDE is responsible for management of defence lands which are specifically placed
under the management of Cantonment Boards and Defence Estates Officers and other
user agencies of the Ministry. A-1 defence land is placed under the management of
AHQ. All vacant or unused land is not leased out by the MoD. Only some of such
42

43
land is thus leased out and that too in public interest. Further, renewal of leases is
done in consultation with service HQ and after the approval of Ministry of  Defence.
DGDE is authorised to grant lease only in respect of Petrol Pumps of IOC etc. and
Director DE the Commandants are competent to renew certain leases providing for a
renewal clause. Renewal of leases is a complex procedure involving extensive
consultation among the lessee, Cantonment Boards. DEO's, LMA's, HQ Commands,
Dte. DE Commands, DGDE, Service HQrs. and Ministry of Defence which leads to
delay. Further, there are variety of factors contributing to delay such as the lessee
not making application for renewal, disputes among legal heirs of deceased lessees,
breach of terms of the lease, mutation not being carried out due to defects in transfer
documents, sub-division of sites, etc. These factors cumulatively cause delays. Such
delays cannot be attributed to any individual or organisation in isolation. However,
there is no loss to the State as arrears of rent are recovered upon renewal of lease.
Instructions have been issued by the DGDE vide letter No. 723/A/2/L/DE/2007 dated
25.06.2007, 12.09.2007 & 15.01.2008 (Annexure-1) to streamline the above procedure
and to eliminate such delays wherever possible. The lease in respect of Madras United
Club has expired on 31.12.2007 and rent etc. recovered. It has been decided by the
Ministry in April 2010 not to renew the same further as the land is required by the
Army for married Accommodation Project, Phase-II. The matter regarding fixing of
annual rent for execution of fresh lease/agreement is being negotiated with SBI Avadi
by Heavy V ehicle Factory. Lease in respect of IOC at Jabalpur has ben renewed upto
03.11.2011. Lease of three sites in respect of IOC at Belgaum have been renewed
upto 22.01.2010, 24.10.2010 and 20.06.2011. Lease of two sites in r/o HPCL at Belgaum
has been renewed upto 22.07.2009 and 05.12.2010.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
2 August, 2011 Chairman,
11 Sravana, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

CONFIDENTIAL
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 28TH JUNE, 2011
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 28th June, 2011 from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in
Room No. '53', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
8. Shri Jagdambika Pal
9. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Adhi Sankar
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K.Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
15. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
16. Shri Naresh Gujral
17. Shri Satish Chandra Mishra
18. Smt. Jayanthi Natarajan
19. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
6. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Under Secretary
44

45
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri R.S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit (Central
Expenditure)
2. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence Service)
3. Ms. Geetali Taare — Pr. Director of Audit (Scientific Department)
4. Shri Bhawani Shankar — Pr. Director (Economic Service &
Ministries)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised
that the sitting was convened to consider the draft Reports of the Committee.
Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twelfth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Functioning of A.D.G .E.S. Radar, Procurement of
Special Clothing and Mountaineering Equipment and Delay in Execution/
Renewal of lease’; and
(v) *** *** ***
3. After detailed deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports, one
by one with some modifications/amendments and authorized the Chairman to finalise
and present the same to the Parliament in the light of factual verification done by
Audit.
4 . *** *** ***
5 . *** *** ***
6 . *** *** ***
7 . *** *** ***
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR TWELFTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations — 21
(ii) Observations/Recommendations    of    the — T otal: 18
Committee which have been accepted by the Percentage—85.71%
Government:
Para Nos. 2-16 and 19-21
(iii) Observations/Recommendations   which   the — Total: 0
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of — Percentage—0%
the replies received from the Government:
—Nil—
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of — Total: 2
which replies of Government have not been Percentage—9.52%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para No. 1 and 17
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of — Total: 1
which  Government  have  furnished  interim — Percentage—4.76%
replies:
Para No. 18
GMGIPMRND—1741LS(S-4)—10.01.2012.
46