85
IDLE INVESTMENT ON A NEW LINE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha]
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILWAY BOARD)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
EIGHTY-FIFTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

EIGHTY-FIFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
IDLE INVESTMENT ON A NEW LINE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILW AY BOARD)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/V aisakha, 1935 (Saka)

PAC No. 2012
Price:  ` 20.00
© 2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government
of  India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-2013).................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been  accepted
by the Government ............................................................ 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which  the  Committee  do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from  the
Government........................................................................ 13
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in    respect    of    which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by  the
Committee and which require reiteration ............................ 14
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which  the
Government have furnished interim replies........................ 17
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the  29th  sitting  of    the    Public    Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 29th April, 2013..................... 18
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the  Government  on  the
Observations/Recommendations of  the  Public  Accounts
Committee contained in their Forty-third Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha)......................................................................... 20

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on 28th
October, 2012.
(iii)

SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
4. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
5. Shri Deepankar Kamble — Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2013-13), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Eighty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Forty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Idle Investment on a
New Line’ relating to Ministry of Railways.
2. The Forty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
19th December, 2011. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 22nd February, 2013. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Eighty-fifth Report at their sitting held on
29th April, 2013. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Forty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
29 April, 2013 Chairman,
9 Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Forty-Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Idle Investment on a New Line”
based on the C&AG Report No. 19 of 2008-09 (Performance Audit) Union Government
for the year ended March, 2007 relating to the Ministry of Railways.
2. The Forty-Third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 19th December, 2011. It contained 06 Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been
received from the Ministry of Railways and categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been accepted
by the Government
Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5
Total: 04
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government.
—Nil—
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which requires reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 4 and 6
Total: 02
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
—Nil—
Total: Nil
Chapter-V
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee t had revealed certain
shortcomings/deficiencies on the part of the Ministry of Railways which inter-alia
delay in submission of Action Taken Notes and need for regular review of pendency of
1

2
ATNs for timely disposal; inordinate delay in completion of Railway Projects leading
to time and cost overruns and idling of assets created; etc. The Committee had
accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in their Forty-third Report.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with
action taken by the Government on their Observations/Recommendations which either
need reiteration or merit comments.
I. Delay in Settlement of Pending Audit Paras
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
5. The Committee noted that according to Department of Expenditure, as on 25th
June, 2010, 4191 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were pending with various
Ministries/Departments of Government of India, whereas according to Audit the
pendency was 3462 paragraphs as on 31st May, 2010. The Committee desired that the
discrepancy in the data be reconciled and they be apprised of the same. Further, the
Committee noted that 448 paras were pending with the Ministry of Railways alone. The
Committee urged the Ministry to take all necessary measures so as to submit Action
Taken Notes well within the stipulated time period of four months.
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have responded as under:
“With concerted efforts, we have been able to bring down the above pendency of
448 paras to 246 besides bringing down the number of cases where initial response
to Audit is outstanding to zero. With a view to causing expeditious disposal of
outstanding ATNs regular chasing/monitoring with the executives/railways
concerned is being done. In fact, this item has been included as an agenda item in
the Board Meeting in January 2012 where Board Members concerned have been
apprised of the pendency in their respective domain. Further, during GM’s/
FA&CAOs conferences also, importance of expeditious finalization of ATNs is
regularly impressed upon. In addition,  a Standing Audit Committee has also been
set up to review the pendency of ATNs in line with the directions of Ministry of
Finance. It is expected that with close monitoring more paras will be finalized in the
coming months”.
7. The Committee are pleased to note that in pursuance of their recommendations,
the Ministry has taken suitable measures for bringing down the pending number of
Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes, the most notable being setting up of a
Standing Audit Committee to review the pendency of ATNs and expeditious finalization
of ATNs. While taking note of the fact that due to the concerted efforts of the Ministry
pending Audit paras have been reduced from 448 to 246, and the outstanding cases
where initial response to Audit paras have been made to zero, the committee feel
unhappy that on more than half of the outstanding paras, the Action Taken Notes are
yet to be furnished. The Committee, therefore, recommend that far greater and
sustained efforts need to be made to bring down the backlog of pendencies by taking
suitable corrective measures.

3
II. Lack of Effective Monitoring Mechanism to Ensure Timely Submission
of  ATNs
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
8. During the course of examination of the reasons for delay in submission of
Action Taken Notes, the Committee were assured by the Ministry that it would finalise
by 31st March, 2011 at least 50 per cent of the outstanding Action Taken Notes. The
Committee recommended that the Ministry put in place a more effective Monitoring
System and ensured that the Action Taken Notes are furnished well within the period
of four months and apprise them of the tangible outcome of such efforts.
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:
“As on 31.1.2012, a total of 246 audit paras up to the period 2008-09 are pending
with this Ministry. With a view to causing expeditious disposal of outstanding
ATNs regular chasing/monitoring with the executives/railways concerned is
being done. In fact, this item has been included as an agenda item in the Board
Meeting in January, 2012 where Board Members concerned have been apprised
of the pendency in their respective domain. Further, during GM’s/FA&CAOs
conferences also, importance of expeditious finalization of ATNs is regularly
impressed upon. In addition, a Standing Audit Committee has also been set up
to review the pendency of A TNs in line with the directions of Ministry of Finance.
It is expected that with close monitoring more paras will be finalized in the
coming months.”
10. The Committee deplore that despite the assurance given by the Ministry that
it would finalise at least 50 per cent of the outstanding ATNs, as many as 246 audit
paras amounting to more than 50% of the then pending paras remain unsettled as on
31.01.2012 by the Ministry’s own submission. In view of the imperative need for
expeditious finalization of ATNs, the Committee recommend that a sound and efficacious
mechanism be put in place to address Audit observations.
III. Unsatisfactory Outcome of ATN Adalats and Absence of Timeline for Disposal
of  ATNs
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
11. The Committee noted that for timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the
Audit Paragraphs, a Cell in the Railways is in place. Such a huge pendency of A TNs
with the Railways raised serious questions as to the efficacy and effectiveness of the
Monitoring Cell. The Ministry had also informed that regular follow up was done to
meet the target date fixed in each case. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
procedure, the time line prescribed and the follow up action Taken for timely submission
of ATNs. Further, the Committee were informed by the Ministry that disposal of pending
A TNs was included in the Agenda items in the monthly Board Meetings for four
months since July, 2010. The status of ATNs was again reviewed in January, 2011 by
Board in its meeting. The Committee were constrained to note that status of ATNs had
been reviewed in January, 2011 i.e. after six months since its inclusion in the monthly
Board Meetings in July, 2010. The Committee, therefore, recommended that pendency

4
of ATNs be reviewed regularly to ensure timely disposal of ATNs. The Committee were
happy to note that ATN Adalats/Workshops were also being organized to resolve any
stalemate between the Audit and the Ministry and the first such A TN Adalat/workshop
was held on 31.12.2010. The Committee would, however, like to be informed about the
tangible outcome of these ATN Adalats. The Committee noted that the term A TN Adalat
had not been used in conventional sense but it was essentially that a workshop was
organized occasionally for reconciliation of differences between the Railways and the
Audit over ATNs. The Committee, therefore, cautioned the Ministry to refrain from indulging
in such terminological ambivalence causing confusion. The Committee also noted that the
Ministry had categorized Audit paras namely Category ‘A’ —very old paras upto the year
2000, Category ‘B’ — paras from year 2001 to 2008 and Category ‘C’—comprising cases for
the year 2008-09. Though efforts were being made to clear all pending paras and a special
drive was being launched to clear Category ‘A’ cases, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the timeline for disposal of A TNs put under various categories.
12. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:
“All efforts are being made to finalize the pending audit paras in the minimum
possible time. It may be emphasized that with concerted efforts, we have been
able to, finalize 167 and 179 cases in 2010 and 2011 respectively besides bringing
down the number of cases where initial response to Audit is outstanding to zero.
As already replied in para 2, regular chasing/monitoring with the executives/
railways concerned is being done for expeditious disposal of outstanding ATNs.
In fact, this item has been included as an agenda item in the Board Meeting in
January, 2012 where Board Members concerned have been apprised of the
pendency in their respective domain. Further, during GM’s/FA&CAO’s conferences
also, importance of expeditious finalization of ATNs is regularly impressed upon.
In addition, a Standing Audit Committee has also been set up to review the
pendency of ATNs in line with the directions of Ministry of Finance. It is expected
that with close monitoring more paras will be finalized in the coming months.
Disposal of pending A TNs was reviewed by the CRB in Board Meeting for the
months of July, August, September and October, 2010. It was again reviewed by
the Board in the month of January 2011 i.e. after two months. Thus the review was
made continuously for four months and again reviewed after two months and not
six months as noted by the Committee.
ATN Adalat/workshop— The term ATN Adalat was used as per Cabinet
Secretariat’s O.M. No. 213/2/5/2010-CA.IV dt. 28.06.2010 forwarding the minutes
of COS Meeting held on 17.06.2010. The A TN workshop held on 31.12.2010 by this
Ministry was to discuss certain areas/sphere of work which causes frequent
disagreement between Audit and Ministry. Audit Paras related to these issues are
being dealt accordingly.
Categorization— The Audit paras have been categorized in three categories viz.
A, B and C. The purpose of categorization was to prioritise the pending audit
paras as per their age. The pendency of all paras is being reviewed simultaneously
but the emphasis is more on finalization of older ones. The effect can be gauged
from the fact that since the categorization in August 2011, 70 paras have been

5
finalized in all categories. This also includes 4 very old paras which have been
settled with aggressive chasing not only with Railways but also with Audit.”
13. The Committee deplore the vague and evasive response given by the Ministry
to their recommendations calling for specific tangible outcome of ATN Adalats
purportedly being held for reconciliation of differences between the Railways and the
Audit over ATNs and  also the timeline for disposal of ATNs put under various
categories. Apparently, while no further ATN Adalat/workshop was held after the
first one statedly held on 31.12.2010, the fact of which was already apprised to the
Committee earlier and suitably commented upon, the Ministry’s reply is silent on
any specific timeline drawn up for ATNs put under various categories. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that clear timelines be specified
for clearance of backlog categorized as per the age of the pendency and that effective
and proactive measures be taken for expeditious resolutions of Audit observations.
IV . Cost Overrun in the Construction of New Broad Gauge Line Due to Improper
Planning and Delay in Execution of the  Project
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
14. The Committee had observed that the construction  of new broad gauge line
between Hassan and Bangalore via Shravanabelgola (166 km)  at an estimated cost of
` 412.91 crore was sanctioned by Railway Board in the year 1996-97. The construction
of a rail line between Hassan and Shravanbelgola (41.17 km.) was completed in January
2006 at a cost of  `  140 crore. However,the  Committee noted that the revised cost as
on 31st March, 2010 was `  913 crore and `  455 crore had  already been spent by then.
The cost overrun was  more than hundred percent the sanctioned cost which reflected
the improper planning and unconscionable delay in the execution of the project. The
Committee had urged the Ministry  to make proper and realistic project assessment
and lay down firm procedures for project execution to avoid time and cost overruns.
The Committee had recommended that the reasons for the cost escalation for this
faulty planning and implementation be enquired  and action be taken to fix responsibility
so that it would prevent such recurrences.
15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:
“In any new line project like this one, section can be completed only in patches as
works cannot proceed in all sections simultaneously for various reasons such as
availability of land in patches, constraint in funds availability, Permanent Way
materials availability etc. Taking over all land in advance and arranging all materials
in advance is not advisable as Railway cannot protect all the acquired land and
materials all the time and there is possibility of encroachment & losses. Hence,
execution in new line projects is planned in patches for completion in predecided
phases. Hassan-Shravanabelagoal new line section was opened and operated for
a noble cause under direction of the Government and closure became necessary
as continuing the  operation was not viable due to conditional clearance of the
Commissioner of the Railway Safety. This cannot be treated as idling of assets, as
in any project execution,  some assets will always be idling till the project is fully
completed.

6
Due to delay in handing over of the required land by the Government of Karnataka
and strong objection from land owners of archeologically important Kunigal Stud
Farm to pass the alignment through the farm area, works on only Sharavanabelgola-
Neelamangala section of the project could be taken up. Delay in handing over of the
required land to the Railway resulted in escalation  of the project cost which is beyond
the control of the Railway and was unavoidable.
Further, due to a large number of on-going projects, the average availability of
funds for this project is about Rs. 30 crore each year. With this pattern of allotment of
funds, it may take another 12 years to complete the balance 110 km. stretch of the
project.
The realistic project assessment can be made provided the flow of funds for the
particular project in the  successive years is known in advance. The execution of work
is planned in  commensurate with the funds made available every year and in this case
the fund made available has not been utilized fully.
The cost sharing with Government of Karnataka came into effect from 01.04.2010
only thereafter the land acquisition got expedited due to the keen interest shown by
Government of Karnataka. Position of land acquisition is as below.
Total land required 577.3  Hec. (1426 Acres)
Acquired up to 01.04.10 122 Hec. (301 Acres)
Acquired till date 537.6  Hec. (1328 Acres)
Balance yet to be acquired 39.7  Hec. (98 Acres)
Funds availability has started improving and is expected to be better in coming
years as cost sharing arrangement with Government of Karnataka came into effect
from 01.04.2010."
16. The Committee  observe that there is nothing new about the nature of
constraints and limitations addressed by the Railways. Apparently, the Railways seem
to have drawn little from their experience while conceiving and  executing such
projects as the reply furnished to the Committee is silent on any definite action plan
such as laying of firm procedures for project execution as recommended by them
earlier. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Railways should do necessary
spadework as also proper consultation with the concerned State Governments/
Stakeholders before finalization of projects so as to minimize delays and avoid cost
and time overruns.
V . Inordinate Delay in Completion of New Line Project Resulting in Cost Overrun
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
17. The Committee were constrained to note that there was no  initial target fixed
for completion of the entire Bangalore-Hassan New line project. The Committee were
unable to accept the plea of the Ministry that it was not feasible to fix target date for
completion of all sections simultaneously for various reasons. Obviously, in the absence
of any stipulated target, the project completion was delayed inordinately which resulted

7
in cost overrun. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry henceforth
fix target date(s)  for completion of projects within the stipulated time frame. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the completion of Bangalore-Hassan rail line
within the year 2011.
18. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:
“On this project, work on Chikbanawar-Nelamangala (14 km.) & Hassan-
Shravanabelagola (42 km.) has already been completed and the balance portion is
planned for completion as per following details:
  Sl. Section Length (km.) Y ear (Target)
No.
1. Shravanabelagola-Hirisave 16 Km. 2012-13
2. Hirisave-B.G . Nagar 17 Km.
B.G . Nagar-Yediyur 15 Km. 2013-14
Nelamangala-Solur 18 Km.
3. Solur-Tippasandra 14 Km..
Tippasandra-Kunigal 14 Km. 2014-15
Kunigal-Yediyur 16 Km.
Total 110 Km.
The above mile stones are subject to availability of Land and adequate funds of
Rs. 150 Cr. per year from Government of Karnataka & Railways.”
19. While appreciating the fact that the Ministry has now provided target dates
to complete the long drawn pending project, the Committee are concerned that the
issue of availability of land and funds should not be a cause of further delay. The
Committee, therefore, desire that vigorous efforts should be made to adhere to time-
lines. The Ministry should pursue the matter with the State Government on war
footing so that there should not be any financial crunch. Side by side acquisition of
land should have top priority. The Committee desire to be furnished with the current
status of the project including whether the targeted achievement of the
‘Sharavanabelagola-Hirisave Section’ has been completed or not.
VI.  Idling of Assets on a Rail Line due to Lack of Maintenance Staff
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
20. The Committee found that the  Hassan-Sharavanabelagola rail  line was opened
for passenger traffic on 7 February, 2006 and subsequently closed from 12 July, 2006 as
one of the conditions stipulated by the Commissioner of Railway Safety (CRS) was not
complied with, The Committee found that the CRS had authorized opening of the line
to passenger traffic with conditions that regular open line staff may be posted to
operate and maintain the  line within one month from the date of opening. However, the
Ministry did not post regular  maintenance staff and this resulted in closure of the line.
}
}

8
The Committee was assured by Ministry that vacancies would be filled up and adequate
staff posted on this line. The Committee, therefore, desired to  be apprised of the action
taken to implement the assurance given to them. Further, the Committee may be apprised
of the necessary measures taken to ensure that the assets created do not remain idle.
21. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:
“Commissioner of Railway Safety/Southern Circle/Bangalore again inspected the
section during August, 2011 for reopening of Hassan-Sharavanabelagola section
(42 km.). Commissioner of Railway Safety authorized Railway for running of train
services in September, 2011.  Accordingly, it has been  decided fore-opening of the
section on one train only system and necessary arrangements are being made to
introduce train services in the section after posting of maintenance staff.”
22. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation, a decision
has been taken for authorizing re-opening of a station of the Railway line in September,
2011 after posting of maintenance  staff. The Committee deplore the Ministry’s
callous attitude of closure of a railway line due to non-compliance  of safety condition
and ill staffed maintenance work force wasting precious resources, and reiterate
that proper assessment must be made to avoid time and cost over-run in  project
executions.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 1)
The Committee note that according to Department of Expenditure as on 25th
June, 2010, 4191 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were pending with various
Ministries/Departments of Government of India whereas according to Audit, the
pendency was 3462 paragraphs as on 31st May, 2010. The Committee desire that the
discrepancy in the data be reconciled and they be apprised of the same. Further, the
Committee noted that 448 paras were pending with the Ministry of Railways alone. The
committee urge the Ministry to  take all necessary measures so as to submit Action
Taken Notes well within the stipulated time period of four months.
[Sl. No. 1; Appendix-II; Para No. 1 of 43rd  Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
With concerted efforts, we have been able to bring down the above pendency of
448 paras to 246 besides bringing down the number of cases where initial response to
Audit is outstanding to zero. With a view to causing expeditious disposal of outstanding
A TNs regular chasing/monitoring with the executives/railways concerned is being
done. In fact, this item has been included as an agenda item in the Board Meeting in
January 2012 where Board Members concerned have been apprised of the pendency
in their respective domain. Further, during GM’s/FA&CAOs conferences also,
importance of expeditious finalization of ATNs is regularly impressed upon. In addition,
a Standing Audit Committee has also been set up to review the pendency of A TNs in
line with the directions of Ministry of Finance. It is expected that with close monitoring
more paras will be finalized in the coming months.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 329-Rly/Co.-ord/17-78/2010 dated 22.03.2012 have vetted
the ATN.
Ministry of  Railways’ case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/43 dated 30.03.2012.
Comments  of the Committee
Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 2)
During the course of examination of the reasons for delay in submission of Action
Taken Notes, the Committee were assured by  the Ministry that it would finalise by
31st March, 2011 at least 50 per cent of the outstanding Action Taken Notes. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry put in place a more effective Monitoring
System and ensure that the Action Taken Notes are furnished will within the period of
four months and apprise them of the tangible  outcome of such efforts.
[Sl. No. 2; Appendix-II; Para No. 2 of 43rd  Report of Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
9

10
Action Taken by the Government
As on 31.1.2012, a total of 246 audit paras up to the period 2008-09 are pending
with this  Ministry. With a view to causing expeditious disposal of outstanding A TNs
regular chasing/monitoring with the executives/railways concerned is being done. In
fact, this item has been included as an agenda item in the Board Meeting in January
2012 where Board Members concerned have been apprised of the pendency in their
respective domain. Further, during GM’s/FA&CAO’s conferences also, importance of
expeditious finalization of ATNs is regularly impressed upon. In addition, a Standing
Audit committee has been set up to review the pendency of ATNs in line with the
directions of Ministry of Finance. It is expected that with close monitoring more paras
will be finalized in the coming months.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 329-Rly/Co.-ord/17-78/2010 dated 22.03.2012 have vetted
the ATN.
Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/43 dated 30.03.2012.
Comments  of the Committee
Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that for timely submission of Action Taken Notes on  the Audit
Paragraphs, a Cell in the Railways is in place. Such a huge pendency of A TNs with the
Railways raises serious questions as to the efficacy and effectiveness of the Monitoring
Cell. The Ministry has also informed that regular follow up is done to meet the target date
fixed in each case. The Committee would like to be apprised of the procedure, the time line
prescribed and the follow up action being taken for timely submission of ATNs. Further, the
Committee were informed by the Ministry that disposal of pending A TNs was included in
the Agenda items in the monthly Board Meetings for four months since July 2010. The
status of ATNs was again reviewed in January 2011 by Board in its meeting, The Committee
are constrained to notethat  status of A TNs has been reviewed in January, 2011 i.e. after six
months since its inclusion in the monthly Board Meetings in July, 2010. The Committee
therefore recommend that pendency of ATNs be reviewed regularly to ensure timely disposal
of A TNs. The Committee are happy to note that A TN  Adalats/Workshops are also being
organized to resolve any settlement between the Audit and the Ministry and first such
A TN Adalat/workshop was held on 31.12.2010. The Committee would, however, like to be
informed about the tangible outcome of these ATN Adalats. Here the  Committee note that
the term ATN Adalat has not been used in conventional sense but it is essentially a
workshop organized occasionally for reconciliation of  differences between the Railways
and the Audit over A TNs. The Committee  would therefore like to caution the Ministry to
refrain from indulging in such terminological ambivalence causing confusion. The Committee
also note the Ministry’s categorization of Audit paras namely Category ‘A’—very old
paras upto the year 2000, Category ‘B’—paras from year 2001 to 2008 and Category ‘C’ —
comprising cases for the year 2008-09. Though efforts are being made to clear all pending
paras and a Special drive is being launched to clear Category ‘A’ cases, the Committee
would like to be apprised of the time line for disposal of A TNs put under various categories.
[Sl. No. 2; Appendix-II; Para No. 2 of 43rd  Report of Public  Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

11
Action Taken by the Government
All efforts are being made to finalize the pending audit paras in the minimum
possible time. It may be emphasized that with concerted efforts, we have been able to,
finalize 167 and 179 cases in 2010 and 2011 respectively besides bringing down the
number of cases where initial response to Audit is outstanding to zero. As already
replied in para 2, regular chasing/monitoring with the executives/railways concerned is
being done for expeditious disposal of outstanding A TNs. In fact, this item has been
included as an agenda item in the Board Meeting in January, 2012 where Board  Members
concerned have been apprised of the pendency in their respective domain. Further,
during GM’s/FA and CAO’s conferences also, importance of expeditious  finalization
of ATNs is regularly impressed upon. In addition, a Standing Audit Committee has also
been set up to review the pendency of A TNs in line with the directions of Ministry of
Finance. It is expected that with close monitoring more paras will be finalized in the
coming months.
Disposal of pending ATNs was reviewed by the CRB in Board Meeting for the
months of July, August, September and October, 2010. It was again reviewed by the
Board in the month of January, 2011 i.e. after two months. Thus the review was made
continuously for four months and again reviewed after two months and not six months
as noted by the Committee.
ATNs Adalat/workshop —The term ATN Adalat was used as per Cabinet
Secretariat’s O.M. No. 213/2/5/2010-CA/IV dt. 28.06.2010 forwarding the minutes of
COS Meeting held on 17.06.2010. The A TN workshop held on 31.12.2010 by this Ministry
was to discuss certain areas/Sphere of work which causes frequent disagreement
between Audit and Ministry. Audit Paras related to these issues are being dealt
accordingly.
Categorization—The audit paras have been categorized in three categories viz.
A, B and C. The purpose of categorization was to priorities the pending audit paras as
per their age. The pendency of all paras is being reviewed simultaneously but the
emphasis is more on finalization of older ones. The effect can be gauged from the fact
that since the categorization in August 2011, 70 paras have been finalized in all categories.
This also includes 4 very all paras which have been settled with aggressive chasing
not only with Railways but also with Audit.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 329-Rly/Co.-ord/17-78/2010 dated 22.03.2012 have vetted
the ATN.
Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2011-BC-PAC/XV/43 dated 30.03.2012.
Comments  of the Committee
Please see Para No.13 of Chapter I
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 5)
The Committee are constrained to note that there was no initial target fixed for
completion of the entire Bangalore-Hassan new line project. The Committee are unable
to accept the plea of the Ministry that it was not feasible to fix target date for completion
of all sections simultaneously for various reasons. Obviously, in the absence of any

12
stipulated target, the project completion was delayed inordinately which resulted in cost
overrun. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry henceforth fix target
date(s) for completion of projects within the stipulated time frame. The committee would
like to be apprised of the completion of Bangalore-Hassan rail line within the year 2011.
[Part-II, Part No. 5 of 43rd Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
On this project, work on Chikbanawar-Nelamangala (14 km.) & Hassan-
Shravanbelagola (42 km.) has already been completed and the balance portion is planned
for completion as per following details:
Sl. Section Length ( km.) Year (Target)
No.
1. Shravanbelagola-Hirisave 16 Km.— 2012-13
2. Hirisave-B.G . Nagar 17 Km.—
B.G . Nagar-Yediyur 15 Km. — 2013-14
Nelamangala-Solur 18 Km.
3. Solur-Tippasandra 14 Km.
Tippasandra-Kunigal 14 Km. 2014-15
Kunigal-Yediyur 16 Km.
Total 110 Km.
The above mile stones are subjected to availability of Land and adequate funds
of  Rs. 150 cr. per year from Government of Karnataka & Railways.
Audit vide their U.O. I. No. 25-Rly/SWR/12-195/2008 dated 20.02.2013 have vetted
the ATN with following observations:
“Ministry has not indicated  any definite action plan as recommended by PAC for
making proper assessment for avoidance of time and cost over-run in project
execution and only tentative targets have been fixed for the completion of work in
phases that are subject to availability of land and adequate funds.”
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2011-BC-PAC-XV/43 dated 22.22.2013.
}
Comments  of the Committee
Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I
}

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
—Nil—
13

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that the construction of new broad gauge line between
Hassan and Bangalore via Shravanabelgola (166 Km.) at an estimated cost of
Rs. 412.91 crore was sanctioned by Railway Board in the year 1996-97. The construction
of a rail line between Hassan and Shravanabelgola (41.17 km.) was completed in January
2006 at a cost of Rs. 140 crore. However, the Committee  note that the revised cost as
on 31st March, 2010 was Rs. 913 crore and Rs. 455 crore had already been spent by
then. The cost overrun is more than cent percent the sanctioned cost which reflects
improper planning and unconscionable delay in the execution of the project. The
Committee urge the Ministry to make proper  and realistic project assessment and lay
down firm procedures for project execution to avoid time and cost overruns. The
Committee would strongly recommend that the reasons for this cost escalation for this
faulty planning and implementation be enquired and action be taken to fix responsibility
so that it would prevent such recurrences.
[Part-II, Para No. 4 of 43rd  Report of the Public Accounts Committee
 (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
In any new line project like this one, section can be completed only in patches as
works cannot proceed in all sections simultaneously for various reasons such as
availability of land in patches, constraint in funds availability, Permanent Way materials
availability etc. Taking over all land in advance and arranging all materials in advance
is not advisiable as Railway cannot protect all the acquired land and materials all the
time and there is possibility of encroachment & losses. Hence, execution in new line
projects is planned in patches for completion in predecided phases. Hassan-
Shravanbelagola new line section was opened and operated for a noble cause under
direction of the Government and closure became necessary as continuing the operation
was not viable due to conditional clearance of the  Commissioner of the Railway
Safety. This cannot be treated as idling of assets, as in any project execution, some
assets will always be idling till the project is fully completed.
Due to delay handing over of the required land by the Government of Karnataka
and strong objection from land owners of archeologically important Kunigal Stud
Farm to pass the alignment through the farm area, works on only Shravanbelagola-
Neelamangala section of the project could be taken up. Delay in handing over of the
required land to the Railway resulted in escalation of the project cost which is beyond
the control of the Railway and was unavoidable.
14

15
Further, due to a large number of on-going projects, the average availability of
funds for this project is about Rs. 30 crore each year. With this pattern of allotment of
funds, it may take another 12 years to complete the balance 110 km. stretch of the
project.
The realistic project assessment can be made provided the flow of funds for the
particular project in the successive years is known in advance. The execution of work
is planned in commensurate with the funds made available every year and in this case
the fund made available has not been utilized fully.
The cost sharing with Government of Karnataka came into effect form 01.04.2010
only thereafter the land acquition got expedited due to the keen interest shown by
Government of Karnataka. Position of land acquisition is as below:
Total land required 577.3 Hec. (1426 Acres)
Acquired up to 01.04.10 122 Hec. (301 Acres)
Acquired till date 537.6 Hec. (1328 Acres)
Balance yet to be acquired 39.7 Hec. (98 Acres)
Funds availability has started improving and is expected to be better in coming
years as cost sharing arrangement with Government of Karnataka came into effect
from 01.04.2010.
Audit vide their U.O. I. No. 25-Rly/SWR/12-195/2008 dated 20.02.2013 have vetted
the ATN with following observations:
“Ministry has not indicated any definite action plan as recommended by PAC for
making proper assessment for avoidance of time and cost over-run in project execution
and only tentative targets have been fixed for the completion of work in phases that are
subject to availability of land and adequate funds.”
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2011-BC-PAC-XV/43 dated 22.02.2013.
Comments  of the Committee
Please see Para No.16 of Chapter I
Observations/Recommendations (Para No. 6)
The Committee find that the Hassan-Sharavanbelagola rail line was opened for
passenger traffic on 7 February, 2006 and subsequently closed from 12 July, 2006 as
one of the conditions stipulated by the Commissioner of Railway Safety (CRS) was not
complied with. The Committee find that the CRS had authorized opening of the line to
passenger traffic with conditions that regular open line staff may be posted to operate
and maintain the line within one month from the date of opening. However, the Ministry
did not post regular maintenance staff and this  resulted in closure of the line. Whereas
the Committee was assured by Ministry  that vacancies would be filled up and adequate
staff posted on this line. The Committee, therefore desire to be apprised of the action
taken to implement the assurance given to them. Further, the Committee may be apprised
of the necessary measures taken to ensure that the assets created do not remain idle.
[Part-II, Para No. 6 of 43rd Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

16
Action Taken by the Government
Commissioner of Railway Safety/Sourthern Circle/Bangalore again inspected the
section during August, 2011 for reopening of Hassan-Sharavanbelagola section
(42 km). Commissioner of Railway Safety authorized Railway for running of train services
in September, 2011. Accordingly, it has been decided for re-opening of the section on
one train only system and necessary arrangements are being made to introduce train
services in the section after posting of maintenance staff.
Audit vide their U.O.I. No. 25-Rly/ SWR/12-195/2008 dated 20.02.2013 have vetted
the ATN with following observations :
“Ministry has not indicated any definite action plan as recommended by PAC for
making proper assessment for avoidance of time and cost over-run in project
execution and only tentative targets have been fixed for the completion of work in
phases that are subject to availability of land and adequate funds.”
Ministry of Railway’s case No. 2011-BC-PAC-XV/43 dated 22.02.2013.
Comments  of the Committee
Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—Nil—
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
29 April, 2013 Chairman,
9 Vaisakha,  1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
17

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-NINTH SITTING OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 29TH APRIL, 2013
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th April, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in
Room No. ‘51’, (Chairman’s Chamber) Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
9. Shri J.D. Seelam
10. Shri N. K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh —   Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar —   Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty —   Deputry Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi —   Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam   —   Under Secretary
6. Shri A. K. Yadav —   Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja —   Under Secretary
18

19
Representatives  of  the  Office  of  the  Comptroller  and
 Auditor  General of  India
1. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General
2. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Dirctor
3. Ms. Athoorva Sinha — Director
4. Shri Likhariya — Director
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India  to the last sitting of the Committee (2012-13). Giving
an overview of the performance of the Committee in the year 2012-13 as well as in the
15th Lok Sabha, the Chairman observed that the years have been very productive due
to the hard work of the C&AG and his team, the PAC Secretariat led by the Joint
Secretary and above all the cooperation and active participation of the Members in the
deliberations. The Committee unanimously endorsed the view of the Chairman.
3. The Chairman, then apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider
the following Draft Reports of the Committee:
(i)  *** ***  ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii)    *** *** ***
(iv)   *** *** ***
(v)     *** *** ***
(vi) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Forty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Idle Investment
on a New Line’; and
(vii) *** *** ***
4. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman  solicited the views/ suggestions
of the Members.
5. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports in the
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to Parliament
on a convenient date.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Draft Reports. The Members also conveyed their
thanks to the Chair for his able leadership in conducting the meetings of the Committee
in a probing and educative manner.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX  II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS  OF THE  ACTION  TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-THIRD REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 06
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee T otal: 04
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 80%
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Total : 0
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: 0
the reply of the Government
-Nil-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of T otal: 02
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 20%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 4 and 6
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: 0
which the Government have furnished interim replies: Percentage: 0
-Nil-
20
GMGIPMRND—802LS—31-05-2013.