99
ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL REMOTE
SENSING CENTRE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Sixtieth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2013-2014
NINETY-NINTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

NINETY-NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-2014)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL REMOTE
SENSING CENTRE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Sixtieth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2014
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2014
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka)

P.A.C.  No. 2026
Price:  `     66.00
© 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi 110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON (2013-14)  . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ( V)
CHAPTER I Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
the Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration.  . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies  . . . . . . . . . . 56
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2013-14) held on 30th January, 2014  . . . . . . 57
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi   —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
  3. Dr. Baliram
  4. Shri Ramen Deka
  5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
  6. Dr. M. Thambidurai
  7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
  8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
  9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
 10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
 12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
 13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
 17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
†18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
  19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
‡20. Dr. V. Maitreyan
 21. Shri N.K. Singh
 22. Smt.  Ambika Soni
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh —  Joint Secretary
2. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 14th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija Vyas  appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his
retirement as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
‡ Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M.  Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister
of State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2013-14), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Ninety-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Sixtieth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Activities of National Remote
Sensing Centre' relating to the Department of Space.
2. The Sixtieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
30th August, 2012. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 20th February, 2013. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Ninety-ninth Report at their sitting held on
30th January, 2014. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-II.
DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
N
EW DELHI ; Chairman,
31 January, 2014 Public Accounts Committee.
11 Magha, 1935 (Saka)
(v)

1
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Activities of National Remote Sensing
Centre' based on C&AG Report No. 21 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit), Union
Government (Scientific Departments) for the year ended March 2009, relating to the
Department of Space.
2. The Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2012, contained 25 Observations and
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Department of Space and are broadly
categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1-4, 6-9, 11, 13-18, 20-25
Total: 21
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para Nos. 5, 10 and 19
Total: 3
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para No. 12
Total: 1
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
Total: Nil
Chapter-V
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed many
significant deficiencies and fundamental weaknesses that resulted in underutilization

2
of remote sensing satellites and their applications which had not only stalled timely
achievements of important national development goals with vital social objectives like
food security, conversion of wastelands into usable land, water security through
drinking water missions, environment security through disaster management support
programmes, etc. but also impinged upon the nation's endeavour to be the frontrunner
in remote sensing technologies, a very promising tool in the struggle for sustainable
development. Keeping in view that the applications of remote sensing technology in
particular have emerged as cost effective means for efficient management of national
resources in the fields of agriculture, water resources, urban development and disaster
management, the Committee had examined in detail the activities of the National Remote
Sensing Centre, a unit of Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) under the
Department of Space (DoS) and had found glaring lapses which inter-alia included
underutilization of remote sensing satellites, poor revenue generation through sale of
data products; under performance of aerial remote sensing aircraft; deficiencies in
planning and implementation of remote sensing application projects undertaken by
NRSC thereby affecting timely realization of expected benefits, shortfall in the enrolment
in training courses in remote sensing and poor financial management. The Committee
had accordingly given their Observations and Recommendations in their Sixtieth Report.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Department of Space in respect of all
Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have been reproduced in the
relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations and Recommendations made in the Original
Report which either need reiteration or merit comments.
I. Careful planning of design capacity of satellites emphasized for accurate
assessment of their performance
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
5. While scrutinizing the subject in detail, the Committee had noted that three
(IRS-P3, IC and P4) out of seven remote sensing satellites could utilize only 32, 45 and
50 per cent of their maximum capacity, which in the absence of their designed capacity,
were assessed by Audit on the basis of comparison of actual number of scenes acquired
by these satellites. The Committee had found that the satellites could not be put to use
to their maximum capacity due to technical problems in the spacecrafts and the impact
of lower capacity utilization on remote sensing application projects of national
importance was not assessed by NRSC. In response, the Department of Space (DoS)
had justified that all the three satellites in question had performed beyond their designed
life of 3-5 years and the overall performance of the satellite exceeded the designed
capacity of the mission. The DoS had further claimed that there had not been any
deficit in terms of meting data requirements and remote sensing application projects
did not suffer during the operational period of the satellites. Finding this reply deficient
as it did not address the core issue of assessment of the performance of the satellites
based on its designed capacity and the actual number of scenes captured, the Committee
had recommended that important parameters such as the design capacity of satellites
should be carefully worked out and planned so as to enable an accurate and scientific
assessment of performance of satellites based on their actual capacity to capture

3
scenes. The Committee had also desired that emphasis of the Department of Space
should be on maximum and effective data acquisition by the satellites rather than
utilizing the satellites beyond their designed life as the lower capacity utilization of
these satellites adversely impacted remote sensing application projects of national
importance.
6. In its Action Taken Note, the Department of Space stated as under:—
"Design capacity of the satellite to capture scenes cannot be directly derived
as there are many factors for considerations and these vary from one satellite
mission to another and may be noted that this may not be unique for all earth-
observation satellites. However, an estimated figure can be arrived at based
on certain criteria/assumptions.
The design capacity depends on parameters, such as, spacecraft altitude,
swath or ground coverage, stereability, revisit cycle, imaging payloads, use
of onboard recorder and so on:
/circle6Number of passes/coverage over India is to be primarily considered while
estimating the design capacity, noting that spare capacity could further be
used for international coverage;
/circle6The presence/absence of International Ground Station (IGS) is another
variable that will decide on the utilisation of the spare capacity for imaging.
In addition, the user request for coverage outside Indian visibility circle
decides the usage of onboard recorder/Solid State Recorder (SSR), if
available on the satellite. The capacity of the SSR is also a limiting factor
for such modes of data acquisition;
/circle6For land-based studies, the ocean coverage may not be taken into account,
particularly and the IRS 1C. However, IRS P4, due to its large swath and
choice of multi-spectral bands, could be considered for all acquisitions;
/circle6All images captured (inclusive of cloud infested scenes) are considered as
part of capacity of satellite to acquire images. However, cloud infested
images will not be usable/sellable as part of user-services; and
/circle6About 10% of imaging and data acquisition may not be possible due to
sensor calibration-validation exercises, exercises, in-orbit maintenance, orbit
manoeuvres (once in 3 weeks) and other contingencies.
A senior level Inter-centre Committee will arrive at the formulation of
guidelines for estimation of design capacity of Earth Observation Satellites
for all future satellite missions, based on some of the above mentioned
criteria/assumptions."
7. The Committee note the constraints expressed by the DoS in arriving at an
accurate estimation of the design capacity of Satellites to capture scenes as many
factors have to be taken into consideration which may not be unique for all Earth
Observation Satellites. The Committee however note that pursuant to their
recommendation, a senior level Inter-Centre Committee will arrive at the formulation

4
of guidelines for estimation of design capacity of Earth Observation Satellites for all
future satellite missions, based on certain criteria/assumptions viz. spacecraft
altitude, swath or ground coverage, stereability, revisit cycle, imaging payloads, use
of onboard recorder, etc. The Committee would like to be apprised of the time-frame
within which the Inter-Centre Committee would be able to formulate the guidelines.
II. Inadequate thematic data need assessment for realistic planning of payloads of
Satellites
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
8. In their Report, the Committee noted that a realistic thematic data need assessment
in various remote sensing applications was required to enable the planning of the
payloads of operational remote sensing satellites prior to their launch so that the data
acquisition capacity of the satellites were in tune with the expected needs. The
Committee were, however, dismayed at the Audit revelation that satellites were planned
without adequate thematic data need assessment and therefore, the extent of data gap
against the data need could not be assessed and observed that the Departmnent's
reply, by their own admission underlines the imperatives of data need assessment for
planning the payloads of satellites. Though the Committee appreciated the Department's
efforts to collect information on the intended use for data products disseminated by
NRSC and development of a CRM module under IMGEOS project, which was expected
to be put in operation in 2012, and hoped that the module was made operational within
the stipulated time and monitored at the highest level at attain the objectives, they also
desired that collection of information by Customer Relations Management (CRM)
module may be institutionalized to contain clear outcomes to ensure a realistic
assessment of data needs to enable a scientific correlation in the planning and
operationaslisation of remote sensing satellites.
9. The DoS in its Action Taken Note has stated as under:—
"As per Committee's recommendation, NRSC will institutionalise the Customer
Relations Management (CRM) activity as soon as the software application
module is ready (which is currently under development and the beta version is
likely to be ready by March 2013).
NRSC is continuously assessing the data needs of the users through various
mechanisms, such as, feedback surveys, feedback during annual user
interaction meet, CRM inputs (planned) and also through regular meetings of
the thematic NNRMS Standing Committees and PC-NNRMS.
The feedback mechanism comes through Planning Committee of National
Natural Resources Management System (PC-NNRMS) which is an inter-
ministerial standing committee, chaired by Member (Science), Planning
Commission with Secretaries of various ministries as members for effective
utilisation of space based remote sensing data."
10. The Committee note that the NRSC was to institutionalize the Customer
Relations Management (CRM) activity purportedly by March, 2013. The Committee
regret to observe time overruns in the development of the CRM module under IMGEOS

5
Project which was earlier expected to be in operation by 2012. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate that appropriate mechanism be put in place for conduct of an
exhaustive and realistic data need assessment to enable a scientific correlation in the
planning and operationalisation of individual remote sensing satellites. The Committee
further desire that development of the CRM module be expedited and the Committee
apprised.
III. Technological upgradation for enhancement of quality and credibility of
IRS data
(Recommendation Para No. 12)
11. In their Sixtieth Report, the Committee had noted that the international market
rate of high resolution satellite data was about six times more than the price of
comparable IRS products. In response thereto, DoS stated that IRS data available were
not comparable with foreign satellite data with respect to pectral and spatial resoltuion
and hence their prices were not comparable. The Committee had observed that the
Department's reply itself indicated an urgent need for further enhancement in the
quality of IRS data in order to reach cutting edge compatibility in the international
market and had exhorted DoS to put in place suitable mechanisms in consultation and
collaboration with renowned scientists and technocrats leading to constant
technological upgradation, elimination of  bottlenecks and enhancement of quality
and credibility of IRS data.
12. The Department of Space, vide its Action Taken Note has stated as under:—
"For International users, the rates of Indian Satellite data are on par with
international rates. However, for Indian users these images are provided at a
subsidised price for the purposer of public good and national development,
particularly after NRSC has become a Government agency since
November 2008.
The quality of data being provided by the IRS series of satellites is on par with
any other satellites. The diversified spectral, spatial, radiometric and temporal
resolutions provided by IRS satellites address all aspects of resource mapping
and monitoring at various scales. Due to such diversified options available
from IRS platforms, varieties of projects at National, Regional, State and local
level are successfully implemented by various ministries and other user groups.
The NNRMS system has got richly benefitted from such unique possibilities
provided by these satellite platforms.
IRS Satellites are state-of-the-art in terms of technology and their capabilities
to provide best quality data to the user community. There are different classes
of IRS satellites providing services, ranging from coarse, medium and high
spatial resolution imaging, that address specific user requirements.
The high resolution class of imaging for cartography is addressed by
CARTOSAT series of satellites. Amongst such class of satellites CARTOSAT-2
has capability to provide images at less than 1m spatial resolution.

6
Technology-wise the capabilities demonstrated by IRS series of satellites have
been one of the best in the world. For instance, the CARTOSAT-1, with its
stereo viewing and high resolution mapping capabilities has enabled
3 dimensional mapping of the country and the globe (through many
international ground stations across the globe); OCEANSAT-2, with its
capabilities of ocean colour monitoring and Ku band pencibeam scatterometer
data, is a unique satellite system in the world providing global data services.
In addition to this, with the successful launch of MEGHATROPIQUES, a
unique Indo-French joint setellite mission is a contribution to the Global
Precipitation Mission which is yet another important achievement. Further,
ISRO/DoS has recently launched yet another unique satellite, RISAT-1, the
RADAR imaging Satellite with Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) based imaging
capabilities. This has registered India amongst few countries, with microwave
remote sensing capabilities RISAT-1 is one of the most complex satellite
missions and also the heaviest remote sensing satellite launched by PSLV
C19.
During the 12th FYP, the missions that are being planned, use state-of-the-art
technology, such as, very high resolution CARTOSATs with resolution of the
order 0.65m and 0.25m, improved OCEANSAT with spatial multispectral bands
for Sea Surface Temperature, Scatterometer, Geo Imaging satellite-GISAT
(enables frequent/near-real time imaging from geosynchronous platform), ideally
suited for disaster management and frequent monitoring of events on the earth
surface, INSAT-3D, the improved weather and meteorlogical observation of
next generation with Imagers and Sounders.
Hence, the Indian Remote Sensing missions are comparable with international
class of satellites and the same is pursued even during the 12th FYP with state-
of-the-art technology for supporting varieties of developmental activities in
the country. The data from these satellites, not only serves as public good but
also has potential for commercial exploitation for value added products and
services. In addition, this will also address the purpose of monitoring disasters,
weather forecasting, climate change and resource monitoring and planning."
13. The Committee are perturbed to note an apparent contradiction in the replies
furnished by the DoS pertaining to the Committee's observation of prices of
comparable IRS products of high resolution satellite data, being much lower than
the international market rate. While the Department of space had earlier submitted
that IRS data available were not comparable with foreign satellite data with respect
to spectral resolution resulting in price differential, it has now stated that the quality
of data being provided by the IRS series of satellites is no par with any other satellite
and the data from these satellites, not only serves as public good but also has potential
for commercial exploitation for value added products and services. The Committee
desire that the ambiguities in the responses made by the DoS in this context be
clarified. The Committee are dismayed to observe that the reply of the DoS is silent
on the aspect of the recommendation pertaining to setting up of systemic mechanism
in consultation and collaboration of renowned scientists and technocrats for constant
technological upgradation and enhancement of quality and credibility of IRS data.

7
While reiterating their recommendation, the Committee also demand a firm
commitment from the DoS on this aspect as well.
IV . Exploration of possibilities to induct and retain pilots
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
14. The Committee, in their Sixtieth Report, had noted the delay in completion of
aerial projects and underperformance of aerial remote sensing aircraft due to non-
availability of pilots and technical snags. Further, 12 aerial projects constituting
33 percent of those scrutinized by Audit, costing ` 45.85 crore, were delayed from 8 to
54 months. The Secretary, DoS, during evidence, attributed the non-availability of
pilots to greener pastures available in the aviation market. The Committee were informed
that an institutional arrangement has been established with the Indian Air Force (IAF)
for obtaining pilot on deputation and efforts were being made to increase the deputation
period so as to have higher stability in operations. In this regard, the Committee had
recommended that besides such institutional arrangements, other avenues for induction
and retention of pilots by devising attractive wage structure and other incentive
packages should be explored so as to obviate scope for delays in projects and
underperformance of aircraft due to want of pilots. The Committee also desired that
DoS explore the possibility of having a tie-up with various prestigious academies and
institutes in the country by obtaining their services and finally absorb these skilled
pilots.
15. The Department of Space vide its Action Taken Note has submitted that a
Committee constituted by Director, NRSC is working on the salary/incentive scheme
for pilots and aircrew and will also give recommendations on hiring on pilots.
16. Apprehensive of the actue shortage of pilots adversely affecting smooth
functioning of aerial remote sensing projects, the Committee had recommended
certain tangible measures to be explored by the Department of Space. In this regard,
the Department has now merely informed that a Committee constituted by Director,
NRSC is working on the salary/incentive scheme for pilots and aircraft which will
also give recommendations on hiring of pilots. While reiterating that DoS should
also explore other possibilities of recruitment through aviation academies and
instututes besides the proposed incentive scheme for hiring/retention of pilots, the
Committee desire that the Committee constituted by Director, NRSC gives its
recommendations on hiring of pilots epeditiously, sanctioned strength of the pilots be
filled up with skilled persions at the earliest and the Committee apprised.
V . Non-Achievement of targeted objectives by Village Resources Centre (VRC) and
Disaster Management Support Programme (DMSP) implemented by NNRMS
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
17. In their Sixtieth Report, the Committee were pained to note that the Village
Resources Centre (VRC) and Disaster Management Support Programme (DMSP),
projects of national importance directly implemented by NNRMS through DoS, could
not achieve the desired results. Audit review of performance of VRC coordinated by
NRSC covering the period from October 2007 to August 2008 revealed that targets for

8
setting up VRC nodes could not be met with only 473 VRC nodes set up in 22 States/
UTs across the country. The Committee expected the DoS to set up remaining VRC
nodes at the earliest so that the aim of making satellite based services directly accessible
to rural population was fully achieved. The Committee further noted that in DMSP, as
much as 92 per cent of the funds amounting to Rs. 86.90 crore released for coping with
floods, agricultural drought, earthquake, landslides, forests fires etc., to the NRSC as
well as assets worth Rs. 7.80 crore remained unutilized with the NRSC. The Committee
had desired that further release of funds for DMSP may be withheld until Utilization
Certificates for the previous amounts released were submitted to the satisfaction of
the DoS. Further, taking note of the fact that the VRC and DMSP could not discharge
their assigned mandate due to non-availability of satellite communication bandwidth,
the Committee desired the Department to take appropriate steps to enhance their
technological capacity to meticulously tackle such problems so that such vital national
projects were not rendered dysfunctional.
18. The DoS vide its Action Taken Note has stated as follows:—
"Village Resource Centre (VRC) was established using EDUSAT satellite under
VRC Programme. Due to the de-commissioning of EDUSAT for operational
services, the functioning of VRC and expansion activities were discontinued.
With the launch of GSAT-12 in July, 2011, necessary transponders for
re-activating the VRCs are allotted.
The DMS Programme coordinated by ISRO HQ. includes various components
such as:
(i) Monitoring of major natural disasters using satellite and aerial data towards
damage assessment and Dissemination of products and services through
Decision Support System at NRSC;
(ii) Creation of digital databases for facilitating hazard zonation and multi-
hazard risk assessment, including the development of the National
Database for Emergency Management (NDEM);
(iii) Acquisition of close contous data for hazard prone areas using Air-borne
Laser Terrain Mapper (ALTM) and Large Format Digital Camera (LFDC);
(iv) Development of Air-borne Synthetic Aperture Radar (ASAR) towards all-
weather monitoring capability;
(v) Developing satellite based emergency communication equipments and
strengthening the communications network with satellite based, secure,
Virtual Private Network (VPN); and
(vi) Partaking in the relevant international initiatives, such as, International
Charter, Space and Major Disasters and Sentinel Asia.
Out of the above components, (i), (ii), (iii) and part of (vi) are mainly being
carried out by NRSC and the rest are carried out by Space Application
Centre, Ahmedabad.
The unspent balance as mentioned in the Committee report was for
procurement of aircraft and operationalization of ALTM.

9
Efforts to procure a dedicated aircraft were initiated in 2005 to augment
the aerial survey capabilities during a disaster. To facilitate the early
realisation of the aircraft, Rs. 65 crores were transferred to NRSC in
2006-07. However, unreasonable and unexpected price hike, midway of
negotiations by the aircraft supplier, forced the Department to cancel
the procurement process which was duly approved by the 115th Space
Commission during March 2010.
Similarly, the Airborne Lazer Terrain Mapper (ALTM) procurement and
operationalization, initiated in 2003, had faced problems in the initial
period but subsequently made opertational by 2007. Using ALTM, close
contour maps have been generated for more than 43,000 sq. kms. area
till date, and the efforts are being continued in a systematic manner.
It may also be noted that, in 2008. NRSC has become fully Government
and hence, no amount is transferred to NRSC and only authorisation to
utilise budget is provided. DoS is taking all measures to review the budget
periodically and emphasising on the realistic budget estimates and the
realisation of the same within the budget year.
Further, it is brought to the notice of the Committee that the DMS
programme was having required of satellite communication bandwidth.
The Virtual Private Network operating in Extended C-Band connecting
20 States Emergency Operation Centres, 10 data providing nodes and 5
monitoring nodes were opertional since 2006 using a transponder on
EDUSAT satellite. On decommissioning of EDUSTA T in September 2010,
the services were restored using 13Mhz bandwidth in INSAT-3E. Further
on operationalisation of GSAT-12 in 2012, full services were restored
using a complete transponder on GSA T-12. Similarly, the emergency
communicational using disasters is continued unhindered using INSAT
Type-D satellite phones operational through INSAT-MSS transponder
and Fishermen Distress Alert Terminals (DAT) through INSAT DRT
transponder."
19. The Committee are pleased to note that in pursuance of their
recommendation, the DoS has made efforts to revitalize the Village Resources
Centre (VRC) and Disaster Management Support Programme (DMSP) and also
taken measures for formulation of realistic budget estimates. The Committee
however note with concern that though the DoS stated that the DMS Programme
has the required Satellite Communication Bandwidth and the emergency
communication during disaster is continued unhindered using INSAT Type-D
Satellite phones operational through INSAT-MSS transponder, the effectivenss and
actual emergency preparedness remains questionable in view of the deficiencies/
weaknesses brought out by CAG's Audit Report No. 5 of 2013 on Performance Audit
on 'Disaster Preparedness in India' as also the recent natural calamity in
Uttarakhand. The efforts initiated by DoS are apparently far from adequate given
the stupendous task of Disaster Management Support Programme.

10
The Committee, therefore, recommend that DoS needs to review the programme
after a comprehensive evaluation in the light of its effectiveness to cope up with the
recent natural disasters that occurred in the country and devise appropriate remedial
measures to ensure achievement of the targeted objectives within a stipulated
time-frame. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter within
a period of three months of presentation of this Report.

11
CHAPTER   II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED  BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that three (IRS - P3 IC and P4) out of seven
remote sensing satellites could utilize only 32, 45 and 50 per cent of their maximum
capacity, which in the absence of their designed capacity, were assessed by Audit on
the basis of comparison of actual number of scenes acquired by these satellites. The
Committee finds that the satellites could not be put to use to their maximum capacity
due to technical problems in the spacecrafts and the impact of lower capacity utilization
on remote sensing application projects of national importance was not assessed by
NRSC. The Department of Space (DoS) justified that all three satellites in questions
have performed beyond their designed life of 3-5 years and the overall performance of
the satellite exceeded the designed capacity of the mission. The DoS further claimed
that there had not been any deficit in term of meeting data requirement and remote
sensing application projects did not suffer during the operational period of satellites.
The Committee find the reply deficient as it gives a relative assessment of the
performance of satellites based on designed life time of the satellite and does not
address the core issue of assessment of the performance of the satellites based on its
desinged capacity and the actual number of scenes captured. The Committee, therefore,
recomend that important parameters such as the design capacity of satellites should
be carefully worked out and planned so as to enable an acurate and scientific assessment
of peformance of satellites based on the their actual capacity to capture seenes. The
Committee further desire that emphasis of the Department of Space should be on the
maximum and effective data acquisition by the satellites rather than utilizing the satellites
beyond their desinged life as the lower capacity utilization of these satellites adversely
impacts remote sensing application projects of national importance.
[Sl. No.1, Para 2 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts  Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Design capacity of the satellite to caputre scenes cannot be directly derived as
there are many factors for consideration and these vary from one satellite mission to
another and may be noted that this may not be unique for all earth observation satellites.
However, an estimated figure can be arrived at based on certain criteria/assumptions.
The design capacity depends on parameters, such as, spacecraft altitude, swath
or ground coverage, stereability, revisit cycle, imaging payloads, use of onboard
recorder and so on:
/circle6Number of passes/coverage over India is to be primarily considered while
estimating the design capacity, nothing that spare capacity could further be
used for international coverage;

12
/circle6The presence/absence of International Ground Station (IGS) is another
variable that will decide on the utilisation of the spare capacity for imaging.
In addition, the user request for coverage outside Indian visibility circle
decides the usage of Onboard Recorder/Solid State Recorder (SSR), if
available on the satellite. The capacity of the SSR is also a limiting factor for
such modes of data acquisition.
/circle6For land-based studies, the ocean coverage may not be taken into account,
particularly and the IRS 1C. However, IRS P4, due to its large with swath and
choice of multi-spectral bands, could be considered for all acquisitions;
/circle6All images captured (inclusive of cloud infested scenes) are considered as
part of capacity of satellite to acquire images. However, cloud infested
images will not be usable/sellable as part of user-services;
/circle6About 10% of imaging and data acquisition may not be possible due to
sensor calibration-validation exercises, in-orbit maintenace, orbit
manoeuvers (once is 3 weeks) and other contingencies.
A senior level inter-centre committee will arrive at the formulation of guidelines for
estimation of design capacity of Earth Observation Satellites for all future missions,
based on some of the above mentioned criteria/assumptions.
Vetted Comments of Audit
DoS had expressed the constraints in the data product generation capability from
a remote sensing satellite. The design capacity is the capacity of the satellite to acquire
certain number of scenes which is an absolute figure. DoS may fix the design capacity
of each satellite as recommended by central PAC. Please state whether the Inter-Centre
Committee has been constituted and whether a time-frame has been determined for
preparation of the guidelines. Terms of reference for the committee may also be indicated
to the Committee.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/ Recommendation
The Committee note that various mechanisms have been formulated by the DoS
for utilization of remote sensing satellites to their full potential. These include setting
up of the National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS) for integration
of satellite remote sensing data with conventional techniques towards management of
natural resources and development planning in the country, holding of interaction
meetings with various user Ministries/Departments on need basis, institutionalization
of remote sensing in many ministries/Departments, upgradation of the capability of
the Earth observation satellites and the mission management strategy to ensure

13
optimum use of available resource. The Committee desire that the synergy of information
obtained from remote sensing and complimentary geomatics technologies such as
Geographical Information System (GIS), Global Positioning System (GPS), Cartography,
Graphical Processing, Statistics, Photogrammentry, etc. along with ground based socio-
economy data should be utilized judiciously for achievement of national development
goals as set out in the NNRMS. The Committee further recommend that DoS should
ensure effective implementation of the mechanisms put in place to optimize the
performance of the remote sensing satellites and also institute a robust monitoring
system so that there are quantifiable positive outcomes.
[Sl. No. 2, Para 3 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
DoS/ISRO ensures that the synergy of information obtained from remote sensing
add complimentary geomatics technologies such as Geographical Information System
(GIS), Global Positioning System (GPS), and data processing along with field data is
utilized judiciously for achievement of national development goals under NNRMS
setup.
The mechanisms of NNRMS Standing committees (9 thematic Committees) and
the Planning Committee of NNRMS has been effectively administering the mechanisms
for proper utilization of remote sensing technology by the user ministries. Regular
review meetings are being held to ensure necessary monitoring of all activities under
NNRMS. The 18th Meeting of PC-NNRMS was held on July 18, 2011, while
19th Meeting was held on June 26, 2012. The meetings of the respective NNRMS
Standing Committees were also held to the PC-NNRMS meetings to facilitate discussion
of specific issues by the concerned ministries on the use of technology.
/circle6DoS/ISRO has established the following mechanism to link the data need
assessment while planning of payloads and their utilization as part of
applications. The system has been effective in ensuring the use of remote
sensing and geospatial technologies in various departments that has led to
institutionalization mechanism. For example,:
/circle6The biennial forest cover monitoring by Forest Survey of India (FSI), MoEF,
using digital image processing and geospatial technologies is a good example
in forestry sector;
/circle6Providing regular information on Potential Fishing Zones (PFZ) to fishermen
in the coastal areas using satellite observations, ocean state forecasts and
setting up of a Tsunami advance warning system by INCOIS, MoES in the
oceanography sector;
/circle6Crop forecasts using satellite remote sensing and the recent commissioning
of Mahalanobis National Crop Forecast Centre (MNCFC) by MoA in
Agriculture sector.

14
/circle6Also, a comprehensive Water Resources Information System (India-WRIS)
is already implemented for CWC, MoWR as a part of decision support
system, using earth observation and GIS technology, which is hosted as a
web portal for usage.
/circle6While Institutionalisation of remote sensing has successfully happened
under MoEF, MoES, MoA, MoWR; other ministries like Department of
Land Resources, MoRD, Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation,
MoUD and others have been effectively using the technology for their
respective requirements.
/circle6The NNRMS system also ensure that all the States in the country effectively
participate in using the technology within each of the State Governments.
There are 27 State Remote Sensing Application Centres (SRSACs). All
SRSACs work in close coordination with ISRO in implementing national
missions, in addition to State's requirements. GIS, GPS and photogrammetry
based techniques are effectively being used by the SRSACs.
DoS/ISRO is also making all efforts to ensure effective implementation
mechanisms to optimize the performance of the remote sensing satellites
and their usage in various sectors.
/circle6To ensure that earth observation data gets properly utilized by the
Government, States, Private and Academia, DoS/PSRO has setup a
mechanism of review through Earth Observation Applications—
Management Council (EOA-MC), chaired by Director, Space Application
Centre.
The Council meets regularly to ensure that the technologies are effectively
utilized by the user community.
/circle6DoS/ISRO has also prepared its 12th FYP by taking necessary inputs from
the user ministries, particularly with reference to the Earth Observation
Satellites, that are proposed to be realised during the current plan period.
Vetted Comments of Audit
A national system of strategic management and performance measurement is
essential for control and monitoring of organizational strategies at the national and
departmental level. DoS has failed to clarify how the positives outcomes are proposed
to be quantified through monitoring system on utilization of remote sensing satellites
as recommended by the committee. DoS may therefore issue instructions to implement
the recommendation of central PAC to ensure better control and monitoring.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]

15
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are dismayed to note that while the total capital investment on the
seven satellites in operation during the Audit review period was Rs. 1468.59 crore,
operational returns were negative in the year 2003-08 and ranged from Rs. 96.87 crore
to Rs. 134.27 crore indicating that realization from sale of data products was not sufficient
enough to match its yearly operational expenditure. The Department of Space claimed
in self-justification that the spacecraft systems are considered to be infrastructure for
national development and public welfare and the emphasis is on the outreach of the
data products rather than cost recovery. It was further asserted by DoS that the pricing
policy of NRSC was in tune with the increasing global trend of making data freely
available for public services. The Committee do not find the Department's justification
convincing in so far as the relevant provision in the Remote Sensing data Policy, 2011
provides only an assurance from the Government for a continuous and improved
observing/imaging capability from its own Indian Remote Sensing satellites programmes
as a national commitment and a 'Public Good' and does not provide to give usable
remote sensing satellite data free of cost. While acknowledging that remote sensing
satellites are indeed public good infrastructure with the mission towards sustainable
national development, the Committee, however feel that a balanced segregation can
surely be worked out based on various data types and needs of various users. The
Committee also feel that appropriate customized packaging of remote sensing data by
way of adequate value addition and making them fit for synergistic and simultaneous
application will definitely enhanced the marketability of such data and bring about
increase in the net returns. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department
should enhance their data marketing capability by way of appropriate packaging of
data and value addition. The Committee also recommend that the Pricing Committee in
the DoS should adopt a sustainable balanced approach to meet the twin objectives of
making certain category of data available as public good free of cost while also
simultaneously pricing another set of marketable category to bring about positive
returns.
[Sl. No. 3, Para 4 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Considering the recommendations of the Committee necessary steps are taken
by NRSC to provide data to the user segment both in terms of pricing and public
good (free data) services. The reconstitution of pricing committee for satellite data
products, under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary, DoS has reviewed the
pricing policy and has recommended a well balanced mechanism of sectoral pricing
(Government, Academia/Research and Private sectors). In additional, newer
strategies are also recommended for enhancing the outreach and popularisation of
IRS data amongst user community. The minutes of the meeting; EOS-35.3.2/2012
dated 27 December, 2012 is as in Annexure I and the summary of recommendations
is enclosed in Annexure II.
NRSC is also enhancing the data marketing capability by the way of
institutionalising the Customer Relations Management (CRM) software module, supply

16
of data products through FTP mode, improving the turn-around-time (TAT), increasing
the number of value added products, making available the public good data through
Bhuvan Geoportal, etc.
In the recent past, NRSC has taken initiatives in development of geophysical
products to enhance further utilisation of remote sensing data by the users.
The pricing committee has taken note of these suggestions and is in the process
of administering the same as part of costing/pricing exercise for all types of satellite
data products from NRSC, ISRO.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The central PAC recommended that the Pricing Committee in the DoS should
adopt a sustainable balanced approach to meet the twin objectives of making certain
category of data available as public good free of cost while also simultaneously pricing
another set of marketable category to bring about positive returns. DoS may therefore
issue instructions to issue specific guidelines to the pricing committee in view of the
recommendations of Central PAC and also work with Controller General Accounts for
distinctly accounting receipts from remote sensing data/products.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]

ANNEXURE  I
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF PRICING COMMITTEE OF SATELLITE
DATA PRODUCT HELD ON 22ND NOVEMBER, 2012 AT ISRO HQ.
Date: 27 December, 2012
The 4th meeting of the Pricing Committee for Satellite Data products was convened
on 22nd November, 2012 under the chairmanship of Shri S. Srinivasan, Additional
Secretary, DOS at ISRO HQ. The focus of the meeting was to address all aspects
related to the guidelines and policies for satellite data pricing, while considering the
fact that the costing exercise (document prepared by the committee and submitted to
Ministry of Finance) is being looked into by the Advisor, Costing, Ministry of Finance
for necessary guidelines and suggestions.
The list of participants, is given at Annexure-I.
Following are the salient points that emerged from the meeting.
1a. User Definition & Services
(i) All users located within India are defined as Indian users, irrespective of the
location of the data requested by them. The prices applicable for such users
are in Indian Rupees.
(ii) Users from SAARC and BIMSTEC countries are defined as users from
neighbouring country and NRSC will be the focal point for data supply at
Indian price, in equivalent US Dollars, except for Nepal (payment in Indian
Rupees).
All other uses, except for SAARC and BIMSTEC countries, are defined as
International users and ANTRIX will be the focal point for data supply. The applicable
prices for this category of users are in US Dollars.
• The distribution of all free data downloads as defined in the Mission proposal/
document of ISRO/DOS of IRS Satellites, where NRSC operates Data Reception
Station, will be through NRSC, irespective of user category.
• ANTRIX will facilitate obtaining a copy of the IRS data acquired by the
International Ground Stations (IGS) for global archives, being maintained by
NRSC. For sales of such archieved data, a Tripartite Agreement will be worked
out between NRSC-ANTRIX-IGS.
1b. Presentations & Discussions
• Detailed presentation was made by Dr. Nagaraja, Member Secretary & GD-
NDC, NRSC on the Costing aspects and the proposed Pricing methodology
for IRS data,
17

18
• Both national and global scenarios were addressed with respect to free data
availability, Satellite Data Sales and global pricing & costing polices. Particular
reference was made to USGS for Landsat series, ESA for all its missions and
third party missions, as well as Digital Global and Geoeye. Detailed cost
tables, based on fixed and variable cost components and per-scene costs
considering all parameters, were also presented. The proposed pricing
strategies and policies were presented, in detail, and discussed by the
committee.
• Mr. Manish Parmar, ANTRIX Corp. Ltd., presented the existing International
prices, proposed prices for Resourcesat-1 & 2, Cartosat 1 & 2, Oceansat-2
and RISAT-1, He also presented the price comparison of other equivalent
global datasets, proposed fee structure for downlink services, hardware and
software components, Volume discounts and proposed discounts for academic
proposals.
• Details on Resellers' discount to NRSC by the foreign satellite data providers
and proposal to pass on the discounts to users was also specifically addressed
as part of the meeting.
The following are the highlights of the meeting and discussions.
2.0 Salient Points discussed in the Meeting
2.1 Global Scenario
• Globally, moderate and low spatial resolution data are made available freely to
the users.
• The United States Geological Survey (USGS) provides data based on Landsat
Distribution Policy called COFUR (Cost of Fulfilling User Request) which is
defined by the US 1992 Act as "the incremental costs associated with providing
product generation, reproduction, and distribution of unenhanced data in
response to user requests," and should not include the recovery of capital
costs of satellites, ground systems, or other capital assets paid for by the
Government. Accordingly, the Landsat 5/7 scenes were priced at USD 600.
• European Space Agency (ESA) provides free dataset from the ERS, Envisat
and the Earth Explorer missions. For third party mission data, ESA prices are
based on the cost of reproduction, which includes the direct costs associated
with Physical media, human and computer resources for extracting from the
archive and copying the required data, and quality control (ESA Third Party
Mission Product Prices, Sep 2012). Accordingly the SPOT scenes were priced
at 400 Euros and ALOS scenes at 50—75 Euros depending on zone of
coverage.
2.2 Indian Scenario
• India is providing free data for selected datasets that are older than 2 years
and coarser than 23m. Oceansat-2 Ocaen Colour Monitor-Global Area

19
Coverage (GAC) data, as well as Scatterometer data are being provided free
of charge, globally, as per mission requirements.
• The product off-take trends for last 4 years indicate that about 80-90% of the
satellite data are used by Government departments 8-12% by private and
academic and 2 - 8% by foreign users. The increasing trend in data off-take
can be attributed to the reduction in prices in the last few years. General trend
shows that the users prefer less than 2 years latency in data.
• The demand for high resolution data has increased from a mere 13,000 sq. km
during 2001-02 to about 5,00,000 sq. km in the current year.
2.3 Pricing Proposal for satellite data
• The data product cost were worked out considering fixed elements, such as,
satellite cost, launch vehicle cost and variable cost elements, such as, in orbit
operational cost, SVALBARD/ Tromso connectivity and downlink cost &
NRSC variable elements such as depreciation, maintenance, operational
consumables and manpower cost. The Access Fee earned by ANTRIX through
IGS is considered as revenue, while working out the cost. The Access Fee
earned by ANTRIX through IGS is considered as revenue, while working out
the cost. The number of scenes considered for each mission is based on
cloud free data over Indian footprints and saleable products for SSR and
SV ALBARD/ Tromso. Considering the above elements, the per-scene costs
were computed.
• It has been decided that as a public good service, the satellite cost, the
launch vehicle cost and in-orbit maintenance cost could be waived from price
fixation for Indian users. Only the production cost for all four variable elements
of NRSC (system, maintenance, consumables and manpower cost) could be
considered as the base while pricing the satellite data.
• Considering various aspects, such as, the cost of different products, demand
for data products, availability of contemporary satellite data and related
policies, global trend for free data access, affordable data for public good/
societal benefit as per RSDP 2011 and the vision of NNRMS, it was decided to
adopt a differential pricing policy/strategy.
• For Indian users, 3 categories of user-pricing were suggested.
• For private users, the prices are proposed based on recovering all
four variable elements, which NRSC incurs, viz., (i) depreciation,
(ii) maintenance, (iii) operational consumables, and (iv) manpower. This
is termed as the base price.
• For the Government and Academic users, the prices are proposed based
on recovering only three variable elements (that is, excluding manpower
cost).
• For ISRO/DoS users, the prices are proposed based on recovering only
two variable elements (that is, without manpower and depreciation).

20
Accordingly, the prices for both Government and Academic users are
reduced by 40% from the base price and 60% for ISRO/DoS users
respectively.
NRSC is also supplying the data products to BIMSTEC/SAARC users,
which come under the visibility circle of NRSC data acquisition facility.
The pricing for the BIMSTEC/SAARC users (neighbouring country
users) is based on the base price, which is at par with Indian private
users.
NRSC acquires IRS data at the earliest opportunity and provides them
to national and international agencies, including Disaster Support Centre,
International Charter, Sentinel Asia, etc within few hours of acquisition
to cater to disaster support servies, The pricing fixed for all such data
are at par with ISRO/DoS price.
• Apart from the digital data, the photo-products are also provided to users.
The demand for photo product has been gradually decreasing over a period
of time due to users shifting to digital data usage and presently, it is
observed to be only 1% of total data off-take. Hence, considering the
demand and reproduction costs, the proposed price for photo products
are:
Rs. 2000 for AO size and above
Rs. 1600 for A1 size
Rs. 1200 for A2 size
Rs. 800 for A3 size and
Rs. 400 for A4 size.
• To encourage users to opt for online data download through File Transfer
Protocol (FTP) mode of electronic delivery, it is proposed to offer
5% discount.
• To promote the sales of archived data (older than 2 years from date of
acquisition) for climate change/time-series analysis, it is proposed to offer
50% discount on the respective user category pricing, to only non-DoS
users.
• To encourage the use of IRS data by Researchers & Academia from Indian
Universities, it is proposed to offer 50% discount for the data that are less than
2 years old, However, the number of data products would be limited to a
maximum of 5 products per Academic Institution/Department in a calendar year.
• It is also proposed to provide free data sets to Data Quality Evaluation (DQE)
Group of ISRO/DoS Centres for activities related to mission calibration and
performance evaluation of satellites and sensors.

21
2.4   New Pricing Strategies for improving off-take
• To encourage private users to utilize Indian Remote Sensing Satellite data, a
new provision of volume discount may be administered as follows:
• At the rate of 3%, for orders more than Rs. 10 lakhs and upto Rs. 25 lakhs
• At the rate of 5%, for orders more than Rs. 25 lakhs and upto Rs. 1 cr.
• At the rate of 10%, for orders more than Rs. 1 cr.
• Chairman, ISRO/Secretary, DoS has accorded approval for providing free
downloads of selected data sets from IRS that are older than 2 years and
coarser than 23 m spatial resolution. Accordingly, these free data download
provisions are implemented through Bhuvan Portal and the effort would be
continued.
• To provide continuous data to various user community in the country,
subscription service is being newly proposed for Ocean Colour Monitor
(Local Area Coverage-LAC), AWIFS, LISS-III, LISS-IV and CARTOSAT-1,
The basic unit for consideration will be the region (say, 10,000 sq. km.)/State/
country. The user will be provided necessary data, irrespective of cloud
cover, through subscription service, based on a yearly agreement. The
suggested pricing for such subscription services is:
• 25% of the user category price for OCEANSAT OCM, AWIFS and LISS-III
data.
• 50% of the user category price for IRS LISS-IV and CARTOSAT-1 data.
•  With respect to licensing mechanism, three schemes are proposed, namely:
• Base license (single user) — this permits use of IRS data by a single user.
• Work Group license — this permits use of IRS data by 2 to 20 user
groups within the same organisation/institution. An additional charge of
20% on the corresponding category price would be levied on such request.
• Enterprise License — this permits the use of IRS data by more than
20 user groups with the country across organisation/institution. An
additional charge of 40% on the corresponding category price would be
levied on such request.
/head2rightLicensing mechanism : Such Licensing mechanisms are worked out
based on some of the international practices followed. One such example
is that of  Digital Globe which uses such mechanism. The implementation
of such licensing is addressed as part of End-User-License agreement
and is part of the Order form. The customer declares the number of users
at the time of placing order. The declaration given by the user is
considered as a valid commitment. Monitoring of such a licensing
mechanism is not reported by any of international data providers,
however there is a need to consider software based solution for

22
controlling the license usage, while providing the digital data to the user
so that the number of licenses is automatically controlled. Also, it is
noted that there is no upper limit for the usage of data, as indicated in the
Digital Global End-user-agreement.
• It is proposed to charge 3 times the base price for those data requirement
that could be web hosted by any user (other than ISRO/DoS) for non-
commercial use:
/head2rightData for Web user: This aspect was discussed in the pricing committee
meeting. As per NDC records, on an average, 3 to 4 users purchase the
same scene. The proposal is that the primary-user uploads the scene
purchased onto the web for multiple usage of the same data by different
users. Due to multiple access of the same scene by different users, it is
proposed to charge 3 times of base price for web users.
• Satellite derived products, like, Digital Elevation Model (DEM) are in demand
by many users. The DEM with 30 m posting, is also made available as free
downloads through BHUVAN, with due approval of the department. It is also
proposed to provide DEMs with 10 m posting of the unrestricted areas based
on approved pricing, on-request-basis to Government and Private Agencies
(with due recommendation from Government Department). For private users
and NGOs, the data will be the provided after necessary clearance of ISRO/
DoS Internal Committee (which will be duly setup based on departmental
guidelines). For restricted areas, the DEM with 10 m posting could be provided
after necessary clearance from Internal Committee.
2.5   Passing of Resellers' Discount to the Users
• It was presented that commercial foreign data suppliers give reseller discount
to NRSC, and also price the product differently based on volume of the order.
The agents/resellers of foreign suppliers also approach users directly and
promise additional discount.
• In order to make foreign data available to users at best price and also in view
of NRSC being one of the ISRO/DoS centres, it is also proposed to pass on
the discounts being provided by foreign data suppliers to users. However, it
is proposed to charge 5% as handling charges to cover the cost incurred by
NRSC, such as, administrative charges, morphing clearance handling etc., as
well as actual Customs Duty levided by Customs and related handling charges.
2.6    ANTRIX Elements—Recommendations
2.6.1  IRS International Downlink price
• To enable a ground station for IRS data downlinking, ISRO proprietary

23
hardware and software are required to be installed. The following price list is
proposed for hardware/software:
Satellite All Prices in USD
DAQLB DPGS ADP AFEH/PCA Card TCT
RS-1 150,000 125,000 100,000 50,000 15,000
CS-1 150,000 150,000 150,000 50,000 15,000
CS-2 150,000 200,000 — 50,000 15,000
RS-2 150,000 125,000 100,000 50,000 15,000
RISA T-1 150,000 200,000 150,000 50,000 20,000
Note : DAQLB: Direct Acquisition and Quick Look Browse system
DPGS: Data Product Generation System
ADP : Ancillary Data Processing
AFEH : Advnce Front End Hardware
TCT : Time Code Translator
• In view of the current market trends and to bring flexibility in services, "per
minute downlink" prices are proposed. The provision for customer's
commitment to a minimum service will have to be included in the contract.
• The following "per minute downlink" prices are proposed for the International
market:
Satellite RS-1 CS-1 CS-2 RS-2 RISA T-1
Awifs and <500 min: 2500
Access LISS III 501-1000 min: 2000
fee Chain 1:100 343 Channel 1: 110
(USD/Per LISS IV 1001+min: 1500 Channel 2: 140 445
Minute) Chain: 125
Note: RS: RESOURCESAT; CS: CARTOSAT
• Based on the past experience with OCEANSA T-1, revision of existing
OCEANSAT-2 prices are proposed. Antrix proposes 10,000 USD for single
pass and 15,000 USD for two passes with an average of 300 and 500 passes
per year respectively.
• The following hardware/software price list is proposed for OCEANSAT-2
satellite:
Hardware/Software Price (USD)
Pre-Processing and Product Generation 100,000
Advance Front End Hardware (AFEH) 15,000
Time Code Translator (TCT) 10,000
½
¾
¿

24
2.6.2   IRS International Data Products Pricing
• It is proposed to maintain the existing price list for Resourcesat-1, Cartosat-1
and Cartosat-2 satellites. However, following pricing is proposed for
Resourcesat-2 and RISAT-1 data products.
(i)   Resourcesat-2 Pricing
• Based on the Resourcesat-1 experience and the current market scenario,
following price list for Resourcesat-2 satellite data products are proposed:
/head2rightLISS-3: 20% higher than RS-1 price
/head2rightLISS-4 SMx: and Mono: 20% reduction as against RS-1 price
/head2rightLISS-4 FMx: 3 times price of new SMx, as the swath of the data is
3 times
/head2rightAWiFS: 20% higher as against RS-1 price
(ii)  RISAT-1 Pricing
• Considering the market trend, competition with established market and the
mission cost, the following international prices are proposed for RISAT-1
data products
Spatial Resolution Coverage (km × km) Scene Price (USD)
1m 10 × 100 8165
3m 25 × 25 3640
9m 25 × 25 1875
25m 115 × 115 2215
50m 220 × 220 1285
2.6.3   Policies for IRS International Data Sales/Services
• Volume Discounts Policy: Antrix proposes a discount policy for bulk orders.
It is a common practice in the current international market to provide volume
discounts to improve sales of data products. Hence, the following prices-
slabs and discounts are proposed.
a.   For US$ 25,001 to 35,000, discount of 5% is proposed
b.   For US$ 35,001 to 50,000, discount of 8% is proposed
c.   For more than US$ 50,000, discount of 10% is proposed
•  Academic/Research purpose discount policy: In order to encourage more
usage of IRS data by research institutions and academia, 25% discount is
proposed for academic institutions on fresh collects. This policy will not be
applicable for archived data. A copy of the research paper/outcome will have
to be provided to Antrix, with a right to use for promotional purposes.

25
• Archive-data pricing policy : Data older than 6 months from the date of
acquisition may be classified as archive-data. A uniform discount of 25% is
proposed for such data. The volume discount policy will not be applicable to
archived data sales. The reseller discount will be only 10% and Internal Ground
Station (IGS) will be 20% of the net price instead of 15% and 30% existing
currently.
• Sample data policy: As per the International practices IRS sample data sets
are required to be provided for to prospective distributors/resellers, users
and ground stations. As practiced currently it is recommended to provide
sample datasets at Indian price by NRSC to ANTRIX.
• Per Square Kilometer (PSKM) pricing policy : The current global trend
for satellite data sales is based on PSKM. Antrix also has the PSKM
pricing structure, but has limitations in terms of the minimum size of the
area of interest. Hence, it is proposed to provide data on per square
kilometers basis. However, minimum order has to be at least the size of
one standard scene.
• Delivery terms for the proposed pricing policy : It is proposed to introduce
delivery terms for the pricing policy for archive-data. Based on past experience
and customers' requirements for fast delivery the following terms are
proposed:
/head2rightNormal delivery – Within 5 working days and up to 50 products at
no extra charges
/head2rightExpress delivery – Within 3 working days and up to 10 products at
20% extra charges
/head2rightEmergency delivery – Within 24 hours at 50% extra
/head2rightCommission/discount is not applicable on the additional charges
The above time-lines are applicable on receipt of order complete in all
respects, at NRSC.
• International scenario of satellite data sales and competition is always dynamic
and they change as per the market demand, international market, data usage
trends and requirements . Considering these points, it is proposed to review
the pricing policy/structure at least on an annual basis for possible revisions
in prices. Committee may also revise prices at any time, depending on the
need and requirements.
2. 7   Establishing foreign data downlink
Due to increased demand for HR data and most of the demand being met by
foreign supplies, it was suggested to explore to establish down linking of foreign
satellite data by NRSC ground station. This will help in building a archive of HR data,
service multiple demand of same data, and help in providing value added services.

26
3.0   Committee suggestions
Following are the important points suggested by the Committee for necessary
action:
• The guidelines discussed above could be considered as the Pricing Policy
guidelines of ISRO/DoS.
• The pricing policy guidelines to incorporated in the final version of the
Costing-Pricing document.
• The pricing policy guidelines may be put up to Space Commission for
approval
Chairman of the Committee concurred with the above suggestion of the Committee.
The meeting ended with thanks to the Chair.
Sd -
Prepared by
Dr. R Nagaraja,
Member Secretary, Satellite Data Pricing Committee.
Approved by:
Chairman, Satellite Committee
To
All Members/Invitees

ANNEXURE- I
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
Mr. S. Srinivasan, Additional Secretary, DoS
Mr. A. Vijay Anand, Jt. Secretary, DoS
Dr. V .K. Dadhwal, Director, NRSC
Dr. V .S. Hegde, CMD, ANTRIX
Mr. P.G. Diwakar, Director, EOS
Mr. Thirunavukkarasu, Controller, NRSC
Mr. M. Venkat Rao, PD, ISAC – Rep. PD (IRS & SSS)
Mr. P . Kamalakar, HA&FA, NRSC
Dr. R. Nagaraja, GD, NRSC
Invitees
Dr. J. Krishnamurthy, Dy. Director, US&U, EOS
Mr. S. Parameswaran, ED, ANTRIX
Mr. Manish Parmar, Dy. Manager, ANTRIX
Mr. S. Arunachalam, NDC, NRSC
27

ANNEXURE- II
SALIENT RECOMMENDATIONS OF PRICING COMMITTEE
Indian, SAARC & BIMSTEC Pricing Policy
The Price of IRS digital data products for Indian user is recommended based on
the expenditure involved by NRSC towards data acquisition, data processing and
data dissemination related activities. Considering the commercial interest of the user
category, utilization for public good srvices, data requirement for flagship programmes
of Government of India, three categories of user pricing were recommended as
follows:—
(a) For private and BIMSTEC/SAARC users, the prices are proposed based on
the base price of all four variable elements of NRSC, that is, (i) depreciation,
(ii) maintenance, (iii) operational consumables, and (iv) manpower and
additionally, the market trend.
(b) For the Government and Academic users, the prices are proposed based on
the base price of three variable elements (excluding manpower cost).
(c) For ISRO/DoS users, the prices are proposed based on the base price of
two variable elements (without manpower and depreciation).
Accordingly, the prices for both Government and Academic users are reduced
by 40% from the base price and 60% reduction are provided for ISRO/DoS users.
Photo Product Price
Apart from the digital data, the photo products are also provided to users. The
demand for photo product has been gradually decreasing over a period of time due
to users shifting to digital data usage and presently, it is observed to be only 1% of
total data off-take. Hence the proposed price should be fixed considering the demand
and reproduction costs.
Subscription service
India being a monsoon prone region, it is generally seen 4-6 months in a year is
cloudy. However, the cludy scenes can be used for generation of time composites
for better utilizaiton of the data. To provide continuous and layered data to various
users in the country, subscription service is proposed for Ocean Colour Monitor
(LAC), AWIFS, LISS-III, LISS-IV and Cartosat-1. In view of the above, pricing
Committee recommended to provide all data acquired in a year to users based on an
Agreement and advance payment as part of subscription service with the following
discounts. The basic unit will be a region (10,00 sq.km.)/State/country. In case any
partial data is not supplied to users due to technical difficulty, NRSC will reimburse
the price on pro-rata basis.
28

29
/head2right25% of the user category price for OCM, AWIFS and LISS-III, and
/head2right50% of the user cateogry price for LISS-IV and Carto-1. The subscription
service will made through entering in to yearly contract.
Web hosting
The Pricing Committee recommended to charge 3 times of base price to users who
would like to purchase data and host on the website for non-commercial use.
Discounts
• All satellite data are being provided to users through media such as CD,
DVD, Hard disk through courier/speed post. The FTP mode of delivery will
make available data in near real time and cut the costs related to media and
shipping. To encourage users to opt for FTP mode of delivery, it is
recommended to offer 5% discount as per the existing practice.
• The data off take trend for last few years shows the preference for data less
than 2 years old. Data older than 2 years accounted for less than 10% of the
data supplied from 2008 to 2012. In order to promote the sale of archived data
for different climate/change analysis studies, it is proposed to offer
50% discount from the respective user category price for the data older than
2 years to non DoS users.
• To encourage research programmes in the country, the Pricing Committee
recommended for providing data, limited to a maximum of 5 products of less
than 2 years old in a calendar year for academic institutions/department at
50% cost.
• To encourage utilization of satellite data by private users, the Pricing Committee
recommended a new provision of volume discounts @3% for orders more
than Rs. 10 lakhs, @ 5% for orders more than 25 lakhs and 10%for orders more
than 1 crore.
Free data
• To create general awareness, to encourage research activities and as a public
good service, ISRO is making available selected datasets older than 2 years
latency, freely through its web portal called "BHUV AN". ISRO also is providing
Oceansat GAC and Scatterometer data for scientific research, free of charge
as envisaged in the Mission objectivies. The Committee recommended
continuing such efforts.
• As part of mission calibration activity, the performance of the satellite and
sensors are evaluated continuously. The datasets required for such activity
by Data Quality Evaluation (DQE) are recommended to be provided free of
charge.
Licensing
Generally the licensing and the price are dictated by the number of users.
Accordingly, considering the international practices, the Pricing Committee

30
recommended 3 types of Licensing Schemes namely:—
(i) Base license (single user)—permits internal use of IRS data by the user,
(ii) W ork Group license—permits internal use of data by 2-20 user groups within
the same Government Departments with an upliftment of 20% on the base
price, and
(iii) Enterprise License—Permits use of IRS data by more than 20 user groups
within the country across departments with an upliftment of 40% on the base
price.
Digital Elevation Model product
Satellite derived products, like, Digital elevation Model (DEM) are in demand by
many users. The DEM with 30 m. posting, is also made available as free downloads
through BHUVAN, with due approval of the department. It is also proposed to provide
DEMs with 10 m. posting of the unrestricted areas based on approved pricing,
on-request-basis to Government and private Agencies (with due recommendation
from Government Department). For private users and NGOs, the data will be provided
after necessary clearance of Geospatial Data Clearance Committee (GDCC) of ISRO/
DoS (which will be duly set up based on departmental guidelines). For restricted areas,
the DEM with 10 m posting could be provided after necessary clearance from GDCC.
International pricing Policy
Pricing for data products
The Pricing Committee recommended International price considering fixed cost
such as satellite cost, launch vehicle cost and variable cost such as in-orbit maintenance,
SV ALBARD/TROMSO data downlink and communicaiton cost, data products
acquisition, generation and shipment cost, market trend, internaitonal price for similar
satellites' data.
Pricing for Down-linking Services
• To operationalise International Ground Station (IGS) for IRS data downlink
and processing, ISRO proprietary hardware and software are needed to be
installed. It is proposed to continue the existing practices.
• In view of the current market trends and to bring flexibility in services, "per
minute downlink"prices are proposed considering customer's commitment to
a minimum service, current international downlink prices, and mission
capabilities.
Discount Policy Data Sales/Services
• Volume Discounts: For bulk orders a discount policy is proposed considering
the common practice in the current international market as under:
a. For US$ 25,001 to 35,000 discount of 5% is proposed.
b. For US$ 35,001 to 50,000, discount of 8% is proposed.
c. For more than US$ 50,000, discount of 10% is proposed.

31
• Academic/Research discount: In order to encourage more usage of IRS data
by research institutions and academia, 25% discount is proposed for academic
institutions on fresh collects. This policy will not be applicable for archieved
data. A copy of the research paper/outcome will have to be provided, with a
right to use for promotional purposes.
• Archive-data pricing: Data older than 6 months from the date of acquisition
may be classified as archive-data. A uniform discount of 25% is proposed for
such data. The volume discount policy will be applicable to archived data
sales.
• Reseller Discount: It is proposed to extend a discount of 10% to all Resellers
registered with ANTRIX and a discount of 20% to International Ground Station
(IGS) of the net price instead of 15% and 30% existing currently.
• Sample data: Sample IRS data to propective ground stations and resellers
will be provided at Indian prices as practiced currently.
• Per Square Kilometer (PSKM) pricing: The current global trend for satellite
data sales is based on Per Square Kilometer. hence, it is proposed to provide
data on per square kilometer bases. However, minimum order has to be at
least the size of one standard scene.
• Delivery terms for the proposed pricing: It is prosposed to introduce delivery
terms for the pricing policy for archive-data. Based on past experience and
customers'requirements for fast delivery the following terms are proposed:
a. Normal delivery— Within 5 owrking days and up to 50 products at
no extra charges.
b. Express delivery— Within 3 working days and up to 10 products at
20% extra charges.
c. Emergency delivery— Within 24 hours at 50% extra charges.
d. Commission/discount is not applicable on the additional charges.
The above time-lines are applicable on receipt of order complete in all respects, at
NRSC.
Observation/ Recommendation
As regards the downward trend in the earnings through access fee/Royalty from
the International Ground Stations (IGS) by Antrix, The Committee recommend that the
DoS explore the possibility of collaboration with global remote sensing round station
and research centres to establish closer linkages, more reliable and faster data sharing
and analysis, shared archives and near real time data access among different countries
and also establishing networks with higher bandwidth for distribution of archival
repositories and provision of real time access.
[Sl.No. 5, Para 6 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

32
Action Taken
Antrix is marketing services from Cartosat-1, Cartosat-2 and Resourcesat-2
satellites of international customers by participating in international conferences
and exhibitions. Antrix has participated in the International Society of
Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS)-2012 Australia and Bengaluru Space
Expo (BSX-2012).
Currently, Antrix is in the process of establishing 2 new ground stations. It is
also in receipt of many other requests for stabilizing business relations with new
ustomers for services from IRS constellation for which necessary initiatives have
been taken and will materialize these opprtunities on getting necessary clearances.
Antrix has also started discussions with customers for marketing of RISAT-1
data and services. Further steps will be taken in this direction after necessary
instructions are issued by the Department with respect to the pricing aspect.
New policies are also proposed for IRS data and services to international
customers; viz. archive data policy, policy for research activities etc. The proposal
has been submitted to the concerned Committee for necessary directions. The
Recommendations of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The specific action taken by Department of Space (not Antrix) based on the
recommendation of Central PAC to explore the possibility of collaboration with global
remote sensing ground station and research centres to establish closer linkages,
more reliable and faster data sharing and analysis, shared archives and near real time
data access among different countries and also establishing networks with higher
bandwidth for distribution of archival repositories and provision of real time access,
may be stated.
Sd/-
(S Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/ Recommendation
The Committee note that a realistic thematic data need assessment in various
remote sensing applications is required to enable the planning of the payloads of
operational remote sensing satellites prior to their launch so that the data
acquisition capacity of the statellites are in tune with the expected needs. In this
context, the Committee are dismayed at the Audit revelation that satellites were
planned without adequate thematic data need assessment and therefore, the extent
of date gap against the data need could not be assessed. The Committee abserve
that the Department's reply, by their own admission underlines the imperatives of
data need assessment for planning the payloads of satellites . The Committee
appreciate the Department's efforts to collect information on the intended use for
data products disseminated by NRSC and development of a CRM module under

33
IMGEOS project, which is expected to be put in operation in 2012, and hope that
the module is made operational within the stipulated time and monitored at the
highest level to attaain the objectives. The Committee also desire that collection
of information by Customer Relations Management (CRM) module may be
institutionalized and contain clear outcomes and DoS should ensure that a realistic
assessment of date needs is conducted exhaustively to enable a scientific correlation
in the planning and operationalisation of remote sensing satellites
[Sl No. 6, Para 7 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per Committee's recommendation, NRSC will institutionalise the Customer
Relations Management (CRM) activity as soon as the software application module
is ready (which is currently) under development and the beta version is likely to be
ready by March 2013). NRSC is continuously assessing the date needs of the users
through various mechanism, such as, feedback surveys, during annual user interaction
meet, CRM input (planned) and also through regular meeting of the thematic NNRMS
Standing Committees and PC-NNRMS. The feedback mechanism comes through
Planning Committee of National Natural Resources Management System (PC-NNRMS)
which is an inter ministerial standing Committee, chaired by Member (Science),
Planning Commission with Secretaries of various Ministries as members for effective
utilisation of Space based remote sensing data.
Vetted Comments of Audit
DoS may put in place a mechanism through specific executive orders/instruction
specifying therein the guidelines and procedure to conduct realistic data need
assessment exhaustively to enable scientific correlation in the planning and
operationlisation of individual remote sensing satellites as recommended by Central
PAC.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B.11011/7/2011 dated 5.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
Huge idling of IRS date ranging between 53 to 95 per cent, as highlighted by
Audit, has engaged the attention of the Committee. This is a pointer to the fact
that data need assessment was not based on any scientific study and lacked
marketing capability. The Committee note that the Department of Space have made
some efforts to initiate action to improve the utilization and sale of data by way of
reduction in price level of satellite data products, increasing awareness through
BHUV AN web portal, advertisements, publication of promotional materials, etc.
The Committee, however, cannot help observing that reduction in scale prices of
data to encourage their utilization might prove to be counterproductive as it is
sure to bring down the net returns, which are already negligible. The Committee,

34
therefore, recommends that the DoS should set up a comprehensive mechanism to
bring about optimum utilization of satellite date while also increasing the net returns
from sale of such data. The Committee should like to be apprised of the mechnism
so involved and the tangible outcome thereof.
[Sl No. 7, Para 8 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As indicated under Para 4 specific actions are being taken by DoS/ISRO to
address optimum utilisation of satellite data.
NRSC follows the data archival policy to store data periodically, following a
time-series mechanism. The Data archival is done, not only for commercial exploitation
but also to ensure that such data is available as and when required for utilisation in
the interest of the nation, particularly for change detection and analysis. The data
archived at NRSC is usable for climate change studies, land coverchange analysis,
etc. or for any kind of monitoring activity that involves multi-date periodicity.
The action proposed under Para 2 and Para 7 will also address these aspects for
evolving a comprehensive mechanism to bring about optimum utilisation of satellite
data.
Vetted Comments of Audit
DoS may put in place a specific mechanism, through executive orders/
instructions, stipulating therein time-frame and tangible outcome which would ensure
optimum utilisation of satellite data and would increase the sale of satellite date.
Sd/-
(S.Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B.11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
Notably, the efficiency of data processing is measured in terms of turn-around
time, i.e., the processing time required to process the data into a finished product
from the time of receipt of request for data. The Committee deplore the decline in
efficiency of data processing as there has been increase in the turn-around time,
which has in turn adversely impacted timely delivery of data products to the users.
The Committee expect that the DoS make earnest efforts to operationalize the project
on Integrated Multi-Mission Ground Segment of Earth Observation Satellites
(IMGEOs) which has been purportedly conceived to eable faster and efficient data
products and services for users so as to bring about reduction in the turn-around
time for standard products to 24 hours and emergency products to 1 hour after
acquisition. The Committee are of the considered view that establishement of robust
operational remote sensing, geospatial information systems and supporting
infrastructure are critical to securing accurate and timely access to both archival and

35
real or near-real time reliable data. Keeping this in view, the Committee desire the
Department to enhance the present infrastructure for remote sensing encompassing
organization, computational, educational and bandwidth components, particularly
as relates to time critical anticipation, disaster mitigation and emergency responses
to both natural and manmade catastrophes. To this end, the Committee further impress
upon the Department to strengthen and upgrade their software and other related
geomatics technologies associated with the processing of data at par with the best
international standards so as to ensure a quantum jump in the efficiency of data
processing. The Committee also desire that ideal turn-around time be fixed for different
categories of data processed at NRSC and a stringent mechanism be installed to
monitor actually obtained turm-around time vis-a-vis prescribed.
[Sl No. 8, Para 9 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Department has taken necessary steps to address the points raised by the
Committee by taking necessary steps to realise one of the best and state-of-the-art
computational facility with required hardware, software and computation speed to
meet the user requirements .
Integrated Multi-mission Ground segment and Earth Observation Satellites
(IMGEOS)] which was commissioned during November 2011 at NRSC, Shadnagar,
is fully operational and is already providing services to the user community. The
facility has one of the best hadware and software capabilities to address all aspects
of data acquisition, processing and dessimination with optimal turn-around-time.
Following are the benchmark figures achieved:—
• Normal Products : 24 hours as against 4-5 days earlier.
• Emergency Products : 1 hour as against 24 hours earlier.
• Throughput rate : 1000 products per day as against 100-150
products/day earlier.
The facility is able to meet all types of use requirements with optimal
turn-around-time. The facility is particularly of immense use under disaster and
emergency situations when near-real-time data requirements are to be met.
IMGEOS data processing chain has time tagging for data processing and
products disssemination, which is effective in monitoring the turn-around-time of
data products on regular basis.
In addition, the department has provided many new geomatics solution for the
user community through BHUV AN portal and also the deployment of "ISRO
Geoportal" (a facility that provides a single-window gateway to various geospatial
tools and data portals of ISRO/DoS), which enables various layers of natural
resources data and related metadata information for the user community to browse,
visualize and download as required.

36
Vetted Comments of Audit
DoS had indicated the benchmark to be achieved in the data processing time.
DoS may issue specific instructions to fix the ideal turnaround time as recommended
by central PAC. Further a mechanism to monitor actually obtain turnaround time
vis-a-vis prescribed also needs to be installed by the Department.
Sd/-
(S.Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B.11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/ Recommendation
The Committee are in agreement with the views of the Standing Committee of
Parliament on DoS contained in their 42nd Report presented to both the Houses
on 13.03.1997 that more and more private entrepreneurs should be associated in
the process of remote sensing data utilization programme as there is a huge
scope of value addition to the remote sensing data and using it in marketable
form in several sectors. The Committee are, however, dismayed to note that the
efforts of NRSC are not adequate in customizing the data according to the needs
of private users and also exploring the possibility of widening the customer base
resulting in very low levels of average sales to the private sector. Audit examination
revealed that the average sale to the private sector were less than
20 per cent whereas the sales to the Government sector more than 80 per cent
during the period 2003-2009. The Committee recommend that a comprehensive
mechanism for promotion of sale of data to private users incorporating therein
effective sensitization programmes, training modules for efficient handing of
such data and also value addition, customization and appropriate packaging of
data to enhance their utility for multipurpose applications should be brought
about and the Committee apprised accordingly.
[Sl. No. 10, Para 11 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Department has taken necessary measures to establish a comprehensive
mechanism for promotion of sale of data to private users including the conduct of
sensitization programmes, training modules for efficient handling of such data and
also value addition, customization and appropriate packaging of data to enhance their
utility for multipurpose applications.
The mechanism is set up for strengthening data sales to all sectors, including
private users, through value addition and organising training programs for effective
data utilization. Towards this following actions are taken:—
• Specific training programme has been conducted for Private Sector users and
will be a regular feature:

37
Towards promoting Private Participation, in 2012 NRSC has organized an
exclusive one-week training programme on "Geospatial Technologies for
Private Entrepreneurs" and trained 18 personals. Two such courses are planned
in 2013 in addition to an exclusive programme for women.
/circle6Sensitization programmes are being organized at regional/state level under
national application programmes by NRSC.
/circle6Technical manuals/guidelines have been hosted in NRSC website.
/circle6Customized geospatial web services are being hosted in BHUV AN.
/circle6BHUVAN also provides platform to users to showcase their applications
through spatial mashups.
/circle6NRSC/NDC conducts annual National level User-meet, which enables all
user community, including private users, to participate and get benefited. It is
planned to hold the annual user-meet during 21-22 February, 2013.
Vetted Comments of Audit
DoS may issue specific instructions stipulating therein ways and means of
improving the sale of data products to 'private users'. The guidelines may also specify
the time with definite targets for improvements.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee have been given to understand that DoS has undertaken an
exercise to gauge the total cost of remote sensing satellite systems and data products.
While earlier only the cost incurred for generating data products was taken into
consideration, now cost of the satellites and their launching will also be taken into
account. The Committee also appreciate that the costing and pricing are being finalized
by a high-power Committee set up by DoS and a differentiated pricing policy is being
considered for different users like Government users, DoS users, academic users,
private users, etc. The Committee, however, impress upon DoS to finalize and implement
this pricing policy with a sense of urgency after due legal and financial vetting and the
Committee be apprised within six months of its finalization.
[Sl. No. 12, Para 13 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The pricing committee for satellite data products has prepared the draft report on
costing and pricing and the same has been submitted to Chief Advisor Costing,
Department of Cost, Ministry of Finance for vetting of costing methodology adopted
by the department. Meanwhile the pricing policy and strategy has also been arrived at
by the committee. The pricing committee has finalised the recommendations for data
products pricing which is further being processed for approval (Annexure II).

38
Vettted Comments of Audit
DoS may finalise and implement the pricing policy with a sense of urgency after
due legal and financial vetting as recommended by Central PAC. Further action awaited.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are deeply concerned to note the delay in completion of aerial
projects and under performance of aerial remote sensing aircraft due to non-availability
of pilots and technical snags. The Committee further note that 12 aerial projects
constituting 33 per cent of those scrutinized by Audit, costing Rs. 45.85 crore, were
delayed from 8 to 54 months. The Secretary, DoS in evidence, attributed the non-
availability of pilots to greener pastures available in the aviation market. Needless to
say, this acute shortage of manpower to fly the aerial remote sensing aircraft is a major
handicap in the smooth function of aerial remote sensing projects. The Committee are,
however, informed that an institutional arrangement has been established with the
Indian Air Force (IAF) for obtaining pilots of deputation and efforts are being made to
increase the deputation period so as to have higher stability in operations. The
Committee feel that besides such institutional arrangements, others avenues for
inductions and retention of pilots by devising attractive wage structure and other
incentive packages should be explored so as to obviate scope for delays in projects
and under performances of aircraft due to want of pilots. The Committee also desire
that DoS may also explore the possibility of having tie-up with various prestigious
aviation academies and institutes in the country by obtaining their services and finally
absorb these skilled pilots.
[Sl.No. 13, Para 14 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
A Committee constituted by Director, NRSC is working on the salary/incentive
scheme for pilots and aircrew. It will also give recommendations on hiring of pilots.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The recommendations of the Committee and further action taken may be intimated.
Action taken by DoS to explore the possibility of tie-ups with aviations academics and
institutes may be stated.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are informed that a three year comprehensive contract had been
signed with a maintenance agency for reduction in delays in fixing technical snags,
better flow of spare parts and facilitation of better supervision in carrying out

39
maintenance work. Retrofit of avionics system of two beach-craft owned by NRSC
has also been planned to be carried out in a phased manner. As regards the
replacement of ageing aircraft, the Committee were assured by DoS that the matter
will be critically examined at an appropriate time. The Committee are surprised to
note that it is only on being pointed out by Audit, the Department intimated steps to
address the issue of technical snags of the aerial remote sensing aircraft. Needless
to say, the DoS needs to be proactive and taken appropriate measures so that the
work of remote sensing is not hampered due to technical snags.
[Sl.No. 14, Para 15 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15the Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
NRSC has taken note of the point highlighted and initiated necessary actions
on getting repair works on the aging aircraftrs. NRSC has been directed to plan for
procurement of two new aircrafts for phased replacement of ageing aircraft.
An Inter-Agency Technical Committee is set up vide Order No. D. 03/138/2013
dated January 07, 2013 to arrive at the technical specifications for procurement of
these aircrafts.
Vetted Comments of Audit
Further action taken to procure two new aircraft may be intimated.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee cannot absolve the delay in completion of aerial remote sensing
project on the ground that inter-agency consultations take time and that no time-
frame can be predicted for such consultations. Mindful of the imperative need for
expeditious release of the data collected by the remote sensing aircraft by the end
users, the Committee hardly need to emphasize the urgency for efficient coordination
between concerned. The Committee would like to be apprised of the new mechanism
put in place to facilitate timely release of the data collected by the NRSC.
[Sl.No. 15, Para 16 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Some of the measures initiated for minimising delays in execution of aerial remote
sensing projects are:—
• Conditions related to weather dependence for flying, change in scope of
work by sponsoring agency etc. are being built into MoU clauses for arriving
at realistic project schedules.

40
/circle6Advance action being taken on field related works without waiting for
completion of aerial survey tasks, wherever feasible.
/circle6Advance intimations are being sent to users on release of timely payments to
avoid delays in supplying the data.
Letter was sent to Secretary, Ministry of Defence (MoD) requesting for special
dispensation for NRSC, similar to that followed in situations like disaster related aerial
surveys, which will reduce time taken for approvals and security vetting by MoD to a
large extent, NRSC continues to pursue with MoD for speeding up permission to fly
and for data classification.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The Action Taken by DoS in complying to the recommendation of Central PAC,
such as revision in MoU, advance action on field related works, collection of dues to
avoid delay may be systematised by issuing executive order/instruction so that
implementing division in NRSC would implement the decision of the department in
individual cases.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note with concern lack of effective and periodic co-ordination in
the implementation of projects of National importance under the National Natural
Resources management Systems. Projects scuh as planning of irrigation schemes;
mapping of wasteland to enable reclamation and rehabilitation thereof; and identification
of drinking water sources could not fructify well in time for want of efficient and regular
coordination. The Committee are particularly perturbed to note that even in the face of
extreme water stress all over the country, the DoS failed to extent the much needed vital
assistance in the implementation of the Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission,
Further, notably, the various Standing Committees under the NNRMS did not hold the
regular meetings as mandated. The DoS needs to review the mandate of these
Committees as also the desirability of replacing by more efficient and reliable system
and the Committee apprised.
[Sl. No. 16, Para 17 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Specific action has been taken by the Department to ensure that all Standing
Committees and PC-NNRMS meet regularly and the Committee is being apprised of the
various requirements of different ministries and status updates of various on-going
projects. PC-NNRMS has been reviewing the progress of the Standing Committees on
a regular basis.

41
Some of the Projects mentioned in the para 17 have since been completed, such as
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (ABIP) phase 1 is successfully completed
and phase 2 has been initiated for 50 irrigation projects across 14 States and the project
is progressing as per schedule. The wasteland mapping has been completed and the
maps are provided to MoRD while national wasteland Atlas-2011 was also released for
developmental purposes by the Ministry; and drinking water potential maps, as part of
Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission, has been accomplised in three phases
(Phase 1, 2, 3A and 3B) and the database and maps are made available to the priority
States for necessary use. Phase 4 of the project is initiated to address the water quality
aspects at national level.
Department of Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Ministry (DDWS),
Government of India is the nodal department for implementation of Rajiv Gandhi
National Drinking Water Mission taking help of the respective State Governments.
The ministry is well cognitive of the fact that this scheme should cover the entire
nation. However there is lead time required in formulating the project and implementing
the same. Due to this reason, the implementation of this scheme was taken up in a
phased manner in different states by the Ministry. Accordingly, the ministry had
requested NRSC to prepare groundwater prospect maps using satellite images to
enable them for targeting groundwater sites (bore well and hand pumps) in four phases
with the funding from the ministry as follows:—
/circle6Phase I—6, States namely Andhra Pradesh (part), Kerala, Karnataka,
Chattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan—Commenced by December
1998, Target of completion by June 2002 & completed by 2002;
/circle6Phase II—4 States namely Orissa, Gujarat, Jharkhand & Himachal Pradesh—
Commenced by August 2001 (Jharkhand) and October 2002 (Orissa, Gujarat,
& Himachal Pradesh), Target of completion by 2005 & completed by 2005;
/circle6Phase IIIA—6, States namely Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, Assam, Andhra
Pradesh (remaining part from Phase I), Jammu & Kahsmir and Punjab—
Commenced by February 2007, Target or completion by December 2009 &
completed by 2009 (except Maharashtra and J&K by June 2011);
/circle6Phase III B—4 States namely West Bengal & Uttar Pradesh in part, Arunachal
Pradesh & Haryana—Commenced by March 2008. Target of completion by
December 2010 & completed by December 2010;
/circle6Phase IV—Rest of the country including Union territories and Islands—
commenced by November 2010, Target of completion by December 2013.
Phase IV also includes generation of maps with ground water quality layer for
all the States, generation of digital database for the entire country and training
programme for 600 state officials.
Maps generated under this project are submitted to respective state nodal
departments as per the instructions of the ministry. Orientation training has also been
imparted to state officials of the nodal departments on how to use the maps.

42
Vetted Comments of Audit
DoS may review the mandate of the Standing Committee under NNRMS and
examine the desirability of replace these committees with more efficient and reliable
system. Action taken in the matter may be intimated.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/17/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/ Recommendation
The Committee are pained to note that the Village Resources Centre (VRC) and
Disaster Management Support Programme (DMSP) which are projects of national
importance directly implemented by NNRMS through DoS, could not achieve the
desired results. Audit review of performance of VRC coordinated by NRSC covering
the period from October 2007 to August 2008 revealed that targets for setting up VRC
nodes could note be met, DoS, on being questioned by the Committee submitted that
473 VRC nodes have been set up in 22 States/UT across the country. The Committee
expects the DoS to set up remaining VRC nodes at the earlier so that the aim of making
satellite based services directly accessible to rural population is fully achieved. The
Committee note that in DMSP, 92 per cent of the funds amounting to Rs. 86.90 crore
released to the NRSC as well as assets worth Rs. 7.80 crore remained unutilized with
the NRSC. The Committee seek explanation of the DoS for non-utilization of almost the
whole of the funds released for coping with floods, agricultural drought, earthquake,
landslides, forests fires etc.. The Committee also desire that further release for funds
for DMSP may be withheld untils Utilization Certificates for the previous amounts
released are submitted to the satisfaction of the DoS. Further, taking note of the fact
that the VRS and DMSP could not discharge their assigned mandate due to non-
availability of satellite communication bandwidth, the Committee desire the Department
to take appropriate steps to enhance their technological capacity to meticulously
tackle such problems so that such vital national projects are not rendered disfunctional.
[Sl. No. 17, Para 18 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Village Resource Centre (VRC) was established using EDUSAT satellite under
VRC Programme. Due to the de-commissioning of EDUSAT for operational services,
the functioning of VRC and expansion activities were discontinued. With the launch of
GSAT-12 in July, 2011, necessary transponders for re-activating the VRSs are allotted.
The DMS Programme coordinated by ISRO HQ includes various components
such as:—
(i) Monitoring of major natural disasters using satellite and aerial data towards
damage assessment and Dissemination of products and services through
Decision Support System at NRSC;

43
(ii) Creation of digital databases for facilitating hazard zonation and multi-hazard
risk assessment, including the development of the National Database for
Emergency Management (NDEM);
(iii) Acquisition of close contour data for hazard prone areas using Air-borne
Laser Terrain Mapper (ALTM) and Large Format Digital Camera (LFDC);
(iv) Development of Air-borne Synthetic Aparture Radar (ASAR) towards
all-weather monitoring capability;
(v) Developing satellite based emergency communication equipments and
strengthening the communications netwok with satellite based, secure, Virtual
Private Network (VPN); and
(vi) Partaking in the relevant international initiatives, such as, International Charter,
Space and Major Disasters and Sentinel Asia.
Out of the above components. (i); (ii); (iii); and part of (vi) are mainly being carried
out by NRSC and the rest are carried out by Space Application Centre, Ahemedabad.
The unspent balance as mentioned in the Committee report was for procurement of
aircraft and opertionalization of ALTM.
Efforts to procure a dedicated aircraft were initiated in 2005 to augment the aerial
survey capabilities during a disaster. To facilitate the early realization of the aircraft,
Rs. 65 crores were transferred to NRSC in 2006-07. However, unreasonable and
unexpected price hike, midway of negotiations by the aircraft supplier, forced the
Department to cancel the procurement process which was duly approved by the
115th Space Commission during March 2010.
Similary, the Air-borne Lazer Terrain Mapper (ALTM) procurement and
operationalization, initiated in 2003, had faced problems in the initial period but
subsequently made operational by 2007. Using ALTM, close contour maps have been
generated for more than 4300 Sq. kms area till date, and the efforts are being continued
in a systematic manner.
It may also be noted that, in 2008, NRSC has become fully Government and hence,
no amount is transferred to NRSC and only authorization to utilise budget is provided.
DoS is taking all measures to review the budget periodically, and emphasizing on the
realistic budget estimates and the realization of the same within the budget year.
Further, it is brought to the notice of the Committee that the DMS programme was
having required of satellite communication bandwidth. The Virtual Private Network
operating in Extended C-Band connecting 20 State Emergency Operation centres,
10 data providing nodes and 5 monitoring nodes were operational since 2006 using a
transponder on Edusat satellite. On decommissioning of  EDUSAT in September 2010,
the services were restored using 13Mhz Bandwidth in INSA T-3E. Further on
operationalisation of GSAT-12 in 2012, full services were restored using a complete
transponder on GSAT-12. Similarly, the emergency communication using disasters is
continued unhindered using INSA T Type-D satellite phones operational through
INSAT-MSS transponder and Fishermen Distress Alert Terminals (DAT) through INSAT
DRT transponder.

44
Vetted Comments of Audit
Inspite of the action taken by DoS as given in the reply the desired results have
not been achieved. This has been brought out in the CAGs Audit Report No. 5 of
2013 on P.A. on Disaster preparedness in India. DoS therefore needs to review the
programme and take adequate steps to ensure achievements of the objectives set
out under the reply.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No.B. 11011/97/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee further note that in operational projects for various users other
than ACL, there were shortcomings such as delays in completion of projects,
outstanding dues, wasteful expenditure, blocking of funds, under costing of projects
and undertaking of projects without MoU rendering recovery of dues difficult. The
Committee find that the reasons attributed for recovery of dues difficult. The
Committee find that the reasons attributed for delays in many of these projects
includes inter alia  non receipt of scheduled payments from users, installation of
new technology, time taken for security vetting, unfavourable weather conditions,
naxal problems creating difficulties in ground survey, subsequent change in user
specifications, logistics challenges and also time taken for getting necessary insputs
form the project sponsoring agencies. The committee were assured that various
mechanisms are being put in place in NRSC to expedite the process of completion of
projects and minimize delays in carrying out operational projects such as conduct of
regular monthly project progress review meetings, holding of extensive discussions
and signing of MoU with projects sponsosring agencies to bring about
standardization of uniform costing methodology, review of costing policy, preparation
of Product Realisation Plan in the form of a Technical Manual, formation of a core
team for management of each project etc. The Committee would like to be apprised
to the corrective action taken to fulfil the assurances given to them in each area of
deficiency/shortcoming.
[Sl. No. 19, Para 20 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
NRSC has fulfilled all the assurances given to avoid delay in complete of
operational projects by making various structural and system built procedures like:
• Conducting of regular project progress review meetings.
• Discussions and Signing of MoU with project sponsoring agencies.
• Standardization of uniform costing methodology has been documented and
is being reviewed by Chief Advisor Costing, Ministry of Costing.

45
/circle6Preparation of Product Realization Plan in the form of a Technical Manual is
being systematically followed.
/circle6Formation of a core team for management of projects has been done for
effective project management and monitoring.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The Action Taken by DoS in complying with the recommendation of Central PAC
as enumerated above may be systematised by issuing executive order/instruction so
that implementing divisions in NRSC could implement the decision of DoS in individual
cases.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secreatry
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS), Dehradun,
a unit of NRSC, is the focal point for long and short-term courses and refresher courses
for training in remote sensing and its main function is capacity building through
education at post-graduate level in the application of remote sensing and geo-
informatics for natural resource management. Taking cognizance of the fact that capacity
building is crucial in the endeavour towards optimum utilizaion of remote sensing
satellite applications; the Committee find the shortfall in the enrolment in long term
courses as well as lower percentage of private persons trained for promoting sale of
data products alarming. The DoS has enumerated various measures such as issued of
advertisements, deputations, interactive meetings etc., to increase enrolment in long
term courses. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of such measures
to make good the shortfall in enrolment for various courses and any further review
taken to apply more innovative corrective measures.
[Sl. No. 20, Para 21 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Due to various measures such as issue of advertisements, deputations, interactive
meetings etc., the enrolment of participants for the long term course (M. Tech/M.Sc/
PG Diploma) as well as certificate course has increased significantly. However, special
courses have been organized on request and on demand basis. The comparative table
is as under:
Course 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
Long Term (M. Tech./M. Sc./PG diploma) 56 29 109 96
Courses
Certificate Courses 33 38 105 109

46
Vetted Comments of Audit
The Action Taken by DoS in complying with the recommendation of Central PAC
such as issue of advertisements, deputations, interactive meetings etc., may be
systematised by issueing executive order/instruction so that implementing divisions
in NRSC/IIRS could implement the decision of DoS.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to note that an amount to the tune of Rs. 6.38 crore
was awating adjustment as outstanding work centre dues. Though the DoS reported
subsequent adjustment of Rs. 0.71 crore, the Committee recommend that the DoS
scrupulously follow the financial instruction to adjust outstanding advances paid
to its work centres. The Committee, wihile acknowledging that certain situations
may demand instant supply of data for emergency applications without payment of
100 per cent advance, desire that the Department's policy should also recognize such
exigencies and incorporate appropriate institutional mechanism for a time bound
recovery of outstanding dues.
[Sl. No. 21, Para 22 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Out of Rs. 6.38 crores of pending work centre advances, Rs. 65 crores have been
adjusted. Action for the adjustment of remaining work centre advances to the tune of
Rs. 45 crores is being taken up.
Vetted Comments of Audit
Further action taken to adjust balance work centre advance may be in intimated.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B.11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee takes serious note of the fact that revenue earned by NRSC varied
between (+) 17 per cent to (-) 29.84 per cent against its estimation during 2003-09
indicating deficiencies in planning of its resources. The DoS has claimed that all
efforts are being made by them to expand the user base on a continous basis by
providing varieties of services through newer means like ftp based data delivery, quick
turn-around-time from IMGEOs and BHUV AN portal for data visualization and services.
Having regard to the dictum that increase in revenue is one of the most significant
markers of financial growth of any organization, the Committee wish to impress upon
the DoS not to undermine the importance of revenue generation but initiate measures

47
for self reliance in their financial operations. The Committee also recommend that DoS/
NRSC need to overhaul their management system to exercise better monitoring and
control over their financial activities.
[Sl. No. 22, Para 23 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Subsequent to NRSC becoming a Government institution under ISRO/DoS in
2008, the emphasis is on societal good and national development. The financial
operations of NRSC are being reviewed periodically both within NRSC and by the
Department for improving efficiency of functioning. Efforts have already been initiated
for better monitoring and control of financial activities. NRSC is systematically
addressing the objectives of societal good/National development as well as commercial
exploitation of the technology for optimal results. This is done both interms of data
sales and value added services in addition to various unique services being provided
through BHUV AN geoportal. The revenue earned by NRSC against its estimation for
the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 is as under:
(Rs. in lakhs)
Y ear Estimates Actuals
2010-11 3959.50 5837.31
2011-12 2613.50 3892.22
Vetted Comments of Audit
Specific action being taken to (i) initiate measure for self relative in financial
operation and (ii) for exercising better control and monitoring of financial activities
may be stated.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are startled to note the absence of regular and effective internal
control and internal audit system in the NRSC. The Committee further finds that the
DoS neither indicated the scope of internal audit nor were operational issues covered
in internal audit. The DoS has informed that restructuring of Internal Audit Wing
(IAW) of DoS has been taken up and some changes in the existing procedures have
been envisaged such as dissolving of decentralised audit wing, establishing a
centralized internal audit wing at DoS, Bangalore, preparing an audit calendar for the
entire department covering all ISRO/DoS establishment, periodic training of IAW
personnel and organization of entry and exit meeting at each of the centres etc. The
Committee desire that this restructuring of internal audit system of NRSC be finalised
and implemented expeditiously so that accounting, financial and administrative matters

48
in NRSC do not suffer from want of efficient and effective internal control system and
the Committee apprised.
[Sl. No. 23, Para 24 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Internal Audit Wing at DoS is restructure vide Office Order No. B. 11011/6/
2011-Sec. 2 dated 27.07.11 and it is now centralised at Antariksh Bhavan, Bangalore
under the overall control of CCA which envisages conducting internal Audit of each
centre on an annual basis and following changes in the existing system/processes/
procedures are envisaged:
• An Audit Calendar is draw up for the entire department covering all DoS/
ISRO Centres/Units including Autonomous Bodies. The Audit period is from
May to January and the period from February to April is used for follow up
and reconciliation;
• An Entry and Exit meetings is organized at each of the Centres/Units which is
chaired by Controller/Director of the respective Centre/Unit with participation
by Chief Controller of Accounts, DoS, Sr. Head (IA), along with the Audit
team;
• Training is conducted to enhance the skills and knowledge in the area of
audit to the personnel of centralised IAW; and
• An Audit Plan is drawn up to cover all the activities that have bearing on the
reliability of accounts and records in all four areas of administrative system
and decentralized entities like CMD etc. The Audit plan also includes setting
out the objectives, defining the processes and scope of the Audit and the
techniques and resources to be used by the Auditor.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The cadre control of the officials working in internal audit wing (recruitment,
service matters, promotion, etc.) are continued to be under the control of Department
of Space, instead of Department of Expenditure, Controller General of Accounts as is
the case with Civil Ministries/Departments.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
To sum up, the Committee find that many significant deficiencies and fundamental
weaknesses have resulted in under utilization of remote sensing satellites and their
applications which have certainly stalled timely achievements of important national
development goals with vital social objectives like food security, conversion of
wastelands into usable land, water security through drinking water missions,

49
environment security through disaster management support programmes, etc. The
Committee observe that these shortcoming would also definitely impinge upon the
nation's endeavour to be the frontrunner in remote sensing technologies, a promising
tool in the struggle for sustainable development. The Committee also recognize that
timely access to both archival and real time multispectral earth observation data
determines the level of emergency preparedness, disaster mitigation, early, warning
vulnerability assessment, adaptive responses and humanitarian relief associated with
a wide array of disasters besides providing cost effective solutions to the natural
resources and protection problems. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Department
of Space, to take note of their considered suggestions/recommendations, as highlighted
in the preceding paragraphs to overcome the deficiencies that bedevil the effective
utilization of remote sensing technologies.
[Sl. No. 24, Para 25 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Regular interactions are being held with the stakeholders for assessing their
requirements and to meet them. Efforts are also being made for effective utilization of
remote sensing technique for natural resources management, environmental studies
and disaster management support through effective user participation. The progress
of all the projects are being reviewed and monitored by EOA-MC, NNRMS Standing
Committees and PC-NNRMS.
Vetted Comments of Audit
As recommended by the PAC, DoS may take concrete measures to overcome the
deficiencies in the effective utilisation of remote sensing technologies by issuing
executive orders and instructions for better compliance and better control and
monitoring of systems.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note with concern the huge discrepancy between the statistical
figures on the revenue from the data sales from IRS Missions and Access fee/
Royalty earned through International Ground Stations furnished by DoS to the
Committee and that obtained by Audit from the Principal Pay and Accounts Office
of DoS. The total revenue generated in three financial years from 2008-2011 amounted
to Rs. 20968 lakh as calculated from the table furnished by the DoS to the Committee
whereas the Audit vetting of the aforesaid data reveals an inflation in the figure by
48.31 per cent (9770.50 lakh), with the corresponding figure furnished being
Rs. 11197.50 lakh. The DoS owes and explanation to Parliament on the discrepancy
within six months of the presentation of this report.
[Sl. No. 4, Para 5 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Account Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(Rs. in lakhs)
Y ear Access Fee & Royalty Data Products
Antrix Sales Payable to Paid to DoS NRSC Sales Received
Ledger DoS Ledger by DoS
2008-09 5040.00 2451.53 2600.00 3890.00 0.00
2009-10 2969.00 1208.22 0.00 2278.00 1809.00
2010-11 2893.00 1876.48 952.49 3898.00 5224.00
Total 10902.00 5536.23 3552.49 10066.00 7033.00
It may be noted from the above table that the actual Access Fee and Royalty for
the period 2008-2011 is 10902.00 lakhs and Data Sales is 10066.00 lakhs totalling to
20968.00 lakhs as provided to audit earlier. The Sales Ledger figures furnished by
both Antrix and NRSC is on accrual basis. However, marketing service charges are
deducted on access fee and royalty by Antrix and only the balance amount is
payable to DoS. Hence, for the period 2008-2011 an amount of  Rs. 5536.23 lakhs
only is payble by Antrix against which a sum of 3552.49 lakh has been remitted
during the above mentioned period and 388.47 lakhs has been remitted during
2011-2012, and on realization of the remaining, amount, the same will be transferred
to DoS.
50

51
In respect of data products, the receipt for the year 2008-2009 was utilized by
NRSC for its operations and the remaining amount was retained by it and transferred to
Government on departmentalization of NRSA into NRSC in lumpsum. A summary of
the above mentioned facts is as under:
(Rs. in lakhs)
year Sales and Payable by Payable by Payable
furnished to Antrix to NRSC to DoS
PAC DoS to DoS
2009-09 8930.00 2451.53 0.00 2451.53
2009-10 5247.00 1208.22 1809.00 3017.22
2010-11 6791.00 1876.48 5224.00 7100.48
Total 20968.00 5536.23 7033.00 12569.23
Hence the amount receivable for 2008-2011 is Rs. 12569.23 lakhs. An amount of
10973.96 lakhs has been received and the remaining amount will be credited to DoS
on realization. The details furnished by PAO is as in the table mentioned below:
(in lakhs)
year Access Fee Data T echnology T otal
and Royalty Products Transfer
2008-2009 2600.00 0.00 12.00 2612.00
2009-2010 0.00 1809.00 600.00 2409.00
2010-2011 952.49 5224.00 0.00 6176.49
Total 3552.49 7033.00 612.00 11197.49
It may kindly be noted that the receipts furnished by PAO as on cash basis which
consists of receipts from technology transfer, etc. also. Therefore, the sales and receipt
figures furnished to PAC is in order.
Vetted Comments of Audit
DoS stated that sale ledger figures which were compiled on 'accrual basis' was
furnished by DoS, while Audit had compiled the information from Principal PAO office
of the Department of Space, on cash basis. The amount actually realized by DoS and
remitted to Government account needs to be taken for the purpose ascertaining of
'revenue realised' from the operational remote sensing satellites which would be as per
the figures looked by the Pr. PAO, DoS.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B. 11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Standing Committee of Parliament on Department of Space, had observed in
their 129th Report presented to both the Houses on 26th August, 2004 that in order to

52
increase accuracy of IRS data and also for more realistic interpretation of acquired
data, DoS needed to set up National Remote Sensing Coordination Committee to
facilitate holistic implementation of the following proposals: (i) integration of
Geographical Information System (GIS), Global Positioning System (GPS) and IRS
technology to enhance accuracy of derived data, (ii) production and distribution of
satellite data, (iii) processing of remote sensing data, (iv) using functional approach
towards difficulties faced by departments for accurate interpretation of the data
retrieved, (v) updating of technology at par with world standards, (vi) promotion of
remote sensing applications in coordination with universities and research centres,
and (vii) maintenance of national archive on remote sensing data with a view to
preserving data also constantly updating it. The Committee deplore the reluctance of
the DoS to set up the National Remote Sensing Coordination Committee for a variety
of reasons but, apparently, the DoS have not been able to guide, implement and
monitor the works of multifarious programmes and agencies in an integrated and
efficient manner. Since the integration of satellite data with complimentary geospatial/
geomatics technologies such as GIS, GPS, Cartography, Photogrammetry, Digital
Elevation Model (DEM) has become inevitable for enabling immediate display of
intelligible, interpretable real-time data for various applications, which is in consonance
with the Standing Committee's recommendation of integration of various technologies,
the Committee, recommend that an integrated approach should be taken and a unified
overarching Coordination Committee be constituted to obviate scope for delays and
duplication, of work performed by various agencies and for their effective monitoring.
[SI. No. 9, Para 10 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Committee may kindly note that there is already a national level Planning
Committee of National Natural Resources Management System (PC-NNRMS), an inter-
ministerial Committee, chaired by Member (Science), Planning Commission, with
Secretaries of the respective line department/ministries as members of the Committee.
The Committee has been providing directions for utilization of earth observation
and geospatial data at national level. In the recent past the PC-NNRMS has met more
frequently to address all issues related to remote sensing and technology utilization
by the user-community. The 18th Meeting of PC-NNRMS was held on July 18, 2011,
while 19th Meeting was held on June 26, 2012.
The PC-NNRMS is actively supported by 9 theme-oriented NNRMS Standing
Committees, which are chaired by respective secretaries of Line-Department Ministries,
These Standing Committees ensure proper utilization of data, avoid duplication and
ensure efficient execution of projects across different line departments. Again, in the
recent past all the 9 Standing Committees have been meeting and providing able
guidance on the utilization of remote sensing and geospatial technologies by the
respective Ministries.
Since such a mechanism already exists and is functioning well, the department
feels there is no need for one more national level Coordination Committee for the same
purpose.

53
Vetted Comments of Audit
DoS may initiate 'due process' to constitute a unified and overarching Coordination
Committee to obviate scope for delays and duplication of work performed by various
agencies and for their effective monitoring as recommended by Central PAC.
Sd/-
(S Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B.11011/17/2011 dated 05.12.2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note that there were instances of relaxation of
terms of payments, short realization of revenue, etc., in the projects undertaken by
NRSC on behalf of ACL and other users. Audit review revealed that in four out of
seven such operational projects of Antrix Corporation Ltd. (ACL), chargeable overheads
were not levied resulting in under costing of these projects by ` 83.43 lakh and in two
completed projects, NRSC did not raise demand for balance dues of ` 1.85 crore from
ACL. The Committee find, on further examination, that no overheads were charged as
no dues were apparently pending with ACL during the implementation of the projects.
Apparently, there is an urgent need for prior planning and fixing of clear objectives of
projects and also observing greater transparency in the execution of projects according
to canons of financial propriety. The Committee, therefore, recommend that in future,
the Department should not only avoid resorting to such deviations in the costing
policy but should also establish sound practices in the management of their projects
so as to obviate financial mismanagement.
[Sl. No.18, Para 19 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabhar)]
Action Taken
Antrix remits the entire cost as demanded by NRSC. As a part of system
improvement, the Department of Space, introduced the concept of 4.5 per cent handling
charges vide OM No. B.31012/6/2006-Sec. 3 dated 27.10.2006. Accordingly, the cost
transferred to NRSC against the project conceived after the issue of the above OM
includes 4.5 per cent handling charges. CARTOSAT 1 & 2 projects were conceived
before the issue of the above OM, Since the last two years, Antrix remits the cost in
advance before execution of the work.
Vetted Comments of Audit
Department may issue executive orders/instructions to avoid resorting to
deviations such as violation of costing policy, non-collecting of overhead charges in
the management of their projects so as to obviate financial mismanagement as
recommended by Central PAC.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O.M. No. B.11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]

CHAPTER   IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
The Committee are surprised to find that the international market rate of high
resolution satellite data was about six times more than the price of comparable IRS
products. The Department's response in this regard, that IRS data available are not
comparable with foreign satellite data with respect to spectral and spatial resolution
hence their prices are not comparable, indicates an urgent need for further enhancement
in the quality of IRS data in order to reach cutting edge compatibility in the international
market. Reposing immense faith in the intellectual and technological capabilities,
potential and future prospects of our space science and scientists, the Committee
exhort DoS to put in place suitable mechanisms in consultation and collaboration with
renowned scientists and technocrats leading to constant technological upgradation,
elimination of bottlenecks and enhancement of quality and credibility of IRS data.
[SI No.11, Para 12 of the Sixtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
For International users, the rates of Indian Satellite data are on par with international
rates. However, for Indian users these images are provided at a subsidised price for the
purpose of public good and national development, particularly after NRSC has become
a Government agency since November, 2008.
The quality of data being provided by the IRS series of satellites are on par with
any other satellites. The diversified spectral, spatial, radiometric and temporal
resolutions provided by IRS satellites address all aspects of resource mapping and
monitoring at variousscales, Due to such diversified options available from IRS
platforms, varieties of projects at National, Regional, State and local level are
successfully implemented by various ministries and other user groups, The NNRMS
system has got richly benefited from such unique possibilities provided by these
satellite platforms.
IRS satellites are state-of-the-art in terms of technology and their capabilities to
provide best quality data to the user community. There are different classes of IRS
satellites providing services, ranging from coarse, medium and high spatial resolution
imaging, that address specific user requirements.
The high resolution class of imaging for cartography is addressed by CARTOSAT
series of satellites. Amongst such class of satellites CARTOSAT-2 has capability to
provide images at less than 1m spatial resolution.
Technology-wise the capabilities demonstrated by IRS series of satellites has
been one of the best in the world. For instance, the CARTOSAT-1, with its stereo
54

55
viewing and high resolution mapping capabilities has enabled 3 dimensional mapping
of the country and the globe (through many international ground stations across the
globe); OCEANSAT-2, with its capabilities of ocean colour monitoring and Ku band
pencilbeam scatterometer data, is a unique satellite system in the world providing
global data services. In addition to this, with the successful launch of
MEGHATROPIQUES, a unique lndo-French joint satellite mission is a contribution to
the Global Precipitation Mission which is yet another important achievement. Further,
ISRO/ DoS has recently launched yet another unique satellite, RISAT-1, the RADAR
imaging Satellite with Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) based imaging capabilities.
This has registered India amongst few countries, with microwave remote sensing
capabilities RISAT-1 is one of the most complex satellite missions and also the heaviest
remote sensing satellite launched by PSLV C19.
During the 12th FYP, the missions that are being planned, use state-of-the-art
technology, such as, very high resolution CARTOSATs with resolution of the order
0.65m and 0.25m, improved OCEANSAT with spatial multispectral bands for Sea Surface
Temperature, Scatterometer, Geoimaging Satellite — GISAT (enables frequent / near-
real time imaging from geosynchronous platform), ideally suited for disaster
management and frequent monitoring of events on the earth surface, INSAT-3D, the
improved weather and meteorological observation of next generation with Imagers
and Sounders.
Hence, the Indian Remote Sensing missions are comparable with international
class of satellites and the same is pursued even during the 12th FYP with
state-of-the-art technology for supporting varieties of developmental activities in the
country. The data from these satellites, not only serves as public good but also has
potential for commercial exploitation for value added products and services. In addition,
this will also address the purpose of monitoring disasters, weather forecasting, climate
change and resource monitoring and planning.
Vetted Comments of Audit
The reply is silent about the action taken by the Department for setting up of
mechanisms in consultation and collaboration of renowned scientists and technocrats
leading to a constant technological upgradation and enhancement of quality and
credibility of IRS data as recommended by the PAC.
Sd/-
(S. Srinivasan)
Additional Secretary
[Department of Space, O. M. No. B.11011/7/2011 dated 05.12.2013]

CHAPTER   V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-Nil-
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
31 January, 2014 Chairman,
11 Magha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
56

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2013-14) HELD ON 30th JANUARY , 2014
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 30th January, 2014 from
1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri N.K. Singh
11. Smt. Ambika Soni
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Jaya Kumar T. — Additional Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
57

58
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Dy C&AG
2. Smt. Usha Sankar — Dy C&AG
3. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit
4. Smt. Ila Singh — Director General of Audit
5. Shri C. Gopinathan — Director General of India
6. Shri Jayant Sinha — Pr. Director of Audit
7. Shri Purushottam Tiwari — Pr. Director of Audit
8. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Pr. Director of Audit
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised that
the meeting was convened to consider and adopt nine Draft Reports (five Original and
four Action Taken Reports) of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the
following Draft Reports one by one for consideration:
(i) **** **** **** ****
(ii) **** **** **** ****
(iii) **** **** **** ****
(iv) **** **** **** ****
(v) **** **** **** ****
(vi) **** **** **** ****
(vii) **** **** **** ****
(viii) Draft Report on Action Taken on the 60th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on
‘Activities of National Remote Sensing Centre’; and
(ix) **** **** **** ****
3. After detailed deliberations, the Draft Reports at Sl. Nos. (i), (ii) and (iii) were
adopted with some modifications/amendments that are given at Annexure and the rest
were adopted without any changes. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to
finalise these Reports, in light of their suggestions and the factual verifications received
from the Audit and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports.
The Committee then adjourned.
****Matter does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTIETH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations — 25
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the — T otal : 21
Committee which have been accepted by the Percentage : 84%
Government:
Para Nos. 1-4, 6-9, 11, 13-18, 20-25
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the — T otal : 03
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage : 12%
the reply of the Government:
Para Nos. 5, 10 and 19
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of — Total : 01
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage : 4%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para No. 12
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of — Total : 0
which the Government have furnished interim Percentage : 0%
replies:
-Nil-
59