33
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO SHORT
LEVY OF TAX, INCORRECT
CLASSIFICATION OF EXCISABLE
GOODS AND NON-FULFILMENT OF
EXPORT OBLIGATION
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Fifteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2010-2011
THIRTY THIRD REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

THIRTY THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOSS OF REVENUE DUE TO SHORT LEVY OF
TAX, INCORRECT CLASSIFICATION OF
EXCISABLE GOODS AND NON-FULFILMENT
OF EXPORT OBLIGATION
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23 March, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23 March, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
March, 2011/Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1940
Price:  ` 43.00
© 2011  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-2011)  . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
CHAPTER I Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been
accepted by Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee
do  not desire to pursue in view of  the replies received
from Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
replies of  the Government  have not been accepted  by
the Committee and which require reiteration  . . . . . . . . . 32
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies  . . . . . . . . . . 33
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Twenty-seventh sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2010-11) held on 18th March, 2011  . . . . . . . . . . 35
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2010-2011)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
*16. V acant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt.  A. Jyothirmayi — Under Secretary
(iii)
* Vacancy occurred vice  Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State  w.e.f.
19th January, 2011.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2010-11), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Thirty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on action
taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Loss of Revenue due to
Short Levy of Tax, Incorrect, Classification of Excisable Goods and non-fulfilment of
Export Obligation’ based on Para No. 3.24.4 of C&AG Report No. 8 of 2007
(Direct Taxes), Para No. 2.2.1 of C&AG Report No. CA 7 of 2008 (Central Excise) and
Para No. 7.1 of C&AG Report No. 10 of 1998 (Customs).
2. The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
29th April, 2010. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 24.02.2011. The Public Accounts Committee
considered and adopted the Thirty-third Report at their sitting held on 18th March,
2011. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
18 March, 2011 Chairman,
29 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

1
CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Fifteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Loss of Revenue due to Short Levy of Tax,
Incorrect Classification of Excisable Goods  and non-fulfilment of Export Obligation'.
2. The Fifteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee based on Para No. 3.24.4
of C&AG Report No. 8 of 2007 (Direct Taxes), Para No. 2.2.1 of C&AG Report No. CA7
of 2008 (Central Excise) and Para No. 7.1 of C&AG Report No. 10 of 1998 (Customs)
respectively relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) was presented
to Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2010. The Report contained twelve Observations/
Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations
have been received from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and are
broadly categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,  8, 9, 10, 11 & 12
Total: 11
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations, which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
-Nil-
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
-Nil-
Total: Nil
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
Para No. 7
Total: 1
Chapter-V

2
3. The Committee in their 15th Report had made the following Observations/
Recommendations:
/circle6Serious concern was expressed over inordinate delays and persistent failures
on the part of a large number of Ministries/Departments in submitting Action
Taken Notes within the stipulated period of 4 months from the date of laying
the Audit Reports on the Table of the House. As many as 3450 Audit
Paragraphs were pending with the various Ministries/Departments as on
28th February, 2010. Out of this, 2208 paras were pending with the Department
of Revenue with the break up being, 1453 relating to Direct Taxes (CBDT),
443 paras on Central Excise (CBEC) and 312 paras on Customs (CBEC).
/circle6The Committee had desired that the Department of Revenue-CBDT put in
place a strong and effective mechanism to ensure that the issue of Non-
Compliance by the Departments in timely submission of replies to the Audit
paragraphs are settled conclusively so that same issues do not recur.
/circle6In their Report, the Committee had recommended that the Department of
Revenue should institutionalize half yearly meetings between the
Department and the Office of C&AG at the level of Joint Secretary and
quarterly meetings at the Director's level to reconcile the quantum of
pendency in order to settle the controversial/disputed issues, facts and
figures. It was also recommended that the work of computerization of records
and building of electronic database should be expedited to improve the
monitoring and quick disposal/submission of Action Taken Notes by the
Department.
/circle6Regarding definitions of 'edible oil' and 'hair oil', the Committee had noted
that the products had not been codified clearly in the relevant chapters of
Central Excise Tariff which had resulted in classification of excisable 'hair oil'
as duty free 'edible oil' and had thereby affected the revenue earnings
adversely. The Committee had desired that before issuing clarifications or
carrying out any amendments to this effect, the legal sustainability of the
same be ascertained to avoid different interpretations and litigation by the
assessees.
/circle6Noting that Action Taken Notes on Para No. 7.1 of Audit Report No. 10 of
1998 relating to 'Non-fulfilment of export obligation (Customs)' was not
furnished, the Committee had recommended that the coordination between
the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Commerce be strengthened to
prevent revenue leakages in respect of Export Promotion Schemes.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the ensuing
paragraphs, the Committee deal with Action Taken by the Government on Observations/
Recommendations made in the Original Report which merit comments or need
reiteration.

3
5. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
furnish, at the earliest, final/conclusive Action Taken Note on the Observation/
Recommendation to which interim reply has been submitted.
A. Inordinate delay in timely submission of Action Taken Notes
[Recommendation Paragraph Nos. 1 and 4 of the Fifteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha)]
6. In their Fifteenth Report, the Committee had observed that there were inordinate
delays and persistent failures on the part of a large number of Ministries/Departments
in submitting Action Taken Notes within the stipulated period of four months from the
date of laying the Audit Reports on the Table of the House. During examination of the
subject, the Committee had found that as on 28th February, 2010, Remedial Action/
Corrective Action Taken Notes on a total number of 3450 Audit Paragraphs were
pending with various Ministries/Departments pertaining to the period from 1995-96 to
2008-09. Out of this, 2208 paras were pending with the Department of Revenue. Amongst
them, 1453 related to Direct Taxes (CBDT), 443 paras to Central Excise (CBEC) and 312
paras pertained to Customs (CBEC). The Committee had noted that the Department of
Revenue were facing certain practical difficulties in adhering to the prescribed period
of four months for furnishing the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes and had
recommended that the Department of Revenue institutionalize half yearly meetings
between the Department and the Office of C&AG so as to minimise the quantum of
pendency and to settle the controversial/disputed issues, facts and figures. The
Committee had further recommended that the work of computerization of records and
building of electronic database be expedited in order to improve the monitoring and
quick disposal/submission of Action Taken Notes by the Department.
7. Apprising the Committee about the steps that were taken by the Ministry on their
Recommendation, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue-Central Board of
Excise & Customs) in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:—
"Special effort has been put in to reduce pendency of ATNs. In compliance with
the observations/recommendations of the PAC the following measures have
been initiated to bring down the pendency:
(a) A Standing Audit Committee has been constituted under the Revenue
Secretary with representatives from the CBEC and CAG to monitor the
disposal of A TNs and expeditiously resolve issues relating to contested
paras.
(b) Workshops with officers of the CAG at the level of Director and Joint
Secretary have been conducted during the months of July, August and
September to facilitate expeditious settlement of paras.
(c) A special drive has been undertaken to expeditiously complete translation
of ATNs into Hindi. As a result 693 have been translated into Hindi out of
1400 paras reported to be pending on this count.
(d) Close coordination between CAG and Dept. of Revenue (CBEC-Central
Excise & Service Tax) has enabled reconciliation of pendency of outstanding

4
paras. As on 30.09.2010 the number of paras outstanding (up to the Audit
Report No. 7 of 2008) has been brought down from 443 to 130 paras. Since
the then current report (CA 20 of 2009-10, containing 316 paras) is now
classified as non-current, the present figure of outstanding paras is as
follows:—
Outstanding Non-Current Audit Paras as on 28-02-2010 : 316
Add: Paras contained in CA 20 of 2009-10 : 443
Total : 759
Outstanding paras as on 30.09.10 : 214
Outstanding with CAG : 132
Outstanding with CBEC (Central Excise & Service Tax) : 82
Paras settled during the period Feb—Sept. 2010 : 545
Reduction in Pendency : 52%
(e) It is also brought to the kind notice of the Committee that a serious fire
incident which occurred on the night on 26th/27th May 2010 in Hudco
Vishala Building on the 5th and 6th Floors severely affected the section
dealing with PAC and CAG matters. All office equipment (Computers,
Photocopies and Fax machines) and large amount of records and files were
destroyed in the fire incident. This has adversely affected the functioning
of the Section and delayed disposal of the outstanding paras. Records are
still in the process of reconstruction, which has been undertaken with
assistance of CAG Office and field Offices of the CBEC."
8. Further, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue—Central Board of
Direct Taxes) have added as under:—
"The Paragraph is a statement of facts and concerns expressed by the Hon'ble
Committee have been noted. Every efforts is being made to expedite furnishing
of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) at the earliest. It is however, submitted that the
pending ATNs pertain to past 8 years (Audit Report Years 1999-2000 to 2006-07)
and in the same period the Income Tax Department underwent complete
restructuring. As a result, jurisdiction of large number of cases got changed and
the process inolved physical transfer of records. Because of these problems, it
became difficult to trace records in many cases delaying the replies.
The issue of pending ATNs has been taken up with the field formations and 624
A TNs have been furnished since February 2010. However, still there are 733 old
draft paras in which A TNs are to be submitted. Everry effort is being made to
obtain the requisite information from the field formations (Chief Commissioners
of Income Tax) to enable the Ministry to furnish ATNs in the remaining cases at
the earliest."

5
9. The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendations, the Department of
Revenue (CBEC) have constituted a Standing Audit Committee under the Revenue
Secretary with representatives from CBEC and CAG to monitor the disposal of Action
Taken Notes (ATNs). It is heartening to note that the pendency of outstanding
paragraphs pertaining to Department of Revenue (CBEC) has been brought down
from 443 to 130. With the constitution of a Standing Audit Committee for removal of
bottlenecks  and monitor the disposal of ATNs, the Committee hope that the ATNs
would be submitted within the stipulated period of four months from the date of laying
the Audit Reports in Parliament. The Central Board of Direct Taxes, have informed
the Committee  that they had taken up the pendency of ATNs with the field formations
and 624 ATNs were furnished since February 2010. However, the Committee, would
like to know the latest position in respect of 733 paras on which ATNs are still
pending and by when the rest would be furnished by the Central Board of Direct
Taxes. Further, the Committee would also like to know the action initiated to fix
responsibility against the officials who were  responsible for delayed submission of
Action Taken Notes. Regarding the fire incident which occurred on 26/27 May, 2010
in Hudco Vishala Building, the Committee are appalled to note that the Section
dealing with PAC and CAG matters was engulfed by fire leading to delay in disposal
of the outstanding paras. The  Committee call upon the Ministry to expedite the
process of reconstruction of the relevant records with the help of the C&AG and also
ensure its safe custody. The Committee would like to be apprised of the preventive
steps taken by the Ministry after this incident.
B. To obviate systemic deficiencies and removal of ambiguities in the Law
[Recommendation Paragraph No. 3 of the Fifteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
10. The Committee while examining the reasons for inordinate delay in the submission
of Action Taken Notes on the part of the Department of Revenue found that some
cases were pending in various Courts and it was opined that timely submission of
Action Taken Notes had nothing to do with the finality of matter through the judicial
process. The Committee had recommended that notwithstanding the Court cases,
Action Taken Notes must be forwarded  within the prescribed period of four months
and had also desired to know the measures contemplated by the Ministry to obviate
systemic deficiencies apart from removing ambiguities in the law in this regard in order
to bring down the pendency of cases.
11. The Ministry while furnishing their Action Taken Notes have inter-alia stated
as under:—
(a) The Directions of the PAC have been complied with from March 2010 to Sept.
2010—ATNs have been submitted to the CAG incorporating the status of the
cases i.e., whether pending with appellate authorities or courts—with details
of the action taken by the Department in response to observation of the
Audit.
(b) The steps taken to bring down the court cases and disputes are:—
(i) The Department selectively, places on the website draft circulars, draft
regulations etc. inviting comments from field formations and trade bodies
so that likely difficulties and disputes can be removed at draft stage.

6
(ii) The Department has set up a Directorate of Legal Affairs with the
mandate of closely monitoring cases before CESTAT, High Courts and
Supreme Courts.
(iii) The Department has a Policy Wing and Tax Research Unit which
formulates policies relating to the Act and addresses disputes by issue
of instructions under Section 37B and takes up references from the field
formations/trade bodies/assessees for amendments of the act and
notification for rationalization of duties.
(iv) The Department has also taken several steps for improving the quality
of representation before the Tribunal and Courts. Some of the steps
taken are by way of circulars.
12. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry has made it clear to their
field formations that the pendency of matters in the courts has nothing to do with
submission of ATNs within the prescribed period of four months, constituted a
Committee headed by Member (A&J) CBDT for reducing litigation and also decided
to implement the National Judicial Reform System (JRS). The Committee would like
to be apprised of the findings of the Member (A&J) CBDT for reducing litigation, the
action taken by the Government on such findings and the results following
implementation of JRS so as to reduce litigations.
C. Delayed action in monitoring the Export Obligation
[Recommendation Paragraph No. 11 of the Fifteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
13. The Committee had taken serious exception to the failure of the Department of
Revenue—CBEC to furnish Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes for more than 12
years on the Audit Paragraph No. 7.1 of C&AG's Report No. 10 of 1998, Union
Government inspite of Audit pointing out the delay wayback in October, 1997. The
Committee had noted that only after the selection of the para for examination by them
that the DGFT under the Ministry of Commerce had intimated in the meeting held on
5th February, 2010 that three out of the seven licences had been redeemed. The
Committee were then informed about the status of the cases and the action that had
been taken so far.
14. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs) have submitted as under:—
“M/s. DCM Toyota Ltd. has been declared defaulter. An adjudication order
under FT(DT) Act, 1992 has been issued by Ministry of Commerce by imposing
penalty of  ` 32.23 crores on the firm, followed by issuance of a recovery letter
dated 11.06.2010 to Chief Secretary, New Delhi. Further, Regional Authority,
New Delhi has initiated action for fixing the responsibility for the delay in action
in monitoring the Export Obligation.”
Further, it has been added that:—
"M/s. Pearl Intl. Ltd. also has been declared defaulter and placed under Denied
Entity thereby stopping all benefits under the Foreign Trade Policy. An
adjudication order under FT(DR) Act, 1992 has also been issued by the Ministry

7
of Commerce and a penalty of  ` 90.45 crores has been imposed on the firm. This
has been followed by issuance of a recovery letter dated 11.05.2010 to Chief
Secretary, New Delhi. Further, Regional Authority, New Delhi has initiated action
for fixing the responsibility for the delay in action in monitoring the Export
Obligation."
15. The Committee were apprised that two firms (M/s. DCM Toyota Ltd. and
M/s. Pearl Intl. Ltd.) were declared as defaulters and penalties of Rs. 32.23 crores
and ` 90.45 crores were imposed on them respectively and that action has also been
initated to fix responsibility for delay in monitoring the Export Obligation. The
Committee would like to be informed about the recoveries effected. from the defaulter
firms and the outcome of the steps initiated to fix responsibility in this regard.
D. Strengthening the monitoring mechanism
[Recommendation Paragraph No. 12 of the Fifteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
16. The Committee in their Original Report had stressed that monitoring of licences
issued under Export Promotion Schemes was the foremost duty of licensing authority
to ensure that there were no revenue leakages. Nothing that both the Ministry of
Finance and the Ministry of Commerce (which were involved in monitoring) had not
taken action in the instant case for 12 years, the Committee had stressed the need for
strengthening co-ordination between the two Ministries. Further, it was also
recommended that the Ministry of Finance strengthen their mechanism to monitor the
cases where licensees had availed the benefit of duty-free imports. Fearing that there
could be many such other similar unreported cases, the Committee had also
recommended that the Ministries/Departments concerned look into such cases and
carry out necessary rectifications.
17. While furnishing the Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Revenue (Central Board of Excise & Customs) in this regard, it has been stated as
under:
"The Department of Revenue has issued Circular No. 5/2010—Customs
Dt. 16.3.2010 whereby the field formations have been directed to monitor the
Export Obligations (EO) effectively and to ensure that the Government revenue
is safeguarded in cases of default.
The Ministry of Commerce has also issued Policy guidelines regarding monitoring
of EO vide letter No. 01/94/180/1060/AM-10/PC-4/dated 27.7.2010 to all the
Regional Authorities, who have been instructed to meticulously monitor the
Export Obligation and take appropriate action as per FT (DR) Act, 1992 for
recovery in cases of non-fulfilment within the specified time period."
18. The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance have issued instructions
to the field formations to ensure that the Government revenue is safeguarded in
cases of default. Further, the Ministry of Commerce have also issued policy
guidelines to monitor meticulously the Export Obligation for recovery in case of
non-fulfilment of Export Obligations. Surprisingly, both the Ministries are studiously
silent about the initiative taken to strengthen the coordination between them as

8
desired by the Committee. The Committee would like to be apprised of the tangible
action initiated to plug the loopholes and for effective coordination between the
Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Commerce and the outcome of such efforts.
The Ministry of Finance also need to indicate whether any, and what efforts, have
been made by them to ascertain similar unreported cases of non-fulfilment of Export
Obligations.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation No. 1
1. Non-Compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies
to the Audit paragraphs of C&AG is a matter of great concern to the Public Accounts
Committee because such lack of response on the part of the Chief Accounting
Authorities/Secretaries of the Ministries/Department dilutes the role and authority of
Parliament and encourages financial indiscipline, frauds and corruption. With effect
from March, 1996 Ministries/ Departments are required to furnish the remedial/corrective
Action Taken Notes to the Public Accounts Committee through the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) on all those Paragraphs of the Reports of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India, which are not formally taken up by the Committee for
examination and Reports presented thereon. Such remedial/corrective Action Taken
Notes are to be furnished within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports in
Parliament. Nevertheless, the Committee are at pain to note that still there are inordinate
delays and persisting failures on the part of a large number of Ministries/Departments
in timely submission of Action Taken Reports within the stipulated period of 4 months
from the date of laying the Audit Reports on the Table of the House. The Committee's
examination of the subject has revealed that as on 28th February, 2010 remedial action/
corrective Action Taken Notes on a total number of 3450 Audit Paragraphs were pending
with various Ministries/Departments. This pertains to the period 1995-96 to 2008-09.
Out of this, as many as 2208 paras are pending with the Department of Revenue with
the break up being, 1453 relating to Direct Taxes (CBDT), 443 paras on Central Excise
(CBEC) and 312 paras on Customs (CBEC).
[Para 1 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Special effort has been put in to reduce pendency of ATNs. In compliance with the
observations/recommendations of the PAC the following measures have been initiated
to bring down the pendency:—
(a) A Standing Audit Committee has been constituted under the Revenue
Secretary with representatives from the CBEC and CAG to monitor the
disposal of A TNs and expeditiously resolve issues relating to contested
paras.
9

10
(b) Workshops with officers of the CAG at the level of Director and
Joint Secretary have been conducted during the months of July, August
and September to facilitate expeditious settlement of paras.
(c) A special drive has been undertaken to expeditiously complete translation
of ATNs into Hindi. As a result 693 have been translated into Hindi out of
1400 paras reported to be pending on this count.
(d) Close coordination between CAG & Deptt. of Revenue (CBEC—Central
Excise & Service Tax) has enabled reconcilation of pendency of outstanding
paras. As on 30.09.2010 the No. of paras outstanding (upto to the
Audit Report No. 7 of 2008) has been brought down from 443 as reported
during Oral evidence in the course PAC's 15th Report (15th Lok Sabha) to
130 paras. Since the then current report (CA 20 of 2009-10, containing 316
paras) is now classified as non-current the present figure out of standing
paras is as follows:—
Outstanding Non-Current Audit Paras as on 28-02-2010 : 443
Add: Paras contained in CA 20 of 2009-10 : 316
TOTAL : 759
Outstanding paras as on 30.09.10 : 214
Outstanding with CAG : 132
Outstanding with CBEC (C. Excise & Service Tax) : 82
Paras settled during the period Feb.-Sept. 2010 : 545
Reduction in Pendency : 52%
(e) It is also brought to the kind notice of the Committee that a serious fire
incident which occurred on the night of 26th/27th May 2010 in Hudco Vishala
Building on the 5th & 6th Floors severely affected the section dealing with
PAC and CAG matters. All Office equipment (Computers, Photocopiers &
Fax machines) and large amount of records and files were destroyed in the
fire incident. This has adversely affected the functioning of the Section and
delayed disposal of the outstanding paras. Records are still in the process
of reconstruction, which has been undertaken with assistance of CAG Office
and field Offices of the CBEC.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue) O.M. No. 238/04/2010-CX-7
dated 5th January, 2011]
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Direct Taxes)
Observation/Recommendation No. 1
Non-Compliance by the Ministries/ Departments in timely submission of replies to
the Audit paragraphs of C&AG is a matter of great concern to the Public Accounts
Committee because such lack of response on the part of the Chief Accounting/

11
Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments dilutes the role and authority of Parliament
and encourages financial indiscipline, frauds and corruption. With effect from March,
1996 Ministries/Departments are required to furnish the remedial/corrective Action
Taken Notes to the Public Accounts Committee through the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) on all those Paragraphs of the Reports of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India, which are not formally taken up by the Committee for
examination and Reports presented thereon. Such remedial/corrective Action Taken
Notes are to be furnished within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports in
Parliament.  Nevertheless, the Committee are at pain to note that still there are inordinate
delays and persisting failures on the part of a large number of Ministries/Departments
in timely submission of Action Taken Reports within the stipulated period of 4 months
from the date of laying the Audit Reports on the Table of the House. The Committee's
examination of the subject has revealed that as on 28th February, 2010 remedial action/
corrective Action Taken Notes on a total number of 3450 Audit Paragraphs were pending
with various Ministries/Departments. This pertains to the period 1995-96 to 2008-09.
Out of this, as many as 2208 paras are pending with the Department of Revenue with
the break up being, 1453 relating to Direct Taxes (CBDT), 443 paras on Central Excise
(CBEC) and 312 paras on Customs (CBEC).
[Para 1 of Part—II of the 15th Report of PAC
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The Paragraph is a statement of facts and concerns expressed by the Hon'ble
Committee have been noted. Every effort is being made to expedite furnishing of
Action Taken Notes (ATNs) at the earliest possible. It is, however, submitted that the
pending ATNs pertain to past 8 years (Audit Report Years 1999-2000 to 2006-07) and in
the same period the Income Tax Department underwent complete restructuring. As a
result, jurisdiction of large number of cases got changed and the process involved
physical transfer of records. Because of these problems, it became difficult to trace
records in many cases delaying the replies.
The issue of pending ATNs has been taken up with the field formation and 624
A TNs have been furnished since February 2010. However, still there are 733 old draft
paras in which ATNs are to be submitted.
Every effort is being made to obtain the requisite information from the field formation
(Chief Commissioners of Income Tax) to enable the Ministry to furnish ATNs in the
remaining cases at the earliest.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 240/5/2010-A&PAC-I
dated 28-10-2010]
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Direct Taxes)
Observation/Recommendation No. 2
The Committee observe certain critical shortcomings in the internal audit system of
the Department of Revenue—CBDT which are responsible for the Non-Compliance by

12
the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of
C&AG of India. For instance, while preparing Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes
Internal audit missed a number of Facts/Figures and issues which the Audit had to
point out and make corrections later on thus delaying the finalization and furnishing of
the Action Taken Notes. The Committee recommend that the Department of Revenue—
CBDT should take corrective measures at their level to streamline the existing internal
audit system to ensure that no requisite information is missed out at any stage of
auditing. They further recommend that a strong and effective mechanism should be
put in place to ensure that the issue of Non-Compliance by the Departments in timely
submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs of C&AG be settled conclusively and
the same issues do not recur.
[Para 2 of Part—II of the 15th Report of PAC
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The period under consideration in the present report of the Public Accounts
Committee is 1999-2000 to 2006-07. During this period the internal audit in the Income
Tax Department was being done through the Chain Audit System which was
subsequently found to be ineffective. This system was replaced by the new Internal
Audit System with effect from 01-06-2007. Details of the same have already been
submitted to the Hon'ble Committee and find mention at Para 16 of Part-I of this report.
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) issued an instruction on the subject vide
F. No. 246/109/2004-A & PA C.I dtd. 17.04.2007 as Instruction No. 3 of 2007. It is a
comprehensive instruction prescribing, inter alia, targets for internal audit by dedicated
audit teams headed by different levels of officers of the department depending upon
the Income limits of cases assessed. In order to ensure uniform and systematic auditing
a check list was issued on 10-03-2008 for use by the Internal Audit wing of the
department. However, this check list was found wanting and committee headed by a
Chief Commissioner of Income tax was formed for re-writing the Audit Manual and the
check list for Internal Audit. The revised Check List is exhaustive and has been approved
for issue to be used by the Internal Audit of the Income Tax Department. The Director
General of Income Tax (Admn.) has also been directed to revisit the Check List after
two years based upon the experience gained.
With the introduction of new Internal Audit System, the processes have got
streamlined. However, because of sever constraints on manpower front, the desired
pace is yet to be achieved. The Department is making sincere efforts to overcome the
problem of shortage of manpower.
The timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG , has been
taken up on priority and the CBDT has asked all the Chief Commissioners of Income
Tax (Cadre Controlling Authority) to expedite submission of reports/ATNs. This
was followed up during the month of April, 2010 by the Member (A&J), CBDT
through holding review meeting with all the Chief Commissioners of Income Tax
of Delhi, Chennai and Mumbai which constitute a majority of the pendency. In
the Annual Conference of the Chief Commissioners and Director Generals on
09th &10th June, 2010, this issue was again taken up and all the senior officers were

13
sensitized about the urgency of the matter and they were asked to ensure that replies
in all the pending cases should be sent most urgently. Comprehensive guidelines
issued vide instruction No. 9 of 2006 of the CBDT prescribing the modalities in which
the Audit Paragraphs received from the C&AG , are to be dealt with, were reiterated.
These guidelines prescribe the procedure from the initial stage— i.e., the requisitioning
of records by the Local Audit Parties of the C&AG from the Assessing Officers till the
final submission of ATNs. Time lines for each stage along-with the responsibility of
officers to ensure due compliance has also been prescribed. In order to give focused
attention, the CBDT has included the implementation of instruction No. 9 as part of the
Central Action Plan for the Financial Year 2010-11. The progress is being regularly
monitored at the level of Member in the Central Board of Direct Taxes.
The Cabinet Secretary held a meeting on 17-06-2010 of the Committee of Secretaries
to review the work of submission of ATNs on paras contained in the C&AG Audit
reports and the Public Accounts Committee reports laid on the table of the Parliament.
Further, a Standing Audit Committee in the Department of Revenue under the
Chairmanship of the Revenue Secretary has been constituted to review the progress
of work relating to the submission of ATNs wherein the C&AG has been requested to
nominate an officer of the rank of Director General/Principal Director to enable better
co-ordination in disposal of the pendency.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 240/5/2010-A&PAC-I
dated 28-10-2010]
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation No. 3
(a) The Committee take serious note of the inordinate delay in the submission of
Action Taken Notes on the part of the Department of Revenue on the plea that many
of these cases are pending in various courts. The Committee are of the opinion that
timely submission of Action Taken Notes has nothing to do with the finality of the
matter through the judicial process because what is sought from the Ministry is the
information on Action Taken by the Department on the Audit observation within a
period of four months from the date of laying of the Audit observation within a period
of four months from the date of laying of the Audit Report on the Table of the House.
If necessary, these Action Taken Notes may include necessary details of judicial
processes like serving, going in for appeal etc. as well as the Action Taken by the
Ministry/Department on the Audit Paras. The Committee therefore, recommend that
notwithstanding the court cases. Action Taken Notes must be forwarded within the
prescribed period of four months.
(b) The Committee would like to know the measures contemplated by the Ministry
to obviate systemic deficiencies and to remove ambiguities in the law in this regard so
as to bring down the number of court cases.
[Para 3 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

14
Action Taken by Government
(a) The Directions of the PAC have been complied with From March 2010 to
Sept. 2010—ATN have been submitted to the CAG incorporating the status
of the case i.e. whether pending with appellate authorities or courts—with
details of the action taken by the Deptt. in response to observation of the
Audit.
(b) The steps taken to bring down the court cases and disputes are:—
(i) The Department selectively, places on the website draft circulars, draft
regulations etc. inviting  comments from field formations and trade
bodies so that likely difficulties and disputes can be removed at draft
stage.
(ii) The Department has set up a Directorate of Legal Affairs with the
mandate of closely monitoring cases before CESTAT, High Courts and
Supreme Courts.
(iii) The Department has a Policy Wing and Tax Research Unit which
formulates policies relating to the Act and addresses disputes by issue
of instructions under Section 37B and takes up references from the
field formations/trade bodies/assessees for amendments of the act and
notification for rationalization of duties.
(iv) The Department has also taken several steps for improving the quality
of representation before the Tribunal and Courts. Some of the steps
taken are by way of circulars:
(1) F.No. 390/Misc./411/07-JC dated 7.1.2008
(2) F. No. 390/Misc./411/07-JC dated 6.2.2008
(3) Circular No. 863/1/2008-CX dated 2.1.2008
(4) F.No. 390/Misc./100/09-JC dated 3.6.2009
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M. No. 238/04/2010-CX-7
dated 5th January, 2011]
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Direct Taxes)
Observation/Recommendation No. 3
The Committee take serious note of the inordinate delay in the submission of
Action Taken Notes on the part of the Department of Revenue on the plea that many
of these cases are pending in various courts. The committee are of the opinion that
timely submission of Action Taken Notes has nothing to do with the finality of the
matter through the judicial process because what is sought from the Ministry is the
information on Action Taken by the Department on the Audit observation within a
period of four months from the date of laying of the Audit Reports on the Table of the
House. If necessary, these Action taken Notes may include necessary details of judicial

15
processes like serving of notices, going in for appeal etc. as well as the Action Taken
by the Ministry/Department of the Audit paras. The Committee therefore, recommend
that notwithstanding the court cases, Action Taken Notes must be forwarded within
the prescribed period of four months. The Committee would like to know the measures
contemplated by the Ministry to obviate systemic deficiencies and to remove
ambiguities in the law in this regard so as to bring down the number of court cases.
[Para 3 of Part-II of the 15th Report of PAC,
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Recommendations of the Hon'ble Committee have been noted. It is submitted that
the observations of the committee have been conveyed to the field formation clarifying
that pendency of matters in the courts has nothing to do with submission of Action
Taken Notes within prescribed period of four months.
Regarding reducing litigation, the Finance Minister has constituted a Committee
headed by Member (A&J), CBDT which has held several meetings. Report of the
Committee is expected by the end of 2010. However some of the initiatives taken by the
Department to reduce litigation include decision to implement National Judicial Reference
System (JRS) which will comprise of repository data base of all reported and
unreported judgements of ITAT, High Courts and the Supreme Court. Besides, the
statutory provisions, allied laws, circulars,  instructions etc. will be accessible in e-
form. The JRS will have facility of a search engine to peruse through/search for cases
in the repository data base as well as in the data base for tracking the appeals (the
judicial monitoring data base). Such a system will help in the following manner:
/circle6It will help in tracking all appeals in ITAT, High Courts and the Supreme Court.
/circle6It will facilitate issuing alerts and reminders in case of delays in filing
appeals.
/circle6It will empower the Assessing Officers in arriving at just and fair assessment
orders through easy accessibility to judicial information, case laws and
judgements. It will help in improving the quality of assessment orders. This
is one of the important challenges before the department as poor quality
high pitched orders often result in appeals which are difficult to be defended
before the tribunal and courts. Since substantial revenue is often entailed,
the officers concerned tend to pursue these cases in appeal.
/circle6Easy availability of this data base will help the Assessing Officers and the
supervisory officers (Joint/Additional Commissioners and Administrative
Commissioners) to know latest judgements of Supreme Court, various
High Courts and ITAT on a issue and thus help to avoid frivolous litigation.
/circle6It will assist the Departmental Representatives/Counsels in improving the
quality of representation before Tribunal & Courts and enhancing the
success rate of the department in appeals.

16
The JRS is expected to be operational during Financial Year 2011-12
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 240/5/2010-A&PAC-I
dated 28-10-2010]
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation No. 4
(a) The Committee feel that Department of Revenue which are stated to be facing
certain practical difficulties in adhering to the prescribed period of four months for
furnishing the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes, should overhaul the concerned
section/wing by inducting more manpower and machinery so as to comply with the
mandatory requirement.
(b) The Committee also recommend that the Department institutionalize half yearly
meetings between the Department and the Office of C&AG at the level of Joint Secretary
and above and quarterly meetings at the Director's level to reconcile the quantum of
pendency and also to settle the controversial/disputed issues, facts and figures etc.
(c) The Committee further recommend that the work of computerization of records
and building of electronic database should be expedited to improve the monitoring
and quick disposal/submission of Action Taken Notes by the Department.
[Para 4 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts  Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
(1) It is also brought to the kind notice of the Committee that a serious fire
incident which occurred on the night of 26th/27th May 2010 in Hudco
Vishala Building on the 5th & 6th Floors severely affected CBEC office
among which is also the section dealing with PAC matters. All Office
equipment (Computers, Photocopiers & Fax machines) and large amount of
records and files were destroyed in the fire incident. This has adversely
affected the functioning of the Section and delayed disposal of the
outstanding paras. Records are still in the process of reconstruction, which
has been undertaken with assistance of CAG Office and field Offices of the
CBEC.
(2) The Department is in the process of augmenting officers working in the
section. Due to the fire incident there is limited infrastructure and equipment
available. Upon resurrection of the office space and machinery, proposals
for enhancing manpower and equipment (Fax Machines, Photocopiers,
Computers, V ehicles etc.) which are at various stages of approval, will be
implemented.
(3) A Standing Audit Committee has been constituted under the Revenue
Secretary with representatives from the CBEC and CAG to monitor the
disposal of A TNs and expeditiously resolve issues relating to contested

17
paras. Workshops with officers of the CAG at the level of Director and
Joint Secretary have been conducted during the months of July, August
and September to facilitate expeditious settlement of paras.
(4) The work relating to computerisation of Audit paras for the last 10 years has
been completed to enable bettter monitoring of compliance.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M.No.238/04/2010-CX-7
dated 5th January, 2011]
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central  Board of Direct Taxes)
Observation/Recommendation No. 4
The Committee feel that Department of Revenue which are stated to be facing
certain difficulties in adhering to the prescribed period of four months for furnishing
the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes, should overhaul the concerned section/
wing by inducting more manpower and machinery so as to comply with the mandatory
requirement. The Committee also recommend that the Department institutionalize half
yearly meetings between the Department and the office of C&AG at the level of
Joint Secretary and above and quarterly meetings at the Director's level to reconcile
the quantum of pendency and also to settle the controversial/disputed issues, facts
and figures etc. The Committee further recommend that the work of computerization of
records and building of electronic database should be expedited to improve the
monitoring and quick disposal/submission of Action Taken Notes by the Department.
[Para 4 of Part-II of the 15th Report of PAC
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Following the directions of the Hon'ble Committee, the first meeting for reconciling
the pendency between the officers of C&AG of India and the CBDT, took place on
05-03-2010. Subsequent reconciliation was done in August 2010. The latest
reconciliation has been done on 27-10-2010.
Further, a Standing Audit Committee in the Department of Revenue under the
chairmanship of the Revenue Secretary has been constituted to review the work relating
to timely submission of ATNs. The C&AG has been requested to nominate an officer
of the rank of Director General/Principal Director to this Committee for better co-
ordination in disposal of the pendency and to resolve controversial/disputed issues.
The task of preparing electronic database of pending Audit Paras was taken up and
the same is nearing completion. The database will facilitate in better monitoring of
pending cases. This mechanism would be reviewed after 31-03-2011 and further
corrective measures, as required, will be taken.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 240/5/2010-A&PAC-I
dated 28-10-2010]

18
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Direct Taxes)
Observation/Recommendation No. 5
The Committee take note of the fact that while discussing the case of M/s Indian
Overseas Bank (Para 3.24.2 of CAG's Audit Report No. 8 of 2007), the Department of
Revenue informed the Sub-Committee that remedial action had already been taken by
them in 2006. The Committee do not see any plausible reason why this fact could not
have been brought to the notice of the audit in 2006 itself. They further recommend
that the filed formations of Income Tax Department should invariably endorse a copy
of Proforma Reports on paragraphs included in Audit Report to the Office of the
C&AG of India so that instances of such nature do not recur in future. The Committee
also learn that comprehensive guidelines, vide instruction No. 9 of  2006 of the CBDT
prescribing modalities in which the Audit paragraphs received from C&AG are to be
dealt with had been issued by the Department as early as 2006. The Committee are to
the considered opinion that when such elaborate instructions and guidelines have
been made available to the officers to deal with Audit paragraphs, responsibility should
be fixed for those responsible for not submitting the Action Taken Notes within the
stipulated time.
[Para 5 of Part-II of the 15th Report of PAC
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
As per the extant practice, the Accountant General (AG) concerned issues a Statement
of Fact (SOF) to the Commissioner of Income Tax concerned when the AG proposes to
include an audit objection in the report as an audit para. As per Instruction No.9 of
2006 issued by the CBDT, following receipt of the SOF, the Commissioner concerned
has to furnish a reply directly to the AG concerned. Thus, reply of the Commissioner to
the audit objection is already with the C&AG . However, the audit objection gets
converted into audit para when the C&AG is not satisfied with the views of the
Commissioner & there is difference of opinion. In such a situation, endorsing a further
copy may not serve the purpose since the C&AG needs reply of the Ministry on the
Audit Para included in their report presented before the Parliament. It is also submitted
that if field officers are asked to submit reply to an audit para included in the report
directly to C&AG, it may be difficult to maintain uniformity of approach on important
and contentious issues. As per present practice, report of the Commissioner is examined
in CBDT to maintain uniformity keeping in view the legislative intent and the latest
judicial pronouncements. In view of this, the present practice may be allowed to continue.
However, administrative measures are being taken to see that the replies are furnished
within the prescribed time limit.
Instruction No. 9 of 2006 prescribes in para 7 detailed procedures through which
responsibility needs to be fixed for lapse in dealing with revenue audit objections. In
all cases of the audit paras where ATNs are pending, the facts are examined critically to
see that instances of gross negligence and dereliction of duty are duly identified for
initiation of appropriate proceedings against the Officers/Officials concerned.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 240/5/2010-A&PAC-I,
dated 28.10.2010]

19
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Direct Taxes)
Observation/Recommendation No. 6
In view of the unsatisfactory performance of the Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes, the Committee recommend the following measures
to avoid future pendencies: (i) Necessary arrangements should be made to ensure
submission of the Action Taken Notes on all the paragraphs of the Audit Reports of
C&AG of India strictly within the stipulated period of four months; (ii) there should be
a time bound mechanism to monitor and follow up of Audit paragraphs periodically
even after furnishing the first Action Taken Note till the issue is settled; (iii) all the field
formations of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) should be suitably
instructed to take appropriate action against the defaulters promptly and intimate the
same to the Ministry and then to the C&AG without any delay and; (iv) all the
paragraphs related to earlier Reports should also be reviewed and a timeframe should
be specified to finalize them. In the light of the submissions/suggestions made by
senior functionaries of the Revenue Department and the importance of the subject. It
was decided to examine the issue further in the next fiscal year to ensure the compliances
of the Committee's recommendation.
[Para 6 of Part-II of the 15th Report of the PAC
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Measures suggested by the Committee have been duly noted and various steps
have been taken. These include:
(1) The task of preparing Electronic database of the pending cases has been
taken up and the same is nearing completion. All current draft paras are also
being maintained in the electronic database. This will facilitate more efficient
data management & more effective supervision & monitoring.
(2) The issue of timely submission of replies to C&AG has been included in the
Central Action Plan of CBDT for the Financial Year 2010-11 with a view to
give focused attention to the subject matter. This aspect is monitored at the
level of  Member (CBDT) regularly.
(3) The Chief Comissioners of Income Tax have been asked to ensure timely
submission of replies and take necessary action against officials who are
found grossly negligent in this regard.
(4) All the paragraphs related to earlier reports which were pending for ATNs
have been identified and concerted efforts are being made to submit ATNs
in all such cases. All pending cases have been reviewed and target for
submission of ATNs in all such cases has been fixed as 31st March 2011.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 240/
5/2010-A&PAC-I, dated 28-10-2010]

20
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation No. 6
In view of the unsatisfactory performance of the Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes, the Committee recommend the following measures
to avoid future pendencies: (i) Necessary arrangements should be made to ensure
submission of the Action Taken Notes on all the paragraphs of the Audit Reports of
C&AG of India strictly within the stipulated period of four months; (ii) there should be
a time bound mechanism to monitor and follow up of Audit paragraphas periodically
even after furnishing the first Action Taken Note till the issue is settled; (iii) all the field
formations of Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) should be suitably
instructed to take appropriate action against the defaulters promptly and intimate the
same to the Ministry and then to the C&AG without any delay and; (iv) all the
paragraphs related to earlier Reports should also be reviewed and a timeframe should
be specified to finalize them. In the light of the submissions/suggestions made by
senior functionaries of the Revenue Department and the importance of the subject it
was decided to examine the issue further in the next fiscal year to ensure the compliance
of the Committee's recommendation.
[Para 6 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
(1) The instructions have been noted for compliance.
(2) The pendency has been brought down from 443 as on 28.02.2010 to 133 as
on 31.12.2010, a reduction of 70% (Paras from 1995-96 to 2007-08).
(3) Comments with respect to observation/recommendation No. 4 also refer.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M. No. 238/04/2010-CX-7
dated  21.2.2011]
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation No. 8
The Committee, taking note of the serious and complicated nature of the dispute in
regard to classification of Hair Oil, observe that the Department should consider taking
steps to bring the matter to the Supreme Court and to finally get them settled by the
Apex Court in case such matters are pending in the various High Courts. This is
imperative because the possibility of different verdicts/judgments by High Courts
may lead to uncertainty in the law.
[Para 8 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

21
Action Taken by Government
In regard to classification of Hair Oil, 11 cases are pending before various High
Courts. These are as follows:—
ZONE NAME OF THE PARTY (M/s) WRIT PETITION No./HIGH COURT
Cochin Marico Ind., Palakkad 16810 of 2009 (High Court of Kerala)
KPL Oil Mills Thrissur 19673 of 2009 (High Court of Kerala)
KLF Oil Mills Pvt. Ltd. 19369 of 2009 (High Court of Kerala)
K&P Associates 36547 of 2009 (High Court of Kerala)
Pune Marico Ltd., Goa 373 of 2009 (Mumbai High Court of Goa)
Siddivinayak Pack Goa 375 of 2009 (Mumbai High Court of Goa)
Plastic Export Zundert 348 of 2009 (Mumbai High Court of Goa)
Hyderabad Recon Oil Industries Ltd. 23387 of 2009 (A P High Court)
Hyderabad Nilgiri Oil & Job workers 26751 of 2009 (A P High Court)
Mumbai Kamani Oil Industries (P) 5395 of 2009 (High Court of Mumbai)
Ltd.
Bhopal Dabur India, Pithampur 9851 of 2009 (M P High Court, Jabalpur)
In compliance of the directions of the PAC, the Department has in consultation with
the Central Agency Section, Ministry of Law, drafted and filed a Transfer Petition
before the Hon'ble Supreme Court to transfer the cases before the High Courts and
club these with Civil Appeal No. 16595/2009  CCE Chennai Vs. M/s Aishwarya Industries
and others and CA 1766/2009 in the matter of M/s Madhan Agro Industries Ltd., both
of which are pending before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M. No. 238/04/2010-CX-7
dated 5th January, 2011]
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation  No. 9
The Committee regret to observe that the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of
Commerce did not furnish the Action Taken Notes on para No. 7.1 of Audit Report No.
10 of 1998 relating to "Non-fulfilment of export obligation (Customs Receipts)" even
after twelve years from the date of the Audit Report being Tabled in the Parliament.
This case was re-examined by the Ministries only after the Committee selected it for
examination. This reflects the inadequacy of monitoring mechanism in the Department
of Revenue- CBEC. The Committee recommend that the existing mechanism of furnishing
Action Taken Notes by the Ministries streamlined to ensure that they are furnished
within the stipulated time. The Committee further recommend that purposive remedial

22
action be taken to avoid inordinate delays in furnishing the Action Taken Notes in
future. Officials responsible for lapses in this regard be cautioned and called to account.
[Para 9 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation of the Committee have been noted for strict compliance. The
mechanism to monitor the audit paras has been strengthened and it is submitted that
no delays in replying to audit paras shall occur in future.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M. No. 603/1/2010-DBK
dated 9th February, 2011]
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation No. 10
The Committee learn that seven quantity based advance licences were issued by
the Director General of Foreign Trade (DGFT) between February 1993 and October
1995 for duty free import of goods valued at Rs. 279.97 crore with a matching Export
Obligation (EO) of Rs. 506.24 crore to be fulfilled within a period of 12 months. Since
the EO  was not fulfilled by the licensees, a sum of Rs. 432.47 crore, equivalent  to
shortfall in EO. (Rs. 263.51 crore being the  amount of unutilized imports) and a sum of
Rs. 191.59 crore being the customs duty on the unutilized value of imported materials
together with interest at the  rate of 24 per cent per annum amounting to Rs. 143.44
crore, were payable by the licensee. In addition, violation of conditions attached to the
duty free  licence also attracted penalty under the Foreign Trade (Development &
Regulation) Act, 1992. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the total amount of
money payable by the licensees amounting to Rs. 767.6 crore be recovered at the
earliest alongwith the required penalties and interest. To prevent such cases in future
the Department of Revenue and the Ministry of  Commerce must formulate a suitable
mechanism so that there is no loss of revenue to the Government of India.
[Para 10 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Policy guidelines have issued by Ministry of Commerce on monitoring of EO vide
letter No. 01/94/180/1060/AM-10/PC-4/ dated 27-7-2010 to all the Regional Authorities,
who have been instructed to meticulously monitor the Export Obligation and take
appropriate action as per FT(DR) Act, 1992 for recovery in cases of non-fulfilment
within the specified time period. The matter is being  monitored and followed up on
continuous basis.
The Department of Revenue has issued circular No. 5/2010-Customs dt. 16-3-2010
hereby the filed formations have  been directed to monitor the export obligations
effectively and to ensure that the Government revenue is safeguarded in cases of
default.

23
Vetting comments of Audit
The Ministry of Finance Department of Revenue has issued directions to all  field
formation to monitor the Export Obligation effectively in case of default to  prevent
loss of revenue to the Government.
As mentioned in Para 11,  out ot seven licences, four were redeemed and one
cancelled. Action taken in remaining two cases outlined in Para 11. Audit has no
further comments on this para.
Ministry's comments on vetting comments of Audit
No further action is required.
[Ministry of  Finance, Department of Revenue O.M. No. 238/04/2010-CX-7,
dated 5th January, 2011]

24
ATN of DOR on
vetting comments
No further action is
required.
Para No. 10 of  Observation/Recommendation No. 10 Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
Observation/Recommendation of PAC
The Committee learn that seven quantity based
advance licenses were issued by the Director General
of Foreign Trade (DGFT) between February 1993
and October 1995 for duty free import of goods
valued at Rs. 279.97 crore with a matching export
obligation (EO) of Rs. 506.24 crore to be fulfilled
within a period of 12 months. Since the EO was not
fulfilled by the licensees, a sum of Rs. 432.47 crore,
equivalent to shortfall in EO. (Rs. 263.51 crore being
the amount of unutilized imports) and sum of Rs.
191.59 crore being the customs duty on the unutilized
value of imported materials together with interest at
the rate of 24 per cent per annum amounting to Rs.
143.44 crore, were payable by the licensee. In
addition, violation of conditions attached to the duty
free licence also attracted penalty under the Foreign
Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the total
amount of money payable by the licensees amounting
to Rs. 767.6 crore be recovered at the earliest
alongwith the required penalties and interest. To
prevent such cases in future the Department of
Revenue and the Ministry of Commerce must
formulate a suitable mechanism so that there is no
loss of revenue to the Government of India.
(Sl. No....; Appendix .....DAP No. 203 Para
7.1 of the 1996-97.
15th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken by Government
Policy guidelines have issued by
Ministry of Commerce on monitoring
of EO vide letter No. 01/94/180/1060/
AM-10/PC-4/ dated 27.7.2010 (copy
enclosed) to all the Regional
Authorities, who have been instructed
to meticulously monitor the Export
obligation and take appropriate action
as per FT(DR) Act, 1992 for recovery
in cases of non-fulfilment within the
specified time period. The matter is
being monitored and followed up on
continuous basis.
The Department of Revenue has issued
Circular No. 5/2010-Customs dt.
16.3.2010 whereby the field
formations have been directed to
monitor the export obligations
effectively and to ensure that the
Government revenue is safeguarded in
cases of default.
(submitted on 2.11.2010)
Vetting Comments
The Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue has issued
directions to all field formation to
monitor the Export Obligation
effectively in case of default to
prevent loss of revenue to the
Government.
As mentioned in Para 11, out of
seven licences, four were redeemed
and one cancelled. Action taken in
remaining two cases outlined in
Para 11. Audit has no further
comments on this para.
(vetted by C&AG on 22.11.2010)

25
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation No.11
The Committee take serious note of the fact that the Department of Revenue-CBEC
completely failed to furnish Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes for more than
12 years on the Audit paragraph No. 7.1 of C&AG's Report No. 10 of 1998, Union
Government despite Audit pointing out the delay way back in October 1997. Only after
selection of the para for examination by the Committee, the DGFT under the Ministry
of Commerce intimated in the meeting held on 5th February, 2010 that three out of the
seven licences had been redeemed on (i) 12 July, 2000 (M/s BHEL), (ii) 6 February, 2002
(M/s Maruti Udyog Ltd) and (iii) 27 January, 2010 (M/s Maruti Udyog Ltd). Subsequently
in the meeting held on 23 February, 2010, the Director General of Foreign Trade intimated
that EO had been fulfilled in respect of M/s CEGELEC and that the licence had been
redeemed on 30.03.1999, the unutilized licence of M/s Ballarpur Industries Ltd. was
surrendered and cancelled on 9 March, 2000 (Review Order dated 19 February, 2010)
and the remaining two licensees M/s DCM Toyota and M/s Pearl International had
been declared defaulters and that adjudication orders had been passed. Imposing
penalty under the FT (D&R) Act in February 2010.
[Para 11 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
M/s DCM Toyota Ltd. has been declared defaulter. An adjudication order under
FT(DT) Act, 1992 has been issued by Ministry of Commerce by imposing penalty of
Rs. 32.23 crores on the firm, followed by issuance of a recovery letter dated 11.06.2010
to Chief Secretary, New Delhi. Further, Regional Authority New Delhi has initiated
action for fixing the responsibility for the delay in action in monitoring the Export
Obligation.
M/s Pearl Intl. Ltd also has been declared defaulter and placed under Denied Entity
thereby stopping all benefits under the Foreign Trade Policy. An adjudication order
under FT(DR) Act, 1992 has also been issued by Ministry of Commerce and a penalty
of Rs. 90.45 crores has been imposed on the firm. This has been followed by issuance
of a recovery letter dated 11.05.2010 to Chief Secretary, New Delhi. Further, Regional
Authority, New Delhi has initiated action for fixing the responsibility for the delay in
action in monitoring the Export Obligation.
Vetting comments of Audit
Ministry may intimate the PAC of the outcome of the action taken against two
licensees. It may also give the details of action taken on officials on whom responsibility
has been fixed.

26
Ministry's comments on vetting comments of Audit
DGFT has been requested to intimate the action taken.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M. No. 238/04/2010-CX-7,
dated 5th January, 2011]

27
Para No. 11 of observation/recommendation No. 11 Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
Observation/Recommendation of PAC Action Taken by Government V etting Comments A TN of DOR on
vetting comments
The Committee take serious note of the fact that
the Department of Revenue-CBEC completely failed
to furnish Remedial/Corrective Action taken Notes
for more than 12 years on the Audit paragraph
No. 7.1 of C&AG’s Report No. 10 of 1998, Union
Government despite Audit pointing out the delay
way back in October 1997. Only after selection of
the para for examination by the Committee, the
DGFT under the Ministry of Commerce intimated in
the meeting held on 5th February, 2010 that three
out of the seven licences had been redeemed on
 (i) 12 July, 2000 (M/s BHEL), (ii) 6 February, 2002
(M/s Maruti Udyog Ltd.), and (iii) 27 January, 2010
(M/s. Maruti Udyog Ltd.). Subsequently in the meeting
held on 23 February, 2010, the Director General of
Foreign Trade intimated that EO had been fulfilled
in respect of M/s CEGELEC and that the licence had
been redeemed on 30.03.1999, the unutilized licence
of M/s Ballarpur Industries Ltd., was surrendered and
cancelled on 9 March, 2000 (Review Order dated
19 February, 2010) and the remaining two licensees
M/s DCM Toyota and M/s Pearl International had
been declared defaulters and that adjudication orders
had been passed, imposing penalty under the FT
(D&R) Act in February, 2010.
(Sl. No.....; Appendix.... DAP No. 203 Para 7.1
of the 1996-97.
15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)
M/s DCM Toyota Ltd. has been
declared defaulter. An adjudication
order under FT(DT) Act, 1992 has
been issued by Ministry of Commerce
by imposing penalty of Rs. 32.23
crores on the firm, followed by
issuance of a recovery letter dated
11.06.2010 to Chief Secretary, New
Delhi. Further, Regional Authority,
New Delhi has initiated action for
fixing the responsibility for the delay
in action in monitoring the Export
Obligation.
M/s Pearl Intl. Ltd. also has been
declared defaulter and placed under
Denied Entity thereby stopping all
benefits under the Foreign Trade
Policy. An adjudication order under
FT (DR) Act, 1992 has also been issued
by Ministry of Commerce and a
penalty of Rs. 90.45 crores has been
imposed on the firm. This has been
followed by issuance of a recovery
letter dated 11.05.2010 to Chief
Secretary, New Delhi. Further,
Regional Authority, New Delhi has
initiated action for fixing the
responsibility for the delay in action
in monitoring the Export Obligation.
(submitted on 2.11.2010)
Ministry may intimate the PAC of
the outcome of the action taken
against two licensees. It may also
give the details of action taken on
officials on whom responsibility
has been fixed.
(vetted by C&AG on
22.11.2010)
DGFT has been
requested to intimate
the action taken.

28
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation No. 12
The Committee believe that monitoring of licences issued under Export Promotion
Schemes is the foremost duty of the licensing authority to ensure that there are no
leakages of revenue. Since the Ministries did not take action on the instant case for
12 years although it was pointed out by audit, there appears to be total indifference on
the part of the officials concerned in monitoring obligations and responding to audit.
The Committee recommend that coordination between the two Ministries should be
strengthened to prevent recurrence of such lapses. The Ministry of Finance should
strengthen the mechanism to monitor the cases where license has availed the benefit
of duty-free imports. In the meanwhile, the DGFT authorities should follow up and
monitor the cases where the licensee have not fulfilled the prescribed conditions. The
Committee further recommend that show cause-cum-demand notices be issued, pursued
properly and recovery proceedings, if required,  be initiated at the earliest in such
cases. The Committee fear that there may be many such other similar unreported cases
as well. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministries/Department concerned
must look into such cases and necessary rectifications be carried out at the earliest.
The Committee further recommend that the Ministry/Department must re-enforce the
confidence of the people that the laws and procedures are fair and just and are being
implemented in the spirit in which these should be.
[Para 12 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee,
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The Department of Revenue has issued Circular No. 5/2010-Customs dt. 16-3-2010
whereby the field formations have been directed to monitor the Export Obligations
(EO) effectively and to ensure that the Government revenue is safeguarded in cases of
default.
The Ministry of Commerce has also issued Policy guidelines regarding monitoring
of EO vide letter No. 01/94/180/1060/AM-10/PC-4/dated 27-7-2010 (copy enclosed) to
all the Regional Authorities, who have been instructed to meticulously monitor the
Export Obligation and take appropriate action as per FT (DR) Act, 1992 for recovery in
cases of non-fulfilment within the specified time period.
Vetting comments of Audit
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue has issued instructions to the field
formation to ensure the Government revenue is safeguarded in case of default. Ministry
of Commerce has also issued policy guidelines to monitor meticulously the Export
Obligation and take appropriate action for recovery in case of non-fulfilment of Export
Obligations.
Ministry has mentioned nothing about initiative taken to strengthen the coordination
between the two Ministries as observed by the PAC. It has not indicated whether it

29
made any effort to ascertain similar unreported cases. Nothing has been stated on the
action it has contemplated/initiated in such cases.
Ministry's comments on vetting comments of Audit
The Commissioners have been sensitized to hold regular meetings with DGFT
officials so that timely action is taken against the defaulters.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue O.M. No.238/04/2010-CX-7, dated
5th January, 2011]

30
The Committee believe that monitoring of licences issued
under Export Promotion Schemes is the foremost duty of
the licensing authority to ensure that there are no leakages
of revenue. Since the Ministries did not take action on the
instant case for 12 years although it was pointed out by audit,
there appears to be total indifference on the part of the
officials concerned in monitoring obligations and responding
to audit. The Committee recommend that coordination
between the two Ministries should be strengthened to prevent
recurrence of such lapses. The Ministry of Finance should
strengthen the mechanism to monitor the cases where licensee
has availed the benefit of duty-free imports. In the
meanwhile, the DGFT authorities should follow up and
monitor the cases where the licensees have not fulfilled the
prescribed conditions. The Committee further recommend
that showcause-cum-demand notices be issued, pursued
properly  and recovery proceedings, if required, be initiated
at the earliest in such cases. The Committee fear that there
may be many such other similar unreported cases as well.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministries/
Department concerned must look into such cases and necessary
rectifications be carried out at the earliest. The Committee
further recommend that the Ministry/Department must re-
enforce the confidence of the people that the laws and
procedures are fair and just and are being implemented in the
spirit in which these should be.
(Sl. No. .....; Appendix.....DAP No. 203
Para 7.1 of the 1996-97.
15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)
The Department of Revenue
has issued Circular No. 5/
2010—Customs dt. 16-3-
2010 whereby the field
formations have been directed
to monitor the Export
Obligations (EO) effectively
and to ensure that the
Government revenue is
safeguarded in cases of default.
The Ministry of Commerce
has also issued Policy
guidelines regarding monitoring
of EO vide letter No. 01/94/
180/1060/AM-10/PC-4 dated
27-7-2010 (copy enclosed) to
all the Regional Authorities,
who have been instructed to
meticulously monitor the
Export Obligation and take
appropriate action as per FT
(DR) Act, 1992 for recovery
in cases of non-fulfilment
within the specified time
period.
(Submitted on 2-11-2010)
Ministry of Finance, Department
of Revenue has issued instructions
to the field formation to ensure
the Government revenue is
safeguarded in case of default.
Ministry of Commerce has also
issued policy guidelines to monitor
meticulously the Export
Obligation and take appropriate
action for recovery in case of non-
fulfilment of export Obligations.
Ministry has mentioned nothing
about initiative taken to strengthen
the coordination between the two
Ministries as observed by the PAC.
It has not indicated whether it made
any effort to ascertain similar
unreported cases. Nothing has been
stated on the action it has
contemplated/initiated in such
cases.
(Vetted by C&AG on 22-11-2010)
The Commissioners
have been sensitized to
hold regular meetings
with DGFT officials so
that timely action is
taken against the
defaulters.
Para No. 12 of Observation/Recommendation No. 12 Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
Observation/Recommendation of PAC Action Taken by V etting Comments A TN of DOR on
Government vetting comments

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
THE GOVERNMENT
-NIL-
31

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-NIL-
32

CHAPTER  V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Observation/Recommendation No. 7
(a) The Committee note that in Chapter 15 and 33 of Central Excise Tariff,
definitions of  ‘edible oil’ and ‘hair oil’ have not been clearly codified reaulting
in incorrect classifications of excisable 'hair oil' as duty free ‘edible oil’ and
consequent short levy of duty. The existence of such ambiguities in the
provisions of the Central Excise Tariff provides scope for exploitation of
these clauses by certain manufacturers to escape paying duties.
(b) In one illustrative case of such kind, the Committee found that Bhubaneshwar
I Commissionerate cleared coconut oil packed in pouches and bottles
containing 5 ml, 100 ml or 200 ml of Dabur Anmol Coconut Oil as edible oil
even though the product is commonly used as hair oil by the general public.
Moreover, this product contains additives other than butylated
hydroxyanisole, thus not qualifiying to be classified as edible oil in terms of
the provisions of Chapters 15 and 33 the Central Excise Tariff. Even the
manufacturer of the product promoters it as hair oil in the media. The
Committee are constrained to observe that this type of laxity will tempt
other manufacturers of similar products to deliberately classify the product
as edible oil to claim zero duty instead of paying 8 per cent duty under
Chapter 33 of the Tariff. In these circumstances, the Committee recommend
that the Department of Revenue should make clear-cut and transparent
provisions to classify a particular type of oil as 'edible oil' or 'hair oil' especially
by taking into account all the necessary criteria in this regard.
(c) The Committee further recommend the Department of Revenue to revisit the
Central Excise Tariff in its entirety and explore better ways of its enforcement
and compliance. To ensure that revenue loss to Government is avoided at
all cost, ambiguities in the Tariff be removed to minimize possible legal
wrangles later on. The Committee desire that before issuing clarifications or
carrying out any amendments to this effect, the legal sustainability of the
same be ascertained to avoid different interpretations and litigation by the
assessee.
[Para 7 of the 15th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
33

34
Action Taken by Government
(a) The Ministry has undertaken to examine in detail the viability of inserting a
provision in the Chapter notes under Chapter 15 and Chapter 33 so as to
clearly distinguish between edible oil and hair oils. However, since the
directions issued earlier under Section 37 B of the Central Excise Act dated
30.06.09 have been challenged before various High Courts (11 cases) and
the Department has filed a transfer petition before Hon'ble Supreme Court as
directed by the PAC and the matter has become sub-judice. The
recommendation of the Committee that the Department of Revenue should
revisit the Central Excise Tariff on this issue has been noted.
(b) The CAG in its report No. 7 of  2008, para No. 2.2.1 relating to DAP No. 295
had observed that M/s Maxcare Laboratories Ltd. had been clearing coconut
oil packaged in 5 ml, 100 ml and 200 ml in the brand name of Dabur Anmol
Coconut oil at Nil rate of duty as edible oil thereby evading duty. The
Department did not admit the Audit Objection placing reliance upon Board's
Circular No. 166/77/95-CX dated 29.12.1955 issued from F. No. 103/1/95-CX.3
which stated that additives other than BHA would also be permitted provided
such additives were permitted under Rule 59 of the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Rules, 1995, without making the same to be "preparation for
use on hair". As per the list under Rule 59. Tertiary butyl hydro quinone is
similarly permitted to be added to coconut oil as BHQ. In the 15th Report of
PAC (15th Lok Sabha) the Hon'ble Committee has observed, by placing
reliance on the Circular dated 31.08.95, that because a substance other than
BHQ, namely TBHQ was added the coconut oil should have been classified
by the Department as hair oil. However, CAG in its report No. 7 of 2008 have
overlooked the Circular of 29.12.1995, which permits TBHQ as an additive
without altering the classification of the product. It has also been reported
by the field formation that the subject unit- M/s Maxcare Laboratories Ltd.,
is closed since 2007. A protective Show Cause Notice demanding a duty of
Rs. 5,21,63,116/- from the period 21.3.1996 to 31.12.2002 has been issued to
the assessee but has not been adjudicated due to the audit objection being
contested.
(c) In the same para Audit recommended that the Department should amend the
Tariff to plug the loophole through which duty was being evaded. Earlier, the
Department issued an order dated 03.06.09 under Section 37 B of the Act.
This order has been challenged in various High Courts by several assessees.
The Department has also filed a Transfer Petition before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court seeking that these 11 cases before different High Courts be heard by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court. This severely limits the ability of the Department
to bring the same amendment through another route.
N
EW D ELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
18  March, 2011 Chairman,
29 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX-I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD ON 18TH MARCH, 2011
The Committee sat on Friday, the 18th March, 2011 from 1000 hrs. to 1040 hrs. in
Room No. '51' (Chairman's Chamber), First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
4. Shri Satpal Maharaj
5. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
6. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Kalraj Mishra
8. Shri N.K. Singh
9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri R.S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit
(Central Expenditure)
2. Shri Subir Mallick — Principal Director (Indirect Taxes)
3. Smt. A. Panda — Director of Audit (AMG-II)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting. The Chairman, then apprised the Members
that the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt three Draft Reports viz. one
Original Report and two Action Taken Reports.
35

36
3. The Committee, then took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) Draft Report on 'National Rural Health Mission' (Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare) based on C&AG Report No. 8 of 2009-2010 (Performance
Audit) Union Government (Civil);
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifteenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Loss of Revence due to Short Levy of Tax, Incorrect
Classification of Excisable Goods and non-fulfilment of Export Obligation';
and
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Seventeenth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger
Reserves'.
4. After some deliberation, the Committee adopted the aforementioned Draft Reports
with some modifications/amendments and authorized the Chairman to finalise the
Reports, in the light of factual verification done by the Audit and present the same to
both the Houses.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX-II
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTEENTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations: — 12
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the — Total: 11
Committee which have been accepted Percentage—91.67%
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the — T otal: Nil
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage—0%
the replies received from the Government:
-Nil-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of — T otal: Nil
which replies of Government have not been Percentage—0%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
-Nil-
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of — Total: 1
which Government have furnished interim Percentage—8.33%
replies:
Para No. 7
37
GMGIPMRND—11LS—19-05-2011.