30
SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES (SEZs)
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)
AND
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-2011)
THIRTIETH REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

THIRTIETH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2010-2011)
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES (SEZs)
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)
AND
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 24.2.2011
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on  24.2.2011
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February, 2011/ Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)

PAC  No.  1937
Price:  ` 49
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2010-2011) ................. (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10)...................... (iv)
COMPOSITION   OF  THE   SUB-COMMITTEE -II  OF   THE   PUBLIC   ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-10)............................................................................. (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2008-09)...................... (vi)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... ( vii)
REPORT
PART  I
 I. Introductory ......................................................................... 1
II. Incentives and facilities offered to the SEZs ........................ 1
III. Roles of Ministry of Commerce & Industry and Ministry of
Finance ................................................................................. 3
IV . Gist of Audit Para.................................................................. 4
V. Audit objectives ................................................................... 5
VI. Scope of Audit ...................................................................... 5
VII. Achievement of NFE was mostly through deemed exports. ... 5
VIII. Absence of provision to collect duty foregone on inputs
used in exempt products cleared in DTA .............................. 7
IX. Absence of mechanism to verify data in QPR/APR.............. 11
X. Non-achievement of positive NFE ........................................ 15
XI. Units functioned in SEZ in violation of the conditions of LOP ... 17
XII. Short levy of duty on DTA sales .......................................... 19
XIII. Irregular/excess payment of drawback/interest .................... 20
X I V . Goods  removed  for  inter-unit  transfer/job  work  not
accounted for ........................................................................ 21
X V . Short levy of duty from de-bonded units ............................. 23
XVI. Unit approval committees were not constituted ................... 24
XVII. Monitoring Mechanism ........................................................ 26

PART  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS.............................................. 27
APPENDICES
Z  I. Minutes  of  the  sitting  of  the  Public  Accounts  Committee
(2008-09) held on 8th December, 2008..................................... 31
ZII. Minutes  of  the  sitting  of  Sub-Committee-II  of  the  Public
Accounts Committee (2009-10) held on 14th December, 2009..... 34
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2010-11) held on 15th February, 2011..................................... 36
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION  OF   THE   PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2010-2011)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
*16. Vacant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1.    Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.    Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Under Secretary
(iii)
*Vacancy occurred vice  Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
19th January, 2011.

COMPOSITION OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-2010)
*Shri Gopinath Munde—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
#18. V acant
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
* Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant Singh
resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
# Vice the expiry of the term of Shri Ashwani Kumar w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
(iv)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  SUB-COMMITTEE-II  OF  THE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE (2009-10)
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  —  Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr.  K. Sambasiva Rao
3. Shri  Aruna  Kumar  Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri  Sharad  Anantrao  Joshi
(v)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2008-09)
  **Shri Santosh Gangwar  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
***9.  V acant
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
*11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
15. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Raashid Alvi
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Prof. P.J. Kurien
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
* Elected w.e.f. 17th December, 2008 vice Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh resigned his seat in
Lok Sabha on 11th November, 2008.
** Elected w.e.f.  17th December, 2008 vice  Shri Brajesh Pathak ceased to be a Member of
Committee consequent upon his election to Rajya Sabha.
*** Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra resigned his seat in Lok Sabha w.e.f. 18th December, 2008 .
(vi)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2010-11), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Thirtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Special
Economic Zones (SEZs)’ based on C&AG Report No. 6 of 2008 (Performance Audit),
Union Government (Civil) for the year ended March, 2007 relating to the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) and the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue).
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2007 was laid on the Table of the House on 11th March, 2008.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2008-09) selected the subject for examination
and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) and the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) on the subject at their sitting held on 8th December, 2008.
As the examination of the subject could not be completed due to paucity of time, the
Public Accounts Committee (2009-10) re-selected the subject for examination.
A Sub-Committee was constituted for the purpose. Further evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce)
and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) was taken by the Sub-
Committee on 14th December, 2009. However, due to paucity of time they also could
not finalize the Report on the subject. The Public Accounts Committee (2010-11)
decided to continue the examination of the subject and present a Report thereon
based on the earlier evidences taken by their predecessor Committees/Sub-Committee.
Accordingly, a Draft Report was prepared and placed before the Committee for their
consideration. The Committee considered and adopted the Thirtieth Report at their
sitting held on 15th February, 2011. Minutes of the sittings from Appendices to the
Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committees and the Sub-Committee
for taking oral evidence and obtaining information on the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) and the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the
requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.
(vii)

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
21st February, 2011 Chairman,
2 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(viii)

REPORT
PART  I
I. Introductory
The Special Economic Zone (SEZ) Scheme was introduced by the Government with
effect from 1st April, 2000 with a view to overcome the shortcomings experienced on
account of multiplicity of controls and clearances, absence of world-class
infrastructure, an unstable fiscal regime and to attract larger foreign investments in
India. This policy intended to make SEZs an engine for economic growth supported by
quality infrastructure complemented by an attractive fiscal package, both at the Centre
and the State level, with the minimum possible regulations.
2. The main objectives of the SEZ Act are:
(a) Generation of additional economic activity;
(b) Promotion of exports of goods and services;
(c) Promotion of investment from domestic and foreign sources;
(d) Creation of employment opportunities; and
(e) Development of infrastructure of facilities.
The objective of the Scheme was to trigger a large flow of foreign and domestic
investment in SEZs, in infrastructure and productive capacity, leading to generation of
additional economic activity and creation of employment opportunities.
3. The SEZ Rules provide for simplified procedure for development, operation and
maintenance of the SEZs and for setting up  units and conducting business in SEZs. It
also included single window clearance for setting up of an SEZ, for setting up a unit in
a Special Economic Zone and on matters relating to Central as well as State
Governments and simplified compliance procedures and documentation with an em-
phasis on self certification.
II. Incentives and facilities offered to the SEZs
4. The incentives and facilities offered to the units in SEZs for attracting
investments into the SEZs, including foreign investment include:—
— Duty free import/domestic procurement of goods for development, operation
and maintenance of SEZ units;
— 100% Income Tax exemption on export income for SEZ units under
Section 10AA of the Income Tax Act for first 5 years, 50% for next 5 years
thereafter and 50% of the ploughed back export profit for next 5 years;
— Exemption from minimum alternate tax under section 115JB of the Income Tax
Act;

2
— External commercial borrowing by SEZ units upto US $ 500 million in a year
without any maturity restriction through recognized banking channels;
— Exemption from Central Sales Tax;
— Exemption from Service Tax;
— Single window clearance for Central and State level approvals;
— Exemption from State sales tax and other levies as extended by the respective
State Governments.
The major incentives and facilities available to SEZ developers include:—
— Exemption from customs/excise duties for development of SEZs for
authorized operations approved by the Board of Approval (BoA);
— Income Tax Exemption on income derived from the business of development
of the SEZ in a block of 10 years in 15 years under Section 80-1AB of the
Income Tax Act;
— Exemption from minimum alternate tax under Section 115 JB of the Income Tax
Act;
— Exemption from dividend distribution tax under Section 115O of the Income
Tax Act;
— Exemption from Central Sales Tax (CST).
— Exemption from Service Tax.
All these fiscal incentives are implemented by the Development Commissioner.
5. All the export benefits including drawback for supplies to SEZ developer/unit  are
given to developer/unit within SEZ by the specified officers in the SEZs. However, in
case of "No Objection" from the unit/developer in SEZ, drawback/DEPB benefit can be
availed of  by the supplier in Domestic Tariff Area, in terms of Rule 30 (5) of SEZ Rules.
All the import/export operations of the SEZ units are on self-certification basis. The
units in the zones are required to be Net Foreign Exchange (NFE) earners, calculated
cumulatively for a period of five years from the commencement of production. These
Units have to execute a legal undertaking with the Development Commissioner to
achieve positive NFE. Periodical monitoring on the functioning and performance of
the units in the SEZ is carried out by the Approval Committee. The performance of the
Units is required to be monitored quarterly, based  on the reports received in
prescribed formats.
According to Section 53 of the SEZ Act, a Special Economic Zone is deemed to be
a territory outside the Customs territory of India. As per the definition under
Section 2(m) of the SEZ Act, bringing goods or services  into the SEZ from the
Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) is treated as export. As per provisions of Section 30 of the
Act, the goods can be cleared from SEZ to DTA on payment of duties of Customs
including Anti-dumping, Countervailing and Safeguard duties under the Customs
Tariff Act, where applicable, as leviable on such goods when imported.

3
The Department of Revenue provides some of the officers in SEZs known as 'specified'
and 'authorized' officers. Officers when posted in an SEZ work under the control of the
Development Commissioner of the concerned SEZ.
III. Roles of Ministry of Commerce & Industry and Ministry of Finance
6. Detailing the roles assigned for Ministry of Commerce & Industry and Ministry
of Finance with reference to a unit in the SEZ, it was stated that the inter-ministerial
Board of Approval (BoA) constituted under the SEZ Act, 2005 for approval of SEZs,
inter alia  includes the representatives of both Commerce and Finance Ministries. At
the unit level, an Approval Committee has been constituted under the SEZ Act, for
approval of projects and for periodic monitoring of their import-export activities. This
Approval Committee has representatives of both Commerce and Finance Ministries.
The decision-making in both the BoA and the Approval Committee is by consensus
only. While the Development Commissioner is overall in-charge of the SEZ, officials
from the Customs Department deputed to the Zone  under the administrative control of
the Development Commissioner attend to the day-to-day operations of these Units.
7. Regarding the role of the Ministry of Finance it was stated that the Department of
Revenue is represented in the Board of Approval for SEZs by a Member of the Central
Board of Excise  and Customs and a Member of the Central Board of Direct  Taxes, both
of whom are ex-officio members of the said Board. The Board of Approval grants
approval to SEZs and approves authorized operations in terms of the SEZ Act, 2005,
and SEZ Rules, 2006. The Board also  deals with appeals filed against orders passed by
Development Commissioners of SEZs.
8. The SEZ scheme provides for the constitution of an Approval Committee for
every SEZ. This Committee, which is headed by the Development Commissioner of the
SEZ, has two representatives from the Department of Revenue, the jurisdictional
Commissioner of Customs/Central Excise and the jurisdictional Commissioner of
Income Tax or their nominees. The Approval Committee, inter alia, approves the
import or procurement of goods from the Domestic Tariff Area, monitors the utilization
of goods or services or warehousing or trading in the SEZ, approves, modifies or
rejects proposals for setting up of units and monitors and supervises compliance of
conditions of the Letter of Approval granted to  Units.
9. Elaborating on the institutional coordination mechanism at the Department level
in both the Ministries for resolving cases, it was stated as under:
"The SEZ Act, 2005 provides for multi-member authorities at the central level
and  for each SEZ as given below:
Section 8 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005 provides for the
constitution of a Board of Approval. The Board of Approval has
representatives from various Departments. A Member of the Central Board
of Excise and Customs (CBEC) and a Member of the Central Board of
Direct Taxes (CBDT), both of whom are ex-officio members of the said
Board, represent the Department of Revenue in the Board of Approval
(BoA) for SEZs. The Board of Approval grants approval to SEZs and
approves authorized operations in terms of the SEZ Act, 2005, and SEZ

4
Rules, 2006. The Board also deals with appeals filed against orders passed
by Development Commissioners of SEZs. In terms of Section 8(6) of SEZ
Act, all the acts of the BoA shall be decided by a general consensus of the
Members present.
Section 13 of the SEZ Act, provides for the constitution of an Approval
Committee for every SEZ. This Committee, which is headed by the
Development Commissioner of the SEZ, has two representatives from the
Department of Revenue, the  jurisdictional Commissioner of Customs/
Central Excise and the jurisdictional Commissioner of Income Tax or their
nominees. This Committee, inter alia, approves the import or procurement
of goods from the Domestic Tariff Area, monitors the utilization of goods
or services or warehousing or trading in the SEZ, approves, modifies or
rejects proposals for setting up of units  and monitors and supervises
compliance of conditions of the  Letter of Approval granted to Units. In
terms of Section 13(5) of  the SEZ Act, all the acts of the Approval Committee
shall be  decided by a general consensus of the Members present.
Apart from the statutory bodies set up as indicated above, regular
interaction has been taking place between the Departments of Commerce
and Revenue on various issues  which arise regarding the SEZ scheme.
Further a Joint  Committee of both the Departments, Department of
Commerce  (DoC) and Department of Revenue (DoR) has been constituted
to look into various administrative, operational and procedural issues relating
to SEZs. This Joint Committee is headed by the  Joint Secretary, DoC.
As explained above, decisions in the Board of Approval and the Approval
Committee are taken by the general consensus. However, in case of
difference of opinion, which cannot be resolved between the two
Departments, the matter is then referred to an Empowered Group of
Ministers (EGoM) constituted to deal with issues relating to SEZs".
IV . Gist of Audit Para
10. A review of the SEZ scheme by the C&AG (Report no. PA 6 of 2008 — Indirect
Taxes) brought out system as well as compliance weaknesses relating to policy and
procedures governing the management and functioning of SEZ units to see whether
these functioned as intended. While the revenue implication of audit review was
 Rs. 246.72 crore, an additional Rs. 1724.67 crore was foregone or could not be recovered
in the absence of enabling provisions.
11. According to the Audit there was no restriction on 'deemed exports' being
reckoned as exports enabling the Units to attain positive Net  Foreign Exchange  Earning
(NFE) predominantly through deemed exports rather than actual exports. As a result,
22 SEZ units had achieved the required positive NFE, notwithstanding the fact that the
actual export earnings were only 28 per cent and the remaining 72  per cent came from
domestic sales. Further, the units under Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) were put under
disadvantageous position as no provision had been made to recover duty foregone
on inputs procured by the SEZ units and used in the manufacture of  products which
were cleared at 'nil' rate of duty in DTA.

5
12. The SEZ scheme relies mainly on self-certification and does not require the
'Quarterly/Annual Performance Reports (QPRs/APRs)' to be supported by other
statutory documents like annual accounts, customs records, income tax (IT) returns,
Bank Realisation Certificates (BRC) etc. This facilitated a few Units to provide
incorrect/inconsistent data in their APRs/QPRs.
V . Audit Objectives
13. The review was conducted with the objective of verifying that the units in the
SEZs had complied with the applicable Customs Act, Rules, notification etc. and had
functioned appropriately under the provisions of the Exim Policy and the procedures
prescribed as per the 'Handbook of Procedures (HBP) V olume 1'. The adequacy and
effectiveness of the internal controls to ensure compliance with the applicable Act/
Rules/procedures were also examined.
VI. Scope of Audit
14. Of the 2061 units that were approved during 2000-01 to 2005-06 in nine SEZs,
under the jurisdiction of seven (Mumbai, Gandhidam, Chennai, Cochin, Vishakapatnam,
Noida and Kolkata) out of eight DCs, 1,019 Units were functional, 120 Units had
debonded and 922 were either closed or were non-functional as on 31 March 2006.
Audit reviewed the performance of 370 functional Units and 180 Units that had debonded
or were closed.
VII. Achievement of NFE was mostly through deemed exports
15. One of the main objectives of the Scheme was augmentation of exports.
 Additionally, as per paragraph 7.4 of the Exim Policy 2002-07 (as on 1 April 2003) and
the Foreign Trade Policy (FTP) (2004-2009), an SEZ unit had to achieve a positive NFE.
For determination of NFE, DTA sales/supplies effected (i) in terms of chapter 8 of the
policy (deemed exports), (ii) to other SEZ units, 100 per cent EOUs etc. were also to be
reckoned and added to the Free on Board value of actual physical export.
16. However, the policy did not prescribe any percentage of foreign exchange that
should be earned by an SEZ unit through actual physical export and that which could
be earned through deemed exports in DTA, to be a positive NFE compliant. Audit
observed that 22 SEZ units had been achieving the prescribed (positive) NFE mainly
through domestic sales. While an overall export of Rs. 7,149.23 crore was made by
these 22 Units, the actual export content was only Rs. 1,999.27 crore (28 per cent) and
remaining Rs. 5,149.96 crore (72 per cent) related to DTA earnings. The range of the
domestic earnings as a percentage of total export earning in these Units was 59 to 100.
Customs duty of Rs. 1,043.29 crore was foregone on import of goods by these Units.
17. In their written submission to the Committee, the Ministry of Commerce &
Industry have stated as:
"As per the then Foreign Trade Policy (prior to 10.02.2006), SEZ unit had to be a
positive Net Foreign Exchange (NFE) earner. NEF was calculated cumulatively
for a period of 5 years from the commencement of production according to the
formula given in Chapter 7 of the Hand Book. As per Chapter 7 of the Hand Book,
all Deemed Exports are taken into consideration for calculation of NFE. After the

6
SEZ Act came into force w.e.f. 10th February 2006, NFE is calculated as per Rule
53 of SEZ Rules 2006."
18. It has been further added that:
"Rule 53 of SEZ Rules, 2006 deals with modalities for calculation of positive NFE.
Under this Rule, following categories of supplies from SEZs have been permitted
for reckoning towards positive NFE:
(i) Supply of goods to such entities which are in any case entitled for import of
goods without payment of duty. This includes supply of goods against
advance license, duty free replenishment certificate, Export Promotion
Guarantee (EPG) license, project financed by multi-lateral and bilateral agencies
under internal competitive bidding, supply of goods to any project or purpose
in respect of which the Ministry of Finance permits the import of goods at
zero customs duty, supply to projects funded by United National Agencies,
supply against special entitlement of duty free import of goods, supply of
goods to EoUs/SEZs etc. Since recipient of these entities from SEZ would
lead to that much of foreign exchange saving and lead to manufacturing,
value addition and generation of additional economic activity in the country.
Hence there is no reason why these supplies should not be counted for NFE.
(ii) Second category of the supplies are like supply of ITA-1 items which are in
any case permitted to be imported at zero duty. There again since these can
be imported at zero duty, manufacturing of these goods in the SEZs would
lead to generation of additional economic activity and creation of
manufacturing capabilities in the SEZs.
(iii) Third category of the supplies includes supply against foreign exchange
earned from the Exchange Earners Foreign Currency (EEFC) account of the
DTA buyer or the free foreign exchange received from overseas. EEFC account
holder can spend the foreign exchange for import. Hence spending the same
for purchasing goods from SEZ would lead to saving of foreign exchange.
One of the aims of the SEZ scheme is earning of foreign exchange. Since those
DTA units which are eligible to import goods for the purpose of export would
otherwise have imported these goods resulting in outgo of foreign exchange,
supplies being made to such units by SEZ units is logically to be included in the
credit of the SEZ unit since it results in saving of foreign exchange.
Export obligation should be looked at cumulatively for a period of 5 years, and
any one year's performance alone should not be counted."
19. When the Ministry was asked to furnish their views on the Audit observations
that the NFE which was generated within the last two or three years was not actually
on account of manufactured goods sold in the foreign market but goods produced
here in SEZ's and sold in domestic market, the Ministry in their written submission to
the Committee have stated as under:
"In fact, the contribution of DTA sale qualifying for achievement of positive
NFE i.e. categories enumerated under Rule 53 of the SEZ Rules is only to the

7
extent of about 11% of the total turnover in SEZs and the share of DTA sale (not
counted for positive NFE) is about 5% of the total turnover. Rest 84% of goods
produced in the SEZs in the past two years have been exported physically
outside India earning foreign exchange."
20. On the mechanism that was prevalent to verify if the foreign exchange earnings
declared have been actually received or not, it was stated as:
"Exporting units in the zone file shipping bills for each export. These bills are
assessed by the authorised officers and the Free on Board value is, cumula-
tively shown as exports in the Annual Performance Report (APR) filed by the
Unit in the first quarter of the year following the year of reporting. The APR
also contains a declaration about cases pending for foreign exchange realiza-
tion. Data furnished in the APR is duly certified by independent Chartered
Accountant. This is scrutinized during the annual monitoring of SEZ units
and the reasons as well as duration of non-realisation are ascertained. Where
necessary, remedial directions are given and these details are furnished to the
RBI which monitors the foreign exchange remittances."
21. To a pointed question of the Committee, if the country had actually saved
foreign exchange by implementation of the SEZ scheme and if so to what extent, the
Ministry have replied as under:
"The foreign exchange realized during the year 2007-08 is Rs. 53984.00 crore
(provisional)."
22. Elaborating on Deemed Exports, the Ministry in their written submission made
to the Committee have stated as under:
"Deemed export has not been expressly mentioned in any of provisions of SEZ
Act and Rules. But under Rule 53 of the SEZ Rules dealing with the provisions
of net foreign exchange earnings, there are about 15 categories of the goods
supplied from SEZs which also qualifies for the achievement of positive NFE i.e.
categories other than physical exports. Since such categories are similar to the
categories defined as deemed export under Foreign Trade Policy, as such, above
categories of Rule 53 is normally categorized as deemed export in SEZ for
statistical purpose as an element of foreign exchange earnings and the quantum
of such deemed export categories is not very significant compared to total
exports."
VIII. Absence of provision to collect duty foregone on inputs used in exempt
products cleared in DTA
23. According to the Audit, an Export Oriented Unit (EOU), which imports inputs,
raw materials duty free, could clear its final products into DTA after paying the
applicable Basic Customs Duty (BCD) and Countervailing Duty (CVD) as if the final
products were imported. However, in cases where both the BCD and the CVD were 'nil'
on certain products, the EOU would not pay any duty on clearance of the final
products in DTA. A unit in the DTA producing/clearing same final product would also
clear these goods at 'nil' rate of duty, but would have suffered duty on inputs used in

8
the manufacture of these products (as Cenvat credit too is not available when final
products are exempt from duty). This had put the DTA units under a comparative
disadvantage. To remove this anomaly, the EOUs were required to pay back the duty
foregone on inputs utilised for manufacture of such goods cleared into DTA with
effect from 1 September 2004. (Paragraph 6.8 (j) of the FTP 2004-09). However, such
protection to units in DTA was not provided under the SEZ policy/Act. SEZ units can
sell its goods, including by-products, and services in DTA on payment of applicable
duty including at ‘nil’ rate with no requirement to pay back the duty foregone on
inputs used in the clearance of products (at nil rate of duty) into the DTA. Audit
scrutiny of records of Nokia India Pvt. Ltd., a unit in Madras SEZ, revealed that the
Unit cleared mobile phones with a value of Rs. 4,855.69 crore in 2005-06 and 2006-07 in
DTA at ‘nil’ rate of duty. Duty of Rs.  681.38 crore (Rs. 86.76 crore in 2005-06 and
Rs. 594.62 crore in 2006-07) foregone on the inputs used in the manufacture of these
mobile phones could not be recovered in the absence of enabling provisions.
Additionally, this policy had put SEZ units at a distinctly advantageous position
compared with similar units in the DTA or even other EOUs.
24. The Ministry of Commerce & Industry in their written submission to the
Committee have stated as under:
"C&AG has observed that SEZ unit can sell its goods and services in DTA on
payment of applicable duties as if the final products are imported with no
requirement to pay the duty foregone on inputs used in the clearance of
products at NIL rate of duty into the DTA. Giving a comparison to an EOU unit
which is required to pay the duty foregone on imports utilized for manufacture of
goods cleared into DTA, C&AG has observed that there should be a provision
to collect duty foregone on imports used by SEZ units in manufacturing final
products even cleared at NIL rate into the DTA to provide a level playing field for
indigenous industry. C&AG has quoted the example of Nokia India Private
Limited, a Unit in Chennai, which cleared mobile phones of Rs. 4855.69 crore at
nil duty during 2005-06 and 2006-07. Duty of Rs. 681.38 crore was foregone on
the inputs used in the manufacture of these mobile phones which could not be
recovered. C&AG has recommended that the Government may consider
introducing a provision to collect the duty foregone on inputs used by SEZ
units in manufacturing final products cleared at 'nil' rate into the DTA to provide
a level playing field for the indigenous industry.
The mobile handsets do not attract any customs duty. Similarly all the
components and other inputs which go into the manufacture of mobile handsets
also do not attract customs duty.
Even DTA manufacturers are also not required to pay any import duties, be it
Customs or Central Excise like the SEZ units and hence it may not be appropriate
to say that in comparison with Nokia, the DTA units are at a disadvantage."
25. When asked to explain the views of Department of Commerce and Department
of Revenue in the case of the Audit findings with reference to Nokia India Private Ltd.,

9
the Ministry of Commerce & Industry in their written submission have explained as
under:
"The audit points out specific example of Nokia, which is manufacturing mobile
handsets. The moblie handsets do not attract any customs duty. All the
components and other inputs which go into the manufacture of mobile handsets
also do not attract customs duty. Similarly, all the above items are also exempt
from Central Excise.
From the above, it is clear that even DTA manufacturers in this specific case are
also not required to pay any duties, be it Customs or Central Excise like the SEZ
units. Therefore in comparison with Nokia, the DTA units are not at a
disadvantage. Perhaps, the only advantage which Nokia enjoys vis-a-vis a DTA
unit is only in respect of consumables like packing materials for which a DTA
unit will have to pay applicable duty. Even in this case, Nokia imports only eight
such consumable items for which the duty foregone in their three year operation
period was only to the extent of Rs. 40 crore. Therefore, to say that on account
of Nokia's operations in India, India has lost Rs. 681.38 crore on inputs may not
be correct.
In any case, all duty exemptions extended are as per the SEZ Act and Rules."
26. An EOU unit is permitted to sell 50 per cent of its Free on Board (FoB) value of
export in DTA at concessional rate of duty, while other DTA sales are at full duty, on
achieving the prescribed Net Foreign Exchange (NFE). An SEZ unit is also permitted to
sell in the DTA at applicable rates of duty. Hence there is similarity in the provisions.
However, no percentage of FoB exports is prescribed for DTA sales in case of a SEZ
unit.
To this observation of the Committee, the Ministry submitted as under:
"EOU are permitted DTA sale on concessional duty depending on their export
performance. However, for SEZ units no such concept is envisaged. This is
because SEZ units have to pay full duty on any DTA sale made by them and
such DTA sale will not be reckoned towards their export performance. Therefore,
it is felt that fixing a DTA sale norm or ceiling for SEZ units may not be practical
or warranted."
27. When further asked about the reason for not extending the same provisions to
units in the SEZs, as applicable to the EOUs in respect of the requirement to pay back
the duty foregone on inputs used in the clearance of exempted products into the
Domestic Tariff Area, the Ministry have replied as under:
"EOU and SEZs are two separate schemes. In EOUs, DTA clearance is feasible
either by way of payment of concessional duty, or by payment of excise duty in
lieu of customs duty if only indigenous inputs are used, or by way of duty
reversal on Nil duty related items. The general principle in the EOU clearance to
DTA is that it should enable the EOU units which are located in different parts of
the country to sell their goods. Therefore, an element of incentive is in-built in
the case of EOU clearance to DTA.

10
In the case of SEZs, neither there is question of any concession nor application
of any incentive of clearance to DTA. They will have to pay full duty for DTA
clearance, are required to fulfil  NFE requirement and also not eligible to receive
income tax benefits in case of sales to DTA. As the two schemes are not
comparable, one principle in a particular scheme cannot be introduced into
another scheme.
Clearance to DTA from SEZ is through a legal provision in the Act and such
provisions require stability for attracting investment in the manufacturing
sector in the SEZs."
28. In response to the Audit observation, the Ministry have submitted that:
"SEZ units have to achieve positive NFE. No income tax benefits are  available
on DTA sale. For DTA sale, full duty including CVD on the finished product is
levied unlike EOUs where DTA sale is allowed on concessional duty. DTA sale is
just a part of the overall activity of the SEZ unit and not an activity of the SEZ in
its entirety. It is unlikely that SEZ units will clear entire production into DTA
because DTA sales attract nil duty."
Further, the Ministry have stated that DTA sale is just a part of the overall activity
of the SEZ unit and not an activity of the SEZ in its entirety. In this regard, the
Committee sought to know whether the Ministry had considered restricting the
component of deemed export by an appropriate scale so that actual physical export
became a primary component in calculation of Net Foreign Exchange (NFE). The Min-
istry in their written submission made to the Committee have stated as:
"As the deemed export component of the total exports is not very significant,
therefore, restricting the component of deemed export in SEZ is not felt to be a
favoured option. In any case in most of the deemed export categories as
enumerated in Rule 53 of SEZ Rules, they are further required to discharge the
export obligations against such SEZ supplies. For example in case a SEZ unit
clears goods in DTA to an advance license holder, the DTA unit has to further
discharge his export obligation which is on a higher side, therefore, the NFE
benefit availed by such units gets absorbed by way of higher foreign exchange
earning of the export made by the DTA unit, in process of discharge of their
export obligation."
29. When asked about the initiative that was taken/proposed to be taken by the
Ministry to consider introducing a provision to collect the duty foregone on inputs
used by SEZ units in manufacturing final products cleared at nil rate into Domestic
Tariff Area to provide a level playing filed for the indigenous industries, the Ministry
replied as under:
"EOU and SEZs are two separate schemes. In EOUs, DTA clearance is feasible
either by way of payment of concessional duty, or by payment of excise duty in
lieu of customs duty if only indigenous inputs are used, or by way of duty
reversal on Nil duty related items. The general principle in the EOU clearance to
DTA is that it should enable the EOU units which are located in the different
parts of the country to sell their goods. Therefore, an element of incentive is
in-built in the case of EOU clearance to DTA.

11
In the case of SEZs, neither there is question of any concession nor application
of any incentive of clearance to DTA. They will have to pay full duty for DTA
clearnace, are required to fulfil NFE requirement and also not eligible to receive
income tax benefits in case of sales to DTA. As the two schemes are not
comparable, one principle in a particular scheme cannot be introduced into an-
other scheme.
Clearance to DTA from SEZ is through a legal provision in the Act and such
provisions require stability for attracting investment in the manufacturing
sector in the SEZs."
30. The Committee during its in-depth study of the subject noted the
 recommendation in the 83rd Report of the Committee on Commerce relating to the 'The
Functioning of Special Economic Zones' wherein it was stated as under:
"Fears have been expressed in many quarters that fiscal benefits to SEZ
developers-cum-unit holders would affect competitiveness in the domestic
industries. The said benefits have the potential of rendering the project cost
cheaper in SEZs by 40% to 50%, which could have negative impact on the
domestic industry. The SEZs could, thus, act as a disincentive and a dampener
for DTA business. The Committee are of the view that a level playing field
should be provided to the domestic industry vis-a-vis SEZs."
IX. Absence of mechanism to verify data in QPR/APR
31. As per the Exim Policy/Foreign Trade Policy, every unit in a SEZ has to maintain
proper accounts and submit QPR/APR in prescribed format to the DC duly certified by
a Chartered Accountant (CA). This data is the basis for verifying whether the Units
have indeed achieved the required positive NFE and also as a monitoring mechanism
to ensure that the Units are functioning as intended under the applicable policy and
rules. However, the SEZ scheme relies mainly on self-certification and does not require
the QPRs/APRs to be supported by other statutory documents like annual accounts,
customs records, Income Tax (IT) returns, Bank Realisation Certificates (BRC) etc.
This facilitated a few Units to provide incorrect/inconsistent data in their QPRs/APRs.
The NFEs derived on the basis of this inconsistent data cannot be relied upon. Audit
correlated data furnished by the Units in their annual performance reports with data
available in the annual accounts, customs records, IT returns, BRC, etc. and observed
that (i) 16 Units had under reported the Cost, Insurance Freight (CIF) value of imports,
(ii) 25 Units had inflated the FoB value of exports, (iii) three Units had both under
reported imports and inflated exports, and (iv) six Units of Cochin SEZ had shown less
foreign exchange outflow, in their APRs.
32. Elaborating on the mechanism to verify  data in QPR/APR, the Ministry of
Commerce & Industry in their written submission have stated as under:
"The SEZ units as well as developers are required to maintain complete
accounts as prescribed under Rule 22 (2) of the SEZ Rules, which provides as
follows:
Every Unit and Developer shall maintain proper accounts, financial
year-wise, and such accounts which should clearly indicate in value terms

12
the goods imported or procured from Domestic Tariff Area, consumption
or utilization of goods, production of goods, including by-products, waste
or scrap or remnants, disposal of goods manufactured or produced, by
way of exports, sales or supplies in the domestic tariff area or transfer to
Special Economic Zone or Export Oriented Unit or Electronic Hardware
Technology Park or software Technology Part Units or Biotechnology
Park Unit, as the case may be, and balance in stock; Provided that Unit and
Developer shall maintain such records for a period of seven years from the
end of relevant financial year.
Provided further that the Units engaged in both trading and
manufacturing activities shall maintain separate records for trading and
manufacturing activities.
Based on the records maintained by the Units/developers, Unit is required
to give APR in Form 1, as prescribed by Rule 22(3) and the Developer is
required to give a QPR in Form E as prescribed in Rule 22 (4) to the
Development Commissioner and the Development Commissioner in turn
is required to place the same before the Unit Approval Committee (UAC).
Information given in the APR is required to be authenticated by the
authorized signatory of the Unit and is required to be certified by the
Chartered Accountant. Therefore, it is felt that the mechanism prescribed
is sufficient and in case Approval Committee has any doubt in respect of
any information submitted by the Unit or by a Developer, it can always call
for the records which the Unit or Developer is required to maintain under
rule 22(2) of the SEZ Rules. It is practically not advisable that every
APR/QPR should be accompanied by statutory documents like annual
accounts, custom records, income tax returns, bank realization certificates
etc. as suggested by CAG.. This will merely create additional paper work
and certainly it will not be possible for UAC to go through all these
documents in respect of all the  QPRs and the APRs. In fact, it will be
practically impossible to handle all these documents in respect of all
APRs/QPRs by UAC.
It must be emphasized that the emphasis of the SEZ Scheme is on
simplification of procedures as they are operating in bonded premises.
Rule 75 of the SEZ Rule has specifically emphasized on the operation of
these units based on self-declaration. White simplifying the procedure
enough care has been taken to ensure that there is no revenue leakage.
Sale from SEZ to DTA has been prescribed on payment of full duty, whereas
earlier such sale from Export Processing Zones were on payment of 50% of
the duty. Exemption from income tax is also been given only on physical
exports and no income tax exemption is given on profits derived from sale
in the DTA or even sale within SEZ.
Hence the present procedure prescribed in respect of APR/QPR coupled
with monitoring guidelines as given in Rule 54 read with Form 1 of the SEZ
Rules is sufficient mechanism for monitoring the export performance by

13
the Unit Approval Committee. APR/QPR should not be accompanied by
other statutory documents like annual accounts, custom records, income
tax returns, BRC etc."
33. On perusal of the information furnished to the Committee it was seen that the
SEZ scheme relied mainly on self-certification and did not require the Quarterly/
Annual Performance Reports (QPR/APR) to be supported by other statutory
documents. When asked about the system in vogue to safeguard Government Revenue
in the event of Units providing incorrect/inconsistent data in their APRs and QPRs, the
Ministry of Commerce & Industry in their written submission replied as under:
"The performance reports are statutorily required to be authenticated by an
independent Chartered Accountant. Chartered Accountants, being members of
an accredited statutory body with their own rules of conduct, are expected to
verify the records before certifying. They are liable to action for misconduct.
The Approval Committee and/or the Development Commissioner can, at any
point of time, challenge the data if they have valid reasons or doubts.
Further, unlike other Export Promotion schemes, the goods admitted into the
SEZs are subject to peripheral round the clock physical control by the customs
and security staff of the Zone Administration. Goods cannot move in/out
without proper documentation and without the permission/knowledge of the
customs/security officials.
Further, the statistics are mainly summaries of export and import data of the Unit.
Every import, export and other clearance is made against a document prescribed
under the SEZ Rules i.e. Bill of Entry or Shipping Bills. Copies of these are
retained by the Zone administration for record. The assessment of all these
documents are done within the zone and, hence, the records are readily
available. The APRs are verified against the data available in the zone. In the event
of any mismatch, the explanation of the zone unit is called for and decision taken
thereafter. Submission of false data in the APR and lead to action against Units.
Hence there are adequate safeguards to protect government revenue."
34. On being asked about the action that was taken against erring Units, so as to
prevent misutilisation of the Scheme, the Ministry of Commerce & Industry in their
reply have stated as:
"In case of persistent default and violation of conditions of letter of approval,
the Approval Committee may take action for cancellation of letter of Approval as
per Section 16 of the SEZ Act. Further action for remission of exemptions,
drawbacks, concessions and any other benefit in respect of the capital goods,
finished goods, raw materials and consumables lying in stock, relatable to the
Unit is taken as per Rule 77. In case the Unit has also failed to meet the NFE
obligations, it is also liable for penalty under the provisions of the Foreign Trade
(Development and Regulation Act) as prescribed under Rule 77(5)."
35. As the Audit had pointed out a number of deficiencies with respect to some of
the SEZ units, the Committee wanted to know whether any similar type of deficiencies

14
had been observed by the Minstry in respect of various SEZs which had not been
covered during the Audit examination. To this, it was replied as:
"The Quarterly Performance Reports and Annual Performance Reports are being
reviewed periodically by DCs and Approval Committees and action is taken
under FTDR by the concerned DCs, if any deficiency is observed during the
course of such reviews."
36. On the initiatives/follow up measures that have been taken by the Ministry to
ensure that all units under SEZ scheme provide reliable data in their Quarterly
Performance Review/Annual Performance Review, the Ministry have put-fourth as:
"Rule 22 (3) of SEZ Rules, 2006 provides for submission of APR by SEZ units  in
the prescribed format given at Form I in terms of which the information furnished
therein is required to be authenticated by Authorized Signatory of the unit and
certified by Chartered Accountant. Further, Rule 54 provides for monitoring of
performance of the SEZ units by the Approval Committee on the basis of the
C.A. Certified Annual Performance Report.
Further, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry have issued instructions on
4.12.2008 in terms of which random check of minimum 5% of  APRs of Unit is to
be carried out by the Development Commissioners to ensure that there is no
mismatch of data furnished by the C.A."
37. During the course of Oral Examination, the Committee wanted to know the
measures that were taken to prevent recurrence of misreporting in the reports that were
submitted to the concerned authorities. To this, the Joint Secretary of the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry deposing before the Committee stated as under:
"One of the basic objectives of the SEZ Act was simplification of procedures
and therefore, one of the salient features was that on self-certification basis,
allowances would be made. There is a provision of obtaining annual progress
reports and quarterly progress reports from the Units and the Developers. Those
APRs and QPRs are to be certified by the qualified CAs. Audit, during the
process of their audit, came across certain deviations wherein there was a devia-
tion between the report submitted, which was certified by the CA, and actuality,
in certain figures. After that, we asked the Development Commissioners in each
of these cases to go into the details and give specific replies, case-wise, which
we furnished to the audit. In addition to it, we issued instructions that whatever
APRs and QPRs are submitted which are certified by the CA, should be ran-
domly verified to the extent of five per cent by the concerned Development
Commissioner because if APRs and QPRs are submitted which are certified by
the CAs, there may be some intentional and unintentional discrepancy. To avoid
that we issued that instruction; we will get a feedback from all the Development
Commissioners and report to the Committee, and the Audit on the observations
of the Development Commissioners on this particular instruction which we
issued five per cent of compulsory random check on them, which were received."

15
X. Non-achievement of positive NFE
38. An SEZ unit was required to achieve positive NFE, which is calculated
cumulatively for a period of five years from the commencement of production as per
the formula "NFE=A-B". Where, 'A' is the FOB value of exports by the SEZ unit and 'B'
is the sum total of the CIF value of all imported inputs, value of all payments made in
foreign exchange by way of commission, royalty etc. The Audit scrutiny of records of
24 units of Falta, Cochin, Madras, Kandla and Vishakhapatnam SEZs revealed that
these Units failed to achieve the required positive NFE. Accordingly, a duty of
` 106.71 crore (determined in proportion of the shortfall in achieving positive NFE)
with interest of ` 46.17 crore was recoverable from these Units.
39. While providing the status on the Audit findings, the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry in their written submission have stated as under:
"Information is being collected from the respective Development
Commissioners and will be submitted as expeditiously as possible."
40. Replying to the monitoring that was done with reference to arrears in foreign
exchange realization, the Ministry have stated as under:
"Exporting units in the zone file shipping bills for each export. These bills are
assessed by the authorised officers and the Free on Board value is, cumula-
tively, shown as exports in the Annual Performance Report (APR) filed by the
Unit. The APR also contains a declaration about cases pending for foreign
exchange realization. Data furnished in the APR is duly certified by independent
Chartered Accountant. This is scrutinized during the annual monitoring of SEZ
units and the reasons as well as duration of non-realisation are ascertained.
Wherever necessary, remedial directions are given and if there has been
substantial delay without any justifiable reason, the matter is reported to RBI for
taking action against the Unit."
41. During the course of examination, the Audit in a case found that the
Development Commissioner had permitted (May 2004) broad-banding of dissimilar
items such as readymade garment, jewellery etc. which was, however, rejected
(June 2004) by the Department of Commerce. Though the broad-banding was can-
celled, export turnover of these broad-banded items was included in calculating the
NFE achieved.
To a specific query as to how the Development Commissioner allowed
broad-banding of dissimilar goods, it was replied as under:
"The permission for inclusion of various items in the LOP was approved by the
then Development Commissioner as per provisions contained in Para 9.37 (b)
(iv) as it existed in the Handbook of Procedure (V ol. 1) (1997-2002) under 'broad-
banding/diversification'. Till the receipt of the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry's communication, the interpretation of 'broad-banding/diversification'
was not clear which led to the inclusion of items which were dissimilar in nature
from that granted in the original LOP. The matter is being further examined along
with the contentions submitted by the Unit, regarding inclusion of export of
dissimilar items towards calculation of NFE."

16
Regarding the latest position on the above issue, the Ministry have added:
"The provisions of SEZ Act, 2005 and Rules have done away with the limitation
of allowing broad-banding only to similar goods now."
42. When asked to explain as to how ineligible items were taken against exports, it
was replied as under:
"The matter is being further examined alongwith the contentions submitted by
the Unit regarding inclusion of export of dissimilar items towards calculation of
NFE."
43. On being asked to furnish the action taken by the Ministry of Finance in the
instant case, it has been submitted as under:
"The Commissioner of Customs (Airport and Administration), Customs House,
Kolkata has reported that consequent to Central Revenue Audit Department's
revelation that the said Unit could not achieve the statutory requirements of
earning positive NFE, a show cause-cum-demand notice was issued vide
F. No. FSEZ/12(338)/Customs/668 dated 5.10.2006 by the Specified Officer of SEZ.
The Show Cause Notice was made answerable to the said Commissioner of Customs.
However, the Development Commissioner has extended the LOP in respect of
the said Unit up to 12.10.2008 and a final decision in the matter in the form of
adjudication of the case can be taken only after the expiry of the extended LOP."
44. When the Committee sought to know the current status of examination of the
aforesaid matter, the Ministry have made their submission as under:
"Performance of M/s. Plastolene Polymers Pvt. Ltd. for the 5 years period from
1.3.2000 to 28.02.2005 has been monitored and adjudication has been completed
after providing an opportunity for personal hearing. Adjudication Order has
been passed on 31.12.2008."
45. Asked about the latest position with regard to the Demand Notice issued to an
SEZ unit, it has been stated that:
"The Unit had submitted APR for the year 2001-02 only. The Unit had neither
submitted APRs for the remaining periods, nor had it appeared for personal
hearing on 5.1.2009. Therefore, the matter has been adjudicated on the basis of
the APR for 2001-02 and as per customs records. Since the unit's NFE position
came out to be negative, Adjudication Order has been passed on 7.1.2009,
imposing a penalty of 
` 10. lakh."
46. To a specific query as to whether any target had been set under the SEZ scheme
for Foreign Exchange Earnings, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as:
"The preamble of the SEZ Act, 2005 itself says that:
'An Act to provide for the establishment, development and management
of the Special Economic Zone for the promotion of exports and the matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.'

17
As such, promotion of exports is the basic principle on which the whole scheme
rests and only to achieve this very objective, the whole scheme has been formu-
lated and all of the exemptions/benefits are being extended to the Developer as
well as to the Entrepreneur. Further, this is included in the objectives of the
Scheme as contained in the Section 5 of the SEZ Act, 2005.
Only with a view to achieve the above objectives, it has been made mandatory
for each and every SEZ unit to maintain positive NFE for a cumulative period of
five years.
The procedure to calculate NFE is provided in Rule 53 of the SEZ Rules, 2006 and
if a Unit fails to maintain positive NFE, they are liable to face penal action under
Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992."
The Committee note that the Government has not fixed yearly targets for NFE but
has fixed the cumulative target for a period of five years.
XI.  Units functioned in SEZ in violation of the conditions of LOP
47.  According to the Exim Policy/FTP, the Letter of Permission (LoP) issued to an
SEZ unit is valid for five years from the date of commencement of production and is
treated as a licence for all purposes. On completion of five years' period, the LoP may
be renewed by the DC for a further period of five years. Further, each LoP  should have
separate earmarked premises and has to specify the items of manufacture/service
activity and capacity, etc. In case of any change in approved activity, the DC has to
issue an amended LoP. An SEZ unit has to fulfil the terms and conditions of the LoP
failing which the Unit is liable for penal actions under the FT (D&R), Act, 1992.
Scrutiny of records of Falta, Madras, Vishakhapatnam, SEEPZ, Kandla and Surat SEZs
revealed that 41 Units had violated the conditions of the approved LoPs while carrying
out their business. These included (i) carrying out trading activity though the LoP was
for manufacture, (ii) manufacturing in a premises not mentioned in the LoP, (iii) excess
trading that what was permitted in the LoP, (iv) operating without a valid LoP,
(v) clearing all goods in DTA despite the fact that these were required to be exported to
the General Currency Area (GCA), countries etc. Penal action should have been initi-
ated by the DC under the FT (D&R) Act, 1992. Additionally, customs duty of 
` 74.90
crore was also recoverable from these Units.
48. Audit in their findings observed that carrying out manufacturing activity in a
premises, other than that permitted in the LoP was not in order.
Replying to the Audit observations it was stated as:
"The Unit has been operating from both the locations under the single Letter of
Approval. Accordingly, the Unit is submitting the Annual Performance Reports,
covering both locations."
49. In respect of M/s Patni Computers Systems Ltd., a unit of SEEPZ, SEZ
converted from EPZ unit, was issued a LoP for development of computer software. The
LoP expired in March, 2003 after periodical renewals. The Unit had not applied for
renewal thereafter and was functioning within the SEZ without a valid LoP. The Unit

18
had imported capital goods of ` 9.41 crs. during 2003-04 to 2005-06 on which duty of
` 3.34 crs. was foregone, which according to the Audit was to be recovered, as the Unit
had no valid LOP for these imports.
To this, the Ministry have replied as under:
"The Unit was granted LOP on 01.06.1981. The third five year block of the Unit
ended on 31.03.2004. The Unit submitted fresh projections for the next five year
block only on 26.06.2007. During this period, the import/export activities of the
Unit continued. The fresh projections submitted by the Unit on 26.06.2007 were
processed and the intervening period was regularized by taking the actual im-
ports and exports for the year 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2006-07 as projections for the
same period."
50. Deposing before the Committee about the popular perception of SEZ Scheme,
the Commerce Secretary stated as under:
"There has been a lot of mis-representation about Special Economic Zones for a
veriety of reasons. I can tell you with very great confidence that out of 271 zones
which have been notified—we have about 80-90 zones which have started func-
tioning in the sense infrastructure has come, employment factories have been
established and so on and so forth-there is no case of misutilisation in any one
zone and it is a challenge which we have put out publicly to anyone to show the
case of misutilisation in any manner in any SEZ notified in the country."
51. When the Committee sought to know the checks available in respect of Units
already in existence and wanted to shift to SEZ, the Commerce Secretary deposed
before the Committee as under:
"Firstly, it is new Unit. The investments are all new. We do not have any case
where somebody has shifted second-hand machinery from 'x' to SEZ. Even
otherwise, if it is shifted, it is the Income Tax Department which really examines
to see whether it is a company inside the SEZ which has been formed by the
reorganizing. There are a number of provisions under the Income Tax Act. This
is specifically  prohibited under the current rules."
52. While clarifying on the issue of utilization of the land by a unit in SEZ scheme,
the Commerce Secretary stated as under:
"About the land utilization by the SEZ, there was a view that this is all for the real
estate play and a lot of real estate people are making money. There is not a single
SEZ—where there is any real estate activity.
If a developer comes and says that he wants to build 10,000 houses in an SEZ, he
is giving us a plan that he is going to have more than 10,000 houses in an SEZ,
he is giving us a plan that he is going to have more than 10,000 employees and
we give him the permission to build 10,000 houses and say, 'All right, according
to your plan, you are going to have 20,000 workers and you are going to have
houses for 10,000 of them'. We say that principle approval is given for 10,000
houses. He is allowed to first build 2000, that is, only 20 per cent and then he has

19
to fill up those 2000 houses with workers from the factories that have come up
and only when these 2000 houses are filled up, we allow the next 2000 to be built
up. Then the next 2000 will be built after the workers occupy it. We are so strict
to see that there is no real estate activity. The developer cannot build anything
on his own. He has to come to the Board of Approval where not only Commerce
Secretary is there; there is member, Customs; member, CBDT is there, and other
representatives of the Ministries are there. Everybody will ask as to why he
wants 3000 houses, the type of houses, area will depend upon the type of
workers. Workers will have much smaller houses, middle level houses will be for
executives and a little bigger for Chairmen of companies, etc. Each aspect is
looked into by the board of approval and only he can do what is authorized by
the board of approval. He cannot do anything on his own."
53. To a query as to what percentage of land was used for industrial purpose it was
stated that:
"Out of the total notified area, minimum 50% of the area is to be used for
undertaking the industrial activity and the remaining land is to be utilised for
economic activity and for providing support facilities and social infrastructure."
54. On being asked if the defaulting SEZ units had been identified throughout the
length and breadth of the country, the Ministry in their written submission have stated
as:
"Action is taken as per the provisions of the SEZ Act/Rules against the default-
ing SEZ units, whenever it comes to the notice. Details as regards to the default-
ing Units will be furnished in due course."
55. Elaborating on the proper system of monitoring the compliance of the
provisions of Letter of Permission which is issued by the office of the Development
Commissioner, it has been stated that:
"Performance of Units is examined by Approval Committees which is headed by
Development Commissioners, who is also overall in-charge of the whole SEZ.
As such, there is full fledged machinery to administrate the SEZ including the
SEZ Units. Further, the Units work strictly in accordance with the conditions of
the LOA and Bond cum LUT. For this purpose, there is a whole time custom wing
in every SEZ, which is manned by officers from the Department of Revenue, to
take care of any inward/outward movement of goods, their valuation, duty com-
ponent involved, job work from outside the SEZ. As such, there is a proper
system of monitoring the compliance of provisions of LOP by the office of
Development Commissioner."
XII. Short levy of duty on DTA sales
56. As per paragraph 7.8 (a) of the Exim Policy (2000-07), an SEZ unit can sell goods
including by-products, in DTA, in accordance with the import policy in force, on
payment of applicable duty. Assessable value for such DTA sale is determined under
Section 14 of the Customs Act. The Audit scrutiny of the records of 21 Units of Falta,

20
Cochin, SEEPZ, Manikanchan and Madras SEZs revealed short levy of duty of
` 8.03 crore due to undervaluation of goods sold in the DTA.
57. When the Committee enquired if the Ministry had made any comparative study
on imported goods costing more because it is produced in SEZ which was catering to
domestic market, the Ministry replied as under:
"No such comparative study has been made.
After considering all aspects, SEZ Act and Rules have been framed. DTA sale is
just a part of overall economic activity of the SEZ unit which is allowed on
payment of full duty including payment of Countervailing Duty on the finished
product, while DTA unit is supposed to pay duty on inputs only. Moreover, no
Income Tax benefit is available on such DTA sales. Therefore, there is no
revenue loss in case of DTA sales. Further, as per requirement of the SEZ Rule,
the unit in SEZ has to achieve positive NFE which is absent in case of DTA unit.
Another factor that should also be kept in mind while making a comparison is the
benefit that accrues to our economy by way of production in the country arising
out of the SEZ units set up."
58. When asked if any intervention had been initiated by the Ministry with regard
to DTA sales it was stated as:
"No such intervention is required as the quantum of DTA sales is minimal."
59. On whether any corrective/remedial measures had been taken to prevent
recurrence of cases of short levy of duty on Domestic Tariff Area sales by SEZ units,
the Ministry stated as under:
"Necessary precautions like verifying the valuation, quantification of duty are
being undertaken at the time of assessment of DTA bills."
XIII. Irregular/excess payment of drawback/interest
60. Supply from the DTA to an SEZ unit is treated as a 'deemed export' and for such
deemed export, the DTA supplier is entitled to the drawback or the DEPB credit.
However, on the submission of a disclaimer from the DTA supplier, the SEZ unit could
avail this drawback.
However, the Audit scrutiny of records of 11 units in Falta, Cochin and Madras
SEZs revealed irregularities like (i) drawback being paid to SEZ units without the
disclaimer certificates of the DTA units, (ii) drawback being paid on goods procured
from DTA for manufacture of products, which were not covered under the LOP issued
and (iii) payment of interest on drawback at higher rates.
61. On the mechanism that was prevalent in ensuring that irregular/excess
drawback is not paid, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry in their written submis-
sion to the Committee have stated as:
"Grant of drawback in such cases is governed w.e.f. 10.02.2006 by SEZ Act and
Rules. The drawback rates are fixed by the Government in the Drawback Rules

21
from time to time and these are taken into account in addition to the relevant
circulars/notifications prevalent during the period. Scrutiny of all drawback claims
is meticulously conducted. After processing the claim, the bill is sent to the
Regional Pay & Accounts Office, for further scrutiny and issue of cheque.
Adequate safeguards exist to ensure that irregular/excess drawback is not paid."
62. Explaining the position of the Ministry with reference to the Audit findings, it
has been submitted as under:
"Prior to 11th May 2004, suppliers to SEZ units were eligible for drawback on
deemed exports under the Foreign Trade Policy payable by the Department of
Commerce. The SEZ unit could claim the drawback on getting a disclaimer from
the supplier. In CSEZ, 10 claims were filed by M/s Sterlite Industries, the supplier
of CSEZ unit, M/s Elmag Wires between July, 2002 and July, 2003 and drawback
on deemed exports totalling 
` 24,04,206 was granted. This was as per procedure
and hence regular. Between August, 2003 and February, 2004, the zone unit,
M/s Elmag Wires filed the claim with disclaimer from supplier and drawback to
` 12,58,355 was sanctioned as per procedure. Payment of drawback as deemed
exports paid to M/s Sterlite and M/s Elmag is in order and hence there has been
no misuse.
Audit has erroneously raised this objection as the drawback paid out refers to
the period 2001-02 to 2003-04, as stated by audit, but the relevant citation from
the Foreign Trade Policy quoted by audit is para 7.2(b) of FTP 2004-09. It is
apparent that the period covered and the transaction enquired into by audit
precedes the policy provision cited in the audit objection."
63. Regarding the steps that have been taken to prevent drawback being paid on
goods procured from Domestic Tariff Area, which were not covered under the Letter of
Permission it was explained as under:
"In the Letter of Approval issued to the SEZ units, only authorized operations
are defined/included and no specific goods/services are mentioned. As such
only those goods/services are allowed to enter/utilized in the Unit which is
required by it to carry on its authorized operations. In addition, SEZs strictly
follow the provisions of the SEZ policy and also various stipulations on the
subject."
XIV . Goods removed for inter-unit transfer/job work not accounted for
64. When goods are transferred from one SEZ unit to another SEZ unit or 100 per
cent EOU, the supplying Unit has to submit the re-warehousing certificate to the
proper officer within 45 days from the date of clearance, failing which the proper officer
should initiate action for recovery of duty from the receiving Unit through the jurisdic-
tional officer of the receiving Unit. Further, when goods are sent for job work, such
goods are required to be returned to the Unit within a period of 90 days from date of
removal. Any failure on the part of the Unit to get back the goods within the prescribed
time attracts recovery of the applicable customs duty. Audit scrutiny of the records of
14 Units in Falta and Vishakhapatnam SEZs revealed that the re-warehousing

22
certificates for 99 consignments of goods of a total value of Rs. 3.76 crore, which were
cleared (during May 2004 to March 2006) for transfer to other SEZ units (outside the
zone) and 100 per cent EOUs, were not received. In the absence of any evidence that
these goods were used for the intended purpose, the applicable customs duty of
Rs.1.38 crore was recoverable from these Units.
65. To a query on the procedure that was in vogue to monitor the goods when they
are removed for inter-unit transfer/job work the Ministry have stated as under:
"Detailed Procedure for Inter unit transfer of goods has been laid down under
Rule 46(12) of SEZ Rules, 2006. Similarly, detailed procedure for job work has
been laid down under Rule 50 and Rule 51 of SEZ Rules, 2006."
66. On being asked about the action that was taken in cases where the re-warehousing
certificate is not produced within the stipulated time, the Ministry have replied as:
"In case of failure to submit re-warehousing certificate, action is initiated for
recovery of duty."
67. Regarding the action that was taken by the Department in cases where the Audit
had pointed out that re-warehousing certificates were not furnished for 99 cosignments
of goods of a total value of Rs. 3.76 crore which were cleared for transfer to other SEZ
units and 100 per cent EOUs, the Ministry in their written submission made to the
Committee have stated as under:
"Out of the 99 consignments mentioned in the Audit Para, only 6 consignments
pertain to Visakhapatnam Special Economic Zone. The goods were transferred
to MEPZ and in all cases rewarehousing certificates were received within the
time frame of 45 days and the details and copies of B.Es are already submitted. In
Visakhapatnam Special Economic Zone, no permission has been accorded to
any Unit for carrying out job work during the relevant period and hence
question of non-accountable does not arise as no goods were cleared. There is
transfer of Raw material/Capital goods which cannot be put to use by the Unit
and then all these cases Re-warehousing Certificates were received. The details
are as under:
Sl. B.E. No. & Date Item Value Date of Date of
No. ( `) clearance Re-ware-
from VSEZ housing in
Chennai
MEPZ/SEZ
1. 6722/10.8.2005 Cotton 33351 16.8.2005 23.8.2005
yarn
2. 7173/25.8.2005 Knitting 2421980 01.9.2005 13.9.2005
Machines
3. 7172/25.8.2005 Linking 633223 01.9.2005 13.9.2005
Machines

23
4. 3881/19.5.2005 Colour 15000 27.5.2005 31.5.2005
Monitors
5. 11153/26.12.2005 Linking 543008 30.12.2005 05.01.2006
Machines
6 11154/26.12.2005 Matrix 10036 30.12.2005 05.01.2006
Printer
3656598
FALTA
Regarding inter-unit transfer: Out of 96 consignments, re-warehousing certifi-
cates for 83 consignments were received by Custom Wing later on. For the rest 13
consignments, Notices had been issued to the concerned Units by Dy. Commissioner
of Customs. Subsequently, another re-warehousing certificate has been received. Since
the other 12 Units had not taken any action, the jurisdictional Customs authorities
have been requested by Superintendent of Customs, FSEZ on 08.12.2008 to raise
demand of duty from the receiving units.
Regarding Job Work: Return of goods after job work was pending only in respect
of one Unit in FALTA SEZ. Demand Notice was issued by Dy. Commissioner of
Customs on 08.12.2008. Duty including interest of 
 Rs. 32969/- has been deposited by
the Unit on 13.12. 2008."
XV . Short levy of duty from de-bonded units
68. An SEZ unit has the option to opt out of the scheme with the approval of the DC.
Such exit from the Scheme is subject to the payment of applicable customs and central
excise duties on the imported and indigenous capital goods, raw material and finished
goods lying in stock. The Audit scrutiny of records of two de-bonded units in Cochin
and Vishakhapatnam SEZs revealed short levy of duty of  Rs. 84.87 lakh and interest of
Rs. 11.36 lakh upon these Units opting out of the SEZ scheme.
69. Elaborating the conditions that govern de-bonding of Units, the Ministry of
Commerce & Industry have submitted as under:
"Units can be de-bonded voluntarily or on a direction from the Development
Commissioner. In either case, the Specified Officer of the SEZ is directed to
calculate the duty liability. Any material that is to be shifted out of the SEZ into
the domestic tariff area is liable to duty. If the SEZ unit is NFE negative, penalty
under Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 is also imposed.
Once the unit has cleared all its dues thus calculated, the final de-bonding  order
is issued along with cancellation of Letter of Approval."
Sl. B.E. No. & Date Item Value Date of Date of
No. ( `) clearance Re-ware-
from VSEZ housing in
Chennai
MEPZ/SEZ

24
70. On being asked about the latest position regarding short levy of duty of
` 84.87 Lakh in case of two de-bonded Units in Cochin and Vishakhapatnam SEZs, the
Ministry have replied as under:
"CSEZ
No duty is leviable from the de-bonded Unit in Cochin SEZ. So no action is
required.
VSEZ
Only Rs. 5.24 lakh duty has to be collected. The duty will be collected as per
rules and procedures."
71. Providing the latest status with regard to collection of outstanding duty from a
Unit in Visakhapatnam SEZ, the Ministry have stated as:
"The Unit has imported Capital Goods for a value of Rs. 12.00 lakhs. The Letter
of Permission granted to the Unit has been suo moto cancelled and the unit has
been advised to clear the dues. As there is no response from the unit, action will
be initiated to recover the dues by adjusting the lease rent deposit and also by
auctioning the goods/materials lying in the Unit."
XVI. Unit approval committees were not constituted
72. The performance of SEZ units was to be monitored by the Unit Approval Com-
mittee as per the guidelines given in the appendix-14-IG of the HBP. The Committee
was to be chaired by the DC and should have other members including those from the
revenue department (central excise/customs). The performance of the SEZ units was
to be monitored quarterly on the basis of reports received from the Units on the
prescribed formats. Based on the review, the DC was to prepare a report for the infor-
mation of the Department of Commerce and CBEC and suggest corrective measures to
enable the defaulting Units to fulfil their obligations as per the SEZ Scheme/Customs
Notifications. Further, Circular No. 33/2004-cus dated 12 May, 2004 stipulates that the
monitoring of SEZ units is also to be done by the jurisdictional customs authority
through participation in such a committee. Scrutiny of the records of the DCs at Noida,
SEEPZ, Surat and Vishakhapatnam SEZs revealed that no such committee had been
constituted in these zones.
73. In response to the Audit observation, the Ministry in their submission made to
the Committee have stated as:
"Approval Committees have already been constituted for all the SEZs set up by
the Central Government, including NOIDA SEZ, SEEPZ SEZ and Vishakhapatnam
SEZ on 7th February, 2007.
Out of the 231 SEZs notified under the SEZ Act, 2005 Approval Committees have
been constituted for 124 SEZs vide notifications dated 26th July, 2007 and 25th
April, 2008 and notifications for 63 more newly notified SEZs is in the final
stages of issue, in consultation with the Ministry of Law. Since Junuary, 2008.
The practice of constituting Approval Committees simultaneously alongwith
notification of the SEZ is being followed so as to obviate delay in constitution of
the Approval Committees."

25
74. The purpose of constituting an "Approval Committee" was to periodically
monitor the performance of SEZ units. Explaining in detail regarding its role, the
Ministry have stated as under:
"The performance monitoring of Units carried out by the Approval Committee
includes review of performance of the Units in terms of the Letter of Approval
conditions with regard to their import, local procurements, exports and resultant
foreign exchange earnings. Units are required to submit Annual Performance
Report duly certified by independent Chartered Accountant. The details furnished
relate to exports/imports for the year, cumulative value of exports/imports,
utilization of raw materials, consumables, components, capital goods, other
outflow of foreign exchange. DTA sales, investment details employment statistics,
details of external commercial borrowing and details of foreign exchange not
realized. This is certified by a Chartered Accountant before submission. Based
on this data, the Net Foreign Exchange Earning (NFE) status is monitored as per
Rule 53."
75. When asked to furnish reasons for the delay in c onstituting the Approval
Committee which were intended to oversee the functioning of Units in SEZ, the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry have replied as under:
"There was delay in constitution of the Approval Committee initially as these
committees were being formed for the first time. The Approval Committee being
an inter-ministerial Committee. Nominations had to be received from different
departments such as Revenue, Economic Affairs, etc. and the notifications had
to be vetted by the Law Department. However, now Approval Committee in all
cases are constituted simultaneously with the notification of the Special
Economic Zones.
Further Section 14(2) of the SEZ Act empowers the Development Commissioners
to discharge all functions and exercise all powers of the Approval Committee till
such time the Approval Committee is constituted."
76. During Oral Examination, the Committee putforth the view that in certain SEZs,
one had to have small committees to resolve issues so that decisions could be taken at
a quicker pace.
To this, the Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry stated as
under:
"Realizing that all the issues of differences should not go at the highest level, we
have Unit Approval Committees at the zone level and Board of Approval at the
Central Government level. The Development Commissioner which is an
appointee of the Central Government is the Chairman of the Unit Approval
Committee. All the members of all the concerned ministries at domestic level and
at the Zone level also are represented in the Unit Approval Committee. They are
representatives from local customs Commissioner."

26
77. When the Committee opined that the Unit Approval Committee's scope was
very vast, the Joint Secretary of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry deposed before
the Committee as under:—
"Basically it is a two-tier approach. One is at the domestic/field level and the
other is at the Central Government level. At the Central Government level we
have a Board of Approval which consists of 19 members of different Ministries
as well as the concerned State Governments and Commerce Secretary is the
Chairman of the Board of Approval. On any contentious issue we prepare an
agenda item and put it in the Board of Approval and try to arrive at a consensus
in the BoA meeting itself. For BoA we have a specific stipulation that all
decisions of Board of Approval are to be taken on consensus basis. So, even if
there is one agreement or one dissent, BoA defers the decision till a consensus
is built up. So, at the Central Government level, we have a Board of Approval and
at the field level, we have a Unit approval Committee which are represented by
the concerned ministries which are stakeholders in the implementation of the
schemes."
XVII. Monitoring Mechanism
78. On the steps that were taken to strengthen the monitoring mechanism at the SEZ
level so as to avoid recurrence of irregularities, it has been stated as:—
"In order to strengthen the monitoring mechanism at the SEZ level, a check list
has been prepared which also inter-alia includes information as to whether the
units has a valid LOP."
79. Elaborating on the mechanism in the Ministry to monitor cases where the LOP
has been expired and the Unit has not sought its renewal it has been submitted as:—
"The validity of LOP/LOA is monitored by the Office of the Development
Commissioner. Moreover, if the LOA expires, the Customs formation would not
allow further clearances. Furthermore, in case renewal of LOP has not been
sought, the LOP shall be deemed to have been lapsed with effect from the date
on which its validity expired."
80. While examining the issue of the monitoring of the SEZ Scheme, the Committee
found that the 83rd Report of Committee on Commerce on 'The Functioning of Special
Economic Zones' had recommended that:—
"The Government should, at some stage, pause and ponder, to evaluate the
efficacy of the SEZ policy. It should, therefore, consider to put in place a system
for appraisal of the scheme."
81. Further the Committee found that the Ministry of Commerce & Industry while
furnishing Action Taken Notes to the Recommendations contained in the 83rd Report
of Committee on Commerce (The Functioning of SEZs) with regard to monitoring
aspect, it was stated as under:—
"The recommendation of the Committee to put in place a system for appraisal of
the scheme after the already notified SEZs have functioned for five years is
accepted and suitable action will be taken in this regard at the appropriate time."

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Special Economic Zone (SEZ) Scheme was introduced by the Government
with effect from 1st April, 2000 in order to overcome the shortcomings experienced
on account of multiplicity of controls and clearances, absence of world-class
infrastructure, an unstable fiscal regime and also to attract larger foreign investments
in India. The SEZ policy intended to make SEZs an engine for economic growth
supported by quality infrastructure complemented by an attractive fiscal package,
both at the Centre and the State level, with minimum possible regulations. The
exemptions included Customs duties, Central Excise duties and Service Tax for the
authorized operations. Also there were exemptions from Income Tax, Minimum
Alternate Tax (MAT) etc., alongwith exemptions from dividend Distribution Tax for
the developer and all these fiscal incentives were implemented by the Development
Commissioner. All the export benefits including drawback for supplies to SEZ
developer/unit were given to them within SEZ by the specified officers in the SEZs.
The import/export operations of the SEZ units were on self-certification basis. The
Units in the zones were required to be the Net Foreign Exchange (NFE) earners,
calculated cumulatively for a period of five years from the commencement of production.
These Units were to execute a legal undertaking with the Development Commissioner
to achieve the positive NFE. The performance of the Units was required to be monitored
quarterly by the Approval Committee constituted for each SEZ based on the reports
received in the prescribed format. In short, a Special Economic Zone was deemed to be
a territory outside the Customs territory of India. Bringing goods or services into
the SEZ from the Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) was treated as exports. The goods could
be cleared from SEZ to DTA on payment of duties of Customs including Anti-dumping,
Countervailing and Safeguard duties under the Customs Tariff Act, where applicable,
as leviable on such goods when imported. While the Development Commissioner was
overall in-charge of the SEZ, officials from the Customs Department deputed to the
Zone under the administrative control of the Development Commissioner attended to
the day-to-day operations of these Units.
The detailed examination of the SEZ scheme has revealed a number of deficiencies
which include system as well as compliance weaknesses relating to policy and
procedures governing the management and functioning of SEZ units. Besides, as
highlighted by the Audit, revenue implication to the tune of 
` 246.72 crore and an
additional amount of  ` 1724.67 crore was foregone or could not be recovered in the
absence of enabling provisions. The detailed examination of these deficiencies and
the findings of the Committee are dealt with in-detail in the ensuing paragraphs.
2. One of the main objectives of the Scheme was augmentation of exports so as to
boost Foreign Exchange Earnings. The Committee in the course of examination found
that out of an overall export of  
`7,149.23 crore made by 22 SEZ units, the actual
27

28
export content was only `1,999.27 crore (28 per cent) and the remaining `5,149.96
crore (72 per cent) related to Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) earnings. Though the
Committee were apprised that the percentage of deemed exports and the DTA sales
were minimal, they find that the actual physical export which augments the foreign
exchange earnings was quite dismal. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry consider to restrict reckoning of deemed exports by an appropriate scale
for the purpose of calculating Net Foreign Exchange Earnings with a view to reduce
the misuse of the Scheme.
3. The Committee find that an Export Oriented Unit (EOU), which imported inputs
and raw materials duty free, could clear its final products into DTA after paying the
applicable Basic Customs Duty (BCD) and Countervailing Duty (CVD) as if the final
products were imported. However, in cases where both the BCD and the CVD were
'nil' on certain products, the EOUs would not pay any duty-on clearance of the final
products in Domestic Tariff Area (DTA). A Unit in the DTA producing/clearing the
same final product would also clear these goods at 'nil' rate of duty, but would have
suffered duty on inputs used in the manufacture of these products. This had put the
DTA units under a comparative disadvantage. Subsequently, this anomaly was re-
moved as the EOUs were required to payback the duty foregone on inputs utilised for
manufacture of such goods cleared into DTA w.e.f. 1st September, 2004. However, no
such protection to Units in DTA was provided under the SEZ Policy/Act.
Surprisingly, SEZ units can sell their goods, including by-products, and services in
DTA on payment of applicable duty including at 'nil' rate with no requirement to
payback the duty foregone on inputs used in the clearance of products (at nil rate of
duty) into the DTA. The Committee deplore such a discriminatory policy which puts
SEZ units at a distinctly advantageous position compared with similar Units in the
DTA. Such a discrimination was also noticed by the Committee on commerce and
they, in their 83rd Report (relating to 'The Functioning of SEZs'), had recommended
that a level playing field should be provided to the domestic industry vis-a-vis SEZs. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that SEZ Scheme needs a through reap-
praisal with a view to provide a level playing field for the indigenous industry as well.
4. The Committee find that the mechanism for monitoring the functioning of SEZ
units is based on the data provided by the SEZ units through Self-Certification in the
form of Quarterly Performance Reports/Annual Performance Reports (QPR/APR).
If the erring Units provide incorrect or incomplete data in their QPRs/APRs, there is
no alternative and reliable method or procedure for correct monitoring or the Net
Foreign Exchange Earnings (NFEs) data. The Committee feel that the collection of
such vital statistics relating to NFE cannot be based merely on self-certification of
the SEZs units. The Government must put in place a suitable and reliable oversight
mechanism for monitoring the actual NFEs. Further, the Committee recommend that
in cases of default, prompt and timely action must be taken to recover the duty fore-
gone owing to concessions.
5. The Committee while examining the issue of achievement of positive Net
Foreign Exchange Earnings (NFE) found that duty to the tune of 
 `107 crore was
recoverable as there had been a shortfall in achieving positive NFE. As pointed out in

29
audit, the shortfall had occurred owing to the fact that broad-banding of dissimilar
goods had been allowed. When the Committee sought an explanation from the
Ministry in this regard, they were informed that the interpretation of "broad-banding/
diversification" was not clear, leading to inclusion of items which were dissimilar in
nature from those granted in the original Letter of Permission. Further, the Committee
were informed that the provisions of SEZ Act 2005 and the Rules made thereunder
have done away with the limitation of allowing broad-banding only to similar goods.
The Committee would, therefore, like to know the effect of this amendment and the
impact it has had on the foreign exchange earnings of the country.
6. The Committee are concerned to note that 41 SEZ units had functioned in
violation of the conditions that were stipulated in the Letter of Permission (LOP)
leading to considerable loss of revenue. The violation included carrying out trading
activity though the LOP was for manufacture; manufacturing in a  premises not
mentioned in the LOP; excess trading that what was permitted in the LOP; operating
without a valid LOP and clearing all goods in the Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) against
the strict stipulation that the goods shall be exported to the General Currency Area
(GCA) countries. The Committee note that the functioning of SEZs was reviewed by
the Audit between July 2006 and May 2007. When asked during evidence whether
defaulting Units had been identified, the witness submitted that "the details of the
defaulting Units will be furnished in due course". This is unfortunate, to say the
least. The Committee would like to be furnished the details of the defaulting Units,
the action taken to recover the revenue forgone, to award deterrent punishment to
them and the action taken to prevent such recurrences alongwith the reasons for
delay in compiling the details of the defaulting Units.
7. With respect to the accounting of goods removed for inter-unit transfer/job
work, the Committee note that when goods were transferred from one SEZ unit to
another SEZ unit or to a 100 per cent EOU, the supplying Unit had to submit the
re-warehousing certificate to the proper officer within 45 days from the date of
clearance, failing which the proper officer had to initiate action for recovery of duty
from the receiving Unit through the jurisdictional officer of the receiving Unit. Goods
sent for jobwork were to be returned to the Unit within a period of 90 days from the
date of removal and failure to do so attracted recovery of the applicable Customs Duty.
When queried about the procedure that was in vogue to monitor the goods, the
Committee were informed that detailed procedure for inter-unit transfer of goods
was laid down and in cases of failure to submit re-warehousing certificate, action was
initiated for recovery of duty. However, the Committee found that there were cases
where re-warehousing certificates were not furnished and the Ministry had failed to
take prompt action against them. Concerned over such glaring lapses, the
Committee recommend that the monitoring mechanism must be strengthened and
the defaulting Units inflicted deterrent punishment.
8. The Committee were apprised that an SEZ unit had the option to opt out of the
Scheme with the approval of the Development Commissioner. However, such an exit
from the Scheme was subject to payment of applicable Customs and Central Excise
duties on the imported and indigenous capital goods, raw materials and finished

30
goods lying in stock. When asked about the short levy of duty in respect of a few
de-bonded Units which had opted out of the SEZ Scheme, the Committee were assured
that duty would be collected as per rules and procedures. The Committee would like
to know the recoveries that have been effected in this regard. Further, the Committee
be apprised of the measures taken by the Government to ensure that such lapses do
not recur.
9. On their concern over poor monitoring of SEZ units, the Committee were
apprised that the Unit Approval Committees (UAC) were assigned the specific task of
periodically monitoring the performance of SEZ units. The performance of the SEZ
units was to be monitored quarterly on the basis of reports received from the Units in
the prescribed format. Based on the review, the Development Commissioner (DC) was
to prepare a report for the information of the Department of Commerce and the
Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) and suggest corrective measures to
enable the defaulting Units to fulfil their export obligations. The monitoring of SEZ
units was also to be done by the jurisdictional Customs Authority through
participation  in the respective Unit Approval Committee. The Committee are
constrained to observe that there was considerable delay in constitution of the Unit
Approval Committees charged with the onerous responsibility of overseeing the
functioning of these SEZ units. The Committee, therefore, reiterate the need for
strengthening the monitoring mechanism for concurrent and effective appraisal of
the functioning of the SEZ units. Since the Monitoring Committee involves members
from different departments, the Committee hope that there would be effective and
regular Inter-Ministerial Co-ordination between Ministries for timely resolution of
differences and removal of handicaps so to facilitate effective functioning of the SEZ
scheme. In view of the persistent complaints that the SEZ had degenerated into a
Scheme to garner land at advantageous prices and obviate taxes without expected
multiplier benefits the Committee are of the considered opinion that the continuation
of the Scheme in its present form needs serious reconsideration.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
21 February, 2011 Chairman,
2 Magha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX-I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009) HELD ON 8TH DECEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. on 8th December, 2008 in
Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Sardar Tarlochan Singh —In the chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Shailendra Kumar
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Kharabela Swain
6. Shri Tarit  Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Raashid Alvi
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary (AM)
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director (SP & C)
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary-II
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Anupam Kulshreshtha — ADAI (RA)
2. Shri R.G . Viswanathan — Pr. Director (Addl. Charge of
Dir. General of Audit, CR)
3. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director (INDT)
4. Shri P.S. Das — Director (Customs)
31

32
Representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of
Commerce)
1. Shri G.K. Pillai — Secretary
2. Shri R. Gopalan — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Anil Mukim — Joint Secretary
4. Dr. R.K. Mitra — Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri P.V . Bhide — Secretary, Dept. of Revenue
2. Shri P.C. Jha — Chairman, CBEC
3. Shri J.K. Batra — Member (Cus. & EP) CBEC
2. In the absence of Chairman, PAC the Members who were present in the sitting
asked Sardar Tarlochan Singh, Member, PAC to preside over the sitting. At the outset,
the acting Chairman welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to the sitting of the
Committee.
*** *** *** ***
3. Thereafter, the Committee proceeded to take oral evidence of the representatives
of Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) and Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue-CBEC) on Chapter VI of C&AG's Report PA No. 6 of
2008 Union Government (Indirect Taxes-Customs Central Excise and Service
Tax-Performance Audit) on 'Special Economic Zones'.
4. The Audit Officers then briefed the Committee on the important points arising out
of the Audit Report. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry (Department of Commerce) and Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue-CBEC) were called in. The acting Chairman read out the contents of the
Direction 58 by the Speaker regarding secret nature of the proceedings of the
Committee.
5. Then, the Secretary, Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of
Commerce) made a brief presentation on Department's position with regard to the
Audit findings. The Secretary also responded to the various queries raised by the
Members. To certain queries, for which the witnesses could not give ready replies, the
acting Chairman directed the representatives of both the Ministries to furnish the
requisite information in writing at the earliest, particularly in regard to:—
(i) appraisal of SEZ scheme with special reference to earning of Net Foreign
Exchange and employment generation;
(ii) need to restrict the share of deemed exports in the overall exports by an
appropriate scale for the purpose of calculating Net Foreign Exchange;
(iii) need to introduce a provision to ensure/provide a level playing field between
SEZ units and other EOUs operating in Domestic Tariff Areas;
***Matter does not pertain to this Report.

33
(iv) ways to check misuse of tax incentives by SEZ units;
(v) means to take appropriate action against defaulting units including recovery
of duty;
(vi) protection of worker's right in the SEZ units;
(vii) proper coordination between Ministry of Commerce and  Industry (Depart-
ment of Commerce) and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue—
CBEC) to achieve the objectives set under the SEZ scheme; and
(viii) need for effective monitoring of the implementation of SEZ scheme.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX-II
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-II OF
THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10) ON
'SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONES (SEZs)'
Sub-Committee-II of the Public Accounts Committee (2009-10) sat on Monday the
14th December, 2009 from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. '139', First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab  —  Convenor
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
3. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Principal Director (INDT)
2. Shri P.S. Das — Director (Cx. & Customs)
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri S.D. Majumdar — Member
2. Ms. Praveen Mahajan — Director General (EP)
Representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  and  Industry
(Department of Commerce)
1. Shri R. Gopalan — Addl. Secretary
2. Shri Anil Mukim — Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-II of the Public Accounts Committee
(2009-10) welcomed the Members and the representatives of the Office of C&AG to the
second sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers briefed the Sub-
Committee on various  issues concerning the subject 'Special Economic Zones (SEZs)'.
34

35
3. The representatives of the Ministries of Finance (Department of Revenue) and
Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) were then called in to tender
evidence and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The
representatives of both the Ministries, briefed the Sub-Committee on the current status
of the subject and attended to various queries of the Members on related aspects.
4. The Convenor thanked the Members for their active participation in the
deliberations of the Sub-Committee. He also thanked the representatives of the
Ministries of Finance (Department of Revenue) and Commerce and Industry
(Department of Commerce) for appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing
information that the Sub-Committee desired in connection with the examination of the
subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX-III
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD ON 15TH FEBRUARY , 2011
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15th February, 2011 from 1130 hrs. to 1230 hrs.
in Room No. ‘62’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi   —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Ramen Deka
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
7. Dr. M. Thambidurai
8. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri N.K. Singh
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri K.R. Sriram — Principal Director of Audit (ESM)
2. Shri Subir Mallick — Principal Director (Indirect Taxes)
3. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director of Audit
(Air Force & Navy)
36

37
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India to the Committee. The Chairman then apprised the
Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt three Draft
Reports viz. two Original Reports and the one Action Taken Report which was deferred
adoption in the last sitting held on 3rd February, 2011.
3. **** **** ****
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration:—
(i) **** **** ****
(ii) **** **** ****
(iii) **** **** ****
(iv) **** **** ****
(v) Draft Report on ‘‘Special Economic Zones (SEZs)’’ (Ministry of Commerce &
Industry and Ministry of Finance) based on C&AG Report No. PA 6 of 2008; and
(vi) **** **** ****
5. After going through the Draft Reports one by one, the Committee adopted the
Draft Reports with some modifications/amendments. The Committee, then, authorized
the Chairman to finalise the above mentioned Reports adopted by them, in light of their
suggestions and the factual verifications received from the Audit and present the
same to the House on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
**** The Matter does not pertain to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—6592LS—(S3)—23.04.2011.