  77
ABNORMAL DELAY IN EXECUTION OF
ORDNANCE  FACTORY  PROJECT  NALANDA
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-third
Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY  OF  DEFENCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2012-2013
SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SEVENTY-SEVENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ABNORMAL  DELAY  IN  EXECUTION  OF
ORDNANCE  FACTORY  PROJECT
NALANDA
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of  the
Committee contained in their Fifty-third  Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY  OF  DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on  21.3.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21.3.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)

PAC No. 2004
Price:  ` 32.00
© 2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government
of  India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)........................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ...................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which have been accepted
by the Government .................................................................. 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government............................................................................. 14
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ................................................... 16
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which  the
Government have furnished interim replies ............................. 20
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Twenty-seventh Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 19th March, 2013............................ 21
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Fifty-third Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) ................................................................................... 23

COMPOSITION OF THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
  3. Dr. Baliram
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
  5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
  6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
  7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
  8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
  9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10 Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012  vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected w.e.f.  6th December, 2012 vice  Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee  (2012-13),  having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Seventy-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-third  Report  (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Abnormal
Delay in Execution of Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda’ relating to the Ministry of
Defence.
2. The Fifty-third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
30th March, 2012. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 29.1.2013. The Public Accounts Committee
considered and adopted the Seventy-seventh Report at their sitting held on
19th March, 2013. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Fifty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Abnormal Delay in Execution of
Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda' based on Paragraph No. 6.3, Chapter VI of the
C&AG Report No. CA- 4 of 2008 and Chapter II of the C&AG Report No. 15 of 2010-11
relating to the Ministry of Defence.
2. The Fifty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 30th March, 2012. The Report contained 10 Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Defence and these have
been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 2, 4-6 and 8 Total: 5
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Paragraph No. 9 T otal: 1
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 1, 3, 7 and 10 T otal: 4
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL- T otal: NIL
Chapter V
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-third Report
(15th Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the
succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the Original
Report which either need reiteration or merit comments.

2
I.  Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
[Observation/Recommendation Para No. 1 of the 53rd Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
4. The Committee in their Fifty-third Report had observed that pursuant to the
recommendation contained in the 105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha), with effect from
31st March, 1996, all the Ministries/Departments were required to furnish remedial/
corrective Action Taken Notes on all the Audit paragraphs, duly vetted by Audit,
through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a period of
4 months from the date of laying of the relevant Audit Reports on the Table of the
House. In this regard, the Committee had noted that the figures supplied by the Ministry
of Defence regarding the number of pending audit paragraphs with them did not tally
with the figures supplied by the Monitoring Cell (Department of Expenditure) and
Audit. While the Monitoring Cell had indicated the number of pending Audit Paras as
163, the Ministry had stated in a written note that a total of 131 Audit Paras were
received during the last two years i.e. 2008-2009 and 2009-10. However, the figures
shown by Audit regarding the total number of pending Audit Paras as on 31.05.2010
was 187. The Committee had deplored the discrepancy in the number of pending Audit
paragraphs and had recommended that the pendency figures be reconciled and correct
consolidated position as on 31.5.2011 be furnished to the Committee and the remedial/
corrective action taken thereon within 4 months of the presentation of the Original
Report.
5. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:—
"Total numbers of Audit Paragraphs pending with Ministry of Defence as on
31.05.2011 were 127. Further 35 Audit Paragraphs were added after receipt of
CAG Report No. 24 in December, 2011. 44 Audit Paragraphs were settled after
January, 2012. Total numbers of outstanding Audit Paragraphs as on 30.06.2012
are 118."
6. The Committee in their original Report had recommended that the Ministry
of Defence take Remedial/Corrective Action on the pending Audit paragraphs within
4 months of the presentation of the Report and also furnish reconciled figures of
pending Audit paras as on 31.5.2011. The Committee deplore that the reply of the
Ministry is, studiously silent about the Remedial/Corrective Action on the pending
Audit paragraphs. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the Remedial Corrective
Action on the pending Audit Paragraphs be furnished to them within 4 months of the
presentation of this Report along with the reconciled figures of pending audit paras
as on 31.5.2011 and the new audit observations received subsequently upto May 2012.
II.  Consideration of Audit Observations
[Observation/Recommendation Para No. 2 of the 53rd Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
7. The Committee had noted that  the C&AG Report No. CA- 4 of 2008 and 15 of
2010-11 were presented to the Parliament on 14th March, 2008 and 20th August, 2010
respectively and Action Taken Notes were forwarded for vetting on 11th September,
2008 and 4th April, 2011 respectively for the first time. The first Report in question

3
contained the Audit Para No. 6.3 on 'Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance Factory
Project Nalanda' and the second Report a full chapter on the subject under examination.
The Committee had found that Para No. 6.3 of Audit Report CA-4 of 2008 was not yet
settled even after a lapse of more than three years. Like-wise the second Audit
observation which was revisited by Audit through Chapter-II 'Nalanda Factory' in Para
No. 2.2 of Audit Report No. 15 of 2010-11 had yet to be settled even after a lapse of one
year against the prescribed timeline of 4 months. The Committee had deplored the
cavalier manner in which the serious differences and lapses noticed in Audit were
being treated by the Ministry of Defence.
8. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:—
"Ministry of Defence had replied thrice on 28.08.2008, 05.11.2009 and 10.05.2010
for settlement of the Audit Paragraphs 6.3 of Audit Report CA-4 of 2008. Regarding
the status of the second Audit observation which was revisited by Audit through
Chapter II 'Nalanda Factory' in Para No. 2.2 of Audit Report No. 15 of 2011-11,
Ministry has sent the reply to Audit on 31.03.2012."
9. In this regard, Audit have clarified as under:—
"The Ministry of Defence Action Taken Note on the subject -matter was received
vide their letter dated 28 August, 2008 against which Audit raised certain
clarifications which was sent to the MoD vide this office letter dated 21 October
2008. Without attending to the Audit observation sent to the MoD vide letter
dated 21 October, 2008, the Ministry of Defence simply forwarded their A TN
which was nothing but a replica of what they indicated in their A TN received by
Audit vide their letter dated 28 August, 2008. The same was intimated to the
Ministry vide this office letter dated 17 December,  2009. The Ministry of Defence
ATN again received by Audit vide their letter dated 10 May, 2010 did not add
neither value nor they addressed the Audit observation sent to them vide letter
dated 21 October 2008. The position was again intimated to the MoD vide this
office letter dated 17 June,  2010. With regard to MoD ATN on Chapter II of Audit
Report No. 15 of  2010-11,  It is intimated that our comments on the same was sent
to Director General Audit, Defence Services New Delhi vide this office letter
dated 23 June, 2011 as they were the nodal office for preparation of the  ibid
Audit Report No. 15 of 2010-11."
10. As per the established practice, the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
Notes on all the paragraphs of the Reports of C&AG of India are required to be
furnished to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) within a period of 4 months from the date of laying of the Audit Reports
in Parliament. The Committee note with concern that the Ministry of Defence furnished
their Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on both Para No. 6.3 of Report
No. CA-4 of 2008 and Chapter II of Report No. 15 of 2010-11 after the lapse of
mandatory 4 months period. Worse, the same Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
Note was repeatedly furnished to the Audit without attending to the Audit observation
leading to undue delay in  vetting of the Note by Audit and consequent delay in furnishing
the same to the Committee. Such a neglect of audit observations dealing with financial
deficiencies and irregularities is, undoubtedly, a sad reflection on the working of the

4
Ministry of Defence. The Committee deplore the cavalier manner in which the Audit
Paragraphs/Reports are being treated by the Ministry of Defence and desire that
responsibility should be fixed for the lapses.
III. Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda
[Observation/Recommendation Para No. 3 of the 53rd Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
11. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of Defence through Ordnance
Factory Board planned to set up an Ordnance Factory at Nalanda for meeting out the
needs of the Defence Forces in the year 1999 with envisaged capital outlay of  `531.42
crore. However, to the utter dismay of the Committee, it was found that even after a
lapse of 11 years, the Factory had not been set up. The Committee were astounded to
note that against the original target date of completing the project by November, 2005,
the actual progress achieved as of March, 2007 was only 27 per cent in final terms.
Worse, while construction of core technical buildings for the factory and production
of plants and machinery were yet to be commenced as of November, 2007, ancillary
items of work such as construction of residential accommodation, amenity buildings,
open air theatres, shopping centres, ordnance club, purchase of buses, jeeps, cars,
air conditioners etc. were completed. Appalled at such brazen project mismanagement,
bordering on callousness, the Committee had recommended for fixing individual
responsibility to ascertain dereliction  of duty and complicity on the part of the
individuals involved.
12. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:—
"Ordnance Factory Nalanda was sanctioned in November 2001 based on the
Detailed Project Report (DPR) prepared by M/s M.N. Dastur, Kolkata in
September 1999. Transfer of Technology (ToT) agreement for indigenous
production of Bi-Modular Charge System (BMCS) was signed by OFB with
M/s Denel, South Africa in March, 2002.  Subsequently, OFB started tendering
action in 2003 for integrated plants as per ToT documents. Therefore, there was
a mismatch in the DPR price and the quoted price for the integrated plants
resulting in non-finalisation of contracts for the main BMCS plant. The activities
related to ancillary items of work such as construction of residential
accommodation, amenity buildings, open air theatres, shopping centres, ordnance
club, purchase of buses, jeeps, cars, air conditioners etc. being not linked with
the finalisation of the contracts for production plants and machineries were
commenced and most of them have been completed by November 2007."
13. The Committee had recommended that responsibility should be fixed on
persons responsible for brazen project management bordering on callousness leading
to undue delay in setting up of Ordnance Factory at Nalanda. The Committee regret
to note that the Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry is conspicuously silent
on glaring instances of mismanagement in such an important and vital project like
Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda. Considering the importance of Ordnance
Factories in augmenting the defence preparedness of the country, the Committee
reiterate that responsibility should be fixed on the persons responsible for abnormal
delay in completion of Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda. The Committee would like

5
to be apprised of the precise action taken in this regard by the Ministry. The Committee
further desire that a specific time line should be fixed, within which the Ordnance
Factory Project, Nalanda should be completed and operationalized. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the same within three months of the presentation of this
Report.
IV .  Delay in Procurement of Plant and Machinery
[Observation/Recommendation Para No. 7 of the 53rd Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
14. The Committee had observed that in December 2008, the Ministry of Defence
put up a note to the Cabinet Committee on Security seeking approval of the revision of
the estimated cost of the project from ` 941.13 crore to ` 2160.51 crore without referring
to the Bi-Modular Charge System plant at all and sought approval of the revised cost
of the project. The Committee had also observed that the Ministry did not make
substantial efforts to negotiate the cost and even failed to utilize our diplomatic channels.
The Committee could not condone such serious omissions on the part of the Ministry
of Defence particularly when defence purchases and defence projects involving millions
of rupees were handled by them. Observing that there was something awry with the
functioning of the Ministry, the Committee had called for complete overhaul of the
Ministry's procurement systems and procedures.
15. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:—
''Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) constituted by Ministry of Defence
under the Director General Ordnance Factories (DGOF) & Chairman/OFB had
exhaustive negotiations with M/s IMI, Israel for main BMCS plant and could
obtain a reduction of Euro 3 million after four rounds of CNC meetings. The
revised cost of  `  2160.51 crore for the project was based on the negotiated cost
of BMCS plant. It was, therefore, explicitly clear that approval of CCS was taken
for the negotiated cost of the BMCS plant. OFB procurement procedures do not
provide for utilization of Diplomatic Channels and hence not explored.''
16. The Ministry have further stated as under:—
''Approval of Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) was taken for revision of
estimated cost of the Project from ` 941.13 cr.  to ` 2160.51 cr. cost of the BMCS
plant as ` 1174.98 cr. was included in the estimated cost placed before CCS at
Para 4 of Annexure III. Accordingly, Government sanction was intimated vide
DDP letter dated 05.02.2009. However,OFB was authorised to conclude the
contract for the BMCS plant at the negotiated and approved cost vide DDP
letter dated 10.02.2009. Notwithstanding the above, the contract placed on
M/s IMI, Israel has been cancelled by OFB in March 2012.''
17. The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry have not overhauled
their procurement systems and procedures to protect the country's interest in defence
procurements worth billions of rupees. The Committee observe that the defence
procurement systems and procedures existing at the time of approving various
contracts pertaining to Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda were beset with glaring
loopholes and Lacunae to the serious detriment of national interest. It is, therefore,

6
imperative to have transparent and accountable defence procurement systems and
procedures incorporating, inter-alia, utilisation of the services of diplomatic channels,
whenever necessary, especially when facing the situation like the instant case. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry
of Defence to completely overhaul their procurement systems and procedures and
incorporate a suitable clause for utilizing the services of diplomatic channels as well
before entering into defence deals.
V .  Deficiences in Planning and delays in revised cost approvals
[Observation/Recommendation Para No. 8 of the 53rd Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
18. The Committee had noted that the Ministry of Defence cancelled all contracts
with Denel, a company of South Africa for breach of another contract related to
procurement of Anti-Material Rifle in June, 2005. The Nalanda project was kept in
abeyance from June, 2005 to July, 2006. In view of the time and cost over-run, the
Ministry of Defence decided in June, 2005 with the approval of Raksha Mantri, to
constitute an Expert Committee to review the BMCS project which came out with the
report that the Nitro Glycerin and Nitro Cellulose and the component parts of the
ammunition could be made at the existing factories of Ordnance Factories Board at
different locations, indicating that there was no need for a separate and exclusive plant
for BMCS. But the Government noted that the existing plants were very old and
outdated and did not have the requisite knowhow required for this particular type of
ammunition. Secondly, transferring all these components from different locations to
one location would be a major logistical as well as security problem. The Combustible
Cartridge case was a very important ingredient and had to be manufactured in house.
Further it was argued that the cost of augmenting the existing  plants would be as high
as building a new plant. The Committee had regretted to note that it took about
13 months for the Expert Committee to come out with a report which the Ministry
junked. The Committee were dismayed that the findings of the Expert Committee,
appointed by the Ministry, consisting of eminent scientists and experts were brushed
aside by the same Ministry being impracticable and imprudent. The Committee asked
the Ministry to explain the reasons for brushing aside the report of the Expert Committee
and the level at which such decision was taken.
19. The Ministry of Defence have stated in their Action Taken Note as under:—
''The recommendations of the Expert Committee were found not acceptable to
Ministry due to following reasons—
(i) The existing facilities for the propellant manufacturing being old were
considered unsuitable for manufacturing of new generation propellants as
specified in the ToT documents of M/s Denel.
(ii) Manufacturing of different types of propellants at different locations and
transportation are not viable from safety, security and economy angle.
(iii) Combustible Cartridge Case being critical element of BMCS, manufacturing
facilities in Ordnance Factories was considered indispensible.''

7
20. The Ministry have also stated as under:—
''OFB will start the production of BMCS at Ordnance Factory,  Nalanda by utilising
the existing separable capacities after successful user's trial.''
21.  The Committee are unhappy to observe that the Ministry failed to apprise
the level at which the decision to brush aside the report of the Expert Committee was
taken. The contention of the Ministry for brushing aside the report of the Expert
Committee is not tenable simply because the ordnance factories are spread all over
the country at varying distances and so far these factories had not faced any problem
in manufacturing different types of items. The Committee, therefore, feel that the
recommendation of the Expert Committee to utilize the capacity of the existing
propellant factories for manufacture of BMCS vis-a-vis creation of new Nalanda
factory could have been favourably considered. The whole exercise depicts lack of
proper assessment of domestic ability and the unexplained eagerness to go in for a
foreign supplier renders the very motive suspicious. The recent happenings in various
nefarious defence procurements only establishes the urgent need for fresh re-visit of
the defence procurement policy and procedures. The Committee deplore such
unwarranted action of the Ministry. The Committee further desire to be apprised
about the production of BMCS at Ordnance Factory, Nalanda.
VI. Remedial Measures to Prevent Recurrences of Omission and Commission in
Defence Procurement
[Observation/Recommendation Para No. 10 of the 53rd Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
22. The Committee's examination of the subject and close scrutiny of facts had
revealed multiple acts of omission and commission by the Ministry of Defence causing
a loss of  ` 628.87 crore to the public exchequer. Moreover, the Committee had
observed that CBI filed chargesheet in June, 2010 recommending blacklisting of the
Israel Military Industries (IMI) along with five other firms of Indian and foreign origin
for being involved in illegal gratification. The firm had been issued show cause notice
by OFB. The Committee had asked for apprising the final outcome of the penal action
initiated against the defaulter firm and the remedial measures instituted to prevent
such recurrences within three months of presentation of the Original Report.
23. In their Action Taken Note,  the Ministry of Defence have stated as under:—
''Following penal actions have been imposed on M/s IMI, Israel—
(i) Bank guarantees for advance paid to the firm, Performance Bank Guarantee
and EMD under pre-contract Integrity Pact have been invoked and an
amount of ` 224.91 crore have been recovered from them.
(ii) BMCS contract placed on the firm has been cancelled.
Based on the recommendations of CBI, Ministry of Defence has de-barred
M/s IMI, Israel and five other firms for a period of 10 years from further business
dealings.''

8
24. The Committee are perturbed to note that the Action Taken Note furnished
by the Ministry is silent on remedial measures initiated to prevent recurrences of
acts of omission and commission committed in defence procurements causing huge
and recurring but avoidable loss to the public exchequer. Apart from taking penal
action against the defaulting firm, the Ministry ought to have taken a series of
remedial measures to prevent recurrence of acts of omission and commission in
defence procurements. Without these remedial measures, future defence
procurements will continue to be clogged with omissions and commissions leading to
scams to the grave peril of the nation. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their
earlier recommendation that remedial measures be initiated to prevent recurrence
of acts of omissions and commissions in defence procurements.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
2. The Committee note that CAG Report No. CA-4 of 2008 and 15 of 2010-11
were presented to the Parliament on 14th March, 2008 and 20th August, 2010 respectively
and ATNs were forwarded for vetting on 11th September, 2008 and 4th April, 2011
respectively for the first time. As per the system devised A TNs on all the paragraphs of
the Reports of C&AG of India are required to be furnished to the Committee through
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a period of 4 months from
the date of laying of Audit Reports in Parliament. The first Report in question contained
the Audit Para No. 6.3 on 'Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance Factory Project,
Nalanda' and the second Report a full chapter on the subject under examination. The
Committee find that the first Para No. 6.3 of Audit Report CA-4 of 2008 is not yet settled
even after a lapse of more than three years. Likewise the second Audit observation
which was revisited by Audit through Chapter II 'Nalanda Factory' in Para No. 2.2 of
Audit Report No. 15 of 2010-11 has yet to been settled even after a lapse of one year
against the prescribed timeline of 4 months. The Committee deplore the cavalier manner
in which the serious differences and lapses noticed in Audit are being treated by the
Ministry of Defence.
Action Taken
Ministry of Defence had replied thrice on 28.08.2008, 05.11.2009 and 10.05.2010
for settlement of the Audit Paragraph 6.3 of Audit Report CA-4 of 2008. However,
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) had examined the issue on 18.02.2011. Regarding
the status of the second Audit observation which was revisited by Audit through
Chapter II 'Nalanda Factory' in Para No. 2.2 of Audit Report No. 15 of 2010-11, Ministry
has sent the reply to Audit on 31.03.2012.
Audit Comments
The Ministry of Defence Action Taken Note on the subject matter was received
vide their letter dated 28 August 2008 against which Audit raised certain clarifications
which was sent to the MoD vide this office letter dated 21 October, 2008. Without
attending to the Audit observation sent to the MoD vide letter dated 21 October 2008,
the Ministry of Defence simply forwarded their A TN which was nothing but a replica
of what they indicated in their A TN received by Audit vide their letter dated 28 August
2008. The same was intimated to the Ministry vide this office letter dated 17 December,
2009. The Ministry of Defence ATN again received by Audit vide their letter dated
10 May 2010 did not add neither value nor they addressed the Audit observation sent
to them vide letter dated 21 October 2008. The position was again intimated to the
MoD vide this office letter dated 17 June 2010. With regard to MoD ATN on Chapter II
of Audit Report No. 15 of 2010-11. It is intimated that our comments on the same was
sent to Director General of Audit, Defence Services, New Delhi vide this office letter
9

10
dated 23 June, 2011 as they were the nodal office for preparation of the ibid Audit
Report No. 15 of 2010-11.
Ministry Reply
Ministry has made continuous efforts to settle the Audit Paragraphs.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 10 of  Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation
4. The Committee also find that due to the absence of price variation formula the
Ministry could not protect and pursue the deal with new supplier, i.e. the Israeli
Military Industries (IMI). The Committee also observe that the IMI sought incorporation
of price variation formula to protect themselves from the losses arising out of steep
hike in the prices of steel, cement etc. The price variation formula was to be based on
prices as on July 01, 2008 and would be applicable to the rupee content of the contract.
However, as the Request for Proposal for the Bi-Modular Charge System (BMCS)
plant was based on firm and fixed prices, it was decided by the CNC not to include the
price variation formula at that stage. The Committee deplore that due to want of foresight
and prudence on the part of the Ministry, the price variation formula was not built into
the Request for Proposal RFP. Apparently, the failure to incorporate the price variation
formula in the RFP caused substantial time and cost overrun and delayed the project.
Action Taken
Price Variation Formula was not included in the process of procurement of Plant &
Machinery (P&M) for Ordnance Factory Nalanda at any point of time. The tenders were
always issued on the firm and fixed price. M/s IMI sought incorporation of the Price
Variation Formula during negotiations after second time tendering of the BMCS plant
and that too only for rupee content of the contract. As per the prevailing guidelines,
there was no provision to incorporate Price V ariation Formula while finalising the contract,
as it would amount to change in the terms and conditions of the RFP. Finally, contract
was placed on M/s IMI, Israel at the negotiated cost on firm and fixed price.
Audit Comments
Ministry has not addressed the issues brought out by the Public Accounts
Committee properly, Audit however, desires Ministry of Defence to ensure that in
future contracts, the clause of Price variation formula may be spelt out clearly in the
Request for Proposal stage itself with a view to avoiding time run and delayed execution
of the project. OFB has commented that they have constituted a Committee to devise
methodology to work out the Price Variation formula and related issues vide their letter
dated 23 May 2011 without enclosing a copy of the same. It is requested that a copy of
OFB's letter dated 23 May 2011 may please be forwarded to this office along with the
progress achieved by the said Committee with regard to devising the suitable price
variation formula and related issues.
Ministry Reply
OFB has constituted a committee to devise methodology to work out the PV
(Price Variation) formula and related issues. However it may be pertinent to mention
that incorporation of PV formula for Turn Key Project could not have been incorporated

11
in the past tenders. As requested by Audit, OFB will forward the constitution of the
committee and progress achieved by the said committee with regard to devising the
suitable price variation formula and related issues.
Observation/Recommendation
5. The Committee note that the retendering of the contract of BMCS plant
increased the price of the project by 67 per cent leading to the delay in completion  of
the project. In both the retenders there was a huge gap between L1, i.e. IMI company
from Israel and L2, i.e. DMP from Italy of ` 700 crore. A further retender had an eminent
danger of escalating the price further. The Committee observe that due to limited
number of vendors available and the cost of other vendors being much higher than
IMI, the available options were limited. As IMI knew that there was a gap of ` 700 crore
between L1 and L2 they stuck to the increased price. The Committee regret to note that
the supplier was trying to take advantage of the monopolistic market for this kind of
defence requirement which unfortunately it seems escaped the attention of the Ministry.
The Committee therefore, deplore that the Ministry failed to consider the price escalation
aspect before retendering the BMCS contract.
Action Taken
On restarting the project in July 2006, the lowest quote M/s IMI, Israel for
main BMCS plant was called for price negotiations as the quoted price was higher than
the DPR cost. The vendor revised their cost to ` 654.79 crore from originally quoted
price of ` 571.71 crore while extending the validity of their offer. OFB, therefore, refused
to accept the increased price as there was no provisions to accept the increase in the
quoted price against the fixed price tender and decided to issue fresh global tender
enquiry to generate more competition.
Audit Comments
At Sl. No. 4 above are equally applicable against this comment.
Ministry Reply
At Sl. No. 4 above are equally applicable against this comment.
6. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Finance wanted the Ministry of
Defence to confirm in the CCS that the cost and time projected for the plant and
machinery were firm and there would be no further escalation. The Ministry of  Defence
confirmed it saying that the revised project estimates were based on the negotiated
price cost for plant and machinery and therefore there could be no further cost and
time over-run in the furture. This assertion was made on the presumption that all
parameters for the BMCS plant with IMI were normal and equal. The Ministry of
Defence entered into a contract in March, 2009 and the Ministry of Defence paid an
advance of Rs. 174 crore to IMI and only three months later in June, 2009, the Ministry
put on hold this transaction because the CBI registered a case against IMI for being
involved in a bribery case. The Committee regret to note that the Ministry had no
inkling about the ensuing probe by the CBI against IMI at the time of paying the
advance. The Committee wish to caution the Ministry to be attentive and alert so that
such lapses do not recur.
Action Taken
The investigating agencies work independently and secretively lest the
investigations are likely to be compromised. Ministry of  Defence paid advance of
` 174 crore against Bank Guarantee, taken Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) and signed

12
Integrity Pact.  The above safeguards have allowed Ordnance Factory Board (OFB)/
Ministry of Defence, not only to get back advance paid to M/s IMI, Israel but also
invoke Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) and signed Integrity Pact. After the
encashment of all the Bank Guarantees, ` 224.9 crores have been recovered from the
firm against advance payment of  `174 crore. Therefore, a stern message was sent to all
firms against use of unethical business practices in India.
Audit Comments
A suitable mechanism (which needs to be spelt out in the ATN) therefore is
required to be put in place to ensure that the interest of the Government is not
compromised in any situation in the future.
Ministry Reply
Ministry will advice OFB to introduce the Mechanism of Security Clearance
from DGMI and Vigilance Clearance from CVO, OFB/MoD of vendors at RFP stage (as
being followed by Acquisition Wing of MoD) for the value of contract above the
threshold value at which Integrity Pact becomes valid. Accordingly, OFB may
incorporate it in their manual.
Observation/Recommendation
8. The Committee observe that Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) approached the
Ministry of Defence in February 2005 for revision of the project cost. The Committee
also note that the Ministry of Defence cancelled all contracts with Denel, a company of
South Africa for breach of another contract related to procurement of Anti-Material
Rifle in June, 2005. The Nalanda project was kept in abeyance from June, 2005 to July,
2006. In view of the time and cost over-run the Ministry of Defence decided in June,
2005 with the approval of RM, to constitute an Expert Committee to review the BMCS
project which came out with the report that the Nitroglycerin and Nitro Cellulose and
the component parts of the ammunition could be made at the existing factories of
Ordnance Factories Board at different locations, indicating that there was no need for
a separate and exclusive plant for BMCS. But the Government noted that the existing
plants were very old and outdated and did not have the requisite knowhow required
for this particular type of ammunition. Secondly, transferring all these components
from different locations to one location would be a major logistical as well as security
problem. The Combustible Cartridge case was a very important ingredient and had to
be manufactured in house. Further it was argued that the cost of augmenting the
existing Plants would be as high as building a new plant. The Committee regret to note
that it took about 13 months for the Expert Committee to come out with a report which
the Ministry junked. The committee are dismayed that the findings of the Expert
Committee, appointed by the Ministry, consisting of eminent scientists and experts
were brushed aside by the same Ministry being impracticable and imprudent. The
Committee would like to be explained the reasons for brushing aside the report of the
Expert Committee and the level at which such decision was taken.

13
Action Taken
The recommendations of the expert committee were found not acceptable to
Ministry due to following reasons-(i) The existing facilities for the propellant
manufacturing being old were considered unsuitable for manufacturing of new
generation propellants as specified in the ToT documents of M/s Denel.
(ii) Manufacturing of different types of propellants at different locations and
transportation are not viable from safety, security and economy angle.
(iii) Combustible Cartridge Case being critical element of BMCS, manufacturing
facilities in Ordnance Factories was considered indispensible.
Audit Comments
This contention of Ministry of Defence is not tenable simply because the
Ordnance factories are spread all over the country at varying distances and so far,
Ordnance Factories had not faced any problems in manufacturing different types of
items at different locations and transportation from safety, security and economy
angle so far. In veiw of the aforsaid, Audit observes that the recommendation of the
Expert  Committee to utilize the capacity of the existing propellant factories for
manufacture of BMCS vis-a-vis creation of new Nalanda factory could have been
favourabley considered.
Ministry Reply
OFB will start the production of BMCS at Ordnance Factory Nalanda by utilising
the existing sparable capacities after successful user's trial.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 21 of  Chapter I.

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
9. The Committee observe the contract for transfer of technology between
Ordnance Factory Board and Denel, a company of South Africa, was to remain valid for
a period of five years from the effective date, i.e. 15th March, 2003. Two important
conditions were to be valid for seven years. The first was the seller's warranty that if
the product at semi stage have been duly accepted in accordance with the relevant
quality assurance and inspection and acceptance criteria as set out in the Transfer of
Technology (ToT) document and that these semi- stage products have been properly
assembled and tested in accordance with the provisions in the same document by a
competent; experience and skilled manufacturer of products, then the final product will
conform to the performance specifications set out in the Contract. The second one
was the performance bank guarantee which was 10 per cent of the contract value of  US
$13.99 million. Both the warranty and guarantee had lapsed in March, 2010. The
Committee regret to note that no responsibility was fixed for this lapse in warranty. The
Ministry,  however, stated that Ordnance Factory Board had received all the
technological documents related to indigenous production of  BMCS and their
personnel trained were at the technology provider premises for assimilation of
technology. The Committee note that the plant supplier for the main plant for BMCS is
not only responsible for designing, supplying erecting and commissioning of the
plant but also is responsible for dynamic proof of the end product BMCS. Moreover,
the contract for BMCS plant with IMI signed in March, 2009 was due to expire in
September, 2011. The Committee regret to note that the expiry of the warranty period
has resulted in a situation in which the manufacturing process and output  would be
without any coverage by the technological  provider. The Committee therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should find ways and means to ensure that the warranty
and guarantee of the Transfer of Technology by Denel and the BMCS by IMI is
extended so that output would be covered by the technological provider.
Action Taken
In The absence of the warranty and guarantee of the ToT by M/s. Denel, OFB
has planned to manufacture BMCS as per ToT with the help of the OFB personnel
trained at the premises of technology provider and further interpretation of ToT
documents by HEMRL/DRDO.
Audit Comments
No. comments. Nevertheless, the time frame within the OFB plans to manufacture
BMCS as per ToT with the help of their personnel and HERML/DRDO representativse
has to spelt out clearly in the ATN. Further, progress achieved in this regard may also
please be mentioned in the ATN.
14

15
Ministry Reply
OFB has plan to manufacture BMCS as per ToT with the help of the DRDO.
whenever needed. Component validation trials are in progress. Indigenously
manufactured BMCS components matching to ToT are under development. Efforts to
establish capacity through indigenous experts are also going on. User's Trials is likely
to take place in 2013. Trickle production will commence after getting clearance from
User's trial. Regular production requires complete capacity creation.

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation
1. Pursuant  to  the ecommendation  contained  in  the  105th  Report
(Tenth Lok Sabha), with effect from 31st March, 1996, all the Ministries/Departments
are required to furnish remedial/corrective ATNs on all the Audit paragraphs not taken
up by the Committee for detailed examination. The ATNs duly vetted by the Audit are
submitted through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a period
of 4 months from the date of laying of Audit Reports on the Table of the House.
Notwithstanding the fact that this system was devised as early as 1995 and subsequently
modified in 1996, a close examination of the subject by the Committee revealed that as on
25.06.2012, remedial/corrective ATNs in respect of 4191 Audit Paras were pending with
various Ministries/Departments during the period from 1997-98 to 2007-08. Due to time
constraints the Committee took up the examination of only those important paragraphs
for which remedial/corrective A TN had not been furnished by the Ministries. One such
case relates to the Ministry of Defence. The Committee note that the figures supplied by
the Ministry of Defence regarding the number of pending audit paragraphs with them
did not tally with the figures supplied by the Monitoring Cell (Department of Expenditure)
and Audit. The Monitoring Cell had indicated the number of pending  paras as 163. The
Ministry stated in a written note that a total of 131 Audit paras were received during the
last two years i.e.  2008-2009 and 2009-10. However, the figure shown by Audit regarding
the total number of pending paras as on 31.05.2010 was 187. The Committee deplore the
discrepancy in the number of pending Audit paragraphs and recommend that the
pendency figures be reconciled and correct and consolidated position as on 31.5.2011 be
furnished to the Committee and the remedial/corrective action taken thereon within
04 months of presentation of this Report.
Action Taken
Total number of Audit Paragraphs pending with Ministry of Defence as on
31.05.2011 were 127. Further 35. Audit Paragraphs were added after receipt of CAG
Report No. 24 in December '2011. 44 Audit Paragraphs were settled after Janaury '2012.
Total number of outstanding Audit Paragraphs as on 30.06.2012 are 118.
Audit Comments
In so far as Ordnance Factory Organisation Audit is concerned, the total numbers
of Audit Paragraphs pending with the Ministry of Defence as on 31 May 2011 was 33.
Further, eight Audit Paragraphs were added after receipt of CAG Report No 24 of
December 2011. Six Audit Paragraphs were settled after January 2012. Total Number of
Outstanding Audit Paragraphs as on 30 June, 2012 are 29.
Ministry Reply
This is the factual statement and acceptable to Ministry.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 6 of  Chapter I.
16

17
Observation/Recommendation
3. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence through Ordnance Factory
Board planned to set up an Ordnance Factory at Nalanda for meeting out the needs of
the Defence Forces. The work for the Factory started in the year 1999 with envisaged
capital outlay of ` 531.42 crore. However, to the utter dismay of the Committee, it was
found that even after a lapse of 11 years, the factory had not been set up. The Committee
are astounded to note that against the original target date of completing the project by
November, 2005, the actual progress achieved as of March, 2007 was only 27 per cent
in final terms. Worse, while construction of core technical buildings for the factory and
production of plants and machinery were yet to be commenced as of November, 2007,
ancillary items of work such as construction of residential accommodation, amenity
buildings, open air theatres, shopping centres, ordnance club, purchase of buses,
jeeps, cars, air conditioners etc. were completed. Strangely enough, no one found
anything amiss in the project planning and execution. Such brazen project
mismanagement, bordering on callousness, calls for fixing individual responsibility to
ascertain dereliction of duty and complicity on the part of the individuals involved.
Ordnance Facotry Nalanda was sanctioned in November 2001 based on the
Detailed Project Report (DPR) prepared by M/s M.N. Dastru Kolkata in September,
1999. Transfer of Technology (ToT) agreement for indigenous production of Bi-Modular
Charge System (BMCS) was signed by OFB with M/s Denel, South Africa in March
2002. Subsequently, OFB started tendering action in 2003 for integrated plants as per
ToT documents. Therefore, there was mismatch in the DPR price and the quoted price
for the integrated plants resulting in non-finalisation of contracts for the main BMCS
plant. The activities related to ancillary items of work such as construction of residential
accommodation, amenity buildings, open air theatres, shopping centres, ordnance
club, purchase of buses, jeeps, cars, air conditioners etc. being not linked with the
finalisation of the contracts for production plants and machineries were commenced
and most of them have been completed by November, 2007.
Audit Comments
Ministry of  Defence had not addressed the issue brought out by the Public Accounts
Committee nor fixed any individual responsible for brazen project mismangement, dereliction
of duty and complicity on their part. Further, in order to avoid recurrence of similar instances
suitable mechanisms (which needs to be brought out in the A TN) may be evolved by the
MOD which could be a guide for future project management.
Ministry Reply
Steering Committee at OFB level and Project Management Board (PMB) at Ministry
level is currently monitoring the progress of the execution of the project on regular basis.
Till date 19 Steering Committee meetings and 03 PMB meetings have been organised.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 13 of  Chapter I.

18
Observation/Recommendation
7. The Committee observe that in December 2008, the Ministry of Defence put
up a note to the CCS seeking approval of the revision of the estimated cost of the
project from ` 941.13 crore to `  2160.51 crore.  However, the approval para of the note
did not refer to the BMCS plant at all and sought approval of the revised cost of the
project. The Cost negotiation Committee could Negotiate the price down by about
Euro 3 million only. The Committee also observe that the Ministry did not make
substantial efforts to negotiate the cost and even failed to utilize our diplomatic channels.
The Committee cannot condone such serious omissions on the part of the Ministry of
Defence particularly when defence purchases and defence projects involing million of
rupees are handled by them. Obviously, there is something awry with the functioning
of the Ministry calling for complete overhaul of its procurement systems and
procedures.
Action Taken
Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC) constituted by Ministry of Defence under
the Director General Ordnance Factories (DGOF) & Chairman/OFB had exhaustive
negotiations with M/s IMI, Israel for main BMCS plant and could obtain a reduction of
Euro 3 million after four rounds of CNC meetings. The revised cost of `  2160.51 crore
the project was based on the negotiated cost of BMCS plant. It was, therefore, explicitly
clear that approval of CCS was taken for the negotiated cost of the BMCS plant. OFB
procurement procedures do not provide for utilization of Diplomatic Channels and
hence not explored.
Audit Comments
The contention of the Ministry of Defence is not convincing since they ought to
have explicitly mentioned about the BMCS plant while seeking approval of the revised
cost of the project from the CCS. Further, just because the OFB procurement procedures
do not provide for utilization of Diplomatic channels for not exploring the possibility of
utilizing the Diplomatic channels to clear the mess, the Ministry of Defence cannot
absolve of its responsibility particularly when they were dealing with such an important
and vital project like Ordnance Factory Nalanda project. Ministry of Defence may
issue a guidelines to all their Departments and organizations to explore the possibility
of using the services of Diplomatic channels whenever they face the situations like the
one indicated in the subject matter and to that effect they may explore the feasibility of
incorporating a suitable clause in the Defence Procurement procedure.
Ministry Reply
Approval of Cabinet Committee of Security (CCS) was taken for revision of
estimated cost of the Project from  ` 941.13 cr. to `  2160.51 cr. Cost of the BMCS plant
as ` 1174.98 cr. was included in the estimated cost placed before CCS at Para 4 of
Annexure-III. Accordingly, Government sanction was intimated vide DDP letter dated.
05.02.2009. However, OFB was authorised to conclude the contract for  the BMCS
plant at the negotiated and approved cost vide DDP letter dated 10.02.2009. Not
withstanding  the above, the contract placed on M/s IMI, Israel has been cancelled by
OFB in Mar. 2012.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 17 of  Chapter I.

19
Observation/Recommendation
10.The Committee's examination of the subject and close scrutiny of facts has
revealed multiple acts of omission and commission by the Ministry of Defence causing
a loss of  ` 628.87 crore to the public exchequer. Moreover, the Committee observe that
CBI filed charge sheet in June, 2010 recommending blacklisting of the Israel Military
Industries (IMI) along with five other firms of Indian and foreign origin for being
involved in illegal gratification. The firm has been issued show cause notice by OFB.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcome of the penal action
initiated against the defaulter firm and the remedial measures instituted to prevent
such recurrences within three months of presentation of this Report.
Action Taken
Following penal actions have been imposed on M/s. IMI, Israel—
(i)  Bank Guarantees for advance paid to the firm, Performance Bank Guarantee
and EMD under pre-contract Integrity Pact have been invoked and an amount of
` 224.91 crore have been recovered from them.
(ii) BMCS contract placed on the firms has been cancelled.
Based on the recommendations of CBI, Ministry of Defence has de-barred
M/s. IMI, Israel and five other firms for a period of 10 years from further business
dealings.
Audit Comments
No comments being factual statement.
Ministry Reply
Acceptable.
Sd/-
(Ravikant)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi.
Tele .......................
[Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production O.M. No. 4(75)/07/
Audit Para/OF Nalanda/DP (Plg-IV) dated 26 Dec. 2012]
Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 24 of  Chapter I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
— Nil —
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
20

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES  OF  THE  TWENTY -SEVENTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 19TH MARCH, 2013
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th March, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
7. Shri Ashok Tanwar
8. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri Prakash Javadekar
11. Shri J. D. Seelam
12. Shri N. K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D. R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
6. Shri S. L. Singh — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
21

22
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
2. Shri Venkatesh Mohan — Director General of Audit
3. Ms. Anim Cherian — Principal Director (ST)
4. Shri Rajiv Kumar Pandey — Principal Director of Audit
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then,
apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider the following Draft Reports
of the Committee:—
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
(vii) *** *** ***
(viii)  Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Fifty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha) on 'Abnormal
Delay in Execution of Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda';
(ix) * * * *** ***;
( x ) *** *** ***;
3. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/suggestions
of the Members.
4. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above-mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to Parliament
on a convenient date.
5. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this Report.

23
APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations 1 0
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 2, 4—6 and 8 T otal: 05
Percentage—50%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee do not desire the
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. 9 Total: 1
Percentage—10%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 1, 3, 7 and 10 T otal: 04
Percentage—40%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
— NIL — T otal: 0
Percentage—0%
GMGIPMRND—03LS—16-05-2013.