—————— »|+»
59

FUNCTIONING OF LAND AND
DEVELOPMENT OFFICE

MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2011-2012

FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA


FIFTY-NINTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)

(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)

FUNCTIONING OF LAND AND
DEVELOPMENT OFFICE

MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT

Presented to Lok Sabha on 27-04-2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27-04-2012

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

April, 2012/Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka)


P.A.C. NO. 1974

Price: हैं 70.00

©2012 By Lok SaBHa SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

scat! 2.0५... Leanmguuamamsai cet ...



Composition OF THE PuBLic Accounts Committee (2011-12).

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION ......
REPORT
PART - 1
I. Introductory...
I Previous Audit Findings .....

XI.

XII
XIV.

Administrative set up and Manpower
Lease Administration .....
Inspection ....
Documentation
Computerization ......
Scanning of Market Records
Establishment of a Mapping System and Digitization of Layout
Plan ....
Land Allotment and Management
Ground Rent ....
Audit Findings on Hotels, Hospitals, Schools and Petrol

Pumps/Press .....

Encroachment of Government Land
Pending Court Cases ....

PART - II
Observations and Recommendations ...

ANNEXURES
Details of Land allotted by L&DO to various schools, cultural,
religious and educational institutions during the last 10 years .....

List of encroachments on Government Land under the control
of L&DO........

List of encroachments on Government Land under the control of

NDMC....

APPENDICES
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee

(2011-12) held on 19th July, 2011
Minutes of the Twenty-first Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2011-12) held on 24th April, 2012 ...



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS

Lok Sabha

Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul

Dr. Baliram

Shri Sandeep Dikshit

Shri Anant Kumar Hegde

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Shri Shripad Yesso Naik

Shri Sanjay Nirupam

Shri Jagdambika Pal

Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao

Shri Adhi Sankar

12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh

13. Shri K. Sudhakaran

14. Dr. M. Thambidurai

15. Dr. Girija Vyas

0 9० NAM AWN

= 5s

Rajya Sabha

16. Shri Tariq Anwar

17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee

18. Shri Naresh Gujral

19. Shri Prakash Javadekar

20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra

*21. Shri J.D. Seelam

22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din 502

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh न Joint Secretary

2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary

“Elected wef 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan
appointed Minister wef 12th July, 2011

(iii)


sunt tsa en epee 3» ८1०0१

soggy cshapah eur 2० ५ answers



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Fifty-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Functioning of Land and Development Office’ based on C&AG Report No. 6 of
2009-10 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil) for the year ended March
2008 relating to the Ministry of Urban Development.

2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year
ended March, 2008 was laid on the Table of the House on 18th December, 2009.

3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Urban Development on the subject at their sitting held on 19th July, 2011. The
Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 24th April,
2012. Minutes of the Sittings from Appendices to the Report.

4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body
of the Report.

5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Urban Development for tendering evidence before them and
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.

6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India.

New DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
24 April, 2012 Chairman,
4 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

vv)


REPORT
PART 1
1, INTRODUCTORY

The Land and Development Office (L&DO) traces its genesis to the office
of the Chief Commissioner of Delhi. which was responsible for acquiring the land
for the New Capital of Delhi in 1911. In 1928, the Office of L&DO came into being
as a separate organization. With effect from Ist October, 1959 the L& DO was put
under the administrative control of the then Ministry of Works, Housing and
Supply, which is now known as the Ministry of Urban Development. The L&DO
was earlier a subordinate office. It has been upgraded to the status of an attached
office wef’ April 2000. .

2. The main function of the L&DO 15 lease administration, which includes
substitution of title, mutation of title and according permission for sake and
mortgage. The other functions of the L&DO_ include allotment of land to the
Government Departments and political charitable. educational and religious
institutions, conversion of lease hold properties into free hold, recovery of
Government dues. eviction of squatters from Government land and recovery of
damages under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act. 1971 in
respect of land under its control, recovery of lease charges and ground rent,
maintenance of accounts of receipts and refunds of revenue, auction of vacant
land and built up properties under its charge under the direction of the Ministry
and policy related to land management and allotment.

3. The L&DO_ remains responsible for the administration of the properties
of the Government of India in Delhi. These properties fall into the following two
broad categories.

* Nazul lands, which were acquired in 1911 onwards for the formation of
the Capital of India at Delhi; and

* Rehabilitation land. which were acquired by the Government of India for
the speedy rehabilitation of displaced persons from Pakistan.

4. These properties were given out on leases for residential, commercial and
institutional purposes. Leases on old Nazul lands are perpetual lease and ground
rent is revisable at the option of the lessor (L&DO) after every 30 years.
Rehabilitation leases are for a period of 99 years, and revision of ground rent is
due after 20 years.

5. The LEDO reportedly administered 60.526 leases. covering a total area of
19.995 acres falling under different categories. which constituted per cent of
the total area of Delhi covering prime localities in Nazul areas like Chanakya Puri.



Jor Bagh, Golf Links, Sunder Nagar, Defence Colony and Connaught Place within
the Lutyens Bungalow Zone (LBZ) and elsewhere, as well as rehabilitation colonies
like Lajpat Nagar, Rajender Nagar and Patel Nagar:

6. The C&AG carried out a Performance Audit of the functioning of the
L&DO between August and December, 2008 covering the period 2003-04 to
2007-08 and gave their comments/findings in their Report No. 6 of 2009-10. Some
of the important observations made by Audit were as unde!

(0) Despite thousands of acres of land in prime locations with potential value
ranging from Rs. 1,18,000 crore to Rs. 3.44,000 crore, ground rent receipts
from leased out properties were relatively insignificant. During 2008-09,
L&DO was receiving an average annual ground rent of only Rs. 40.43 per
square metre, this was primarily due to continuation of and ad hoc formula
for enhancement of ground rent for Nazul leases evolved in 1984, which
had no relationship with the current letting/market values of these
properties. The potential for revised ground rent in respect of even
1/30th of the non-residential leases, if calculated on letting value, would
amount to Rs. 356 crore. Thus, leases falling due for evision during last
three years alone could have fetched Rs. 1068 crore annually. Also the
revision of ground rent for Nazul leases, even under the ad ‘hoc formula
of 1984, was in arrears, and L&DO was not aware of how many leases
fell due for revision of ground rent or the total amount of outstanding
ground rent and other dues. Further. the Ministry/L&DO_ had not revised
the premium rates for allotment of land since 1998.

(ii) There was lack of effective and efficient disposal of lease applications of
various lands. 11 per cent of applications were processed with great
speed and finalized within 15 days against the available time-frame of
90 days while 51 per cent of cases were settled after considerable delays
ranging from 6 to 24 months or more. This reflects the lack of effective
oversight, and the possibility of undue favour being shown to certain
applicants.

(ii) The documentation of leases and properties, and maintenance of necessary
records and registers were poor, impairing effective functioning. Although
the L&DO reportedly administered 60,526 leases covering a total area of
19,995 acres, of which 28,824 leases had been converted into freehold,
the detailed breakup of current leases administered by the L&DO was
not available and the authenticity of these reported figures could not be
verified.

(iv) Key components of the computerization plan, including establishment of
a mapping system for all land parcels to be linked to a database,
digitization of layout plans for all properties, and scanning of documents
relating to markets transferred to NDMC/MCD, had not been effectively
implemented. The utilization by the L&DO_ of the computerized maps/
data generated by these initiatives was not ascertainable.



(v) In the absence of details of total outstanding dues, audit scrutiny of
specific categories of lessees-hotels, presses, and petrol pumps-revealed
total outstanding dues of Rs. 968.47 crore; even this figure is incomplete,
as only partial details in respect of only a few lessees were furnished by
the L&DO.

(vi) There were significant shortfalls in the treatment of patients of
Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) in hospitals, despite the order or
the Delhi High Court prescribing 25 per cent of the IPD beds. This
shortfall was attributable partly to lack of referrals from the Government
hospitals. In the absence of treatment of the requisite number of EWS
patient, the implicit subsidy provided by the Government through allotment
of land at highly concessional rates appeared unjustified.

(vii) There were breaches of lease conditions by the hospitals, schools and
petrol pumps in terms of unauthorized construction, encroachment, and
misuse, on which effective action had not been taken by the L&DO. The
conduct of regular inspections of leased properties by the L&DO to
detect such breaches was also very poor.

7. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject for detailed
examination and report. In the process the Committee obtained the Background
Note and Advance Reply from the Ministry of Urban Development. The Secretary
and other representatives of the Ministry or Urban Development and L&DO as
well as that of DDA & NDMC appeared before the Committee for tendering oral
evidence on 19th July, 2011. Subsequently, the Post Evidence Replies were also
obtained from the Ministry. Based on all these written and oral depositions, the
Committee examined the subject in detail and identified certain critical issues, 85
enumerated below, in the functioning of the Land and Development Office.

IL PREVIOUS AUDIT FINDINGS

8. The functioning of the L&DO was previously reviewed and commented
upon in the C&AG's earlier Reports in 1986-87 and 2000. However, despite the
Ministry's specific assurances in the Action Taken Notes submitted to the PAC,
most of the deficiencies pointed out in the previous Audit Reports, particularly
those relating to poor documentation of properties, irregular revision and
non-revision of ground rent and non-recovery of outstanding dues from lessees,
continued to persist.

9. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the reasons for the
inadequate remedial/corrective measures to remove the deficiencies as pointed out
by the Audit in their earlier observations and that too despite an assurance given
to the PAC. The Ministry, in reply, stated as under:

"Despite the constraints in the functioning of L&DO, various steps have
been taken toward remedial/corrective measures. Computerisation of
processing of applications has been adopted since September 2004, movement
of files has been computerised, receipt of applications has been computerised,


scanning of all the files of the markets transferred to local bodies has been
done, scanning of other records is in progress, scanning of different policy
orders has been scanned year-wise and subject-wise, L&DO Manual has
been loaded on the website of L&DO (Ido.nic.in). The policy orders being
issued after the opening of website are being uploaded regularly. Other
detailed progress made in computerization is as under:

(a) Software developed for creation of database and for Management
Information System (MIS).

©

Visual survey and data entry-completed for 4440 properties in LBZ area
and 26308 properties outside LBZ area—the said data can be accessed
on the L&DO's website (Ido.nic.in).

(९

For topographical survey of land under the administrative contro! of the
office, advertisement inviting proposal from the firms has been sent to
DAVP for publishing in a national daily as per requirement of GFR.

(d) Creation of database of land owned by L&DO in and outside Lutyen's
Bungalow Zone (LBZ),

(०) Computerization of office processes for conversion from lease hold to
free hold, substitution, mutation, permissions, inspections of properties
breaches notices, demand notices, recovery of dues, payments and refunds
ete.

(f) Computerized noting, check lists and letters have been made bilingual
(English & Hindi).

(g) Sacanning of files have been completed in the case of markets transferred,
all office orders item-wise and year-wise and cases of properties
2249 files of properties and 617 other files have been scanned so far. The

scanning work is in progress.

(h

Computerisation of documentation of 8707 has been completed. Ground
rent has been revised except 169 cases of Nazul Leases. The revision of
these 169 Nazul leases is in progress.

(0) The issue of removal of encroachment was considered by the Ministry in
2006 and the detailed instructions on the issue were issued on 30.11.2006
clarifying the responsibilities of different agencies.

() About 60 orders against the unauthorised occupants have been issued
by ESO after the last report of CAG. The disposal of cases in the different
courts is beyond the control of L&DO.

(0 The policy of revision of ground rent in respect of petrol pumps has
been finalized and issued/notified in 2006.

()) Due to various initiative taken by L&DO to recover the government dues
the recovery has increased to Rs. 145.24 crore during 2008-09 and
Rs. 308.46 crore during 2009-10."



10. The Committee asked whether the L&DO had created a data-base of
land owned by it and completed the topographical survey of land. The Ministry
replied in the negative and stated that two options i.e. (i) topographical survey of
land and (ii) sharing of data collected by the Government of Delhi through
geospatial survey were under consideration in the L&DO. The appropriate
alternative would be chosen base on technical and financial evaluation.

11, Drawing the attention of the Ministry to their assurances that they
would overcome some major deficiencies pointed out by Audit in the earlier report,
by a definite timeframe, the Committee asked whether the commitments had been
fulfilled. In reply, the Secretary, Urban Development deposed in evidence:

"I admit that commitment was not fulfilled fully because the entries are not
completed. We have noticed that."

12. Asked to state the other difficulties for not honouring the commitments,
the Secretary, Urban Development replied:

"What | have gathered from the records is that the main problems is that we
do not have manpower, we have very few people.”

I]. ADMINISTRATIVE SET-UP AND MANPOWER

13. The Land & Development Office is headed by a Director level officer,
designated as Land & Development Officer (L&DO). The L&DO is assisted
by the Deputy Land and Development Officer, Assistant Settlement Officer,
Vigilance-cum-Legal Officer, Estate Officer, Engineer Officer, Public Relation Officer,
Accounts Officer, Administrative Officer etc.

14. The original sanctioned strength of L&DO was stated to be 276. However,
57 posts has been abolished bringing down the sanctioned strength to 219 though
workload had increased.

15. The Committee were informed that the Land & Development Office had
been facing acute shortage of staff. Even though the total sanctioned strength
stood at a meager 219, only 162 incumbents were in place. As a result, the existing
officers were shouldering additional responsibilities for an extended period of time
and functioning of the L&DO had been affected adversely in areas like
computerization, revenue recovery, eviction and inspection of properties.

16. In the above context, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development
stated in evidence:

"...The Office of L&DO today is beset with manifold problems. One of the
major handicaps being felt by the Office of L&DO is the shortage of
manpower both in the administrative and technical streams. We have shortage
of personnel in all groups, that is, the officer level and also at the staff
level. On the other hand, L&DO is experiencing a certain spuri in work due
to the large number of RTI applications. In the year 2009-10, the L&DO
office received 1237 RTI applications, which has further increased to
1489 during 2010-11. Another major area of difficulty is a large number of


court cases. At the end of the year 2010-11 there were 709 court cases
pending in the Supreme Court, the Delhi High Court and various Lower
Courts. This figure keeps increasing due to the institution of new cases.
The pending litigations are proving to be a major hurdle in the recovery of
revenue. Moreover, it drains away the manpower available with the office as
the officers and staff are required to attend various courts almost on a daily
basis besides spending a lot of time in the preparation of counter-replies,
briefing the government counsel, etc. The time taken for handling RTI
applications as well as the pending litigations takes away a substantial
portion of the man hours available to the L&DO and eats into the man
hours for routine office work like maintenance of records, processing of
various requests of the lessees and maintenance of accounts relating to
revenue collection... ."

17. When the Committee desired to know the exact staff strength required
for smooth functioning of L&DO, the Ministry in a written reply submitted as
under:—

"L&DO office will be in position to discharge its functions effectively with
overall strength of 298. This includes the earlier strength of 276 and the
proposed creation of 15 posts of Technical Staff and 7 posts for legal cell."

18. In response to a query of the Committee regarding the impediments
faced in getting adequate manpower for the L&DO, the Secretary, M/o Urban
Development deposed in evidence as under:—

न What has happened is that after this office became an attached office,
all the recruitment powers have been taken away from the L&DO. All the
personnel have to be given by the Department of Personnel. There is also a
rule that if there is any vacancy which remains vacant for one year, it gets
abolished. Since posts have not been filled, they are getting abolished ”

19. In response to a specific querry of the Committee, the Ministry stated
that the staff strength of the L&DO was last reviewed in 2002 by the Staff
Inspection Unit of the Department of Expenditure. Asked to state whether the
shortage of manpower which was adversely impacting the functioning of the L&DO
had ever been taken up at the appropriate level, the Ministry replied as under:—

"The acute shortage of staff strength of this office has been brought to the
notice of Ministry of UD and CPWD, being the respective cadre authorities,
on several occasions through letter dated 10.8.2009, 7.1.2010, 8.6.2010, 3.3.2011
& 4.72011 respectively. Ministry of Urban Development had also taken up
this matter vide D.O. No. A-32016/1/2010-Admn.-IV/3027 dated 26.11.2010
and letter O.M. No. A-22012/2/2011-Admn.-1 dated 21.06.2011."

20. The Committee then desired to know categorically whether the Secretary,
UD had taken up the issue with his counterpart at the DoPT. In reply, the Ministry
stated that the Secretary, UD had written a D.O. letter to the Secretary. DoPT on
Ist August, 2011 requesting him to provide adequate staff to the office of L&DO.

a eapeinbn ese i

te ++मशमन्‍+बक> A NHANES AgLE osha a 5



The Ministry further stated that the Minister for Urban Development vide his
D.O. letter dated 27th May, 2011 had already written to the Minister of Law
requesting him to provide a panel of officers for defending the court cases pending
in the various courts.

21. The Committee asked in evidence whether the Ministry of UD had made
any efforts to recruit people on contractual basis, as other Ministries were doing.
In reply, the Secretary, UD submitted:—

"We are trying that .....But the problem is that we cannot hand over the files
to these people. Files have to be handled by people who are in regular
employment. We have some problems in that regard.”

22. The Committee asked whether the problems were being brought to the
notice of the DoPT with all the seriousness and on the logic that if more manpower
were given to the L&DO, more revenue would accrue to the Government. In reply,
the Secretary, UD stated:—

"We will do that. We will try our best.”

23. Asked to state specifically whether the deficiency would be overcome
within one year, the Secretary, UD submitted:—-

"We will try. I will personally go to the Secretary (Personnel) and request
him."

24. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Ministry/L&DO
on the need of restructuring/revamping of the Office of L&DO, the Ministry stated
that in the medium/long term, the entire organization of the L&DO needed to be
restructured/revamped considering the work load and the sanctioned strength.
Asked to state the specific medium/long-term planning under consideration of the
Ministry to restructure/revamp the L&DO, the Ministry submitted that the following
proposals were under active consideration:—

* Setting up a Legal Cell to defend the court cases pending before various
courts.

+ Simplification of procedures.

* Strengthening of Technical Wing of L&DO with a view to undertake
adequate inspections.

IV. LEASE ADMINISTRATION

25. The Committee were informed that the objective of converting the lease
holdrights into freehold was to transfer the ownership rights from Government to
the lessees. It was further stated that the documents submitted for conversion
were examined administratively and if required, through the Ministry of Law and
Justice.

26. As regards the location-wise details of residential, commercial, industrial
and institutional leases, the Committee were informed that as per the information
obtained from the office records, there were 49523 residential, 22 commercial,


9 industrial. 156 institutional and 311 residential-cum-commercial — leases in
103 different locations in Delhi.

27. When the Committee asked the Ministry to clarify the term ‘as per the
information obtained from office records’, it was replied that to show the definite
number of leases might not be possible as the records were inherited from other
sources at various points of time. The Nazul records were transferred to the
L&DO from the Notified Area Committee in 1955 and the records of rehabilitation
properties were transferred irr 1983 from the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of
markets transferred to them. The Ministry thus submitted that in the given situation,
the L&DO_ had to rely on the available documents for furnishing information to
the Committee.

28. In view of the fact that conversion included commercial leases too, the
Committee asked the reasons for not showing the records of category-wise
break-up of the frechold properties to Audit. In reply, the Ministry stated that the
break-up of properties upto 2004 was shown to Audit and for the subsequent
period, the break-up had been computerized and was available for inspection by
Audit.

29. The Committee specifically desired to know whether the Ministry/L&DO
maintained year-wise records of the conversion of the leased properties. The
Ministry replied in the affirmative. The Committee then asked the reasons for not
showing the year-wise records to Audit when such records were being maintained.
In reply, the Ministry regretted the incident and submitted that there was no
intention of denying access to such records, but due to the overload of work, the
records could not be retrieved from the Record rooms.

30. The volume of transactions made by the L&DO from 2004 to 2008 was
stated to be as under:—

Year 2004 2005 2006 2007 _ 2008 Total
Mortgage ~ er) 2 m 10 08 “HB
Permissions

Substitutions 755 556 545 336 220 2412
Mutations 118 143 139 50 43 493
Sale Permissions 25 14 19 ol 02 6]
Conversions 1886 1821 1422 824 524 6A77

31. As would be seen from above, the volume of lease transactions processed
by the L&DO had consistently declined over the five year period from 2004 to
2008. On being asked about the reasons for consistent decline of lease transactions
processed by the L&DO, the Ministry submitted as under:—

"The number of leases decreases with the increase in the number of



free-hold properties. Accordingly the number of the applications under
different lease transaction categories will continue to decrease. Secondly,
the recovery of different dues has been made mandatory in the free-hold
policy for the applications received on or after June, 2003 policy. In 2008 the
inspection of the properties has been made mandatory in all cases if not
carried out in last three years in the requests for other than free-hold and
one year for freehold. Since there are large scale breaches by the lessees
being found on inspections, they are now not coming forward as was being
seen earlier. All these factors are leading to the decrease in number of receipt
of applications for different purposes".

32. Audit scrutiny also revealed that the volume of transactions reported
into the Performance Budgets of the Ministry did not tally with the computerized
data base of transactions maintained in the L&DO. Audit further observed that
the L&DO had given the details of 6233 leases converted into freehold from
January 2005 to August 2011. But Audit could not verify from the soft copy of
the data the break-up of the leases pertaining to residential and commercial category
leases. Audit further pointed out that the accuracy of assertions made in the
Performance Budget and the Statement of Achievements was open to debate.

33. In the above context, the Committee asked the Ministry to furnish the
comparative data as found place in the Performance Budgets and as uploaded in
the Computer. In response, the Ministry provided the following date:—

Lease administration No. of cases as per the No. of cases in the IT
activities performance budgets for system for the years
the years 2004-08 2004-08
Mortgage permission 118 80
Substitution 2412 1891
Mutations 493 338
Sale permissions 61 7
Conversions 6477 5030

34. Asked to state the reasons for such discrepancy, the Ministry stated
that efforts were being made to complete the records and reconcile the figures.

35. The Citizen's Charter for Lessees of L&DO stipulates that L&DO will
ensure quality of service by disposing of applications within a period of three
months from the date of receipt, provided the information and papers submitted
by the lessee are in order. However, Audit's analysis of the electronic database of


10

the Land Management Information System (LMIS), containing data up to August
2008 revealed the following fact:-—

Profile of Time Taken for Processing Lease Applications

Lease activity Total 15 16 to 91 10 181} to 2) More Percentage of
days 90 180... 0008. years than cases where

or days days to 1 2 more than

less year years 90 days were

taken. to dispose

Conversion 5615 406 1998 1214 874 702 RI

Substitution 2305 421 1054. 342 327 147 18 36
Mutation 375 56. 145 72 63 35 4 46
Mortgage 108 21 उ5 21 18 9 4 48

Permission
Sale Permission 30 5 10 10 5 0 0 50

Gift Permission 2 0 1 0 1 0 0 50

_ 8435 909 3243 1659 17288 893 #+#3_ sl

36. Audit specifically pointed out that there was lack of effective and efficient
disposal of lease applications of various lands by the L&DO, only 11 per cent of
applications were processed with great speed and finalized within 15 days against
the available timeframe of 90 days while 51 per cent of cases were settled after
considerable delays ranging from 6 to 24 months or even more.

37. In the above context. the Committee asked whether the system of
processing the lease applications had been computerized by the L&DO and if so,
the reasons for inordinate delay in processing the applications. In reply, the Ministry
stated as under:—

"Yes, the system of processing the applications has been computerized by
the L&DO. The delays in processing the applications are primarily because
of the complications involved in the respective cases themselves and because
of the fact that all requisite papers/complete information are not submitted
by the applicants in time. It has been stipulated that the respective
applications shall be disposed of within 90 days from the date of receipt of
complete applications/information/documents and complete payment as
applicable. Decision on an application depends on various factors ९.8.
correctness of particulars and details in the application, submission of
requisite documents, availability of sanctioned building plan, involvement of
legal issues, court cases, policy conformity. mandatory inspection of the
premises, breaches by the lessee. response from the lessee, clearance of
Government dues and availability of manpower etc. If the applications
submitted are incomplete, government dues are pending, breaches are found
on inspection, the applicants do not cooperate in completion of all the

a eee ae हन॥ ४० ४]


11

formalities, court case is pending and any complaint or objection is pending,
the decision will depend on the time taken in settlement of the issues.”

V. INSPECTION

38. As per the L&DO Manual, annual inspections of all leases are to be
carried out by the L&DO. Inspections are also carried out on receipt of applications
for mutation/sub-division/change of purpose etc. and whenever NDMC/MCD notice
for unauthorized construction, specific written complaints etc. were received, or
where breaches were to be regularized. However, Audit pointed out that in practice,
no uniform policy for routine inspection of properties had been adopted. Between
1971 and 1998, inspection of properties in rehabilitation colonies was banned,
presumably on grounds of fear of harassment. During 1998-99, inspections were
permitted, and from 1999-2000 onwards inspections were to be conducted only
when specific complaints were received. However. inspections of these properties
for purposes like unauthorized constructions etc. were also within the jurisdiction
of local bodies like MCD/NDMC, and it was not known whether similar bans on
inspections by these bodies were also in effect.

39. Audit had also observed that they could not ascertain the number of
inspections conducted by L&DO during the period 2003-2008, as the Register of
Inspections was not maintained. Perusal of individual files, however, revealed that
annual inspections were not being conducted. There was also no effective
mechanism for ensuring that breaches were intimated to the lessees, and for
watching the regularization of breaches. Audit scrutiny further revealed that the
scheme of conversion of lesses to freehold was introduced in April 1992, and
modified four times in its scope and coverage in June 1996, June 1999, June 2003
and June 2006. However, no provision for mandatory inspection of such leases
prior to conversion, which would have detected cases of unauthorized construction,
misuse, breaches, encroachments etc., was made at any time. An analysis of the
computerized database, which was admittedly incomplete, revelaed that 90 per
cent of the conversions related to rehabilitation properties were not subject to
annual inspection.

40. In the above context, the Committee desired to know whether it was a
fact that regular and periodic inspection on the based properties was not carried
out by the L&DO. Admitting the lapses, the Ministry submitted as under:—

"Due to severe scarcity of technical man power it is not feasible to carry
out inspections periodically though the L&DO Manual prescribed periodical
inspections of all properties. Inspections are being carried out in the cases
of applications received for conversion from lease hold to freehold and for
substitution/mutation/sale/mortgage/gift permission or NOC.

Earlier As per L&DO's Manual the inspection was to be made annually. It
has been reviesed, changing periodicity from one year to three years. Since
30-10-2009, the inspection has been made compulsory in all cases if it has
not been done earlier within three years of receipt of an application for any
purpose. In the case of conversion it has bene decided vide Office Order
No. 14/2009 dated 30/10/2009 that if the property has not been inspected


12

during the last one year preceding the date of receipt of application the
inspection must be carried out due to further depletion of the technical staff
strength, it is becoming extremely difficult to maintain the periodicity as
mentioned in the L&DO Manual. As per records available, 6737 inspection
notices were issued and inspections were conducted by L&DO during the
year 2004 to 2008".

41. The Ministry further stated that they were bound to comply with the
Government Policy on conversions. However, the onus for taking the policy in
that direction, by making inspections mandatory in all cases, laid with L&DO,
which was well aware of the ramifications of any laxity in its approach on the
matter.

VI. DOCUMENTATION

42. The Compendium of Information, issued by the L&DO in October 2005,
under Section 4 of the Right to Information Act, 2005, specifies various records
which need to be maintained by the individual Lease and Property sections based
on their territorial jurisdiction, for exercising control over the different aspects of
lease administration. Similarly, the Office Manual of L&DO also prescribed the
maintenance of such records.

43. The key records, containing complete details of various matters related
to leases administered by L&DO, which were to be maintained in the form of
registers, are summarized as follow:—

Register Purpose

Ground Rent Register To watch recovery of ground rent due, and date of next
revision; to be maintained separately by each dealing hand.

Squatter Register To record squatting notices during survey of government
lands; to be maintained by each Overseer to note
particulars of each squatter

Register of Damages To maintain record of damages recovered under the Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act 1971.
The register is to be maintained separately for each year.

44. However,.the above registers were not produced to Audit by any of the
sections. As regards the alternative method of data capture in computerized fashion,
this had been done only partially. Since these registers were not produced to
Audit, these were evidently not maintained, despite assurances in the Action
Taken Note (ATN) on the earlier Audit Report.

45. Audit specifically pointed out that documentation of leases and
properties, and maintenance of necessary records and registers was poor. Although
the L&DO reportedly administered 60,526 leases covering a total area of
19,995 acres, of which 28,824 leases had been converted into freehold, the detailed
breakup of current leases administered by the L&DO was not available, and the
authenticity of these reported figures could not be verified.



13

46. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the methodology
adopted by the L&DO for proper maintenance of Ledger, Property and Ground
Rent Registers. In reply, the Ministry stated that earlier these Registers were
maintained manually but it was proposed to computerize these Registers with a
view to improve the functioning of the L&DO.

47. In response to another specific querry of the Committee, the Ministry
stated that regular updating of the Ground Rent Registers could not be done due
to shortage of staff. In view of the non-updation of the Registers, the Committee
asked the mechanism devised to ensure the accuracy and authenticity of the
entries made in the Registers. In reply, the Ministry stated that on entry of the
details of the property in the files by the staff concerned, the same are attested
by the supervising officer to ensure its authenticity, The Ministry further stated
that the maintenance of the details of the properties was independent of the
updation of the Ground Rent Registers. The details of the records were being
maintained in the respective property files.

48. Asked to state the periodicity prescribed for the inspection/monitoring
of the Registers/Ledgers, the Ministry submitted that the supervisor used to inspect
the Ledger as and when entries were made in them. However, no specific periodicity
had been prescribed for the purpose. On being asked since when the Ground
Rent Registers had not been updated, the Ministry replied that the Ground Rent
Registers had not been updated since 1984-85.

49. In evidence when the Committee desired to hear the views of the Ministry
on non-maintenance of Registers, the Joint Secretary, UD submitted: —

"Many of them (Registers) have not been maintained for the last 40 years;
we have to prescribe the format and generate. So, we will need three months.”

50. Expressing their surprise, the Committee desired to know the basis on
which a particular property was leased out or made freehold in view of the
non-maintenance of many Registers since last 40 years. In reply the Joint Secretary,
UD stated:—-

"We have individual files. But in a particular register, they are not there.”

51. Asked to state categorically whether the L&DO had started maintaining
the various Registers, the JS, UD replied:—

"It is done now."

52. The Committee asked the methodology adopted for data generation when
the Ministry/L&DO did not have any trace of the files. In response, the JS, UD
submitted:—

"The files are there; we have to change the format.”

53. When asked to state unambiguously whether the methodology adopted
by the L&DO for the upkeep and maintenance of land records was adequate and
foolproof, the Ministry in a post-evidence information admitted that the effort was


14

inadequate and there was room for improvement. The Ministry further submitted
that the L&DO was resorting to substantial computerization to bring about
improvement in the extant system.

शा. COMPUTERIZATION

54. Audit scrutiny revealed that key components of computerisation plan,
including establishment of a mapping system for all land parcels to be linked to a
database, digitization of layout plans for all properties and scanning of documents
relating to the markets transferred to NDMC/MCD had not been effectively
implemented. Audit further pointed out that the utilization by the L&DO of the
computerised maps/data generated by these initiatives was not ascertainable.

55. In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the views of
the Ministry, they were informed that computerisation of documentation of
8707 files had been completed. Similarly, 2249 files of properties and 617 other files
had been scanned so far.

56. When the Committee desired to know the progress made so far on the
sue of computerisation, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development responded
ring evidence:—

"We have already started exploiting the information technology to make
the functioning of L&DO smoother, faster and contemporary with a view to
providing hassle free services to the public. Computerisation has been taken
up on a large scale both for land records management as well as providing
day to day services to the clients. A specific software called e-DHARTI is
already in operation. Computerisation of various registers which help in
monitoring of revenue recovery is underway. A fully computerised information
facilitation centre has been established for the benefit of public visiting the
L&DO office and availing various services. Information Kiosks have also
been established for the benefit of the public through which real-time progress
can be ascertained..."

57. The Committee asked as the pace the files were computerised/scanned,
when the Ministry would be able to finish the job for approximately 30,000 property
files. In response, the JS, UD submitted:—

"On Computerisation, I would like to submit that earlier about four and half
crores of rupees was spent and the project has started for both hardware
and software. We have both hardware and software. The basic challenge at
this time is data entry... in the first priority, we are taking those properties
which fetch higher revenue. There are about three thousand commercial
leasehold properties. So we target to complete the entire data for those
properties by this year end i.e. December (2011). Thereafter, we shall take
rehabilitation properties which are not so high revenue earning and we will
take about one year thereafter. At this moment, we have a programme ie.
e-DHARTI which includes the systems of conveyance deed, rejection-
objection letters, inspection notice, show cause notice, breaches, reporting
etc. Ground rent register is also being generated through it."



15

58. The Joint Secretary further apprised:—

"Now, we have to do another thing. The registers which have not been
maintained till now, we shall generate all those registers through computers
in next three months. Then, we want to make this system user friendly that
at each and every stage when it is processed, automatic e-mail or SMS
should be generated to the lessee... We are going to make all applications
online. We are targeting to reduce affidavits with the help of self-certification,
scanned copies and online filing. But it will take about six months for the
development of this software. But within one year, we will make this system
operational and bring it up to the public satisfaction.”

59. The Committee asked the reasons for the projection of one year to
complete the whole process when technical knowledge and know-how were
available in the country, which the Ministry could outsource to accomplish the
job within few months. In reply, the JS, UD submitted:

"My humble submission is that we have taken 10 data operators through
outsourcing. We cannot give it to all the people because they are property
files. When I said three month, I gave a target we have set for ourselves
for creation of out registers... The software reach needs to be changed; it
does not include the process; we will do it one by one and complete it
within three months.”

60. The Committee desired to know whether the computerisation of all the
files, Registers etc. would be completed within three months. In response, the
Secretary, UD stated that within three months the software work would be over,
by 31st December 2011 all the files pertaiing to Nazul properties would be
computerised and by June, 2012 all other files/register would be computerised.

61. In view of the above assurance of the secretary, UD, the Committee look
stock of the situation after December 2011. In a latest information, the Ministry
stated that as on 15th March, 2012, the computerisation programme had been
completed regarding input works relating to the Nazul properties. The Committee
were apprised that out the total 3373 Nazul properties, 901 properties had been
converted to freehold and out of the remaining 2472 leasehold properties, input
pertaining to 2404 properties had been completed.

62. The Ministry further stated that computerisation of key registers like
Ground Rent Register, Squatter Register, Inspection Register etc. had been
completed and prepared colony-wise.

63. As regards computerization of the Rehabilitations properties, the Ministry
stated that data entry had already been started and was expected to be completed
as per the scheduled date.


16

शा, SCANNING OF MARKET RECORDS

64. Regarding scanning of market records, Audit had pointed out that in
view of the transfer of markets under L&DO's control to NDMC and MCD, L&DO
requested NIC in November, 2005 to deploy and agency (through National
Informatics Centre Services Inc.) for scanning of the related property files. This
task was to be completed by January, 2006. However, after payment of = 0.94 lakh,
NIC handed over one set of DVDs to L&DO only in January 2008, after an earlier
set of DVDs handed over in August, 2006 were found to be defective. Audit
further pointed out that on random checking of the fresh DVDs many blank pages
were found and a few folders on different disks were empty.

65. In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the views of
the Ministry, they responded as under:—

"The scanning of documents relating to transferred markets was completed.
8500 property files were scanned and stored in 117145 image files spanning
32 CDs. Since 2398 pages were found blank, the agency was paid for
114747 images, and an amount of 30 percent was thus withheld”.

66. When asked the number of files yet to be scanned and the time schedule
for the purpose, the Ministry reponded:—

a

“All layout plans have been scanned and are used for reference purposes
as and when required. All files of properties transferred to the Local Bodies
have been scanned and there is no pendency. Files of other properties are
not to be scanned.”

67. As regards scanning of documents relating to markets transferred to
NDMC/MCD, the Ministry stated as follows:—

"The scanning of documents relating to markets transferred to NDMC/MCD.
has been effectively implemented by L&DO. The documents in the scanned
form will be used for reference as and when required.”

IX. ESTABLISHMENT OF A MAPPING SYSTEM AND DIGITIZATION OF
LAYOUT PLAN

68. One major component of the L&DO's computerization plan was the
establishment of a mapping system by creation of base maps on scale of 1:1250
for all land parcels. This would be linked to a database containing address and
other details, which could be used for easily locating any property lease. While
the total cost of the project was estimated at Rs. 1.82 crore, National Informatics
Centre (NIC) was commissioned to execute Phase-I, covering 40 percent of the
area, at a cost of Rs. 80 lakh for completion by March, 2002.

69. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that the establishment of the mapping
system had not even commenced as of March, 2009, despite payment of
Rs. 80 lakh to NIC between September, 2001 and March, 2002. Of this, an amount
of Rs. 40 lakh was released to NIC on 31st March, 2002 (evendently to avoid
lapse of funds), dispite concerns over the high rates quoted by NIC.



7

70. In the above context, when the Committee desired to hear the views of
the Ministry, it was stated that the project could not commence since it involved
flights over no fly zones of Delhi. Even after meetings with officials of NIC, the
amount paid to them was not refunded, and now, a proposal was underway to
utilize this amount for procuring new hardware and software from NIC.

71. The component of digitization of layout plans involved scanning of
4200 layout plans of different sizes of various colonies/land/pockets/survey which
were available with L&DO for the last 70 years but were badly damaged due to
wear and tear. In addition, there were about 16800 sheets of approved plans and
8600 sheets of B-1 copies. The digitization of layout plans was to be completed
by 31st May, 2005.

72. Asked to explain the position, the Ministry stated that five CDs of
layout plans were received. The Ministry, however, did not intimate how many
plans were digitized, and how these were being utilized. Further, 1. none of the
joint field visits by the Audit team and L&DO staff, was the use of these digitized
plans, or printed copies thereof, noticed. Audit had pointed out that in the absence
of details of how many plans were scanned and how the scanned data was
utilized, the purported completion of digitization of layout plans could not be
verified.

73. When asked to explain the present status of the mapping system and
digitization of layout plans of properties, the Ministry stated as under:—

"Total 1028 maps (Lay out Plans) have been scanned. There is plan to
utilize them in the e-Dharti Application. 5CDs were received from the
concerned agency on 26-08-2005. Among the 5 CDs, one is an installer CD
while 2 copies of Data Sets (2 CDs containing 1028 Raster (TIFF) images of
Layout plans). Master copy CDs are available with NIC plus | set of CD is
also available in L&DO as backup. The project was undertaken to digitize
the layout plans as they are very old and in dilapidated condition and these
will be further utilized as and when the need arises. Further, if concems of
the office regarding the security of mapping data are addressed by the
Survey of India, then linking of properties and their digitized layout plans
shall be considered”.

74, In the course of the oral examination, the Committee pointed out that the
process of topographical survey of land under the control of the L&DO to establish
a mapping system was initiated in 2001, but tender for the topographical work was
invited only in December, 2010 and the work was still incomplete. Explaining the
position, the Secretary, UD submitted that the Defence Ministry did not give
permission for aerial photography which was needed for the topographical work.
Therefore, the work was cancelled and a fresh tender was floated for topographical-
survey which would take a lot of time for which the Ministry were not going to
consider it. The Secretary UD further stated that since the Delhi Government had
already done the topo-survey, the Ministry would be sharing the data with them.


18

75. The Committee asked the basis on which the Defence Ministry allowed
the Delhi Government to carry out topo-survey whereas the Ministry of Urban
Development's request for the purpose was turned down. In reply, the Secretary,
UD stated that aerial photography had very high resolution which was generally
done for maps on the scale of 1:2000 whereas mapping through satellite did not
have any such problem. Since the Delhi Government did the mapping through
satellite, the Defence Ministry did not have any objections.

76. The Committee querried whether aerial photography could be done with
low resolution cameras. The Secretary, UD replied that since the Delhi Government
had done the job, they would share the data with the Delhi Government.

77. In response to another specific query, the Ministry in a post evidence
information stated as under:—

"The Land and Development Office does not intend to implement a Global
Information System. However, a proposal is in the offing to share the spatial
data under the 3D Maping System developed by Geospatial Delhi Limited
under the aegis of GNCTD".

X. LAND ALLOTMENT AND MANAGEMENT

78. The Ministry of Urban Development set up a one man Committee of
Inquiry (Yogesh Chandra Committee) in September, 2004 to examine cases of
allotment by L&DO between 1998-99 and September, 2004 to social, cultural,
religious and educational institutions and to recommend suitable action in cases
of deviations and suggest guidelines for future allotments.

79. On being asked to furnish year-wise details of the number and the total
area of land allotted by L&DO to various social, cultural, religious and educational
institutions during the last 10 years, the Ministry furnished the details as shown
at Annexure-I

80. The Yogesh Chandra Committee examined 100 cases of allotments to
religious, educational, socio-cultural and political institutions. Of these cases, they
found that in 68 cases, the allotments were in order, although in three cases of
allotment to schools, the Committee recommended that the schools should provide
a percentage of seats for children from poor families.

_ 81. In the remaining 32 cases, the Yogesh Chandra Committee found that the
allotments had been made without due regard to the stipulated procedures. Detailed
action taken by the Ministry in the 32 cases was stated to be as follows:—

() Allotments were cancelled in 29 cases, of which, in 23 cases, the lessees
had gone in appeal against the cancellation and the matter was, therefore,
sub-judice. The allotments had been surrendered in the other six cases.

(ii) In two cases of allotment of religious institutions, allotments were not
cancelled, after consideration by the Minister, while in one other case, no
final decision had been taken.

मम


19

82. When asked to state the overall measures taken by the Ministry/L&DO
pursuant to the findings/observations of the Yogesh Chandra Committee, the
Ministry submitted as under:—

“Pursuant to the findings/observations of the Yogesh Chandra Committee,
the Ministry has constituted a Land Allotment Screening Committee for
screening all the applications received for allotment of land of Government
for any purpose.”

83. Audit scrutiny revealed that subsequent to the recommendations of the
Yogesh Chandra Committee, the Screening Committee for screening applications
for allotment was reconstituted and the Guidelines were revised for allotment.
During the period 2005 to 2007, 27 perpetual and 13 temporary allotments were
made. In November 2006, the screening Committee decided that there was no
scope for further allotment of land to Non-Governmental Organisations in the near
future.

84, Audit, during the course of scrutiny of the records, had pointed out that
no consolidated list of allotment from 2005 onwards was made available to them
by the L&DO. However, Audit scrutiny of the minutes of the Screening Committee
meetings held between December 2005 and November 2006 revealed that
29 allotments were made, of which 24 were made to local bodies/Governmental/
Quasi-Governmental agencies and five to political parties.

85. On being asked whether the Guidelines prescribed by the Yogesh
Chandra Committee were scrupulously adhered to by the Ministry/L&DO in all
subsequent allotments, the Ministry in response submitted that they were strictly
following the guidelines prescribed by the Yogesh Chandra Committee.

86. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Secretary, M istry
of Urban Development on the land allotments to social charitable hospitals, religious
and educational institutions at a lower premium, he stated in evidence:—

"......We all know that land is a resource. Government believes that this
resource should be utilised for the public good. It is precisely because of
this commitment that land is allotted to social, charitable, religious and
educational institutions as well as hospitals, public service agencies and
Government Departments at a comparatively lower premium. It is true that if
the land available with the L&DO is valued at prevailing market rates and
allotted at those rates, it would fetch more money to the Government. But
such a commercial approach would defeat the very intention of deploying
public resource of public good.... ."

87. The Committee asked whether L&DO was making any efforts to realize
the true value of land in fresh transactions. In reply, the Secretary, Urban
Development submitted:-—

"In this context, | would like to draw the attention of the Committee to the
fact that in the run-up to the Commonwealth Games 2010, L&DO disposed
of by way of auction, 3 acres of land for construction of a hotel for a sum


20

of Rs. 611 crore. Thus, L&DO is already taking steps to realize the true
value of land in fresh transactions.”

88. The Committee then desired to know the specific areas where the potential
for higher revenue existed. In reply, the Secretary, Urban Development stated:—-

It would be apparent that the potential for higher revenue existed in case
of Nazul leases only. The Government, therefore, proposes to focus only on
these properties, especially the commercial properties for extracting the value
of land by way of higher renewal premium in case of renewals or fresh
premiums in case of fresh allotments. Also, the feasibility of linking the
premium and the ground rent for such properties to the Zonal average action
rates determined by DDA from time to time would be considered.”

89. Asked to state categorically the measures taken to ensure that the scope
of extracting the true value of land, at least under non-residential leases, was fully
exploited, the Ministry responded that the land rates for the L&DO's land were
concessional in comparison to the open market rates as they did not involve
development of the land and services and commercial interests. Since these rates
were policy decision of the Govt., the rates depended on the object of allotment
of the land through L&DO. The allotments through L&DO were generally not for
commercial benefits but aimed to meet the requirement of the Union Government
Departments, Semi-Government Organisations, PSUs, religious, social, educational
institutions and Recognized Political Parties, that too on temporary or lease hold
basis.

90. The Ministry further stated that the institutions which serve the
community were considered for allotment of land at concessional rates. Thus
keeping in view their role in providing designated urban services, (such as schools,
hospitals, basic infrastructure, secondary infrastructure, social, cultural, and religious
contributions etc.), the rates were subsidized and did not reflect the current market
rates.

91. The Ministry also reasoned that the open market land rates reflected the
commercial value of land and hence, were always comparatively higher and could
not be compared with the rates notified by the Government for allotment of land
‘on temporary or regular lease hold basis.

XI. GROUND RENT

92. Ground Rent constitutes one of the primary receipts of the L&DO. It is
an annual charge levied at prescribed rates with reference to the premium or one
time payment levied at the time of allotment. This rent is payable, in advance.
either in two half yearly installments or annually on Ist April. In respect of the
Nazul properties, Ground Rent is generally recoverable at the rate of 2.5 per cent
per annum of the premium calculated at full market rates for premises used for
remuncrative purposes and the premium determined by the Government for premises
used for unremunerative purposes. Ground Rent is revisable at the option of the
L&DO every 30 years. However, for older Nazul leases where the Ground Rent

abcde aed ने «० AOS Sean testes ened



21

was under fixed amount and not based on the market rate/premium, an
Office Order was issued in February 1984, whereby the earlier Ground Rent was to
be enhanced by a specified multiple depending on the period of delay in revision.
In respect of rehabilitation leases, the Ground Rent is nominal, but in cases of
second sale/assignment, Ground Rent can be revised at 2.5 percent per annum of
the value of the land.

93. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that despite thousands of acres of
land in prime locations with potential value ranging from Rs. 1,18,000 crore to
Rs. 3,44,000 crore, Ground Rent receipts from the leased out properties were
relatively insignificant. During 2008-09 the L&DO was receiving an average annual
Ground Rent of only Rs. 40.43 per square metre.This was primarily due to the
continuation and adoption of an ad hoc formula for enhancement of Ground Rent
for Nazul leases evolved in 1984, which had no relationship with the current
letting/market values of these properties. The potential for the revised Ground Rent
in respect of even 1/30th of the non-residential leases, if calculated on letting
value, would amount of Rs. 356 crore. Thus, leases falling due for revision during
the last three years alone could have fetched Rs. 1068 crore. Audit further pointed
out that the revision of Ground Rent for Nazul leases, even under the ad hoc
formula of 1984, was in arrears, and the L&DO was not aware of how many leases
fell due for revision of Ground Rent or the total amount of outstanding
Ground Rent and other dues. Further the Ministry/L&DO had not revised the
premium rates for allotment of land since 1998.

94. In the above context, the Committee desired to know whether any study
had ever been conducted to formulate a suitable policy for revision of the
Ground Rent. In reply, the Ministry stated that the revision of the Ground Rent
was to be done as per the terms and conditions provided in the allotment letters/
Lease Deeds. No unilateral revision of the Ground Rent could be done without
complying with such provisions as these were legally binding on both the parties.

95. The Committee asked whether it was legally binding upon the Government
to renew the lease on its expiry without any changes in the earlier lease terms and
conditions. When the Ministry replied in the negative, the Committee querried
whether the Ministry/L&DO had explored improving the financial interest of the
Government by modifying the earlier lease terms and conditions and leasing the
properties to those parties which offered better financial terms. In reply, the Ministry
stated that no such situation had come up so far.

96. In evidence, the Committee desired to know the year when the
Ground Rent was last revised. In reply, the representative of the Ministry submitted
that the rate was last revised in 1998 which was valid upto the year 2000. When
the Committee asked the reasons for non-revision of the rate after 2000, the
representative of the Ministry responded that they had already sent a proposal
to the Finance Ministry in this regard which had given its approval. The Ministry
of Urban Development was in the process of putting up a Cabinet Note for the
purpose.


22

97. Intervening in the matter, the Secretary, Urban Development submitted in
evidence:—

for rehabilitation properties, after 30 years it can be revised in accordance
with the formula, But if the lessee transfers the land, for the first transfer
there is no provision for any revision of rent, but from the second and
subequent transfer, the rent can be revised to 2.5 per cent of the land value..."

98. The Committee asked whether the provision had already been
implemented. When the Secretary, Urban Development responded in the affirmative,
the Committee desired to know whether the provision of 2.5 per cent of the land
value pertained to the market value of the land or at the cost the land was
registered. In reply, the Secretary, Urban Development submitted:—

"It is 2.5 percent of the land value for which it is registered.”

99. The Committee enquired whether that did not mean that there was no
circular or any other mechanism to evaluate the current market valuation of the
land. In reply, the Secretary, Urban Development stated:—

"We have our land rates."

100. The Committee reasoned that the land rate should have been revised
every two to three years, but it was last done way back in 1998. Agreeing with
the reasoning, the Secretary, Urban Development submitted:—

"The next revision is going to take place. The Finance Ministry has given
the approval and we are going to the Cabinet."

101. On the issue of realisation of revenue in terms of Ground Rent from
various lessees, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development deposed during
evidence:—

"So far as the realisation of revenues by way of ground rent is concerned,
1 would like to draw the attention of this august Committee to some relevant
facts, Out of the total number of leases, 60526 reported by the Audit, about
4500 are Nazul and miscellaneous leases and the rest are leases for
rehabilitation lands given to migrants from Pakistan, soon after independence.
The ground rent for rehabilitation of lands is a mere Re. | per sq. yard
which can be revised after every 30 year period as per 1984 formula based
on letting value of the land. Also, it can be revised at the second or
subsequent transfer of land. At that time the Ground Rent can be revised
to 2.5 per cent of the land value."

102. The Secretary, UD continued:-—

"It is further submitted that roughly half of the rehabilitation properties
have been converted into free-hold already. And they have gone out of the
L&DO books. In course of time, the rest of the rehabilitation properties
would also become free-hold. Thus, not much revenue can be generated

बने हक we eae ako 3००

cae pageant 896



nN
53

from the rehabilitation properties. So far as the Nazul leases are concerned,
these are mostly perpetual leases, 99 year leases and a few 30 years leases.
In case of 99 and 30 years leases which are generally for commercial
properties, it would be possible to realise the increased value of land as part
of the new lease agreement. However, if any restriction is envisaged in the
existing agreement on the premium or the ground rent for the period of
extension or renewal, then the Government is legally bound to observe those
conditions.”

103. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development summed up by stating:—

"You will appreciate that valuation of L&DO land at commercial rates and
the revenue that could be derived through commercial disposal would be an
anti-thesis to the cause de genre of L&DO. At the same time, however, it is
admitted that keeping in view the overall growth of land evaluations, revision
of the current land rates is called for at least in respect of properties allotted
for commercial and industrial use. The last revision was done a decade
back. We propose to revisit this matter to make the land rates more realistic.
I must also state, however, that the revised land rates would apply only to
new allotments and in case of renewal of leases wherever applicable."

104. The Committee were then informed that due to legal and procedural
complications, the Government came out with a policy on revision of Ground
Rent. In 1984, after consulting the Ministry of Law & Justice, Ministry of Finance
and Ministry of Home Affairs, a note was submitted to the Cabinet wherein
the formula for revision of the ground rent was proposed. In November, 1983
the Cabinet approved the proposed formula. After approval of the Cabinet, the
Office Order No. 2/1984 dated 18.01.1984 was issued as the policy. Thus, the
Ground Rent was being revised as per the decision of the Government.

105. The above said Office Order of February, 1984 specified that the earlier
Ground Rent was to be enhanced by a specified multiple, depending on the number
of years elapsed since the due date of revision which is as follows:—

Fixation of Revised Ground Rent

1 to 10 years Four times
11 to 20 years Six times.
21 to 30 years Eight times
31 to 40 years Ten times

106. However, according to Audit, there was no justification for continuing
With this ad hoc formula. Further, under the order of February, 1984, premises
occupied for residential purpose would be exempted from the scope of revision of
Ground Rent; such cases would be reviewed each year to decide which
Ground Rent could be revised advantageously to the Government. Evidence of
such annual review/revision was, however, not provided to Audit.


24

107. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the reasons for
the Ministry persisting with the ad-hoc formula of 1984 for enhancement of the
Ground Rent for the Nazul leases which had no relation to current letting/market
values. In reply, the Ministry stated that the formula as referred to in the C&AG
Report was not an ad-hoc formula and it was rather a policy decision of the
Cabinet. The revision was to be done according to the policy decision.

108. The Committee then asked whether. the Ministry meant to say that
there was no need for revision of the Ground Rent since it was a Cabinet decision,
irrespective of the fact that such a decision was made almost three decades back.
In reply, the Ministry submitted that in the year 1984, L&DO only devised a
formula for the revision of the Ground Rent which was fixed on the basis of the
Jand rates in a different dispensation. The Ministry further stated that a proposal
for revision of the Jand rates was already at an advanced stage of consideration
and once the land rates were fixed, the Ground Rent would also be automatically
revised.

109. The Committee enquired whether it was a fact that the revision of the
Ground Rent for Nazul leases, even under the 1984 formula, was in arrears. The
Ministry replied in the affirmative. Asked to furnish details of the cases of arrears,
the Ministry provided the following information:—

"Status of Nazul Properties where revision of Ground Rent was required is

as under:—

Cases where revision of Ground Rent was pending — 1490
(As per comments on ATN by Audit in previous report)

Revised by RGR Cell — 1085
Properties converted into freehold after revision of Ground Rent — 125
Cases where Ground Rent was due to be revised — 280
Cases where Ground Rent has been revised during 2010 — il
Cases under consideration for revision —_ 169"

110. When asked to furnish the reasons for the above cited arrears, the
Ministry submitted that the Revision of Ground Rent Cell (RGR Cell) ceased to
operate as the personnel working in the Cell had either retired or were transferred
to some other organization. The Ministry further stated that the Cell had been
revived and the work of revision of Ground Rent was under progress.

111. The Committee then desired to know the specific period for which the
RGR Cell ceased to exist and the level at which the decision was taken to close
the Cell. In reply, the Ministry stated that there was a temporary suspension of
the RGR Cell from December, 2007 to January, 2010. The Ministry further stated
that no formal decision was taken at any level to close the RGR Cell. Its activities
ceased to exist automatically due to transfer of the then incumbents and
non-posting of fresh staff due to shortage of manpower.



25

112. Expressing surprise, the Committee asked whether any important Cell of
any Ministry/Department should cease to exist just because it employees retired
or were transferred to somewhere else. In reply, the Ministry stated that the RGR
Cell was not a separate Cell but the work of the revision of the Ground Rent had
been assigned to the officials in addition to their normal duties which was termed
as the RGR Cell. The Ministry further stated that in February, 2010, the RGR Cell
was revived by giving additional charges to other officials in the L&DO to attend
to the pending cases of revision.

113, The Committee then desired to know the accumulated revenue loss to
the L&DO due to irregular revision and non-revision of the Ground Rent. In
response, the Ministry stated that there was an accumulated revenue loss of
Rs. 2 crore (approximately) to the L&DO due to irregular revision and non-revision
of the Ground Rent. The Ministry further submitted that since the Tecovery was
being made as per the policy decision of the Government, there was no ground to
term it as a loss or profit.

114. The Committee pointed out that on one hand the Ministry were saying
that there was an accumulated revenue loss of approximately Rs. 2 crore while on
the other they were of the view that the recovery method as per the policy
decisions of the Government could not be termed as loss of profit. Asked to
reconcile the two contradictory statements and furnish the method followed to
arrive at the figure of Rs. 2 crore, the Ministry stated that there was no scientific
basis for the estimation of Rs. 2 crore. In actual terms, the accumulated revenue
loss shown as Rs. 2 crore was not a loss but a deferred payment. The Ministry
reasoned that since the estimated loss of Rs. 2 crore alongwith the interest would
be recovered at any time from the lessees, it could not be termed as an accumulated
loss in actual money terms.

115. Asked to state clearly whether ineffective and faulty implementation of
the policy decision of the Government which led to poor recovery of Government
dues could not be termed as a loss to the exchequer, the Ministry submitted that
it was theoretically true that faulty implementation of the policy decision would
lead to poor recovery of dues, but in the instant case it was not applicable in
view of the position explained by the Ministry.

116. The Committee then wanted to be apprised of the estimated outstanding
due of recovery of Ground Rent from various lessees. In reply, the Ministry stated
that the approximate estimated outstanding dues in respect of recovery against
Ground Rent was Rs. 100 crore pertaining to various lessees under the control of
एह L&DO.

117. Asked to state the periodicity since the amount of Rs. 100 crore was
lying outstanding and the time schedule fixed to recover all the outstanding dues,
the Ministry submitted that the figure of Rs. 100 crore was only an estimation of
approximate value of the outstanding Ground Rent in respet of Nazul leases. The
Ministry further stated that it might not be realistic to set any definite time frame
for the recovery of outstanding Ground Rent because several Court cases were


26

involved wherein any action taken by the Government had to be in conformity
with the legal provisions and judicial pronouncements. The Ministry also submitted
that to revise the Ground Rent, the RGR Cell had been re-established to complete
the work latest by 31st March, 2012.

118. In a subsequent information, apprising the Committee of the latest
position, the Ministry stated that with a view to recovering the outstanding Ground
Rent at the earliest, the Ministry had initiated action. The process of revision of
Ground Rent in case of all Nazul leases had been completed except in 45 cases
which were also being revised. An amount of Rs. 5.95 crore had been collected as
Ground Rent from 1.4.2011 onwards during the current financial year. Besides this,
any other service to the lessee was provided only after recovering all outstanding,
dues including Ground Rent. The Ministry further apprised that in order to
streamline the collection of Ground Rent, the relevant Registers were being
computerized under the overall scheme of computerization in L&DO.

XII AUDIT FINDINGS ON HOTELS, HOSPITALS, SCHOOLS AND PETROL
PUMPS/PRESS

119, Audit pointed out that in the absence of complete and reliable
consolidated records/statistics on L&DO's leases, they were forced to rely on
examination of individual and selected cases of Hotels, Hospitals, Schools, Press
etc. both through scrutiny of records as well as field audit.

Hotels

120, L&DO had allotted land to 21 hotels. However, on Audit's request for
information relating to the outstanding Ground Rent and other dues, the L&DO
provided partial details in respect of only eleven Hotels. Audit scrutiny of these
records revealed that an amount of Rs. 516.19 crores on account of dues
recoverable was outstanding from eight hotels. The details were as follows: —

_SLNo. Name of the Hotel___—_ Outstanding dues of of the Hotel Outstanding dues of Ground Rent
1. Bharat Hotel Rs. 304 crore
2. Samrat Hotel Rs. 97.94 crore
3. Le-Meridien Hotel Rs. 60.90 crore
4. Taj Mansingh Hotel Rs. 29.57 crore
5. Claridges Hotel Rs. 12.88 crore
6. Ashoka Hotel Rs. 5.96 crore
7. Taj Palace Hotel Rs. 3.07 crore
8. Janpath Hotel Rs. 1.95 crore

121. In the above context, when asked to state the criteria adopted by the
L&DO for allotment of land to the Hotels, the Ministry submitted that the allotment
of land for Hotels had not been decided by the L&DO but by the Ministry.
Initially the land identified for Hotels was allotted to ITDC, DTTDC, NDMC and



27

DDA i.e. Government agencies except a few private Hotels. The Ministry further
stated that in some cases the land was allotted during pre-independence period.
The land under some private Hotels was allotted for residential purpose. The
Ministry admitted that the Hotels operating on such lands were unauthorized.

122. The Committee then enquired about the reasons for delay in the recovery
of Ground Rent and other dues from the Hotels. In reply, the Ministry stated that
the delay in the cases of Hotels with NDMC/DDA was due to the pendency of a
policy decision required on the issues of payment of interest and charges for
misuse and damages. The issues of misuse, unauthorized constructions and interest
were stated to be under examination of the Government for arriving at a policy
decision.

123. So far as recovery of Ground Rent was concerned, the Ministry stated
that up-to-date Ground Rent had been received in respect of ai! che Hotels with
NDMC/DDA. However, subsequently the dues on Ground Rent had been revised/
updated and conveyed to DDA on 16th June, 2010. The Ministry further apprised
that the Claridges Hotel had challenged thz demand of the revised Ground Rent/
other charges in the Delhi High Court and the matter was sub-judice. The Indian
Tourism Development Corporation (ITDC) had deposited Rs. 53,56,077 in respect
of charges due from the Ashoka Hotel. In case of the other two Hotels under
ITDC i.e. Hotel Samrat and Hotel Janpath, sanctioned building plans had been
called for to carry out inspection. In case of Rajdoot Hotel the lease had been
cancelled and property re-entered on account of non-payment of Government
dues.

124. In response to another specific querry, the Ministry stated that the
sites of Bharat Hotel, Le Meridien Hotel and Taj Mansingh Hotel had originally
been allotted to NDMC, which sub-leased the sites without the permission of the
L&DO.

125. The Committee asked in evidence whether sub-lease of land, without
the approval of the L&DO, was permissibie. In response, the Secretary, Ministry
of Urban Development submitted:

"That is not allowed. That becomes a misuse."

126. The Committee then desired to know as to when such misuse was
detected by the Ministry. In response the Secretary, UD stated that it must have
been long time back. Asked to state the specific action taken upon the detection
of the irregularity, the Secretary, Urban Development respondea: —

"We have raised a demand on them."

127. When the Committee desired to near the views of NDMC on the
abovesaid violation of rules, the Secretary, NDMC clarified: —

"We have not violated the order. In the allotment order #3 provision is
there that we should not sub-lease but we can arrange for ~ astruction and
operation.”


28

128. Countering the argument putforth by the Secretary, NDMC, the Secretary,
Ministry of Urban Development submitted:—

"My submission is, land was given to NDMC to build a hotel. They had
given it to a third party without our permission. They had to get permission
in writing. They should not have given it without our permission. That is
why we are asking them for misuse charges.”

129, Intervening, the Committee asked the reason for which the Ministry of
Urban Development did not take back the land when NDMC failed to get permission.
In response, the Secretary, Urban Development stated:—

"It is also a Government organization. So, we would sort it out."

130. When the Committee desired to know the reasons for accumulation of
huge outstanding dues on the part of the Hotels and measures taken to sort out
the differences, realize the amount and within a definite time frame, the Ministry
stated as under:—

"The major component of the outstanding dues are interest and misuse
charges. Since the basic issue of misuse itself is under dispute and that is
precisely being relooked into, it may not be realistic to set any definite time
frame. For the recovery of the outstanding amounts notwithstanding the
constraints, all efforts are being made to settle the issue involved and recover
the dues to the national exchequer.”

131. Not satisfied, the Committee asked in evidence the concrete measures
taken by the Ministry/L&DO to recover the outstanding dues from various Hotels.
especially the Bharat Hotel which owed more than Rs. 300 crore to the Government.
In reply, the representative of the L&DO stated that a meeting was held at the
Secretary level involving the three organizations viz. L&DO, NDMC and CPWD
wherein it was decided to inspect the complete building plans so as to gauge the
misuse and unauthorized constructions.

132. Asked to state when the meeting was held and when the first inspection
was done, the representative of the L&DO responded that the meeting was held
in 2009 and inspection was carried out on 15/16 July 2010.

133. The Committee then pointed out that the Bharat Hotel was running
since the last 27 years and asked the reasons for not taking action for such a
longer period to recover the dues. In reply, the Secretary, UD stated that NDMC
would better explain the reasons for not paying the Government dues. Accordingly,
the Secretary, NDMC deposed that the main point was that approximately
50 per cent of the charges raised against them were that of interest only. The
Committee asked whether the Ministry should not charge interest from the
defaulters irrespective of the stature of the organization. In reply, the Secretary,
NDMC stated that the NDMC had not yet charged interest against any Government
Departments.

FA te ama a oA

शा 1


29

134. The Committee then asked the Secretary, Urban Development the course
of action they would take in case NDMC failed to pay the dues within a definite
time schedule. In response, the Secretary, Urban Development submitted that if
the NDMC did not agree to pay the charges raised against them, then the Urban
Development Ministry would take recourse to legal remedies to realize the dues.

135. In a post-evidence information, the Committee were apprised that:—

“A meeting has been held under the chairmanship of Secretary (UD) with
the representatives of NDMC and DDA on 1.8.2011 to sort out the issues
relating to recovery of outstanding dues from Hotels. It has been decided to
relook the issues involved with reference to the relevant Master Plan. Similar
exercise has been planned for recovery of dues in respect of ITDC Hotels
which were disinvested. However, in these, Court cases are involved.
Therefore, any step being taken has to be in conformity with the legal
position and judicial pronouncement."

Hospitals

136. Audit scrutiny revealed significant shortfalls in the treatment of patients
of Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) in hospitals despite the order of the
Delhi High Court which prescribed 25 per cent of the OPD beds and 10 per cent
of the IPD beds for the patients belonging to EWS. In the absence of the treatment
of the requisite number of EWS patients, the implicit subsidy provided by the
Government through allotment of land at highly concessional rates appeared
unjustified.

137. There were also several press reports that private hospitals, allotted
land at highly concessional rates vis-a-vis the market rates, had not been fulfilling
their obligations in providing free treatment to the patients belonging to the
Economically Weaker Section (EWS). The earmarked free beds had been found
vacant denying the poor patients this very facility. Even the Supreme Court
expressed concern over the matter.

138. In the above context, the Committee desired to be apprised of the
details of the Hospitals that were allotted land at highly concessional rates, the
basis on which such allotments were made, the terms and conditions of the
allotments etc. In reply, the Ministry stated that five hospitals namely Vidya Sagar
Institute for Mental Health and Neurological Sciences (VIMHANS), Primus Ortho
and Spine Hospital (POSH), St. Stephen's Hospital, Moolchand Hospital and
Sir Ganga Ram Hospital were allotted land at highly concessional rates for the
purpose of opening Hospital as Charitable Trusts.

139. The Ministry further stated that the condition of free treatment was
incorporated as one of the conditions of allotment only in respect of POSH and
VIMHANS. The condition of free treatment was not existing in the lease deed in
respect of Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Moolchand Hospital and St. Stephen's Hospital.


140. When the Committee asked whether the Ministry were aware of the
various press reports regarding non-fulfilment of the contractual obligation by
the Hospitals in giving free treatment to the patients belonging to the EWS and
the measures taken by the Ministry in this regard, the Ministry responded as
under:—

"Yes. In pursuance of the directions of the Hon'ble High Court in Writ
Petition No. 2866/2002 titled as "Social Jurist vs. Government, of NCT of
Delhi & Ors, an Inspection Committee headed by the Principal Secretary,
Health, Government of NCT of Delhi (GNCTD) has been constituted to
monitor free treatment for poor patients to be provided by Private Hospitals
who have been allotted land on concessional rate. All the Private Hospitals
to whom land has been allotted on concessional rate by L&DO have also
been directed to comply with the directions of Hon'ble Court to provide free
treatment to 25% in OPD and 10% in IPD."

141. As regards the specific monitoring mechanism devised by the Ministry/
L&DO to ensure that the Hospitals adhered to the terms and conditions upon
which they were allotted land at highly concessional rates, the Committee were
informed as under:-—

"A special Committee headed by Principal Secretary, Health (GNCTD) has
been constituted to ensure effective implementation of the orders of Delhi
High Court. The Hon'ble Court has also constituted an Inspection Committee
headed by the Medical Superintendent, Nursing Homes. The monitoring
mechanism includes inspection of the premises, communication of breaches,
and re-entering the property if the breaches are not remedied. After the
Delhi High Court (DHC) orders, the monthly reports received through the
Inspection Committee set up by the DHC, are examined in L&DO regularly
and it is observed that the OPD/IPD achievement is well below the target.
The deficiencies observed by the Monitoring Committee from time to time
have been communicated to the Hospitals with the directions to adhere to
the conditions of free treatment as per the orders of Hon'ble Delhi High
Court."

142. Asked to specify the coordinating system devised by the Ministry to
take suitable action against the defaulting Hospitals, the Ministry submitted as
under:—

"On the basis of reports submitted by Monitoring Committee actions under
lease terms are initiated against the Hospitals which includes cancellation of
allotments, re-entering of the properties and issuance of the show-cause
notice.”

143. On being asked to state the action taken against the individual defaulting
Hospitals which were found breaching the lease conditions in terms of inadequate

...+-करमककाइबबन- MINA MED een .

ake Ae ce a वे eos pe i ei cae a aonb


31

treatment of EWS patients, unauthorized construction, encroachment and misuse
of the allotted land, the Ministry furnished the following reply:—

6) ""VIMHANS had been inspected from time to time and the last inspection
was done on 28-29.1.2004. A large number of misuses and unauthorized
constructions were observed. The allotment of the VIMHANS was
cancelled on 18.5.2004 owing to unauthorised constructions/misuses and
non-compliance of condition of free treatment to poor. However, taking
over the possession has been kept in abeyance on 24.05.2004 after
considering the representation made by VIMHANS. Monitoring Committee
on 28.8.2009 informed that the hospital has taken measures for public
awareness towards the facilities of free IPD beds. However, the OPD
achievement is below the target. As per the Inspection Report for the
month of May, 2010, the percentage achieved in OPD and IPD are 8.63
and 0.8 respectively against prescribed 25% in IPD and 10% in OPD.

(i) The premises of Moolchand Hospital were re-entered on 8.4.2005 as several
breaches were noticed. However, re-entry has been quashed by the Hon'ble
High Court upon removal/regularisation of breaches by the local body.
As regards the compliance of free treatment, the Hospital approached
the Delhi High Court praying for quashing of directions issued by the
Ministry.

Gii) The premises of Sir Ganga Ram Hospital were inspected and several
breaches were noticed. However, hospital claimed that the breaches are
covered as per MPD-2021. The issue under examination as the policy
with regard to addtional FAR is yet to be announced. As regards the
compliance of free treatment, the Hospital approached the Delhi High
Court praying for quashing of directions issued by the Ministry.

(iv) The premises of St. Stephens Hospital were inspected on 25.2.2005 and
11.1.2008 and breaches were noticed. However, as the completion plans is
not made available to this office it is not feasible to ascertain the exact
extent of breaches. Final show cause notice was issued on 12.4.2005.
Building Plans have been furnished by St. Stephen and the same were
scrutinized and deficiencies intimated on 16.4.2008 with a direction to
submit completion plans to ascertain the breaches and misuses and the
same is awaited. The hospital is not furnishing the OPD/IPD details on
the plea that they are not covered under the High Court Orders and filed
a Misc. Petition seeking clarification in respect of the Judgement of the
Hon'ble High Court.

(v) The premises of Primus Ortho & Spine Hospital (POSH) (Veeranvali) was
inspected on 19.1.2008. No unauthorized construction/encroachment was
observed. The only misuse noticed is 52 sq.m. space in G.F, which is
used as staff Canteen. The misuse was temporarily regularized and the
dues recovered. Lease was executed on 18.2.2008. As regards compliance


we
13

to the conditions of free treatment, the deficiencies observed during the
inspection done on 24.3.2009 by the Monitoring Committee, have been
notified to the Hospital with a direction to adhere to the condition of free
treatment as per the orders of Hon'ble High Court. The OPD achievement
is well below the target As per the Inspection report the percentage
achieved in OPD and IPD are 0.08 and 0.31 respectively against
prescribed 25% and 10."

144. In evidence, the Committee asked the Ministry to furnish the details of
the total number of beds in the Private Hospitals in Delhi that were allotted land
at concessional rates by L&DO, DDA and MCD, the total number of beds
vis-a-vis free beds available, the number of. patients who availed free treatment in
IPD and OPD during the last four years etc. In a post-evidence information, the
following details were furnished: —

“Total number of beds in 40 identified Private Hospitals 3931
Total number of free beds presently available : 597
in 37 identified Private Hospitals

Total number of patients who have availed पु 99681
free treatment in IPD w.e.f. 01.04.2007

to till 30.04.2011

Total number of patients : 2926275

who have availed free treatment in
OPD we.f. 01.04.2007 to till 30.04.2011"

145. As regards the High Court Order of. 2007, the representative of the
Ministry apprised the Committee that the High Court had made it clear that
25 percent OPD treatment to EWS patients and 10 percent IPD treatment had to
be made completely free of cost. The witness further apprised that approximately
ten Hospitals had appealed in the Supreme Court against the High Court order.

146. The Committee desired to know the stand the Government had taken
on the abovesaid development. In reply, the witness submitted that the Government
would want the implementation of the High Court directives. The Committee, then,
asked till the time the matter was not appealed in the Supreme Court what concrete
measures were taken by the Government to implement the High Court orders.
In reply, the representative of the Ministry stated that pursuant to the High Court
order, a Committee had been constituted, headed by the Principal Secretary, Health
which monitored the implementation of the High Court Order. Besides, there was
another Committee in DGHS which regularly inspected and monitored the Hospital
to ensure that free treatment, as prescribed by the High Court, was given to the
EWS patients.



33

147. The Committee enquired about the procedure followed to determine
that the EWS patients genuinely belonged to the weaker sections. In reply, the
Ministry furnished the following information:—

"As per para 77 of the judgement of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi ‘every
person who has no income or has income below Rs. 5,000/- per month shall
be treated under this category to begin with and unless and until the
Committee constituted vide this judgement takes a final view in regard to
fixation of criteria of minimum income for receiving benefits under this
scheme.’

The Special Committee constituted under the directions of Hon'ble High
Court of Delhi in a meeting convened on 9.10.2007 and decided that the
income criteria for free treatment refixed as Rs. 4,000/- per family per month.

The Special Committee in a meeting convened on 13.04.2011 further decided
that the income criteria may be linked to the minimum wages of an unskilled
worker which is presently Rs. 6,084/- per month. Hence, the eligibility income
criteria for EWS category for availing free treatment in identified Private
Hospitals was fixed Rs. 6,084/- per family per month till further orders.”

148. Referring to the case of the St. Stephen's Hospital which had refused to
abide by the High Court Order, the Committee in evidence desired to be apprised
of the latest status. In response, the Director, L&DO submitted:—

"In case of St. Stephen's Hospital, the final status is that the Hospital is
refusing to accept the condition of free treatment for OPD and IPD. They
say that there was no condition mentioned in their original allotment letter.
We have directed them in August, 2010 and in December, 2010 that they
have to adhere to this condition because the Court has also spoken on this
matter. The contention of the Hospital, the Ministry has rejected because no
stay has been granted by the Court. A final show-cause notice has been
issued as of February, 2011 to St. Stephen's Hospital regarding no-adherence
to both issues of non-treatment of EWS category patients as well as non-
submission of the building plans on the basis of which inspections could
have been carried out..."

149. When the Committee asked the Secretary, Urban Development to explain
the refusal of the Hospital to submit the building plans, he responded:—

"Sir, as L&DO mentioned there are two issues. One is regarding the treatment
about which he has already informed. The other issue is that we wanted to
inspect the premises to see whether there are any breaches. Those breaches
can be ascertained only when we compare the actual construction with the
sanctioned plan. The sanctioned plan is not becoming available because in
Delhi, buildings do not have completion certificates, and they are not coming
forward. Since they are not responding, we will go ahead and take action."

150. Expressing surprise, the Committee asked whether refusal to submit the
necessary documents was not tantamount to defying the entire governmental


system and whether cancellation of the allotment would not be the most appropriate
step. In response the Secretary, Urban Development submitted:—

"...As the Hon'ble Chairman said, we will now proceed ahead and cancel
the allotment. That is why the show-cause notice was issued to them.”

School/Petrol Pumps/Presses

151. Audit scrutiny of selected Schools, Petrol Pumps and Presses revealed
that there were significant breaches of lease conditions, in terms of unauthorized
construction, outstanding dues of ground rent, encroachment and misuse, on
which on effective action had been taken by the L&DO. The conduct of regular
inspections of leased properties by the L&DO to detect such breaches was also
reportedly very poor.

152. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Ministry on the
above shortcomings pointed out by the Audit, the Ministry stated as follows:—

"Inspection of the premises is under progress in the cases of Schools and
Petrol Pumps. As per inspection reports, so far in the cases of Schools,
Petrol Pumps and Presses, the breaches of the lease conditions have been
found in all the presses, petrol pumps and 29 of 30 cases of Schools. All the
Oil PSUs have been asked to remedy the breaches. After remedy of breaches,
the recovery of dues will be initiated. All the concerned schools have been/
are being communicated the breaches with a condition to remedy the
breaches within 30 days or to get them regularized, failing which action
under the lease is to be taken. In the cases of Presses, a committee was
constituted to examine various issues of inspections/breaches/its
regularisation etc. with a view to suggest a realistic policy framework which
may encourage compliance. The committee submitted its report in October,
2009. The report has been examined and are under consideration for a
decision."

153. When the Committee desired to know the system put in place to detect
breach of lease conditions by the lessees, the Ministry replied as under:—

“For detecting the breaches inspection of the premises is mandatory. As per
existing orders, inspection is generally to be carried out once in a period of
three years. However in all the cases of conversions, it has been mandatory
to inspect the properties if the same has not been inspected during the last
one year from the date of submission of the application. In other cases, the
inspection is carried out if the same jis not done during the last three years
from the date of submission of the application or receipt of any communication
pertaining to a property."

154. Asked to state categorically the number of inspections carried out by
the L&DO from the year 2007 to 2011 to detect cases of breach of the terms and
conditions by the Schools, Petrol Pumps and Presses, the Ministry submitted that
during the said period, inspection had been carried out in respect of all the
9 premises of the presses, 57 out of 73 petrol pumps and 23 out of 123 schools.

Fed हल जे ena जि 2०क> amt कस at gpa a आह



35

155, The Committee then asked the concrete measures taken by the Ministry/
L&DO to penalize the lessees found to have breached the lease terms and
conditions. In reply, the Ministry stated as under:—

"In the cases where the lessees agree for payment of dues required for
temporary regularisation of breaches, damage charges and misuse charges
are levied and recovered. If the breaches continue beyond the time prescribed,
action for cancellation of lease is taken. In other cases where the lessees do
not agree to remedy the breaches and pay the charges against the breaches,
the action is taken to cancel the lease after final opportunity in the form of
final show cause notice."

XII ENCROACHMENT OF GOVERNMENT LAND

156. Audit had pointed out that as per the Manual of L&DO, surveys of
vacant land were to be carried out twice a year. But, records of surveys were
available in L&DO, which, however, intimated that they had conducted a survey,
covering about 80 per cent of the area for which records were available and the
results thereof were maintained in a computerized database. As per the list, there
were 14 and 326 vacant plots in LBZ and in areas outside LBZ respectively, and
this data did not indicate any encroachment. However, in the absence of a mapping
system, the completeness of even this 80 per cent data could not be verified.

157. During field visits to 18 plots, Audit observed that the vacant plots
were of such a nature that they could not have been allotted to any party and
there were parks/open spaces within colonies being used for parking of vehicles.
No demarcation of these plots had been done, which could increase the risk of
encroachment. When Audit requested L&DO to confirm that these plots were
free from encroachment, L&DO stated that all the vacant plots were under the
care and maintenance of CPWD for keeping it free from encroachment.

158. In the above context, when the committee desired to have the details of
the encroachment cases they were informed that 118 cases of encroachments of
the Government land were reported during the last ten years. In all such cases
proceedings under the PPE Act, were initiated before the Estate Officer for eviction
of the unauthorized occupants. The Committee were further informed that the
vacant land under the control of the L&DO were being managed by CPWD/DDA/
MCD/NDMC and detailed Guidelines for detection and removal of encroachments
had been issued by the Ministry in 2006. The Committee were also informed that
a total of 24.555 acres of land was reportedly under unauthorized occupation.

159. On being asked whether the L&DO carried out periodical inspections
for removal of breaches, encroachments etc. of the Government land, the Ministry
replied that inspections of Govt. land/properties were carried out by the Technical
Staff as and when breaches and encroachments were noticed.

160. Asked to state the number of inspections carried out during the last
five years, the Ministry stated that 32 inspections were got conducted during the


last five years resulting in removal of the encroachments. Asked to furnish the
year wise details of the removal of encroachments, the Ministry furnished the
following statement:—

SI. No. Year No. of encroachment removed
1. 2006-07 13
2. 2007-08 Nil
3. 2008-09 4
4. 2009-10 2
5. 2010-11 13

161. The Committee, then, desired to know the particulars of encroachment
of Government land in New Delhi (locality-wise) pertaining to unauthorized religious-
cum-residential structures. In reply, the Ministry stated that there were
15 unauthorized religious structures in different parts of Delhi on the Government
land under the control of L&DO. Similarly, there were as many as 91 such structures
which had encroached upon the Government land under the control of NDMC.
The details are at Annexures I] and III respectively.

162. The Committee asked the monitoring mechanism evolved by the Ministry/
L&DO to ensure strict adherence to the insepction-Guidelines by NDMC, MCD,
DDA etc. In reply, the Ministry stated that in the e-dharti software used by the
L&DO, an inspection module was being developed so that regular monitoring of
inspection of vacant land could be carried out.

163. The Committee then asked whether the Ministry were aware of anti-
social activities being carried on by the unscrupulous elements in some of the
land encroached upon in the guise of religious structures. In reply, the Ministry
stated that no such instances had come to their notice.

164. Asked to state the steps taken not to provide water and electricity
connections to unauthorized structures on Government land, the Ministry replied
that the NDMC gave temporary electric connections to illegal religious structures
subject to the condition that sanction of such connection shall not confer any
legal right for regularization of building/land use and electricity supply shall be
liable for disconnection without notice where the Government or Government
agencies conveyed immediate action for sealing/demolition/vacation of the building/
land in order to discharge their statutory obligations. The Ministry further stated
that the temporary electricity connection to such places was given only to the
structures existing prior to 31st March, 1993.

165. In response to another specific query of the Committee regarding
connivance of the Government officials with the encroachments, the Ministry stated
that no official had been found to have encouraged encroachers or connived with
them in their illegal activities. The Ministry further stated that the officials concemed
of the L&DO had infact initiated action against the encroachers.

i hap RenNN RRS FMR जन


XIV. PENDING COURT CASES

166. The Estate Officer in the Office of L&DO acts as a semi-judicial officer
to start proceedings under the Public Premises (Eviction of unauthorized occupants)
Act, 1971 for eviction and other works related to the proceedings such as issue of
summons to witness, service of notices, pursue the proceedings, passing of order
and realization of damages. As per the earlier Audit Report of 2000, there were
186 pending cases in the Court of the Estate Officer. As per the Audit Report
under examination, the total cases pending with the Estate Officer had risen to 323
as of September 2008.

167. In addition, there were 592 cases pending in the various Judicial Courts.
The details of the cases pending in Judicial and Estate Officers Courts were as
under:-—

Age-wise pendency of cases

Period No. of cases in No. of cases in Total
Judicial Courts Estate Officer Court

1970--79 Nil 47 47

1980-89 13 160 173

1990---99 43 26 6

2000--08 380 87 467

Dates of filing the 156 0 159

suits not available

Total 592 323 91S

168. On being:asked the number of cases pending in the Court of the Estate
Officer as on 31st August, 2010 and measures taken to dispose offsettle them
within a definite timeline, the Ministry stated as under:—

"303 cases were pending as on 31.08.2010 in the Court of Estate Officer. Out
of 303 cases, 150 cases are pending due to stay by the Judicial Courts.
Since the disposal of cases by the Court of Estate Officer is quasi judicial
function, prescribing any time frame is not under the jurisdiction of L&DO.
The ESO functions under ‘The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971."

169. As regards cases pending in the Judicial Courts, the Ministry stated as
follows:

"A total of 611 cases are pending in the Judicial Courts as on 06.12.2010.
13 cases are pending in Supreme Court, 323 cases are pending in High
Courts and 273 cases are pending in Lower Courts and 2 are pending in
CAT. All these cases are of Civil in nature. However it has been observed
that most of the cases pertain to last ten years.”


170. The Committee then desired to know he measures taken/proposed to
reduce the pendency of cases in the Court of the Estate Officer within a definite
time frame. In reply, the Ministry stated that the Court of the Estate Officer, being
a quasi-judicial authority, it was for the Court itself to regulate the proceedings
as also to take measures for reducing the pendency. The Ministry further stated
that the liquidation of the pendency in the Court of the Estate Officer by and
large depended upon the cooperation of the parties involved. From the L&DO
side, one Deputy Land and Development Officer had been given the charge for
handling the ESO Court Cases.

171. In view of 611 pending cases in the Judicial Courts, the Committee
asked whether any legal cell had been constituted in the L&DO to deal with
various litigations, Court Cases etc. In reply the Ministry stated that creation of
legal Cell was under progress. Elaborating the matter, the Ministry further stated
that with a view to strengthening the human resources to address the matters
relating to Court Cases, RTI Cases, Public Grievance Cases and other legal matters,
a proposal to constitute a separate Cell in the L&DO was under process.

172. Audit observed that pendency of cases adversely affected L&DO's
ability to take punitive action for recovery of outstanding dues, rectification of
breaches etc. When the Committee desired to hear the views of the Ministry for
pendency of so many cases, they replied that the pendency was beyond L&DO's
control as it neither had any legal section nor any panel of advocates of its own
and it had to depend on the Government Counsels appointed by Ministry of Law.
The Ministry further stated that no regular Estate Officer was available in L&DO
since long, and the charge was being dealt with on temporary basis by one or
other Branch Officer.

173. Elaborating the issue, the Ministry further stated:—

"The Estate Officer decides the cases mainly as per "The Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971". The reasons for the
pendency of so many cases in the Court of the Estate Officer are non-
availability of a regular Estate Officer, complicated procedure provided in the
above said Act, procedure given in the Civil Procedure Code, various Judicial
Orders and lengthy procedure involved in issuing notices, examination of
documents and witnesses and arguments of both the parties and forced
adjournments on account of directions >f the Courts, engagement of
concerned officers/officials in the courts on the date of hearing and
adjournment sought by the respondents on one or the other grounds."

174, Expressing surprise, the Committee desired to know the reasons for not
constituting a legal cell despite so many pending cases in the Courts of Law.
In reply, the Ministry stated that the creation of a legal cell invoived creation of
posts as per the Rules and required the approval of the Ministry of Finance. The
proposal in this regard had been agreed to in principle by the integrated Finance
Division and the final proposal was under preparation for submission to the
Ministry of Finance.

Sennen ere eee TT कह


175. Asked to state the time frame by which the legal cell would be
constituted, the Ministry responded that since the matter involved inter-
departmental consultation among the Ministry of Finance, DoPT, the Ministry of
Law and Justice etc., a definite time frame might not be possible to be indicated.


PART II
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

1. The Land & Development Officer (L&DO) traces its genesis to the
office the Chief Commissioner of Delhi, which was responsible for acquiring
land for the New Capital of Delhi in 1911. The L&DO has been entrusted with
the responsibility for the administration of two categories of properties of the
Government of India in Delhi viz. (i) Nazul land acquired in 1911 onwards for the
formation of the Capital of India at Delhi, and (ii) Rehabilitation land acquired
for the speedy rehabilitation of displaced persons from Pakistan. The main
functions of the L&DO are lease administration; management of land allotted to
the Government Departments and political, charitable, educational and religious
institutions; recovery of Ground Rent, lease charges and other Government dues;
removal of encroachments etc. However, the Committee's examination of the
subject has revealed certain very disquieting aspects in the functioning of the
L&DO which inter-alia include scant regard to the earlier Audit findings and
failure to take necessary corrective measures pursuant to the PAC's earlier
recommendations; acute shortage of manpower in the L&DO, inefficient disposal
of lease applications, irregular inspection of the leased properties, inadequate
documentation, deficient upkeep and updation or records, ineffective
implementation of the computerization process, inadequate scanning of market
records, improper land allotment and management, irregular revision/non-revision
of Ground Rent, breaches of lease conditions by Hotels, Hospitals, Schools and
Petrol Pumps, large scale encroachment of Government land and above all, lack
of coordination among various Government Departments to recover the
Government dues. The Committee have accordingly given their considered opinion
and deliberative judgement on these shortcomings in the succeeding paragraphs.

2. The Committee note that the Audit had reviewed the functioning of the
L&DO on two earlier occasions also i.e. once in 1986-87 and the other one in
the year 2000. Upon examining the C&AG Report of 1986-87, this Committee in
their 166th Report (Eighth Lok Sabha) which ५ as presented to Parliament in
1989 had recommended that the Ministry needed to draw up an appropriate action
plan for improvement in documentation. Responding to the Committees'
recommendation, the Ministry in their Action Taken Notes had assured the
Committee that they would update the basic records within a time bound period.
Similarly, while responding to the Audit Findings contained in Para No. 5.1 of
the C&AG Report No. 2 of 2000, the Ministry in their ATN furnished to the
Committee assured overall improvements in the system and procedures. But the
Committee are dismayed to note that despite repeated assurances by the Ministry
to bring in improvement in the overall functioning of the L&DO, the Audit Report

40



41

of 2009-10 again highlighted most of the same deficiencies that were pointed out
by them earlier. Needless to say, it smacks of gross inaction on the part of the
Ministry in taking requisite corrective measures to remove/prevent encroachments
on public land and to safeguard the interest of revenue. Although the Ministry
have reportedly initiated some action like developing software for creation of data
base and for Management Information System (MIS), computerization of the
processing of applications, scanning of files etc., the Committee feel that the
Ministry/L&DO haye still miles to go to put their records in order since such
measures should have been initiated decades earlier when assurances were given
to Parliament. The admission by the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development
during evidence that the earlier commitments could not be fulfilled fully because
of non-completion of the entries of land records and shortage of manpower bears
a testimony to the non-serious attitude of the Ministry. The Committee believe
that had the Ministry taken necessary corrective measures on the earlier Audit
findings and implement the PAC's recommendations as assured, further
deterioration in the functioning of L&DO could have been avoided. The Committee
wish to draw the attention of the Government to the recommendation of the
National Commission to review the working of the Constitution that the findings
and recommendations of the PAC should be accorded greater weight and treat
the PAC ‘as the conscience keepers of the nation in financial matters'. The
Committee hope that the Ministry of Urban Development would give earnest and
thoughtful consideration to the Audit findings and the recommendations of the
PAC so as to bring the desired systemic improvement and good governance.

3. The Committee are deeply concerned to note the statement of the
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development that the office of the L&DO today is
beset with manifold problems and one of the major handicaps being felt by the
L&DO is acute shortage of manpower both in the administrative and technical
streams. The Committee find that the original sanctioned staff strength of 276 of
the L&DO wad reduced to 219 following abolition of 57 posts. Even out of the
219 reduced sanctioned staff strength, only 162 incumbents are in place,
exacerbating the shortage of personnel both at the officer and staff levels. As a
result, the functioning of the L&DO has been virtually paralysed in critical
areas like computerization, revenue recovery, eviction and inspection of properties.
It is a matter of serious concern and worry that the staff strength of the L&DO
was last reviewed a decade ago. Although the L&DO has been taking up the
matter with the Ministry of Urban Development which in turn approached the
Department of Personnel and Training in 2010 and 2011, nothing concrete has
come out. The Committee are apprised that post evidence, the Secretary, Ministry
of Urban Development wrote to the DoPT on Ist August, 2011 requesting them to
provide adequate staff to the office of the L&DO. The Committee desire that the
Ministry of UD vigorously pursue the matter with the DoPT so that the L&DO
gets the minimum required manpower for its smooth functioning. Keeping in
view the typical rule that if there is a post which remains vacant for one year, it
gets abolished, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development needs to act swiftly
to get the requisite manpower definitely within one year so that the staff strength


42

of the L&DO is not depleted further. Till such time, efforts may be made to
recruit people on contractual basis, the M istry's reservation in this regard
notwithstanding, to facilitate recovery of revenue, inspection of properties, the
eviction of encroachers and discharge of other important functioning of the
L&DO. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this
regard and the response of DoPT within three months of the presentation of this
Report.

4. The Committee are informed that there were 49,523 residential,
22 commercial, 9 industrial, 156 institutional and 311 residential-cum-commercial
leases in 103 different locations in Dethi. But the authenticity of these figures
is highly doubtful in view of the Ministry's own admission that it might not be
possible to show the definite number of leases as the records were inherited
from other sources i.e. the Notified Area Committee for the Nazul properties and
the Ministry of Home Affairs for the Rehabilitation properties, at various points
of time. It is beyond comprehension that an organization which is entrusted with
the responsibility of the overall lease administration, including substitution of
title, mutation of title etc. of prime Government properties in Delhi, is not sure
of the exact number of the leased properties in various categories on the plea
that records were inherited from other sources. The Committee are startled that
the L&DO on its own has not made any tangible efforts to make proper survey
or inspection of the leased properties, rather it sat pretty on the records it
inherited instead of verifying/cross-checking them to arrive at an authentic figure.
The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry/L&DO to make urgent and time-
bound efforts in this regard and apprise the Committee about the correct figures
of the leased properties in various categories within three months of the
presentation of this Report.

5. The Committee deplore that the Audit was not made available the records
of conversion of the leased properties. Though the Ministry have been apologetic
and claimed that the records could not be made available due to overload of work,
the Committee reject outright such an excuse as denial of records and documents
and non-cooperation with Audit only fuels public suspicion. The Committee would
like to know the level at which the decision was taken in the Ministry of Urban
Development/L&DO not to furnish records to the Audit. Further, the Committee
would like to be concurrently informed of the organizations who delay or refuse
to furnish information/records to the Audit irrespective of the plea invoked.

6. The Committee are displeased to observe that the volume of transactions
in all the lease administration activities like mortgage permission, substitution, -
mutation, sale permissions and conversions as reported in the Performance
Budgets (2004—08) of the Ministry glaringly varied with the respective figures
as uploaded on the website. Taking cognizance of the Ministry's assurance that
efforts are being made to complete the records and reconcile the figures, the
Committee impress upon the Ministry/L&DO, to not only sincerely endeavour to
rectify the mistakes but also take all precautionary and corrective measures to
prevent recurrence of such glaring discrepancies so that the assertions made in
the Performance Budgets are in sync with the Statement of Achievements.

im 1



43

7. The Committee are dissatisfied to note that there is lack of effective and
efficient processing and disposal of lease applications for various lands by the
L&DO. Although the Citizen's Charter for Lessees of the L&DO stipulates that
the L&DO will ensure quality of service by disposing of the applications within
a period of three months from the date of receipt, provided the information and
papers submitted by the lessee are in order, yet the Committee find that as high
as 51 per cent of the cases were settled after considerable delays ranging from
6 to 24 months or even more. The Ministry have attributed the reasons for such
inordinate delay primarily to the complications involved in the respective cases
themselves and non-submission of the complete information by the applicants.
The Committee are not convinced by the reasons adduced by the Ministry for
taking as much as two years in some cases to dispose of the 1९85९ applications
more so when lease applications for 909 properties were processed with
remarkable speed and disposed of within 15 days and even in lesser time. The
Committee would like to have the detailed breakup of these properties/lease
holders in due course. They are also of the view that a system should be devised
whereby only applications complete in all respect and accompanied by essential
documents are received and the processing of applications received monitored
constantly to meet the objectives of the Citizens' Charter.

8. The Committee note that although the scheme of conversion of leases to
freehold was introduced in April 1992 and modified four times in its scope and
coverage in the years 1996, 1999, 2003 and 2006, they deprecate that no provision
for mandatory inspection of such leases prior to the conversion which might
have detected cases of unauthorized construction, misuse, encroachments etc.
was made at any point of time. It is all the more worrisome that the Register of
Inspections is not being maintained to ascertain the exact number of inspections
and particulars of the properties being inspected by the L&DO. Moreover, the
L&DO Manual prescribes periodical inspection of all properties but surprisingly,
the periodicity of inspections has been raised from one year to three years due to
severe scarcity of technical manpower. This, is deplorable, to say the least. The
Committee are shocked to observe that conversion has been going on for years
together without adequate and proper inspection of the properties. They urge the
Ministry to ensure ‘henceforth’ that all the properties under the control of the
L&DO are periodically inspected to detect unauthorized construction, misuse
and encroachments. Such Inspections should be carried out suo motu as well,
apart from receipt of specific and actionable complaints. Being accountable to
Parliament, the Ministry cannot wash off their hands by just stating that the
onus of mandatory inspections lies with the L&DO, an attached officer, who must
be aware of the ramifications of any laxity or compl in its approach on the
matter. As the nodal Ministry, they ought to help the L&DO to address the
constraints like acute shortage of manpower which impedes regular inspections
of the properties. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry should
regularly and appropriately take up the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs
and the Delhi Government so that the properties under the control of NDMC and
MCD are also inspected regularly so as to remove and prevent encroachments on
public land.



44

9. The Committee are saddened that various basic records like the
Ground Rent Register, the Squatter Register and the Register of Damages are
not being maintained by the L&DO for the last 40 years. The Ministry's
submission that the details of the records are being maintained in the respective
individual property files is flawed. Equally deprecating is their reasoning that
maintenance of the details of the properties is independent of the updation of the
Registers in view of their own admission of non-updation of the Ground Rent
Registers since 1984-85. The Committee hardly need to stress the indispensability
of the requirement of an office like L&DO to maintain the consolidated records
at one place both in the electronic format and in the manually maintained
Registers, instead of relying on scattered individual files to avoid possible misuse
or fraud. The Committee, however, note the assurance of istry of Urban
Development that the L&DO has started maintai ing the various Registers and
started computerization substantially. The Committee desire that due care be
taken to ascertain the data being recorded/transferred. The Committee also desire
that a specific periodicity be prescribed for the inspection of the Registers/
Ledgers by the supervisory officers so as to rectify the anomalies, if any, besides
taking action against the officers who fail to make timely entries in the Registers.

10. The Committee note that the Ministry/L&DO have started, albeit very
late, harnessing the Information Technology to make the functioning of L&DO
smoother, faster, contemporary and above all transparent with a view to providing
hassle free and efficient services to the public. The Committee are informed that
in the matter of computerization of land records, first priority is being accorded
to the commercial lease hold properties which fetch higher revenue and as on
March, 2012 out of 3373 such properties, 901 had been converted to freehold
and out of the remaining 2472 commercial lease hold properties, computerization
pertaining to 2404 properties was complete. The Committee desire that the
computerization of the remaining 68 commercial leasehold properties be finished
expeditiously as the actual achievement in this regard falls short of the assurance
given to the Committee for completing the process of computerization of the
commercial lease hold properties by December, 2011. The Committee also
recommend that vigorous efforts be made to maintain the momentum and complete
the computerization of the rehabilitation Properties and all files, ledgers, registers
etc. by June, 2012 in accord with the assurance of the Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Development so as to bring in transparency and public scrutiny of the
overall property management by the L&DO.

वा. The Committee deplore that the NIC failed to scan the layout plans and
documents relating to the markets transferred by the L&DO to the NDMC/MCD
by the stipulated target of 2006. The random scrutiny of the scanned documents
and plans by the Audit revealed many defects with the result the Ministry with
held 30 per cent payable amount to the NIC. The Committee desire that besides
withholding certain percentage of payable amount, the Ministry of Urban
Development should take up the matter with the Department of Information
Technology so that contractual breach on the part of the NIC is brought to the
notice of the Departmental Head and the NIC is warned to be careful and

५ ३+७००५७५---



45

meticulous enough to fulfil the contractual obligations. Now that the scanning of
all the documents relating to the transferred markets has been completed, the
Committee recommend that the uploads be regularly updated and monitored to
ensure authenticity and ease of reference in public domain.

12. The Committee are highly concerned to note that Phase-I of the
establishment of a mapping system which was awarded to the NIC at a debatable
high cost of Rs. 80 lakh, paid between September, 2001 and March, 2002, for
execution by March 2002, had not even commenced as of March, 2009. Worse
still, the amount paid to the NIC was not refunded for which the Ministry/L&DO
propose to utilize the amount for procuring new hardware and software from the
NIC. The Committee are aslo surprised to observe that although the process of
topographical survey of land under the control of the L&DO to establish the
mapping system was initiated in 2001, the tenders for the same were floated as
late as in December, 2010. To compound the ill-conceived proposal of the Ministry,
the work was finally abandoned as the Defence Ministry did not give permission
for high resolution aerial photography which was needed for the topographical
survey. This is a sad commentary on the Ministry's functioning especially in
view of the fact that the Delhi Government were successful in getting the
permission from the Defence Ministry and mapping the land, using a different
technology ie. Satellite which the Ministry of Urban development could not even
anticipate. Now that the Delhi Government have accomplished the job, the Ministry
have no option but to share the spatial data under the 3D mapping system developed
by the former. While deploring the imprudent planning and unfruitful expenditure
on the part of the Ministry/L&DO, on matters involving public importance and
public money, the Committee recommend that such laxity at the cost of the national
exchequer be discarded forthwith and lack of due diligence viewed as dereliction
of duty. The Committee are also of the firm opinion that requisite interest on
Rs. 80 lakh, which was held by the NIC for almost a decade without accomplishing
the assigned job, be charged upon and recovered from them alongwith the principal
amount as per the contractual agreements for the simple reason that a defaulting
firm, whether Government or private, should in no case be allowed to go scot free
for breach of contract.

13. The Committee note that a one man Committee of Inquiry (the Yogesh
Chandra Committee), constituted by the Ministry of Urban Development in
September 2004 to examine cases of allotment of land by the L&DO between
1998-99 and September 2004 to various institutions, found that in 32 cases, out
of the 100 cases examined by it, allotments were made to religious, educational,
socio-cultural and political institutions without due regard to the stipulated
procedures. Pursuant to the observations of the Yogesh Chandra Committee, the
Ministry sprung to action and cancelled 29 allotments. Surprisingly, the then
Minister refrained cancellation of two allotments while in one case the final
decision is yet to be taken. The Committee also note that subsequent to the
recommenations of the Yogesh Chandra Committee, the Ministry have constituted
a Land Allotment Screening Committee and revised the Guidelines for the purpose
of receipt and screening all the applications for allotment of Government land for


46

any purpose. The Ministry have assured the Committee that they are strictly
following the Guidelines prescribed by the Yogesh Chandra Committee in all
subsequent allotments. The Committee trust that the Ministry/L&DO will continue
strict adherence to the revised Guidelines for allotment of land for evey purpose
so that no fingers are raised against the motives nor any occasion arises for
cancellation of allotments. The Committee would also like to have the details of
the two allotments which were not cancelled due to the Minister's intervention
and the present status of the one undecided case of doubtful allotment, as pointed
out by the Yogesh Chandra Committee.

14, The Committee appreciate the Goverment's concern and commitment in
allotting land at a comparatively lower premium to social, charitable, religious
and education institutions as well as to Hospitals, Public Service Agencies ete.
with the intention of deploying public resource for greater public good. At the
same time, the Committee are of the considered view that it is the duty and
responsibility of the Ministries concerned to ensure through constant monitoring
that all such allottees fulfil scrupulously the terms and conditions of allotment
for greater public good as stipulated by the Government. So far as allotment of
land for commercial purposes is concerned, the true value of the land
commensurate with the extant market rate must be realized without exception.
The auction of three acres of land by the L&DO for construction of a hotel in
the run-up to the Commonwealth Games, 2010 which fetched the Govenrment an
amount of Rs. 611 crore reflects the true value of land in the National Capital.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry/L&DO to fully explore and exploit
the potential for higher revenue in a transparent manner so as to extract
maximum value of land in all cases of renewals and fresh allotments, especially
in cases of commercial leases. The Committee further desire that the feasibility
of linking the premium and ground rent for the commercial properties to the
Zonal average auction rates determined by the DDA be taken into consideration,
as assured to the Committee.

15. The Committee are perturbed to note that the Ground Rent receipts,
which constitute one of the major receipts of the L&DO, are relatively paltry
despite thousands of acres of land leased in prime locations with potential value
ranging from 1,18,000 crore to 3,44,000 crore. Further, the Ministry last revised
the premium rates for allotment of land in 1998 which was valid till the year
2000. The Committee find that the absymally low receipts on account of Ground
Rent and premiums are primarily due to the continuation and adoption of the
formula for enhancement of Ground Rent for Nazul leases evoived in the year
1984, which has now no relationship with the current Ietting/market value of
these properties. The Ministry's reasoning that they are adhering to the 1984
formula as approved by the Cabinet is specious since it is not the duty of the
Cabinet to remind the Ministry to put up a note for its consideration, but the
responsibility lies with the nodal Ministry to approach the Cabinet for appropriate
policy decisions from time to time. The Committee demand an explanation from
the Ministry as to what prevented them from approaching the Cabinet after 1984
for enhancement of ground rent and how the loss to the public exchequer can be

be



47

made good. Further, the Committee recommend that the matter may be taken up
to the Cabinet with a sense of urgency for appropriate revision in land rates/
ground rent. The Committee also recommend that after the Cabinet approval, the
specific multiples for the enhancement of the Ground Rent depending on the
number of years elapsed since the due date of revision, as contained in the Office
Order of February, 1984, be suitably modified and the dues recovered
restrospectively. Needless to emphasize, the schedule of area-wise letting values
should also be considered for upward revision at regular intervals, in line with
the fluctuations in the land market so as to generate reasonable revenue from
the L&DO's vast land holdings in prime locations.

16, The Committee are dismayed to note that an amount of Rs. 100 crore
is outstanding towards Ground Rent involving 169 leases of Nazul properties.
The Ministry have reasoned that the above dues were pending because the Revision
of Ground Rent (RGR) Cell ceased to operate temporaily as the personnel working
in the Cell had either retired or were transferred to some other organizations.
The Committee find that though the Cell was closed for more than two year ie.
from December 2007 to January, 2010 but the Ministry view it as a temporary
suspension. What is more baffling is the Ministry's statement that no formal
decision was taken at any level to close the RGR Cell, but the cell ceased to
operate upon transfer of all the staff posted there. The Committee view the closure
of RGR Cell or over two years when Rs. 100 crores dues were pending for
recovery as unconscionable. The Committee are constrainted to observe that they
cannot exonerate the departmental heads responsible for mass transfers from,
and closure of, the RGR Cell. The Committee therefore urge the Ministry to
investigate the matter and fix responsibility on the Officers concerned for such
unconscionable conduct.

17, The Committee note that the RGR Cell was revived in February, 2010
and the process of revision of Ground Rent in case of all Nazul leases has been
completed except in 45 cases which are also being attended to. But the Ministry's
inability to set a definite time frame to revise the Ground Rent for all the leases
and recover the outstanding dues, on the pretest of litigations and court cases, is
not acceptable to the Committee. In their considered view, the Government must
act in conformity with the legal provisions and judicial pronouncements to avoid
or minimise litigations. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry to act and
put in place an effective oversight mechanism so as to ensure proper assessment
of outstanding dues on Ground Rent and their recovery within a definite time
frame.

18. According to the Ministry, there was an accumulated revenue loss of
Rs. 2 crore (approximately) to the L&DO due to irregular revision and non-
revision of the Ground Rent, although there is no scientific basis for the
estimation of the amount. As an after-thought, the Ministry have expressed the
view subsequently that the accumulated revenue loss shown as Rs. 2 crore was
not a loss in actual money terms but a deferred payment and since the recovery
is being done as per the policy decision of the Government, there is no ground to


48

term it as loss or profit. The Committee outright reject the contention of the
Ministry and wish to caution the Ministry that such a fallacious argument and
faulty implementation of the policy decision coupled with inaction for-a longer
period causes loss of revenue to the Government. In the instant case, the Ministry
have been clinging to a policy decision taken almost three decades back which
has undisputedly outlived its utility and it cannot be used as a shield for every
non-performance and lapse. The Committee therefore impress upon the Ministry
to revisit the issue, and take appropriate measures to calculate the revenue loss
to the Government due to irregular revision or abnormal delay in revision of the
Ground Rent and aiso set a specific time-frame to recover the amount alongwith
penal interest from the lessees concerned.

19, The Committee are extremely concerned to note that an amount of
% 516.19 crore is outstanding on account of recoverable Ground Rent and other
dues like misuse and damages against eight Hotels. The outstanding dues include
Rs. 304 crore against the Bharat Hotel, Rs. 97.94 crore against Samrat Hotel,
Rs. 60.90 crore against Le-meridian Hotel, Rs. 29.57 crore against Taj Man
Singh Hotel, Rs. 12.88 crore against Claridges Hotel, Rs. 5.96 crore against
Ashoka Hotel, Rs. 3.07 crore against Taj Palace Hotel and Rs. 1.95 crore against
the Janpath Hotel. The Ministry have apprised the Committee that the delay in
the recovery of the outstanding dues in the cases of hotels with NDMC/DDA is
due to the pendency of a policy decision required on the issues of payment of
interest and charges for misuse and damages. The Committee are not satisfied
with the reasoning as nowhere the Ministry have been able to convince the
Committee that they taking pro-active measures to either convince the
Government or expedite the recovery of outstanding dues from the defaulting
Hotels. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to take up the
matter with a sense of urgency at the appropriate level so that the policy decision
on the matter is finalized without further delay to facilitate recovery of the
outstanding dues.

20. The Committee are perturbed to note that the sites of the Bharat Hotel,
Le Meridian Hotel and Taj Mansingh Hotel were orginally allotted to the NDMC
which sub-leased the sites without the permission of the L&DO. According to
the Ministry of Urban Development, such sub-lease of the sites by the NDMC,
without permission from the L&DO, is violation of the rules. The Secretary,
NDMC while admitting that sub-lease is not allowed, defended NDMC's action on
the ground that construction and operation are permissible. The Secretary, NDMC
futher submitted that the NDMC was not paying the charges raised against
them by the Ministry of Urban Development for violation of rules because
50 per cent of the charges raised against them were on account of interest. It
was also contended that the NDMC has not yet charged interest against any
Government Departments. The Committee find the admission of the NDMC quite
specious and devoid of merit. They are therefore, of the considered view that the
NDMC violated the rules by sub-leasing the property allotted to them, and that
the Ministry of Urban Development have a lawful duty to raise demand against
the NDMC for expeditious recovery of the outstanding dues including the interest.
Taking note of the assurance of the representative of the Ministry of



49

Urban Development to initiate appropriate measures for recovery of outstanding
dues from the NDMC, the Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of
the measures ii ited within three months of this presentation of the Report.

21. The Committee observed that five hospitals namely Vidya Sagar Institute
for Mental Health and Neurological Sciences (VIMHANS), Primus Ortho and
Spine Hospital (POSH), St. Stephen's Hospital, Moolchand Hospital and Sir Ganga
Ram Hospital were allotted land at highly concessional rates for the purpose of
opening Hospital as Charitable Trusts. The condition of free treatment to the
patients belonging to the Economically Weaker Section (EWS) was one of the
terms of allotment in respect of POSH and VIMHANS whereas no such condition
was incorporated in the lease deeds of the other three Hospitals ie. St. Stephen's
Hospital, Moolchand Hospital and Sir Ganga Ram Hospital. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the specific reasons for which no condition of free treatment
to EWS patients by the above said three Hospitals was incorporated in their lease
deeds, more so when they were allotted land at highly concessional rates. Now
that these three Hospitals have approached the Delhi High Court praying for
quashing of directions issued by the Ministry for free treatment of EWS patients,
the Committee would also like the matter to be pursued vigorously so that all the
Hospitals who were allotted land at concessional rates extend the prescribed free
treatment to the EWS patients. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
outcome of the efforts made by the Ministry in this behalf.

22. The Committee observe that the Delhi High Court passed an Order in
2007 prescribing 25 per cent of the OPD beds and 10 per cent of the IPD beds
for patients belonging to EWS by the Hospitals which were allotted land at
concessional rates. The Committee find that in pursuance of the direction of the
High Court, an Inspection Committee headed by the Principal Secretary, Health,
Government of Delhi has been constituted to monitor the free treatment of the
poor patients to be provided by the private Hospitals allotted land on concessional
rates. The Court itself has also constituted an Inspection Committee headed by
the Medical Superintendent, Nursing Homes for the same purpose. The findings
of these Monitoring Committee are a matter of extreme concern to the Committee.
For example, as per the Inspection Reports, pertaining to a specific period, the
percentage achieved in OPD and IPD free treatments by VIMHANS has been
8.63 and 0.8 respectively against the prescription of 25 per cent and 10 per cent.
The achievement of POSH is worse which stands at 0.08 for OPD treatment and
0.31 for IPD treatment. Decrying such glaring shortfalls on the part of the
Hospitals in giving the prescribed free treatment to the patients belonging to
EWS and the flagrant violation of the lease, the Committee impress upon the
Ministry to warn the defaulting Hospitals to mend their ways within a specific
period failing which stringent and exemplary action, including cancellation of
allotment, be taken against them.

23. The Committee are shocked that the premises of the St. Stephen Hospital
could not be inspected to ascertain the breaches of conditions of land allotment
like unauthorized construction and misuse as the Hospital refused to furnish the


50

originally sanctioned building plan which was required to ascertain the breaches,
if any. The Committee view that denial of the building plan to the Government as
open defiance which cannot be booked. They therefore urge the Ministry to take
immediate legal recourse against the hospital for stalling the inspection and for
violating the terms and conditions of the lease if established strong exceptions to
such an inexplicable conduct on the part of the Hospital and take exemplary
action against it as per the lease terms and conditions.

24. The Committee are started that, breaches of the lease conditions have
been noticed in all the Presses, Petrol Pumps and 29 and 30 Schools
inspected. The Committee note that pursuant to the inspections, the Ministry/
L&DO have issued notices to all concerned to remedy the breaches. The
Committee therefore recommend that after collecting the damages and misuse
charges from these institutions, the Ministry should give them adequate
opportunity to rectify/remedy the breaches, failing which necessary action be
taken against them in accordance with lease provisions. Since inspection of the
premises of the lessees is mandatory for detecting breaches of the lease
conditions, the Committee impress upon the Ministry/L&DO to regularly inspect
the premises of all the Schools, Presses, and Petrol Pumps so as to take both
precautionary and punitive measures as may be warranted.

25. Large scale encroachment of the Government land under the control of
L&DO and NDMC, especially pertaining to unauthorized religious cum residential
structures is another serious issue which has engaged attention of the Committee.
To be very specific, the Committee find that there are 15 unauthorised religious
structures ९! g in different parts of Delhi on the land under the control of
L&DO. Similarly, there are as many as 91 such structures which have
encroached upon the Government land under the control of NDMC. One of the
typical features of the land management and control that has come to the notice
of the Committee is the fact that the vacant lands under the control of L&DO are
being managed by CPWD/DDA/MCD/NDMC and the Ministry of Urban
Development have issued Guidelines to all concerned for detection and removal of
encroachments. The Committee believe that mere issuance of Guidelines will not
deter the encroachers who seem to have taken the weak inspection system for
granted. As encroachment of precious land in any form is not acceptable to the
Committee, they urge the Ministry of Urban Development to intensify their
monitoring and inspection mechanism in coordination with other Departments
concerned for proper detection and early removal of all encroachments, without
exceptions. The Committee further recommend that priority be accorded to removal
of encroachments on road/side walks, public parks and green areas and water
and electricity connection taken unauthorisedly or given temporarily be
disconnected forthwith. Responsibility also be fixed against officers who turn a
blind eye to such unauthorized constructions being dereliction of duty.

26. The Committee note that as of December, 2010, 13 cases are pending
in the Supreme Court, 323 cases in the High Courts and 273 in the Lower
Courts. Similarly, 303 cases were pending in the Court of Estate Officer. The

sae te



51

Committee are informed that pendency of so many Court cases is beyond L&DO's
control as it has neither any legal section nor any panel of Advocates of its own
for which it has to depend on the Government Counsels appointed by the Ministry
of Law. To worsen the matter, no regular Estate Officer is available in the L&DO
since long and the charge is being dealt with on temporary basis by one or other
Branch Officer. The Committee find that in order to address the above constraints,
a proposal to constitute a separate cell in the L&DO to deal with matters relating
to Court cases, RTI applications etc. is under process. However, the Ministry's
contention that a definite time frame is not possible to be indicated for the
constitution of the Legal Cell is not acceptable. The Committee therefore, impress
upon the Ministry to initiate urgent necessary measures for constitution of the
Lega! Cell and appointment of a permanent Estate Officer in L&DO so that the
pendency of large number of Court cases is decreased to the barest minimum
and recovery of outstanding dues, removal of encroachments etc. which are
impeded by litigations, are effectively addressed.

New DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
24 April 2012 Chairman,
4 Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


ANNEXURE I

YEAR-WISE DETAILS OF THE NUMBER & THE TOTAL AREA OF LAND
ALLOTTED BY L&DO TO VARIOUS SOCIAL, CULTURAL,
RELIGIOUS AND EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
DURING THE LAST 10 YEARS

(Area in acres)

Sl Year Socio-cultural Religious Educational
० No. Area No. Area No. Area
1 2000 7 2.4323 3 0.789 4 3.702
2 2001 6 1.433 1 0.3833 9 8.804
3. 2002 20 5.979 7 1.286 3 2,483
4... 2003 9 1915

5... 2004 4 1.252 1 0.559 —
6. 2005 = _ — -- _

7. 2006 = -- _ — — =
8. 2007 _ -- ज- _ — —
9. 2008 1 0.099

10. 2009 4 0.675

11... 2010 I 0.554

Total 51 13.7853 12 3.0272 17 15.543

Nore: There is no separate category of allotment as Social or as Cultural. The category is
Socio-Cultural”

52

ata nna en at gp



ANNEXURE II

LIST OF ENCROACHMENTS ON GOVERNMENT LAND UNDER THE

CONTROL OF L&DO

91... Name of Religious Structure Address
No. _
1. Sarv Shakti Sanatan Dharam Sabha ‘Tl’ Point, P.K. Road.
2. Udasin Ashram I' Point, P.K. Road.
3. Satya Sanatan Agam Nigam Hanuman Near Tilak Bridge.
Temple
4. Shiv Mandir Samiti No.1 Minto Road Area.
5. Shiv Mandir Samiti No.2 Minto Road Area.
6. Dargah Albert Square, DIZ Area.
7. Rati Ram Prem Nagar.
8. Krishna Adhyatmik Kuteer Temple Prem Nagar.
9. Roman Catholic Church Khan Market.
10. Purana Shiv Shakti Mandir Lodhi Road.
11... Bala Ram/Mangal Khalifa Kidwai Nagar.
12. Radha Krishan Shiv Mandir Prem Nagar.
13. Hanuman Mandir Near CPWD Godown, Aliganj.
14. Maharishi Balmiki Temple Rati Ram, Prem Nagar.
15. _ Hindu Dharam Pracharni Sabha Temple Kidwai Nagar.

a
ies)


ANNEXURE It

LIST OF ENCROACHMENTS ON GOVERNMENT LAND UNDER THE

CONTROL OF NDMC

sl. Name of Religious Structure Address
No.

1 2 3

1. Masjid B-Block Corner, Connaught Place.
2... Masjid K-Block Corner, Connaught Place.
3. Indira Masjid New Arena Emporium, B.K.S. Marg.
4. Shiv and Hanuman Mandir DIZ Area Sector-IV, Gole Market.
5. Kalali Masjid R.K. Ashram Marg (Sector-C).

6. Shiv Mandir (Mano Kameshwar) H-Block, Kali Bari Type-I.

7. Balmiki Mandir Balmiki Basti, Mandir Marg.

8. Shiv Mandir G-Point, Kali Bari Lane.

9. Shiv Shakti Mandir G/13, Rashtrapati Sampada Awas.
10. Shivji Mandir Near Lal Bahadur Sadan, Bhai Veer

Singh Lane.
11. Shiv Mandir Behind NDMC Electric Sub-Station,
Old R.K. Ashram Lane, K-Block.

12, Mandir Kali Mata Bangla Sahib Road.

13. Mandir B.K.S. Marg, G-Point.

14... Mandir D-Avenue, Park Side, Sarojini Nagar.
15. Durga Mandir Export Market, Sarojini Nagar.

16. Mandir L-Avenue, Sarojini Nagar.

17. Mandir HPT, Sarojini Nagar.

18. Gurudwara XY Block, Sarojini Nagar.

19. Temple Round about Talkatora Road.
20... Masjid Darbanga House Lane.
21. Masjid K.G Marg Circle.
22. Masjid Maulana Azad Road Circle.

54

Papp nn *«


55

i 2 3

23. Masjid Parking of India Gate, Man Singh
Road.

24. Mandir Near Flyover Safdarjung.

25. Mandir Khanna Market.

26. Mandir Bharti Nagar.

27. Mandir Khan Market.

28. Mandir Palika Niwas.

29. Mandir Brij Mandal Shiv Mandir, Aliganj.

30. Balmiki Mandir Aliganj.

31. Balmiki Mandir Near Double Storey Aliganj.

32. Praachin Hanuman Mandir Aliganj.

33. Shivalaya Malcha Mandir Dharam Marg.

34. Gurudawara Malcha Marg Market.

35. Mazar Kautiliya Marg, Near Bihar Bhawan.

36. Shri Bhuvneshwari Mata Mandir Kautiliya Marg behind P.S., Chankaya
Puri.

37. Prahariwali Mata Mandir Kautiliya Marg.

38. Hanuman Mandir Vinay Marg Near Ashoka Hotel.

39. Shankar Mandir Madhulimay Marg.

40. Ram Mandir Madhulimay Marg.

41. Shaktipeeth Veshnao Devi Mandir Vinay Marg, Near Nehru Park.

42. Balmiki Mandir Nehru Park, Vinay Marg.

43. Bharon Mandir Nehru Park, Vinay Marg.

44. Shiv Mandir Manas Marg, Bapu Dham.

45. Sheetla Mata Mandir Dhaula Kuan, Chankayapuri Railway
Station.

46. Maa Vaishnao Devi Mandir Madrasi Camp, Moti Bagh.

47. Gurudwara Palika Bhawan, R.K. Puram.

48. Shiv Mandir Sarojini Nagar Depot.

49. Shri Ram Mandir Sarojini Nagar Depo t.

+ a7 ९०६/५


59.
). Masjid
61.
62.

65.

67.

). Uttarakhandi Shiv Shakti Mandir
. Shiv Mandir

. Shiv Mandir
. Ram Mandir
. Mandir

. Mandir
. Mandir
. Mazar

. Masjid

Masjid

Mandir
Mandir

. Mandir

. Mandir

Mandir

. Mandir

Geeta Mandir

. Sanatan Dharam Mandir
. Shiv Hanuman Mandir

70.
7.

St. Merry Church
Balmiki Mandir

Cement Godown, Netaji Nagar.

Near Primary School No. 4, Moti
Bagh-I.

Electric Service Centre, Malcha Marg.
Anant Ram Dairy.

Back side of Bank of Baroda, Sansad
Marg.

Gujrati Mkt., Janpath Lane.
Atulgrov Road Opp. P&T Flats.
Vakeel Lane.

Back side of Bank of Baroda. Sansad

Janpath Rd. Near Janpath Hotel.
Patel Chowk, Ashoka Road.

Hailey Lane.

Navnirman Shiv Mandir. D Block. East
Kidwai Nagar.

Arya Samaj Mandir, D-Block, East
Kidwai Nagar.

Shiv Hanuman Mandir, E-Block. East
Kidwai Nagar.

Khatlidiva (Durga) Mandir. E-Block,
East Kidwai Nagar.

Badri Narain Mandir. East Kidwai
Nagar.

East ..1dwai Nagar. Near South
Market.

B-Block, Kidwai Nagar.
Near Gate-1, Safdarjung Hospital.

t Kidwai Nagar.

t Kidwai Nagar.

०40००»



2

क्र.

. Shiv Shakti Hanuman Mandir

. Gurudwara

Mazar

. Durga Saraswati Mandir

. Shiv Hanuman Mandir

'. Mandir
. Shiv Shakti Mandir

Laxmi Narain Mandir

Gurudwara

. Sanatan Dharam Mandir

Kali Mandir
Shiv Mandir
Radha Krishan Mandir

. Mandir

Mandir

. Mandir

Mandir
Mandir

Mandir
Masjid

D-Block, Central Mkt., Kidwai Nagar.
D-Block, East Kidwai Nagar.
D-Block, East Kidwai Nagar.
D-Block, East Kidwai Nagar.

Near Safdarjung Tomb, Aurbindo
Marg.

West Kidwai Nagar D-II Flats.
Laxmi Bai Nagar.

Laxmi Bai Nagar.

Laxmi Bai Nagar.

Laxmi Bai Nagar.

Laxmi Bai Nagar.

Laxmi Bai Nagar.

Laxmi Bai Nagar.

Back side of Shankar Mkt.
Back side of Shankar Mkt.

Back side of Bengali Sweet, Todarmal
Lane.

Barakhamba Lane.

Barakhamba Lane, Power Finance
Corporation Ltd.

Chelmsford Road.
Back side of Bengali Mkt.



APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 19TH JULY 2011

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th July 2011 from
1100 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul

N

Dr. Baliram
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Shripad Yesso Naik

wk ४२

Shri Sanjay Nirupam
Shri Jagdambika Pal
Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao

Shri Adhi Sankar

9 २४ ND

10. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
ll. Shri K, Sudhakaran
12. Dr. Girija Vyas
Rajya Sabha
13, Shri Tariq Anwar
14. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
15. Shri Naresh Gujral
16. Shri Prakash Javadekar
17. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
18. Prof. Saif-ud-Din-Soz

58



59

SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Abhijit Kumar
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty

Director

Deputy Secretary

Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India

1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller and Auditor General of India

2. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG (Report Central)

3. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)

4. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director (Economic & Service
Ministries)

Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation
(Department of Urban Development)

1. Shri Navin Kumar Secretary (UD)
2. Shri २.९. Mishra -~ Additional Secretary (UD)
3. Shri Arun Goel — Joint Secretary (DL)
4, Smt. Sudha Krishnan — — Joint Secretary & FA (UD)
5. Shri Shailash Kumar Singh © — Joint Secretary (UT)
6. Shri Mahmood Ahmed -- Director (L&DO)
Representative of NCT of Delhi
Shri Anshu Parkash — Pr. Secretary (H&FW) GNCTD
Representative of NDMC
Shri Santosh D. Vaidya — Secretary, NDMC
Representatives of Delhi Development Authority

1. Shri Nand Lal -— Finance, Member, DDA
2. Shri Pawan Kumar — Economic Adviser, DDA

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India and the representatives of the Ministry of Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation (Urban Development) and the Government
of NCT, Delhi. Apprising that the meeting was convened to take evidence of the
Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation (Department of Urban
Development) on the subject Functioning of the Land & Development Office’, the
Chairman impressed upon the witnesses to keep the deliberations of the Committee
as confidential until the Report on the subject was presented to the House. He
then requested the Secretary, Department of Urban Development to give a brief
account of the follow up action taken by the Ministry on the Audit findings to
improve the overall functioning of the Land & Development Office. The Secretary


60

accordingly briefed the Committee on action taken by them on various deficiencies,
as pointed out by the Audit. which inrer-alia included poor documentation of the
properties, irregular revision and non-revision of ground rent, non-recovery of
huge outstanding dues from the lessesses, especially Hotels and Hospitals,
significant breaches of lease condition in terms of unauthorized construction,
encroachment etc.

3. During the course of deliberations, the Committee expressed their
displeasure over the tardy progress made by the Ministry in taking follow up
action on several deficiencies pointed out by Audit in 2009-10 as well as a decade
ago. When the Secretary, Department of Urban Development clarified that there
had been some improvement in the facts and figures in the written reply, as
furnished to the Committee, the Chairman sought an explanation as to why the
updated reply was not made available to the Committee and directed the Secretary
to furnish the same urgently. He also asked the Secretary, Department of Urban
Development to send the status report on various issues, as discussed, within
three days.

4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation (Department of Urban Development) and
the Government of NCT Delhi for appearing before the Committee and furnishing
the available information, on the subject. The Chairman also thanked the Members
for their active participation in the discussion on the subject.

The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.

5. Thereafter, one of the Members drew the attention of the Chairman to one
Member of Parliament of a particular political party going to the media and
distorting the deliberation of the sitting of the Committee held on 28th June, 2011.
Expressing his concern over misreporting of the discussion of the Committee, he.
opined that it constituted breach of privilege. Some other Members countered it
saying that whatever had been said outside the Committee and that too by an MP
who was not a Member of PAC should not be taken into cognizance.

6. The Chairman clarified that it was for the political party concerned to see
what their spokespersons used to say to the media and as the Head of the PAC,
he had nothing to do with it. He, however, apprised the Members that he personally
called the reporter concerned and told him that such misreporting of the contents
of the deliberations of the Committee was unacceptable as it would impede the
effective functioning of the Committee. So far as the issue of breach of privilege
was concerned, the Chairman told that many unpleasant situations would crop up
if the past was dug. He categorically mentioned that casting aspersion on the
integrity of the Chair, as had been done earlier and on record, was also a fit case
for breach of privilege, but he chose to forget and forgive. He accordingly requested
the Members to work in tandem, rising above porty affiliation, to maintain the rich
legacy of the PAC. The Members concurred.

The Committee, then adjourned.

Payee wants Tiett eT nT)



MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOL

APPENDIX If

The Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday the 24th April, 2012 from

1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Room No. '51' (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House.

New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi. -- Chairman
Lok Sabha
2, Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul

we

woe

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
Dr. Girija Vyas
Rajya Sabha
Shri Prasanta Chatterjee

Shri Prakash Javadekar

Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz.

‘SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh —_ Joint Secretary
2... Shri Abhijit Kumar Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4... Smt. A, Jyothirmayi _ Deputy Secretary

Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India

1,

>

3.

Shri A.M. Bajaj —- Pr. Director. Audit
Ms. Gcetali Tare -— Pr. Director, Audit
Ms. Sudha Rajan —— Director

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives

of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the sitting of the
Committee. Apprising the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider

61


62

and adopt four Original Draft Reports of the Committee, the Chairman desired that
the said Reports be taken up one by one for consideration for appropriate
incorporation of the views, if any, of the Members therein.

3. Accordingly, the Committee took up the following Draft Reports for
consideration and adopted the same:

() *** ake कक oe
(i) *** HE Fee ee
(iii) *** ee kK wee

(iv) ‘Functioning of Land and Development Office’ based on C&AG Report
No. 6 of 2009-10.

4. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Draft Reports
in light of the factual verifications, if any, received from Audit and present the
Reports to the House on a date convenient to him.

5. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active
participation in the discussions, He also thanked the representatives of the Office
of the C&AG for their valuable inputs and assistance to the Committee in the
examination of the subjects. The Committee also appreciated the hard work put in
by the Secretariat in drafting and finalising 25 Reports during the current term of
the Committee.

The Committee, then, adjourned.

*** Matters not related to this report.

MGIPMRND—579LS—23-08-2012

‘oH 1