1
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2009-10
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NON-COMPLIANCE  BY  THE  MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON NON-SELECTED
AUDIT PARAGRAPHS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
ELEVENTH REPORT
11

PAC  No.  1906
Price: Rs. 37/-
©2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of  Business
in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002

ELEVENTH REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
2009-10
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
NON-COMPLIANCE BY THE MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION
TAKEN NOTES ON NON-SELECTED AUDIT
PARAGRAPHS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on   29.04.2010
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on   29.04.2010
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2010/V aisakha, 1932 (Saka)

 CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10).......................... (iii)
COMPOSITION  OF SUB-COMMITTEE -V OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)................................................................................................................ (iv)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
PART-I Narrative Portion............................................................. 1
I. Introductory ...................................................................... 1
II. Pendency Position of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken
Notes ................................................................................ 2
III. Heavy  Pendency of Action Taken Notes in Respect of
Paras relating to Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) ........................................................................... 3
IV . Role of Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure in
Collection and Monitoring of Remedial/Corrective Action
Taken Notes ...................................................................... 4
V. Committee of Secretaries................................................... 8
VI. V ariation in the Figures Furnished by the Monitoring Cell,
Department of Expenditure and the Office of C&AG
relating to pending Action Taken Notes in Various
Ministries/Departments .................................................... 10
P
ART-II Observations and Recommendations............................... 12
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of  Sub-Committee-V held on
5th March,  2010................................................................ 18
II. Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of  the Public Accounts
Committee (2009-10) held on 26th April, 2010.................... 20

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE (2009-2010)
*Shri Gopinath Munde  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri  Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18. $Vacant
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
* Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant Singh
resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
$ Vice Shri Ashwani Kumar retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE -V OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-2010)
*Shri Ashwani  Kumar —   Convener
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee/Sub-Committee on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha
w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee as authoriesed by the Committee, do
present this Eleventh  Report (15th Lok Sabha) on‘Non-compliance by Ministries/
Department timely submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs' relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).
2. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time frame, the Public Accounts
Committee (2009-10) took up the subject for detailed examination and report.  A
sub-Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation with the
Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of eight Ministries/Departments
viz. Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) and (Department of  Revenue
Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Telecommunications), Department of Space, Ministry of Defence,
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Ministry of Environment and Forests.
In the process, the Sub-Committee called for Background Notes/Written replies and
took separate evidence of the representatives of the Ministries/Departments
concerned.
3. The Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) on 5th March, 2010. The Committee considered
and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 26th April, 2010. Minutes of the sittings
form Appendices to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and  Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in  thick type in the body of the Report.
5. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for their efforts in examining the subject
in detail and finalizing and placing the Report before the main Committee.
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for tendering evidence before the
Sub-Committee and furnishing information that the Sub-Committee/Committee
desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor- General of India.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6  Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)
Public APuufdfcc

REPORT
I. Introductory
Under the Constitution of India, it is the duty of the Comptroller and Auditor
General to audit and report on the Accounts of the Union Government. CAG's Audit
Report is an important instrument through which Parliament exercises its oversight on
the Public exchequer. It is obligatory on the part of the officers spending public money
to take immediate action to remedy the deficiencies/irregularities pointed out in the
Audit Report. The Report of the Comptroller  and Auditor General of India after being
laid in the Parliament in terms of Article 151 of Constitution of India, stand referred to
the Public Accounts  Committee for their scrutiny. These Audit Reports contain
several paragraphs. Since it is not possible for the Public Accounts Committee to go
through every issue dealt with  in the various Audit Reports, it becomes incumbent
upon the Committee  to be selective in approach. Accordingly, at the beginning of the
term every year, the Public Accounts Committee generally select for in-depth examina-
tion only a few relatively more important paragraphs from the various Reports of
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
2. As regards Audit Paragraphs that were not  selected by the Committee for
detailed examination, till 1981, there was no practice of ascertaining the action taken by
the Ministries/Departments thereon. However, at the sitting of 30 June, 1981, the
Committee (1981-82) decided that the Ministries concerned be asked to furnish notes
indicating the remedial/corrective action taken by them on the points raised by Audit
in respect of all such paragraphs in  the Reports of the C&AG for the year 1979-80 as
had not been selected by the Committee for detailed examination. Subsequently, the
Public Accounts Committee at their sitting held on 7 April, 1982 decided that the
various Audit Reports for the year 1980-81 be referred to the Ministries concerned for
furnishing notes duly vetted by Audit showing remedial/corrective action taken on all
the paragraphs contained thereon. The Committee also decided on 16th April, 1982
that these instructions were to be treated as 'standing instructions’ for future also.
According, the Lok Sabha Secretariat informed  the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure) on 19th April, 1982 that the Ministries concerned be asked to furnish in
future notes indicating the remedial/corrective action taken by them on the various
audit paragraphs contained in Audit Reports for the year 1980-81 as soon as the same
were laid on the Table of the House. It was also specified that the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) was to coordinate and collect the notes from the various
Ministries and forward the same to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.
3. Taking Note of the inordinate delay and persisting failures on the part of a large
number of Ministries in reporting to the Committees the corrective action taken on
audit paragraphs, the Committee in their 105th Report (10th Lok Sabha—1995-96)
observed that the results of audit of Government's financial transactions would largely
1

2
remain in vain, unless an adequate mechanism is devised to ensure timely submission
of the Action Taken Notes. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Action
Taken Notes on all the paragraphs of the Reports of C&AG of India should be
furnished to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expendi-
ture (Monitoring Cell) within a period of 4 months form the date of laying of Audit
Reports on the Table of the House (Starting from 31st March, 1996 onwards).
4. Since excessive and chronic delays were noticed in the receipt of Action taken
Notes from the various Ministries/Departments, the PAC (2008-09) took cognizance of
the matter and asked the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure—Monitoring
Cell), to look into the matter and expedite submission of the Action Taken Notes. As
per the information furnished by the Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure,
Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes in respect of about 2500 paras were pending
with the various Ministries/Departments as on 1st September,  2008. The Public
 Accounts Committee (2008-09) took a serious view of the inordinate delay in submission
of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes by various Ministries/Departments and
summoned the Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Dapartment of Expenditure) on
15th September, 2008 for a briefing on the furnishing subject. The Secretary (Expendi-
ture) was then directed to take necessary action for furnishing  all the pending Reme-
dial/Corrective Action Taken Notes to the Public Accounts Committee within a period
of three months i.e. by 14th December, 2008. The Audit officials were also asked to
furnish Ministry/Department-wise position of the paras on which Remedial/Corrective
Action Taken Notes were awaited from the concerned Ministries/Departments.
5. Subsequently the then Chairman, PAC (2008-09) wrote a letter to the Hon'ble
Prime Minister seeking his kind intervention in the matter so that the Remedial/Corrective
Action Taken Notes were furnished expeditiously by all the Ministries/Departments
concerned to the Public Accounts Committee, within the stipulated time period.
Thereafter, the PAC (2008-09)  at their sitting held on 19th January, 2009 took stock of
the position with regard to submission of pending Action Taken Notes by various
Ministries/Departments. The Committee's  review of the position has revealed that
post brifing, no perceptiable improvement has taken place with regard to furnishing of
Action Taken Notes by verious Ministries/Departments.
6. During the first siitting of Public Accounts Committee (2009-10)  held on
7th September, 2009 the Comptroller and Auditor General of India apprised the Committee
of the pendency of large number of Action Taken Notes from various Ministries/
Departments. Consequently, the Public Accounts Committee (2009-10)  selected the
subject "Non-Compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies
to  the Audit paragraphs of the C&AG" for detailed examination and a Sub-Committee
of the P AC  (2009-10)  was constituted for examination of this subject.
II. Pendency  Position of  Remedial/Corrective  Action Taken Notes
7. At the instance of  the Sub-Committee, the Ministries of Finance (Department of
Expenditure — Monitoring Cell) furnished a consolidated statement showing  the
Ministry/Department - wise pendency of Action Taken Notes from the year 1996-97  to

3
2006-07. The same is reproduced in Annexure-I. As per this statement, as on 15.09.2009,
Action Taken Notes in respect of 2827 Paras are pending  with the various Ministries/
Departments.
8. An analysis of this statement reveals that in respect of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)  alone which comprises of revenue division viz.  Central
Board for Direct Taxes (CBDT), Central Board for Central Excise and Customs  (CBEC),
the pendency position of Action Taken Notes is 1811, thus constituting around
70 percent of the total pending paras of all the Ministries/Departments put together.
The other Ministries/Departments where the pendency  of  Action Taken Notes is
quite substantial are Ministry of Railways (362)  and Ministry of Defence (171)  followed
by Ministry of Telecommunications (51)  and Ministry of Health (50). The total number
of outstanding Action Taken Notes that were pending with the various Ministries/Departments
further  increased with the addition of paras  contained in the C&AG  Reports for the
year 2007-2008. As per the latest information furnished by the  Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) as on 15th March, 2010 , the total
number of Audit para in respect of which Action Taken Notes are pending with various
Ministries/Departments from the year 1997-98 to 2007-08 stood at 4934. Out of these
3646  paras relate to Department of Revenue (3172) pertains to CBDT, 462 relating to
CBEC and 12  relating to Department of Revenue).  This is followed by Ministries of
Railways (553), Defence (202), Telecommunication (90) and Health (49).
However, as per the information furnished by the Office of C&AG, Audit  wing-wise,
as of February, 2010, a total of 3450  Action Taken Notes are pending from various
Ministries/Departments out of these 2208 alone pertain to Revenue wing comprising
CBDT, CBEC  and Customs, followed by Railways wing (481), Defence wing (229),
Autonomous Bodies wing (180), Scientific Departments wing (165) and Civil Ministry
Wing (142). Further out of these 3450 pending paras, Action Taken Notes in respect of
1891 paras have not been received in the Audit even for the first time. Though Action
Taken Notes in respect of 960  paras were received in Audit these were returned back
by Audit  to respective  Ministries/Departments and these re-submission for further
vetting is awaited. Action  Taken Notes in respect of 402 paras are under vetting in
Audit.
III. Heavy Pendency of  Action  Taken  Notes in  Respect of  Paras  Relating to
Ministry of Finance  (Department of Revenue)
9. As stated above, as on 15.09.2009, the total number of Action taken Notes pending
with the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) from 1996-97 to 2006-07  stood
at 1811. Out of these, 760  Paras pertain to the Customs division, 565 Paras to the
Central Excise and 486  to the CBDT. As per the statement furnished  by the Audit as on
February, 2010,  a total of 2208 Action Taken Notes are  pending with the Department
of Revenue,  Ministry of Finance. Out of these 1476 Action Taken Notes were not
received in the Audit Office even for the first time. While 461 Action Taken Notes were
awaiting re-submission by the Department after their return by Audit, 271 Action
Taken Notes are under vetting by the Audit.

4
10. Explaining the reasons for large scale pendency of Action Taken Notes in three
revenue divisions viz. CBDT, Central Excise and Customs the Department of Revenue
in a communication addressed to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure
— Monitoring Cell) have stated as under.
".............Once a Draft Para is communicated  to the Ministry, the factual report is
called for from the concerned Commissioner .......Remedial action is invariably
initiated  in such cases to protect  the interest of Revenue, as  per instruction
No. 9 of 2006, and intimated to the CAG along with the Ministry's reply whether
the objection is accepted or not. The remedial action requires due process and
procedure of law to be followed viz.,
/circle6Deciding the appropriate remedial action i.e., a simply rectification or
reassessment of revision u/s 263;
/circle6Issuing notice  to initiate proceedings; and
/circle6Giving opportunity of being heard to the assessee before finalising the
assessment.
Depending on the type of remedial action initiated the proceedings take anywhere
between 6 months  to about 4 years (from the date  of initiation)  for  completion.
These actions are also subject to judicial review before CIT(A). ITA T, High Courts
or the Supreme Court as the case may be. Therefore, it is not possible  to fix a time
line for furnished Action Taken Notes as the remedial action and the time taken
for finalizing the proceedings is case specific..........."
11. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) in a
separate communication forwarded to the PAC Secretariat, has  sought the approval of
the Public Accounts Committee for striking off 1092 cases of pending Action Taken
Notes from the outstanding list of Action  Taken Notes relating to Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue — CBDT). These Action Taken Notes relate  to 399 Paras
contained in the C&AG’ Report  for the year 2007-08 and 693 Action Taken Notes
relating  to various Paras contained in the C & AG Reports of 1999-2000 to 2006-07. The
Monitoring Cell has stated that CBDT and office of C&AG at the meetings held on
31.3.2009 and 07.09.2009 have mutually agreed not to further pursue Action Taken
Notes in respect of these Paras in view of acceptance of the Audit observations by the
Department and remedial action taken and money recovered, and remedial action taken/
initiated. The Sub-Committee-V at their sitting held on 22nd February, 2010 considered
this matter and gave their consent/approval for striking of the aforesaid Paras.
IV . Role of  Monitoring Cell, Department of  Expenditure in Collection and Monitoring
of Remedial/Corrective  Action Taken Notes
12. As stated earlier in this Report, the Monitoring Cell under the Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance have been enjoined upon to coordinate and collect
the remedial/corrective Action taken Notes on the various Audit Paragraphs contained
in different Audit Reports from all the Ministries/Departments concerned duly vetted

5
by Audit and sent the same to the Public Accounts Committee within the stipulated
period of 4 months from the date of presentation of Audit Rports to the Parliament.
13. When asked whether any mechanism has been devised or proposed to be
devised by Department of Expenditure to ensure timely submission of Action Taken
Notes within the stipulated time and also the constraints and difficulties encountered
in this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) in a note stated as
under:
   "Department of Expenditure issues regular reminders at the level of Secretary
(Expenditure) CGA to Ministries/Departments regarding submission of Action
Taken notes on the CAG's Audit paras within 4 months of laying the Report in
Parliament ......Department of Expenditure also organized meetings with officials
of other Ministries/Departments in the past one and half years to expedite
submission of pending Action Taken Notes. Further the following steps have
been taken to expedite submission of pending Action Taken Notes, on CAG's
Audit paras:
/circle6Department of Expenditure has been following up with the Ministries/
Departments by way of informing the Ministries/Departments about the
number of paras shown against them in various reports of C&AG on which
Action Taken Notes are due. Reminders are issued regularly from various
levels viz. Secretary (Expenditure), CGA, Addl. CGA/Joint CGA and also
through usual office memoranda and by telephonic reminders. Monitoring
Cell has been created specifically for the purpose of monitoring furnishing
of Action Taken Notes on CAG's paras by the Ministries/Departments;
/circle6Further, after 15.09.2008 following steps were taken to expedite the submission
of Action Taken Notes on CAG's audit paras:
D.O. reminders to the Ministries/Departments at the level of Secretary
(Exp.)/CGA/Addl. CGA were issued as detailed below:—
Date From To
18.09.2008 Secretary  (Exp.) Concerned Secretaries/Chairmen (CBEC)/
CBDT/Railway Board and FAs
20.10.2008 CGA Concerned Secretaries
01.12.2008 CGA Concerned Secretaries
16.01.2009 Addl. CGA FAs
13.07.2009 CGA Secretaries
31.08.2009 Monitoring Cell O.M. to all Ministries/Departments/All FAs
27.10.2009 CGA Concerned Secretaries
03.11.2009 Secretary (Exp.) Concerned Secretaries
10.02.2010 CGA Concerned Secretaries

6
In addition to the above reminders,
(i) Secretary (Exp.), in November 2008, met the Financial Advisors of major
defaulting Ministries/Departments individually;
(ii) On 14th November, 2008, CGA took a meeting of all CCA/CAs to impress
upon them to expedite submission of Action Taken Notes;
(iii) A one day workshop was held in Vigyan Bhawan on 27th November,
2008, to interact with the representatives of all Ministries/Departments/
Audit to facilitate interaction and reduce the time in finalization of Action
Taken Notes;
(iv) A special drive was also carreid out to expedite submission of Action
Taken Notes:
(v) PAC was also apprised of steps taken by Monitoring Cell to expedite
submission of Action Taken Notes; and
(vi) Hon'ble Finance Minister took a meeting on October 29, 2009, with FAs of
various Ministries emphasizing expeditious submission of Action Taken
Notes.
Office of Controller General of Accounts has developed a centralized computerized
Monitoring System to monitor processing of Action Taken Notes on Audit paras. This
system is being tested. A 5 day training programme has conducted by the office of
CGA from 1st to 5th February, 2010 where representatives of all the Ministries/
Departments/Audit were invited to familiarize them with the working of system. The
system will be hosted on the web after getting security audit certificate from NIC. Once
the system becomes operational, it will become easier for the Ministries/Departments
to monitor pendency which will result in reduction of pendency. O/o CGA have also
been advised to send quarterly reports to Ministry of Finance on pending Action
Taken Notes and once the system is operational to place the Action taken Notes in the
public domain. A copy of the quarterly report will also be sent to the PAC."
14. The Sub-Committee desired to know as to why so many paras are pending with
the Ministries despite they being fully aware of the fact that Action Taken Notes are to
be furnished within 4 months from the date of laying of Audit Reports on the Table of
the House. In response, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) in a note
stated as under:—
"The responsibility to furnish the Action T aken Notes duly vetted by Audit
within 4 months from the date of laying of Audit Reports on table of the House
is primarily that of the respective Ministries/Departments. The reasons stated
by Ministries/Departments during interaction with officials of Department of
Expenditure can be summarized as below:
(1) Submission of Action Taken Notes is delayed because of the excessive
time taken in data collection from field offices;
(2) As regards Audit paras of the Department of Revenue (CBDT, CBEC etc.)
it has been stated by them that the subject of numerous Audit paras are

7
subjudice. Hence Action Taken Notes can be submitted only after the
judical process is complete; and
(3) Submission of Action Taken Notes is also delayed as some draft Action
Taken Notes taken longer time to be cleared by Audit."
15. The Sub-Committee enquired whether the Monitoring Cell continue to pursue
the matter relating to pending Action Taken Notes with the Administrative Secretaries
and if so, with what frequency and at what level and the response of the Administrative
Secretaries to the pending paras in their respective Ministries/ Departments. In response,
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) in  a note, stated as under:
"Monitoring Cell pursues with respective Ministries/ Departments for
submission of Action Taken Notes on CAG's Audit paras at regular intervals.
In the past 18 months, Monitoring Cell has sent reminders on 9 occasions to
concerned Secretaries/FAs from Secretary (Exp./ CGA/Addl. CGA asking them
to submit Action Taken Notes on outstanding CAG's Audit paras. V arious
Ministries/Departments in their letters written by Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
FA/JS have informed monitoring Cell that the matter regarding submission of
Action taken Notes on CGA's Audit para is getting highest priority in their
respective Ministries, and adequate attention is being paid by officers of high
level on this important aspect of work.''
16. To a specific query whether any responsibility has ever been fixed for not
furnishing remedial Action Taken Notes on the pending audit paragraphs, the
Department of Expenditure in a note stated that Secretaries of the respective
Departments/Ministries are the administrative authorities for fixing responsibility.
17. On being asked whether non-furnishing of replies to a large number of Audit
Paragraphs should be taken as non-fulfilment of responsibilities by the Chief Accounting
Authority under Rule 64 of General Financial Rules and whether there is any system in
the Department of Expenditure to obviate such a situation, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) in a note stated that as Chief Accounting Authority,
Secretaries are responsible for furnishing Action Taken Notes on audit paras on time.
Instructions were issued to all Secretaries of Government of India on 3rd November,
2009 for urgent processing of pending Action Taken Notes. Letters have also been
issued on 12th March, 2010 regarding timely submission of Action Taken Notes on
Audit paras. Timely submission of Action Taken Notes is being included as one of the
targets in the Results Framework Document (RFD) of each ministry as the direct
responsibility of the Chief Accounting Authority. Letters have also been written to the
Cabinet Secretary  and Secretary (Performance Management) in regard to inclusion of
this aspect in RFD.
18. When asked as to how the Monitoring Cell in the Department of Expenditure
deal with the Chief Accounting Authority for their inordinate delays and persisting
failures on the part of their Ministry/Department in furnishing Action Taken Notes on

8
C&AG's Report, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) in a note stated
as udner:—
"Monitoring Cell through its higher officials sends reminders at regular interval
to Secretary of the various Ministries/Departments of Government of India.
Further Secretary (Performance Management) has been requested to include
monitoring of the pending Action Taken Notes/ Action Taken Replies as a
success indicator/target in the Results Framework Document (RFD) of each
Ministry as the personal responsibility of the Secretary of the Department/
Ministry as the Chief Accounting Authority. Also, FAs have been advised to
furnish, on a quarterly basis separate reports in respect of pending Action
Taken Notes/Action Taken Replies on:—
/circle6Audit Reports/Paras of the C&AG
/circle6Audit paras selected by PAC
/circle6PAC recommendations.
19. The Sub-Committee desired to know whether the Department of Expenditure
has evolved any formal system with the concerned Ministries to hold regular
discussions with Audit authorities through Audit Committees to ensure timely
submission of correct and complete replies and prompt settlement of audit objections.
In response, the Department of expenditure in a written note stated that letters have
been issued to all Secretaries of Government of India on 12th March, 2010 advising
them to institute a system of frequent discussions for finalization of Action Taken
Notes through establishment of Action Taken Note Adalats/Workshops. A workshop
was also organized on 27th Novemebr, 2008 in Vigyan Bhawan by CGA for this purpose.
V . Committee of Secretaries
20. In their 105th Report (10th Lok Sabha) on "Follow up on Audit Reports'' the
Public Accounts Committee were perplexed at the fact that despite heavy pendency of
remedial Action Taken Notes in various Ministries/Departments the Department of
Expenditure did not chose to take up the matter at appropriate forum like Committee of
Secretaries. However, subsequent to the recoding of evidence on the subject the
Committee were assured that in future the Secretary, Expenditure would be discussing
the matter with the concerned Secretary whenever replies were not sent within four
months and the cases involving further delays would be placed before the Committee
of  Secretaries.
21. During the evidence on the subject held on 5th March, 2010, the Sub-Committee
recalled the aforesaid observation made by their predecessors Committee in their
105th Report (10th Lok Sabha) and the Ministry's response thereon and enquired
whether the matter regarding persistent delays in furnishing Remedial Action Taken
Notes were placed before the Committee of Secretaries. In her deposition, the Secretary
(Expenditure) stated:—
"I am not aware of it.”
22. Later the Secretary (Expenditure), amended her statement mentioned above and
stated:—
‘‘It may be sir that at that point of time, they may have brought it to the notice
of the Committee of Secretaries which is headed by the Cabinet Secretary.”

9
3. Subsequently, in their post evidence reply the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure) admitted that this matter was not brought up for discussion  in the
Committee of Secretaries during the last five years. However, the matter has now been
brought to the notice of the Cabinet Secretary requesting that a meeting of the Committee
of Secretaries could be held in April 2010 so that the seriousness of the matter can be
impressed upon the concerned Secretaries.
24. On being asked whether any mechanism exists in the Ministries/Departments of
the Government of India in general and in the Ministry of Finance in particular to
ensure that seriousness of Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministries is maintained
to taking remedial measures that are required to be taken, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) in a written note stated as under:
"The Action Taken Notes submitted by Ministries/ Departments are invariably
approved by the respective Secretaries and incorporate remedial measures
taken by the Ministries/Departments. The draft Action Taken Notes are vetted
by the Audit authorities. It is only when the Audit authorities are fully satisfied
with the action taken by Ministries that they convey their approval to Draft
Action Taken Notes submitted by Ministry/Audit. This procedure ensures
that Ministries/Departments maintain seriousness about their remedial measure
to be taken. However, Ministries/Departments have been advised to include
pending Action Taken Notes in their Annual Report (after vetting by Audit)
from the year 2010-11. In the letter issued to all Secretaries on 12th March, 2010
it has been mentioned that systems may be devised to ensure that irregularities
pointed put by C&AG do not recur in subsequent cases. Further, where systemic
deficiencies have been pointed out particularly in performance Audit Reports,
these may be addressed promptly for remedial action and where necessary
reference may be made to this Department in a time bound manner.''
25. When asked whether Financial Advisors of the Ministries invariably vet the
Action Taken Notes and the approval of the Secretary is obtained before submitting
Action Taken Notes on CAG's Reports, the Department of Expenditure in a note stated
that in terms of the IFA Charter, action taken on Audit Reports is to be regularly
monitored by the Financial Advisors. The  Action Taken Notes are invariably approved
by the Secretaries.
26. The Sub-Committee enquired as to whether monitoring of  Action Taken Notes
is carried out by sufficiently senior level officers in the Department of Expenditure. In
response, the Department stated in a note that Monitoring of  Action Taken Notes in
Department of Expenditure is done by Monitoring Cell in the Office of CGA, which
functions under the day-to-day supervision of Joint CGA, who is a Joint Secretary
level officer. The Monitoring Cell functions under an Under Secretary  (MC). Addl.
CGA, CGA & Secretary (Exp.) monitor submission of  Action Taken Notes on CAG's
Audit paras periodically and take necessary remedial measures.
27. Enquired whether the monitoring Cell carefully monitors uniformity of  Action
Taken Notes , so that vital information/explanation is not excluded or omitted, the
Department of Expenditure in a note stated that the Monitoring Cell examines the

10
overall procedural requirement like submission of requisite number of copies,
availability of Hindi version and whether comments of Audit have been suitably
incorporated by the Ministry. However, contents of the  Action Taken Notes prepared
by Ministries are vetted by Audit which taken care of remedial measures and uniformity
of action taken.
VI. Variation in the Figures Furnished by the Monitoring Cell,  Department of
Expenditure and the Office of C&AG Relating to Pending Action Taken Notes in
various Ministries/Departments
28. According to the latest information furnished by  the Monitoring Cell of the
Department of  Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, as on 15th March, 2010  Action Taken
Notes are pending in various Ministries/Departments in respect of 4934 paras, contained
in the Audit Reports from 1997-98 to 2007-08. The statement showing Ministry/
Department-wise details of pending  Action Taken Notes are given in Annexure-II.
However, this figure varies with that of Audit. As per the information furnished by the
Audit, as of  February, 2010,  Action Taken Notes are  pending from different Ministries/
Departments in respect of 3450 Audit Paras. The details of the pending  Action Taken
Notes—Audit Wing-wise are given in Annexure-III.
29. On close scrutiny of the statements furnished both by the monitoring Cell and
the Audit revealed several asymmetries, in terms of year of computation as well as the
period for which the Action Taken Notes are pending etc. Besides this, the information
furnished by the Audit is quite comprehensive as it captures the data regading
pendency of  Action Taken Notes at various levels/stages, both at Ministry and Audit
level. As per the analysis done by the Audit,  Action Taken Notes have not been
received from the concerned Ministries/Departments even for the first time in respect
of 1891 Audit Paras. In respect of  960 Audit Paras,  Action Taken Notes are due for re-
submission to the Audit alongwith their comments by the various Ministries/
Departments as these were returned by the Audit alongwith their observations.
30. When asked whether reconciliation of the figures of Monitoring Cell and
Audit has been done and if so the exact number of paras on which  Action Taken
Notes are pending with different Ministries/Departments, the ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) in a written note stated that the conciliation process is
an on-going process between Ministries/Audit, the problem of reconciliation is
more acute in the Department of Revenue ( Viz. CBDT, Customs & Excise).
Reconciliation also needs to be done in respect of Scientific Ministries where Audit
has shown large number of old paras outstanding, while the Ministries are showing
them as cleared. Although as per the data given by o/o C&AG , only 3450 paras are
pending as on February, 2010, information collected by the monitoring Cell shows
that 4934 audit paras are pending as on 15th March, 2010. This information is for
reports tabled in Parliament upto 2009.
31. Asked about the time-frame by which the  Action Taken Notes on all the pending
paragraphs are likely to be submitted for further compliance to the Public Accounts
Committee, the Ministry of Fiance (Department of Expenditure) in a note stated as

11
under:—
"Department of Expenditure is vigorously pursuing with various Ministries/
Departments to submit  Action Taken Notes within 4 months of laying the
Report in the Parliament. In the past 1 year, due to continuously pursuing the
matter with Ministries/Departments, there has been a significant increase in
the pace of submission of  Action Taken Notes by Ministries/Departments. It
is expected that there would be significant  decline in total number of pending
audit paras in the near future. However, it would be difficult to provide a time
frame by which  Action Taken Notes would be submitted on all outstanding
CAG's audit paras.''

PART-II
OBSERVATIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India after  being laid in
Parliament in terms of Article 151 of Constitution of India, stand referred to the
Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. These Audit Reports contain several
paragraphs. since it is not possible for the Committee to go through every issue dealt
with the various Aduit Reports, it is necessary for the Committee to be selective in its
approach. Thus, at the beginning of the term  every year, the Public Accounts Committee
generally select for in-depth examination only a few relatively more important
paragraphs from the various Reports of Comptroller and Auditor General of India. As
regards a large number of audit paragraphs which are not  formally selected and
taken up for detailed examination by the Committee are dealt with  by means of a
procedure whereby the Ministries/Departments are required to furnish to the
Committee remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on all the audit paragraphs.
2. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delays and persisting failures on the part
of a large  number of Ministries in reporting to the Committees the corrective action
taken on audit paragraphs, the Committee in their 105th Report (10th Lok Sabha
1995-96) recommended that the Action Taken Notes  on all the paragraphs of the
Reports of C&AG of India should be furnished to the Committee through the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure-Monitoring Cell) within a period of 4 months
from the date of laying of Audit  Reports on the Table of the House Starting from
31st March, 1996 onwards. Since excessive delays were noticed in the receipt of
Action Taken Notes from the various Ministries/Departments over the year, which
had become a chronic feature the PAC (2008-09) took stock of the situation and
asked the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure - Monitoring Cell), to look
into the matter  and expedite submission  of the Action Taken Notes. As per the
information  furnished  by the Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure, Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes in respect of about 2500 paras were pending with the
various Ministries/Department as on 1st September, 2006. Taking  a serious view of
the inordinate delays in submission of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes by
various Ministries/Departments, the Public Accounts Committee (2008-09)
summoned the Secretary, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) for a
briefing on the matter on 15th September, 2008 wherein the Secretary (Expenditure)
was directed to take necessary action for furnishing all the pending Remedial/Corrective
Action Taken Notes to the Public Accounts Committee within a period of three months
i.e. by 14th December, 2008. Subsequently, the then Chairman, PAC (2008-09) also wrote
a letter to the Hon'ble Prime Minister seeking  his kind intervention in the matter so that
the Remedial/Corrective Action  Taken Notes were furnished expeditiously by all the
Ministries/Departments  concerned to the Public Accounts Committee, within the
stipulated time period. The Public Accounts Committee's (2008-09) review of the position
12

13
with regard to  submission of pending Action Taken Notes by various Ministries/
Departments at their sitting held on 19th January, 2009 had revealed that there was
no perceptible improvement in the furnishing of Action Taken Notes by the defaulting
Ministries/Departments. At the first sitting of the Public Accounts Committee  (2009-
10) held on 7th September, 2009 the matter regarding large pendency of Action
Taken Notes in various Ministries/Departments was again brought to the notice of
the Committee by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. Thereupon, the
Committee considering the gravity of the problem decided to select the subject for
detailed examination.
3. The Committee's examination of the pending position regarding submission
of Action Taken Notes by the various Ministries/Departments revealed several
deficiencies  in the monitoring mechanism both at the Ministry/Department level
as well as in the Department of Expenditure which is the nodal agency for monitoring
the Action Taken Notes. As per latest information furnished by the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expendeture—Monitoring Cell) as on 15th March, 2010,
the total number of Audit paras in respect of which Action Taken Notes  are pending
with various Ministries/Departments from the year 1997-98 to 2007-08 stood at
4934. Out of these 3646 paras related to Department of Revenue (3172 CBDT, 462
CBEC and 12 relating to Department of Revenue), followed by Ministry  of Railways
(553), Defence  (202). Telecommunication (90) and Health (49). However, as per
information furnished  by the Office of C&AG, Audit wing-wise, as of February,
2010, a total of 3450 Action Taken Notes are pending in various Ministreis/
Departments. Out of these 2208 pertain to Revenue wing comprising Central Board
of Direct Taxes (CBDT) and Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) alone,
followed by Railways wing (481),  Defene wing (229), Autonomous Bodies wing
(180), Scientific Departments wing (165), and Civil Ministry wing (142). Further
out of these 3450 pending paras, Action Taken Notes in respect of 1891 paras  have
not been received  in the Audit even for the first time. Though Action Taken Notes
in respect of 960 paras were received by the Audit, these were   returned back to the
respective Ministries/Department and their re-submission for further  vetting is
awaited. Action Taken Notes in respect of 402 paras pertaining to various  Ministries/
Departments are stated to be under vetting by audit. The Committee  are dismayed
at the large scale pendency of Action Taken Notes in various  Ministries/Departments
and also the long periods for which these are pending. The Non-Compliance by the
Ministries/Departments at the scale and magnitude establishes the indifference of the
Ministries/Departments to the observations/recommendations of the Committee. Such
indifference on the part  of Departmental Officers/Chief Accounting Officers of the
Ministries/Departments  undermines the supervisory role and authority of Parliament
and also  encourages  financial indiscipline and inefficiency among the rank and file of
the field offices in the Ministries/Departments. The Committee note that as per Rule
64 of General Financial Rules 2005, one of the primary responsibilities of the Secretary,
who is the Chief Accounting authority of the concerned  Ministry/Department is to
submit Action Taken Notes on  CAG's Reports within the prescribed period of four
months. The Committee therefore recommend that the Chief Accounting Authorities
should be made personally accountable in all cases of abnormal delays in taking remedial
actions and submitting Action Taken Notes to the Public Accounts Committee.

14
4. According to the Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure  the responsibility
to furnish Action Taken Notes is primarily that of respective Ministries/Departments.
One of the reasons attributed by the concerned  Ministries/Departments for the
delays in submission of Action Taken Notes is  excessive  time taken in data collection
by the  field offices. It is to be noted that the Committee find that the same reasons was
adduced by the Ministry as far back as 1995 at the time of the deliberation by the
Committee on the subject. Obviously, the administrative ministries/Departments
concerned have not taken  any concrete measures since then to streamline their
procedures so as to ensure  that field offices furnish data to them in a fixed time frame
in order to facilitate  timely submission of Action Taken Notes to the Public Accounts
Committee,  which is anything but regrettable. Another  reason cited by the  Ministries/
Departments for the delay in longer time taken by the Audit in the clearing/vetting
the Action Taken Notes. Though in certain cases there may be  some delay on the  part
of the Audit, it may not be correct to transfer responsibility to the Audit for delay
which are primarily on account of the indifference of the line Ministries/Departments.
Audit has also brought to the  notice of the Committee on several occasions the delays
on the part of large number of Ministries/Departments in submission of Action
Taken Notes. To obviate such delays which are avoidable, the Committee  desire that
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell), in
coordination with Audit and the concerned Ministries/Departments should find a
workable solution for expeditious submission of Action Taken Notes to the Committee.
The Committee be kept informed  of the initiatives taken in this regard.
5. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) that several measures have been taken by them during
the last one and half years to expedite submission of Action Taken Notes  pending with
the various Ministries/Departments. These include issue of reminders to various
Ministries/Departments at the level of Secretary Expenditure/CGA/Additional CGA;
one to one meeting taken by the Secretary (Expenditure) with the Financial Advisory
of the major defaulting Ministries/Departments; conducting of one day workshop in
Vigyan Bhavan on 27th November, 2008, to interact with representatives of all the
Ministries/Departments and Audit to facilitate interaction and reduce  the time in
finalization of Action Taken Notes. It was also stated that Hon'ble Finance  Minister
took a meeting on October 29, 2009, with Financial Advisors of various Ministries/
Departments emphasizing expeditious submission of Action Taken Notes to the
Committee. The Committee note that despite these measures taken  by the Monitoring
Cell, no perceptible change  has taken place in the settlement of  pending Action Taken
Reports. This is illustrated by the fact that in respect of  1891 audit paras, Action Taken
Notes were not furnished to the Audit by the concerned Ministries/Departments even
for the first time. Obviously, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure -
Monitoring Cell) have not taken by concrete steps or set up any mechanism to ensute
that the Action Taken Notes  are furnished to the Committee within the stipulated  time.
What is perturbing is the fact that delays in certain cases ranged from 4 to 10 years.
The Committee regret to note that this state of affairs have not improved even after the
presentation of the 9th Report of PAC (11th Lok Sabha) on the same subject way back
in 1997 and problem persists to date. The Committee express the hope that  the

15
Department of Expenditure would realize the seriousness of the problem and take all
possible steps to clear the pendency of Action Taken Notes  within the  stipulated  time
frame. The Committee are informed that a computerized monitoring system to monitor
processing of Action Taken Notes on Audit Paras is being developed by the Department
of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell). The Committee expect that computerized monitoring
system will assist in keeping track of the pendency of Action Taken Notes at various
stages and help in speeding up the submission of Action  Taken Notes and also
minimize/eliminate  discrepancies in the figures being maintained by Monitoring
Cell and C&AG's Office. The Committee would like to be apprised about the progress
made in this regard as also its efficacy within three months of the presentation of the
Report to Parliament.
6. The Committee note that there is a heavy pendency of Action Taken Notes  in
respect of Paras relating  to Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance in the
Revenue division viz.  Direct Taxes (CBDT) and Central Board of Excise and Customs
(CBEC), As on 15.09.2009, the total number  of Action Taken Notes pending with
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for the period 1996-97 to
2006-07 stood at 1811. Out  of these, 760 Paras pertained to the Customs division,
565 Paras to the Central Excise and 486 to the CBDT. However, as per the statement
furnished by the Audit as on February, 2010, a total of 2208 Action Taken Notes are
pending with the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance. Out  of these 1476
Action Taken Notes  were stated to be not received in the Audit Office even for the
first time. While 461 Action Taken Notes are awaiting re-submission by the
Department to the Audit after  their return by Audit, 271 Action Taken Notes are
under vetting by the Audit. According to the  Department of Revenue the reasons for
large scale pendency of Action Taken Notes in the three  revenue divisions are due
to numberous Audit Paras being sub-judice and that Action Taken  Notes in respect
of these paras can be submmtted  only after  the judicial process is over, which takes
time anywhere between 6 months to 4 years. However, a scrutiny of the statement
furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure - Monitoring
Cell) reveals that a substantial number of Action Taken Notes are pending for more
than 4 years  and  some  of them are as old as 10 years. Hence, the plea taken by the
Department of Revenue for the inordinate delays in submission/finalization of Action
Taken  Notes is not entirely accurate in a substantial number of cases. Obviously,
the  Chief Controlling Authority, Department of Revenue needs to pay serious
attention to this problem. The Committee would like to be apprised of the break-up
of all cases of pending Action Taken Notes indicating the number of Action  Taken
Notes that are pending before courts/tribunals in respect of each revenue  division
vis. Central Board for Direct  Taxes (CBDT) and Central Board for Excise and
Customs (CBEC). The Committee deisire that Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) in consultation with the Audit should find ways and means to address this
problem so as to ensure that the Action Taken Notes are furnished to the Committee
within a stipulated time sounding the importance of adhering to standards of
parliamentary accountability.
7. In a communication forwarded to the PAC Secretariat the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell) have brought to the notice of the

16
Committee that CBDTand Office of C & AG at the meetings held on 31.03.2009 and
07.09.2009 have mutually agreed not to further pursue Action Taken Notes in respect
of 1092 Paras in view of acceptance of the Audit observations by the Department of
Revenue and remedial action taken/initiated. These Action Taken Notes relate to 399
Paras contained in the C&AGs Report for the year 2007-08 and 693 Action Taken
Notes relating to various Paras contained in the C & AG Reports from 1999-2000 to
2006-07. Consequently, the Department of Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) has sought
the approval of the Public Accounts Committee for striking off these paras from the
consolidated list of pending Audit paras. The Committee concur with the decision
taken by the CBDT and the Audit in the matter and gave their approval for striking of
the aforesaid Paras from the list of outstanding Audit paras.
8. The Committee regret to note that the assurance given by the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) in the 105th Report of PAC (10th Lok Sabha)
that the matter regarding delays in submission of Action Taken Notes by various
Ministries/Departments would be placed before the Committee of Secretaries, had
not been compiled with by the Department of Expenditure—Monitoring Cell even
after a lapse of 13 years since the presentation of the Report. During the evidence
taken on 5th March, 2010, the Secretary (Expenditure) expressed ignorance on this
crucial matter. Subsequently, the Ministry, in their post evidence reply informed the
Committee that the matter has now been brought to the notice of the Cabinet Secretary
requesting that a meeting of the Committee of Secretaries may be held in April 2010.
The Committee desire that henceforth, the matter relating to delays in submission of
Action Taken Nots should be brought before the Committee of Secretaries periodically,
preferably at quarterly intervals so as to expedite the submission of Action Taken
Notes by all the defaulting Ministries/Departments.
9. The Committee note that there is variation in the figures furnished by the
Monitoring Cell, Department of Expenditure and the Office of C&AG relating to
pending Action Taken Notes in various Ministries/Departments. According to the
latest information furnished by the Monitoring Cell of the Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, as on 15th March, 2010 Action Taken Notes in
respect of 4934 paras, contained in the Audit Reports from 1997-98 to 2007-08 are
pending in various Ministries/Departments. However, this figure is at variance
with that furnished by Audit. According to the information furnished by the Audit.
Action Taken Notes in respect of 3450 Audit Paras are pending from different
Ministries/Departments  as on February, 2010. The Ministry have informed the
Committee that the conciliation is an on-going process between Ministries/
Departments and Audit and the problem is more acute in the Department of Revenue
viz. CBDT and CBEC. Further the reconciliation also needs to be done in respect of
Scientific Ministries where Audit has shown large number of old paras outstanding,
while the Ministries are showing them as cleared. The Committee trust that the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) will coordinate with the various
Ministries/Departments and the Audit so that the figures relating to pending Action
Taken Notes are reconciled,  and a precise figure is arrieved at. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard within three months
from the date of presentation of this Report.

17
10. The Committee are of the considered view that the Department of Expenditure—
Monitoring Cell should facilitate conducting Workshops with the participation of
concerned C & AG's Officials and the respective defaulting Ministries/Departments
with a view to expedite clearance of pending Action Taken Notes at regular intervals,
atleast once in 3 months. In their post evidence reply the Department of Expenditure—
Monitoring Cell have stated that they have advised the Secretaries of the Ministries/
Departments to establish Action Tken Notes Workshops, for enabling the finalization
of Action Taken Notes. The Committee welcome the step taken by the Department and
expect them to ensure setting up of  Action Taken Notes Workshops by all Ministries/
Departments within a definite time frame. The Committee would also like to be apprised
of the progress made in this regard within three months from the presentation of the
Report.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE—V OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ON "NON-COMPLIANCE
BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF REPLIES
TO THE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS OF C&AG OF INDIA HELD
ON 5TH MARCH, 2010
The Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 5th
March, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 17.00 hrs. in Committee Room No. '139', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharam — Deputy Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
 AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri R.G . Viswanathan — Pr. Director of Audit (SD)
2. Ms. Nameeta Prasad — Director (Report)
3. Shri Raja Lakshmi R — Director General Railways
4. Shri P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (Report Central)
5. Shri Subir Mallick — P r. Director (INDT)
6. Ms. Rebecca Mathai — Pr. Director (DT)
A. *** *** ***
B. REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF FINANCE (DEPARTMENT OF
EXPENDITURE
1. Smt. Sushma Nath — Secretary (Expenditure)
2. Shri C.R. Sunderamurti — Controller General of Accounts
3. Smt. Madhulika P. Sukul — Joint Secretay (Personnel)
4. Shri H. Pradeep Rao — JS & FA (Finance)
5. Shri Pradeep Kumar Berwah — Jt. CGA
6. Shri N.K. Bhagat — Under Secretary, Monitoring Cell
18
***Matter not related to this report.

19
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee,
(Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar) welcomed the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of
India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
"Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the
Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India''.
3. The convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened for
taking further oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests especially on those issues where select information were sought by the
Committee in the last sitting. The Convenor also informed the members that the Ministry
of Finance—Department of Expenditure has also been summoned today to take oral
evidence on the subject relating to "Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in
timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India''.
4. The Convenor informed the Members that the meeting will proceed with a
discussion on Audit Report No. 18 of  2006 relating to "Conservation and Protection of
Tigers in Tiger Reserves'' which will be followed by oral evidence of the
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance—Department of Expenditure.
5.*** *** *** ***
6. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance—Department of
Expenditure were called in and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-
Committee. The representatives them, briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives
taken by their Ministry with regard to timely submission of replies to the Audit
paragraphs of C&AG. They also, inter-alia, threw light on the current status of pending
paras in various Ministries. The representatives also explained on the various issues
and concerns raised by the Sub-Committee. In regard to certain queries, to which the
representatives of the Ministry could not provide ready information, the Sub-Committee
asked them to submit written replies relating thereto at the earliest with a view to timely
finalization of the Report on the Subject.
7. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Finance—Department of
Expenditure for appearing before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the information
that the Sub-Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.
***Matter not related to this report.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 26TH APRIL, 2010
The Committee sat on Monday, the 26th April, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1650 hrs.
in Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Satpal Maharaj
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Yashwant Sinha
9. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
11. Shri N.K. Singh
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG Central (RC)
2. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
3. Ms. Usha Sankar — Director General (Autonomous Bodies)
4. Shri Gautham Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence
Services)
5. Shri P.K. Kataria — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central (RC)
6. Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central
(Economic & Services Ministries)
20

21
7. Shri R.G . Viswanathan — Pr. Director of Audit, (Scientific
Departments)
8. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director of Audit (Air Force &
Navy)
9. Shri H.K. Dharmadhekari — Pr. Director (State Report Audit)
10. Shri Rajvir Singh — Accountant General (Audit) Delhi
11. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Pr. Director of Audit (Railways)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members of the  Committee and
the Audit Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then apprised the
Committee that out of the eleven Draft Reports stated for consideration, eight have
been finalized by Sub-Committee V. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration and adoption:
(i) Draft Report on ‘‘Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected Adudit Paragraph: ’’
(Ministry of Finance—Department of Expenditure);
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** *** ***
(vii) *** *** *** ***
(viii) *** *** *** ***
(ix) *** *** *** ***
( x ) *** *** *** ***
(xi) *** *** *** ***
3. After some deliberations,  the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports with some modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports
in light of the suggestions made by the Members and the consequential changes
arising out of the factual verification by the Audit and present the same to Parliament.
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active participation
in the Committee's deliberations. He also thanked the PAC Secretariat and the Audit
Officers for the assistance rendered to the Committee in the examination of the subject
and finalization of the Reports.
5. The Members of the Committee thanked the Chairman for his guidance in the
smooth conduct of the meetings of the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Matter not related to this report.

22
ANNEXURE-I
POSITION OF AUDIT PARAS PENDING WITH VARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS AS ON 15.09.2009
Sl. Ministry/DepartmentPending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending PendingTotal No.
No. Upto For For For For For For For For For For o f  Paras
1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999- 2000- 2001- 2002- 2003- 2004-2005- 2006-Pending
2000 2001 2002 200320042005 2006 2007
1                 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
1 . Agri. & Coop. -------- 0 0 1 1
2 .  Animal Husbandry -------- 0 0 1 1
3 . Agri. Res. & Education (ICAR) - - 0 0 0 - - 1 - 0 4 5
4. Atomic Energy ------- 1 1 1 4 7
5 . C.S.I.R. ------- 0 0 0 0 0
6. Commerce ------- 1 2 1 4 8
7 . Culture - 2 -13118 4 6 4 3 0
8. Defence 8 -1725 1 2 1 9 2 0 3 7 6 0 1 7 1
9 . Economic Affairs ------ 1 4 4 2 4 1 5
10. Education (Elementary) - - 1 - 1 - 1 1 - 1 3 8
11. Education (Sec. & Hr.) - - - -1305 2 7 5 2 3
12. Power - - - - 2 - - 2 1 1 - 6
13. Information Tech. -------- - 1 1 2
14. Environment & Forests 2 1 - 2 1 - - 3 5 3 2 19
15. External Affairs - - - 0 - 1 1 5 2 6 10 25
16. Family Welfare 0 0 1 2 - - 0 - 5 4 - 12
17. Health 1 -353448 1 1 8 3 5 0
18. Home Affairs ----- 1 0 0 0 2 1 0 1 3
19. Ocean Development (Earth Sciences) - - - - 0 - - - - 2 3 5
20.  Information &  Broad. 0 - -10311 5 4 2 1 7
21. Labour - - - - 0 - - - 2 1 - 3

23
22. Legal Affairs ----- 1 1 1 3 2 - 8
23. Mines - - - - 0 - - - 0 1 - 1
24. Expenditure - - 0----- - - 1 1
25. Posts ------ 1- 3 4 7 1 5
26. Justice 0----- 1 1 1 4 - 7
27. Public Enterprises 1------ 0 - - - 1
28. Railways 21786 1 9 2 4 2 6 4 1 7 7 1 5 1 3 6 2
29. Revenue 2 - 2 - - 1 1 0 1 1 1 9
30. Revenue (CBDT) 20 22 28 35 55 60 41 30 72 123 - 486
31. Revenue (C. Excise). 20 10 25 20 31 55 123 90 110 76 - 565
32. Revenue (Customs) 90 56 45 60 65 122 90 124 108 - - 760
33. Rural Development/DWS - - 0 - 1 0 - - - - 3 4
3 4 . S  S  I  &  A R I - - -11120 0 5 - 1 0
35. Industrial Policy & Promotion -------- 0 - 0 0
36. Shipping -------- 4 3 6 1 3
37. Telecommunications 3 0 5 1 10 - 9 1 17 2 3 51
38. Textiles - - - 1 - - 1 2 1 1 4 10
39. Tourism -------- 3 2 4 9
40. Tribal   Affairs - 1 -11101 1 2 -8
41. Urban Development 18 - - 1 - 0 0 2 1 1 5 28
42. Overseas Indian Affairs -------- - - 1 1
43. Women & Child Development - - 1 - - 1 1 - 2 5 - 10
44. Space -------- - 0 2 2
45. Water Resources ------ 2 1 - - 1 4
46. Food Processing Industries -------- - - 1 1
47. Science and Technology - - - - 0 0 - - 1 1 2 4
48. Social Justice  & Emp. 1 - - 0 - 1 1 0 - 3 1 7

24
49. Youth Affairs & Sports ------ 0 1 3 4 2 1 0
50. Food & P.D. -------- 1 - 1 2
51. Urban Emply. & PA -------- - 2 - 2
52. Heavy Industry - - - 0 - 0 - 1 1 2 - 4
53. Personnel & PG -------- 0 - - 0
54. Coal -------- 0 - - 0
55. Road Transport ------- 0 - 3 - 3
56. Civil Aviation -------- - 0 - 0
57. Minority Affairs -------- - 0 - 0
58. Statistics & PI 1 - - 1 - - - 0 1 - - 3
59. Company Affairs -------- 0 1 - 1
60. ISMH (AYUSH) ----- 0-- - - - 0
61. Fertilizers ------- 0 0 0 - 0
62. Non-Conventional E. Sources ------- 0 0 0 1 1
63. Chemicals & Petro-Chemicals -------- - - - 0
64. DSIR - - - - 0 - - 1 1 1 - 3
Total 170 93 119 147 183 280 324 341 440 413 3182827
 1                 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4

25
ANNEXURE-II
POSITION OF AUDIT PARAS PENDING WITH VARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS AS ON 15.3.2010
Sl. Ministry/DepartmentPending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending Pending PendingTotal No.
No. Upto For For For For For For For For For For   o f  Paras
1997-98 1998-99 1999- 2000- 2001- 2002- 2003- 2004-2005- 2006-2007- Pending
2000 2001 2002 200320042005 2006 2007 2008
1                 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
1 . Agri.& Coop. - - - - 0 0 0 2 2
2 . Animal Husbandry - - - - 0 0 0 - 0
3 . Agri. Res. & Education (ICAR) - 0 0 0 - - 1 - 0 4 1 6
4. Atomic Energy ----- 1 1 0 3 7 1 2
5 . C.S.I.R. ------ 0 0 0 5 4
6. Commerce ------ 1 2 2 3 1 9
7 . Culture 2 -131184 6 4 - 3 0
8. Defence 71715 1 1 1 9 1 8 2 7 4 5 6 1 2 0 2
9 . Economic Affairs - - 1 - - 1 2 1 1 3 2 11
10. School Education - 1 - 0 - 1 - - 1 2 2 7
11. Higher Education - - -13052 7 5 6 2 9
12. Power - - - 2 - - 2 0 1 - 5
13. Information Tech. -------- 1 1 1 3
14. Environment & Forests 3 - 2 1 - - 3 5 3 2 1 20
15. External Affairs - - 0 -1151 6 8 8 3 0
16. Family Welfare 0 1 0 - - 0 - 3 4 - 8
17. Health 13434378 5 3 8 4 9
18. Home Affairs - - - -1000 0 5 6 1 2
19. Ocean Development (Earth Science) - - - 0---- 2 3 1 6
20. Information & Broad. 0 -103114 2 2 3 1 7

26
21. Labour - - - 0 - - - 2 1 2 5 10
22. Legal Affairs - - - -1113 2 - -8
23. Mines - - - 0 - - - 0 1 - 1 2
24. Expenditure - 0------ - 1 - 1
25. Posts ----- 1- 2 3 5 8 1 9
26. Justice 0---- 1 1 1 4 - - 7
27. Public Enterprises 1----- 0- - - - 1
28. Railways 19 0 2 3 19 24 22 33 53 126 252 553
29. Revenue 3 3 - -1100 1 1 2 1 2
30. Revenue (CBDT) 42 28 35 55 329 233 274 272 451 570 8833172
31. Revenue (Customs/C.Excise) 20 5 8 6 19 32 24 45 68 92 143 462
3 2 . — - ------- - - --
33. Rural Development/DWS - 0 - 1 0 - - - - 3 - 4
34. Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises - - -11100 4 1 1 1 0
35. Industrial Policy & Promotion ------- 0 - 0 - 0
36. Shipping ------- 4 3 5 7 1 9
37. Telecommunications 3 5 1 10 - 9 1 17 2 41 1 90
38. Textiles - - 1 - - 1 0 0 0 4 - 6
39. Tourism ------- 3 2 3 - 8
40. Tribal Affairs 1 -111011 2 - 19
41. Urban Development 13 - 1 -0011 0 4 5 2 5
42. Overseas Indian Affairs -------- - 1 - 1
43. Women & Child Development - 1 - - 1 1 - 2 2 1 1 9
44. Space -------- 0 1 - 1
45. Water Resources ----- 1 0- - 1 - 2
46. Food Processing Industries -------- - 1 - 1
47. Science Technology - - - 0 0 - - 1 1 2 3 7
 1                 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4

27
48. Social Justice & Emp. 1 - 0 - 1 1 0 - 3 1 - 7
49. Youth Affairs & Sports ----- 0 0 2 1 1 1 5
50. Food & PD ------- 1 - 0 - 1
51. Urban Emply. & PA -------- 0 - - 0
52. Heavy Industry - - 0 - 0 - 1 1 1 - - 3
53. Personnel & PG ------- 0 - - 1 1
54. Coal ------- 0 - - 3 3
55. Road Transport ------ 0- 3 - - 3
56. Civil Aviation -------- 0 - - 0
57. Minority Affairs -------- 0 - - 0
58. Statistics & PI 1 - 1 - - - 0 0 - - 1 3
59. Corporate Affairs ------- 0 1 - - 1
60. AYUSH - - - - 0 - - - - - - 0
61. Fertilizers ------ 0 0 0 - - 0
62. New & Renewable Energy Sources ------ 0 0 0 1 - 1
63. Chemical & Petro-Chemicals -------- - - - 0
64. DSIR - - - 0 - - - 1 1 - 1 4
Total 116 48 67 88 391 326 382 441 678 9661435 4934

28
ANNEXURE-III
STATUS OF PENDING ACTION TAKEN NOTES AS ON FEBRUARY , 2010
Wing Y ear No. of No. ofNo. of No. of
ReportsParas/PA Paras/PA Paras/PA  Details of the Para/PA Reports on which ATNs are pending
pre- ReportsReports for Reports
sentedincludedwhich on which
to Parlia- in the A TNs have ATNs are No. of No. of A TNs No. of ATNs
mentAuditbeen Pending ATNsreceived but ATNs under
Reportsubmitted not returnedwhich vetting
to PAC receivedwithhave been in Audit
afterfromobservationsfinally
vetting by the and Audit isvetted by
AuditMinistryawaitingaudit but
even for their re- have not
the firstsubmissionbeen
time by thesubmitted
Ministry by the
Ministry
to PAC
Civil1995-96 to 2008-09 69 276 134 142 61 38 43 0
ABs 1999-2000 to 2008-09 23 299 119 180 58 88 31 3
Revenue1995-96 to 2007-2008 3512146 9938 2208 1476 461 0 271
Defence 1997-98 to 2008-09 40 713 484 229 62 70 60 37
Scientific 1995-96 to 2008-09 18 244 79 165 23 121 0 21
Postal 1998-99 to 2008-09 8 103 58 45 13 32 0 0
Railways 1995-96 to 2007-08 23 1489 1008 481 198 150 63 70
Total 216 15270 11820 3450 1891 960 197 402
GMGIPMRND—2537LS—19.08.2010.