SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)

(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)

SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT OF RATIONS
IN INDIANARMY

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-seventh Report (15th Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.3.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.3.2013

$

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)


No. 2001

Price: हैं 45.00

©2013 By Lok SaBHA SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.



COMPOSITION OF THE PuBLic ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)

INTRODUCTION

Crater |

Carter I

Crater IIT

Carrer IV

CHapTER V

CONTENTS

Report...

Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government

Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government .....

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration

Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies ......

APPENDICES

Minutes of the Thirty-seventh sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 19th March, 2013 ...

Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained their Forty-seventh Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) ..

PAGE
(iii)
W)

37


nc emmnygeceesneee vn snes trangia sigs १८2५-34. ०%०4॥५3७५७३++.५५०५०७५५०३-+७५०००-



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman

MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
३. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr.M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
+13, Shri Takam Sanjoy
14, Dr. Girija Vyas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. ShriJ.D. Seelam
21... ShriN.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh _ Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty _ Deputy Secretary

* Elected wef. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012

+ Elected w.e.f 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012. .

Gil)


er लिभि लि लिकिलभ कि यम की लि

sonmppecen-



INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Seventy-fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army’ relating to the Ministry of Defence.

2. The Forty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
28th December, 2011. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 17th October, 2012. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Seventy-fourth Report at their sitting held on
19th March, 2013. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-II.

New DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,

28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

“{y)


CHAPTER I
REPORT

This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Forty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Supply Chain Management of
Rations in Indian Army’ based on the C&AG Report No. 6 of 2010-11 relating to the
Ministry of Defence,

2. The Forty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 28th December, 2011. It contained Fifteen Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of
Defence in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly
categorized as follows:—

(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the
Government:

Paragraph Nos. 1-6, 8, 9, 11, 13 & 14.

Total: 11
Chapter-II

(ii) Observations/Recommendations, which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government :

—Nil—
Total: Nil
Chapter-III

(ii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which required
reiteration:

Paragraph Nos. 7, 10, 12 & 15

Total: 4
Chapter: IV

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:

—Nil—
Total: Nil
Chapter: V


2

3. The Forty-seventh Report on 'Supply Chain Management of Rations in Indian
Army' was based on the C&AG Report No. 6 of 2010-11. The detailed examination of
the subject by the Committee had revealed certain very disquieting aspects in the
functioning of Supply Chain Management which inter-alia included outdated
procurement procedures for provisioning of dry rations: highly non-competitive
procurement procedure for fresh rations; issue of rations to troops even after the
expiry of the original Estimated Storage of Life (ESL); poor satisfaction level of troops
regarding quality, quantity and taste of rations/food articles; insufficient number of
Defence Food Labs for checking the quality of rations etc. The Committee had
accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in the Forty-seventh Report.

4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence to each of the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-seventh
Report have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee
will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.

1. Assured, Uninterrupted and Quality Supply of Rations to the Army
Recommendation (Para No. 2)

5. In their Forty-seventh Report, the Committee had observed that different
quantities were worked out by different agencies using different figures of the feeding
strength of the troops and more importantly of the opening stock balance. Despite the
fact that the scale of rations were laid down and the data relating to opening stock
balance and feeding strength was verifiable, yet the critical data, on the basis of which
the provisioning was done, varied at different levels causing the risk of over and under
provisioning of rations. The Committee further observed that the estimated opening
stock as on Ist April of the ensuing year at the start of the provisioning period, as
adopted by the Ministry was different from that of the Army HQs. Thus the total
requirement was centrally determined more ona normative basis rather than on actual
data as neither DGST nor the Ministry had at their disposal the correct figures of
feeding strength and opening balance. The Ministry also claimed that the failure on
the part of the suppliers sometimes distorted the well laid down procedures for
provisioning/procurement. In order that such lapses or shortcomings did not recur,
the Committee recommended that the terms & conditions of APO contracts be suitably
revised and made unambiguously stringent to provide for cancellation of non
performing contracts by forfeiture of their Performance Bank Guarantee and conclusion
of fresh contracts so that there was no disruption in the supply chain and the quality
of rations. Taking note of the fact that Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) had become
outdated and needed to be revisited and updated in consonance with the constantly
changing requirements of the time and the recommendations of the High Level Committee
appointed by the Army in the wake of the C&AG report for the amendment of the SOP
on the provisioning, review and quality vetting for procurement of ration items, the
Committee desired to be apprised of the steps taken for implementation of the proposal
for assured, uninterrupted and quality supply of food articles to the Army within three
months from the date of presentation of their Forty-seventh Report.



3

6. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have stated as under:—

“(i) Stringent measures have been initiated to make ‘Army Purchase Organisation

()

(APO) procurement system vibrant, robust and responsive to overcome the
lacunae in the existing procedures as also to ensure a high degree of contract
compliance by suppliers, thereby reducing the gap between indented/
contracted and supplied quantities.

The terms and conditions of APO contract procedure are under final stages
of revision with following salient features:—

(a) The terms and condition have been aligned with provisions of Defence
Procurement Manual (DPM) 2009.

(b) It has been made more stringent including forfeiture of Performance
Bank Guarantee (PBG), Liquidated Damages (LD), General Damages
(GD) and appropriate Risk Purchase ( RP) clause in the event of failure
of central procurement.

(c) Expansion of the vendor base for sourcing each commodity and
opening of procurement to reputed and established players in addition
to the existing vendor base to bring in competitiveness, product
improvement and assured supply commitments.

(iii) The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has been revised and following

steps have been taken for realistic provisioning and implementation of the
proposal for assured, uninterrupted and quality supply of food articles to
the Army:—

(3) The approximate annual requirement which were earlier calculated on
5/6th of posted strength is now being calculated at 3/4th of the posted
strength to account for drawl of Ration Money Allowance (RMA) with
a provision of mid-course review to avoid over/under provisioning.

(b) The methods being adopted are as under:-—

(Annual Stock Return and Demand Statement (SRDS) for dry
supplies is prepared carefully with vetting of provisioning
quantities done in a meticulous manner at Supply & Transport
(ST) Directorate and staff level at Corps/Command HQ.

(ii) 85 an additional input on posted strength of troops the details of
actual strength posted with the units/formations is also drawn
from Management Information System Organisation (MISO), Army
Statistical Organisation, General Staff (GS) Branch Integrated HQ
of MoD (Army). The same data base of MISO is being utilised at
all levels. The holding strength of personnel and recruits under
training are also taken from MISO.

(ii) The data of holding strength of personnel and recruits and
anticipated wastage rate are obtained from Adjutant General (AG)
branch for accurate estimation of provisioning.


4

(०) A conscious effort is being made to bring convergence in provisioning
figures projected by Command Headquarters and Army Headquarters
so as to avoid any over/under provisioning.

(d) To put in place adequate checks and balances, the annual demands
projected by Army Headquarters are cross checked and verified with
data being maintained by the Internal Financial Advisor (IFA) of Army
and Ministry so as to ensure that the provisioning proposals are vetted
keeping in view the past consumption, anticipated future requirements
as worked out by the Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), duly factoring,
requirement of new raisings/disbandment and increase/decrease in
strength of troops.

(e) Vetted quantities are concurred by IFA (Army/Q) and Defence/Finance
as applicable and then approved by respective Competent Financial
Authority (CFA) in Army Headquarters and Ministry following due
procedures.

(f) Acentralised data of annual demands and consumption pattern is being
maintained in the ST Directorate. This data is being shared ona regular
basis with the MISO in Army Headquarters.

(g) To ensure that there is no excess/under provisioning of rations, a close
check is kept on various inputs in the form of fortnightly, monthly,
quarterly and annual reports & returns submitted by Command
Headquarters and lower formations to ST Directorate regularly
intimating details of stocks held, consumption pattern and anticipated
requirements for future. Based upon these reports, appraisal of stocks
held with the Commands depots is carried out in relation to consumption
pattern of various items.

(h) During the actual procurement/stocking period, if necessitated, the
contracted quantities are reviewed by ST Directorate and APO is
approached to re-schedule delivery periods of contracted items to match
the actual consumption requirement.

(i) Dry supplies being scaled items are strictly issued to troops as per their
entitlement and there is no loss to the State due to any minor over
provisioning. Thus the entire provisioning and procurement procedure
is being operated like a dynamic process and well oiled machinery.”

7. The Committee are pleased to note that pursuant to their Recommendations,
the Ministry have initiated a number of measures, as mentioned above, to make the
Army Purchase Organisation (APO) procurement system vibrant, robust and
responsive to overcome the lacunae in the existing procedures as also to ensure a
high degree of contract compliance by the suppliers, thereby reducing the gap between
the indented/contracted and supplied quantities. The Committee also observe that the
approximate annual requirement which was earlier calculated on 5/6th of the posted
strength is now being calculated at 3/4th of the posted strength to account for drawal



5

of Ration Money Allowance (RMA) with a provision of mid-course review to avoid
over/under provisioning. Impressing upon the Ministry to apprise them how the
changed criteria would ensure realistic estimation of the requirement, the Committee
desire that the various measures initiated to make the procurement system robust
and transparent should be continued unabated and further intensified so as to ensure
assured, uniterrupted and quality supply of the requisite food articles to the Army.
The Committee would also like the Ministry to timely intimate them the measures
initiated in accord with the Committee's recommendations and not inordinately
delay communicating them, as has happened in the instant case ie. delay of more than
seven months in apprising the steps taken for implementation of the proposals of the
high Level Committee (HLC).

IL Investigation into the Failure of a Large Number of Contract
Recommendation (Para No. 4)

8. In their earlier Report, the Committee were perturbed to note that out of 343
contracts that were signed for annual procurement of dry rations for the troops, during,
the period 2005-06 to 2007-08, 80 contracts i.e. 23 per cent had to be cancelled by the
APO due to the non-peformance of the contracts. The Committee had further noted
that many of the national Federations and PSUs, who were contracted, failed to suply
dal and tea and as a result local procurements/purchases for high value items had to be
resorted to by the Supply Depots to meet the deficit. Further, due to the higher prices
of local procurements vis-a-vis central procurements, Army incurred an excess
expenditure of Rs. 30.06 crore on account of local purchase of dal and tea to meet the
shortages caused due to failure of central supplies. The Ministry had attributed the
failure of contracts mainly to abnormal rise in prices of the items of rations and the
volatility of market forces. The plea advanced was unacceptable as the Committee
considered it obligatory on the part of the Ministry to have anticipated the price rise of
items, volatility in the market etc. and factored these aspects in the terms and conditions
of the agreement entered into with contractors/suppliers. The Committee had therefore,
demanded an investigation into the causes of failure of a large number of contracts
and the possibility of unholy collusion/nexus between the contractors and local traders
to create artificial shortages in the stocks of food articles and market volatility. The
Committee had also desired that the possibility of any nefarious deals between the
purchasing authorities and the suppliers/contractors be probed into. The Committee
had further recommended that the Ministry and the Army take urgent steps to
strengthen the procurement procedures to overcome wide variations between
provisioning and procurement are avoided. Further, the Ministry and APO should
consider introduction of risk purchase clauses in the Central Procurement contracts
which would cover the local purchases made by the supply Depots in case of non-
performance of the Central Contract. The Committee desired to be apprised of the
decisions taken on the recommendation of the Expert Committee and the impact of the
implementation of the recommendations on the assured and uninterrupted supply of
food articles to the Army, within three months from the date of presentation of their
Forty-seventh Report.



6

9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:—

(i) The direction of the Committee has been noted and the causes of failure of
a large number of contracts and the possibility of unholy Nexus between
Contractors and local vendors druing the period 2005-06 to 2007-08 will be
investigated.

(i) There are occasions where slippages occur due to rejection of stocks, non-
performance of vendors leading to cancellation of contracts.

(iii) However, having known these facts, adequate measures have been
instituted to cover such failures. APO procedures have been made more
stringent and punitive to deter such vendors which include forfeiture of
Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG), Liquidated Damages (LD), General
Damages (GD) and appropriate Risk Purchase (RP) clause. Cancelled
contracts are covered by placing RP contracts at the Risk and cost of
defaulted vendors.

(iv) Due to institution of such measures, the situation in case of Dal and Tea has
improved significantly.

(v) The situation is likely to improve even further due to opening up the
procurement system to the private vendors having bulk production capacity
along with the existing vendor base of PSUs/National Federations. A
systematic change will be brought about and it is envisaged to move towards
a further outsourcing based supply chain management, which will reduce
the supply time frame and the need for stocking of high levels of inventory.
Apilot project will be done by APO to test such an outsourced supply chain
for some commodities and tinned products.

(vi) Following actions have been initiated to overcome wide variations between
provisioning and procurement:—

(a) The approximate annual requirement which were earlier calculated on
5/6th of posted strength is now being calculated at 3/4th of the posted
strength with provisions of mid-course review.

(b) The methods being adopted are as under:—

+ Annual Stock Return and Demand Statement (SRDS) for dry
supplies is prepared in a deliberate manner with vetting of
provisioning quantities done in a meticulous manner at ST and
staff leve at Crops/Command HQ.

+ Asan additional input on posted strength of troops the details of
actual strength posted with the units/formations is also drawn
from MISO, Amy Statistical Organisation, GS Branch Integrated
HQ of MoD (Army). The same data base of MISO is being utilised
at all levels. The holding strength of personnel and recruits under

i, training are also taken from MISO under Army.



(९

(0

oF

(0)

1c

(hy

@

0)

7

* The data of holding strength of personnel and recruits and
anticipated wastage rate are obtained from AG's Branch for accurate
estimation of provisioning.

‘A conscious effort is being made to bring convergence in provisioning
figures projected by Command Headquarters and Army Headquarters
so as to avoid any over/under provisioning.

To put in place adequate checks and balances, the annual demands
projected by Army Headquarters are cross checked and verified with
data being maintaind by the IFA (Army/Q) and Ministry so as to ensure
that the provisioning proposals are vetted keeping in view the past
consumption, anticipated future requirements as worked out by the
Integrated HQ of MoD (Amy), duly factoring requirement of new
raisings/disbandment's and increase/decrease in strength of troops.

Vetted quantities are concurred by IFA (Army/Q) and Minsitry as
applicable and then approved by respective CFAs in Army Headquarters
and Ministry following due procedures.

A centralised data of annual demands and consumption pattern is being
maintained in the ST Directorate. This data is being shared ona regular
basis with the MISO in Army Headquarters.

To ensure that there is no excess/under provisioning of rations, a close
check is kept on various inputs in the form of fortnighty, monthly,
quarterly and annual reports & returns submitted by Command
Headquarters and lower formations to ST Directorate regularly
intimating details of stocks held, consumption pattern and anticipated
requirements for future. Based upon these reports, appraisal of stocks
held with the Commands depots is carried out in relation to consumption
pattern of various items.

During the actual procurement/stocking period, if necessitated, the
contracted quantities are reviewed by ST Directorate and APO is
approached to re-schedule delivery periods of contracted items to match
the actual consumption requirement.

Dry supplies being scaled items are strictly issued to troops as per their
entitlement and there is no losss to the state due to any minor over
provisioning. Thus the entire provisioning and procurement procedure
is being operated like a dynamic process and well-oiled machinery.

For the correct information on data, an automation programme of ST
Directorate is on-going under the aegis of Management Information
System for ASC (MISA). On completion of the project, the entire supply
depots would be connected with Corps/Command HQ for the data
sharing which would be further integrated with Integrated HQ of MoD
(Army). Even the CFLs and APO would be connected to the same
server. The same would enable real time data sharing from the lowest


8

level of execution unit to the apex body of estimation, provisioning and
procurement, thereby obviating any chances of data duplication or
any slippage to occur.

(vii) The risk purchase clause is already included in APO contracts. The details
of contracts of Dals cancelled during the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 due to
non-performance and Risk Purchase contracts concluded are as under:—

Year Nos of Risk Purchase Quantity materialized ex Risk
Contracts concluded Purchase contract (/n MT)

2010-11 07 Nos 3120

2011-12 11 Nos 3423

(viii) New measures have been instituted wherein quantities purchased locally
by Supply Depots against non-performance of contracts, are being intimated
to APO regularly for affecting the recoveries of excess expenditure incurred.
The Risk Purchase clauses in APO contracts have been recommended to be
strengthened.

(ix) The outcome of the decision taken on the recommendations of Expert
Committee in the case of Dals and Edible oils is as under:-—

(a) APO has been asked to expand the base for sourcing each commodity
and opening of procurement to reputed and established players in
addition to the existing vendor base to bring in competitiveness, product
improvement and assured supply commitments.

(b) A Proposal is under active consideration of Ministry for procurement
of 20% of total requirement of Dal and Edible oils for the financial year
2012-13 as a pilot project in selected stations to enlarge the vendor
base inacalibrated manner, through an advertised/open tender system
from reputed and genuine vendors who have bonafide and quantifiable
establishment, inventory and turnover, in addition to existing suppliers."

10. The Committee are pleased to note that in line with their recom! mendation
anumber of stringent and punitive measures like forfeiture of Performance Bank
Guarantee (PBG), imposition of Liquidated Damages (LD) and General Damages
and incorporation of appropriate Risk Purchase (RP) clause have been initiated by
the Ministry to deter the defaulting suppliers as a result of which reportedly, the
situation in the supply of Dal and Tea has improved significantly. However, the
Committee are deeply concerned to find that the specific causes of the failure ofa
large number of contract and the possibility of unholy nexus between the Contractors
and local vendors as well as between the purchasing authorities and Suppliers/
Contractors are yet to be investigated. In view of the fact that any unholy nexus
between the contractors and the local traders and between the Purchasing Officers
and Contractors/Suppliers create artificial shortages in the stocks of food articles
and market volatility besides causing excess expenditure on account of local
purchases, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to urgently carry out



9

investigation of the matter so as to take requisite corrective measures and ensure
the required and quality supply of ration to the Army within the given time. The
findings of the investigation and the action taken thereon by the MoD be intimated
to the PAC and C&AG in due course of time.

Ill. Induction of Latest Technology and Monitoring for Quality Control Mechanism
Recommendation (Para No. 7)

11. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that all the items of
Central procurement on tendering against contracted quantities were qualitatively
analysed for their conformity with Defence Food Specifications by the Food Inspection
Organisation in the DGST, comprising three Composite Food Laboratories (CFLs) and
four Food Inspection Units (FIUs) at various locations. The Committee were however,
surprised to note that when compared with large size and vast geographical outreach
of the Army, setting up of only three important labs was grossly inadequate, since all
other labs were minor in size and their quality of scientific instruments needed
upgradation/modernization. The Committee also found that in spite of tremendous
advancement made in the field of science and technology, Army were not using the
latest state-of-the-art technology for testing the food items/articles. Further, there was
no Scientific or Medical Advisor at the apex level in the Army for rendering advice for
procurement of quality rations as also for checking the quality of rations. The Committee.
had recommended that the Ministry should take immediate steps for appointment of
eminently qualified Scientist/Medical officer at the AHQ level, who could supervise/
monitor the quality control mechanism. Since the foodtechnology was advancing at a
rapid pace, the Committee emphasized that Army had to leverage on the emerging
technology for preservation of food and induct latest technology for testing in all the
Defence Labs.

12. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have stated as under:—

"This recommendation of the PAC is already addressed. A very senior medical
officer to the rank of Brigadier, who is a Preventive and Social Medicine (PSM)
specialist, is the Deputy Director General Supplies and Transport (Food
Inspection) DDGST (FI) is already posted in the ST Directorate at the Integrated
HQ of MoD (Army) level. He heads the quality control organization of the
Directorate and exercises his technical control over all the CFLs and FIUs."

13. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation for
appointment ofa Scientific/Medical Advisor at the apex level in the Army for rendering
advice for procurement of quality rations, the Ministry have already appointed a very
Senior Medical Officer of the rank of Brigadier in the ST Directorate at the integrated
HQ of the MoD (Army) level. However, the Committee are distressed to note the
Ministry's studied silence on their other concerns like inadequacy of the Composite
Food Laboratories (CFLs), upgradation/modernization of the scientific instruments
of the minor labs, non-leveraging on the emerging technology for preservation of
food and non-induction of the latest technology for testing in the Defence labs.
Deploring inaction on the part of the Ministry and reemphasizing the need for adequate
CFLs, induction of latest technology and modernization of the scientific instruments



10

for checking the quality of rations supplies to the Army, the Committee impress upon
the Ministry to initiate urgent measures in this regard and apprise them accordingly.

IV.__ Expansion of the Vendor Base and Review of the Ascs Procedure
Recommendation (Para No. 9)

14. In their forty-seventh Report, the Committee had noted that the Army Service
Corps (ASCs) procedure for conclusion of contracts for procurement of fresh rations
stipulated that contract authorities should make all out efforts to generate adequate
competition and analyse the rates from all the available sources. However, the Committee
found that the competition in tendering and contracts for fresh rations by the ASCs
was quite limited and the procurement process was non-competitive. The Committee
were dismayed to observe that approximately 64 per cent of the cases where open
tenders were invited from the registered firms during the period from 2005-06 to 2007-
08, only one or two vendors responded to the Notice Inviting Tender and purchased
the tender documents. In 36 per cent of the cases only one vendor made a bid for the
contract and in 46 per cent of cases only two vendors made the bids. Worse, 82 per
cent of the procurement was based on less than three quotations. Intriguingly, this
had happened despite the fact that the number of vendors registered annually in all the
three years from 2005-06 to 2007-08 ranged from 110 to 112. Apparently, there seemed
to be cartelization or collusive bidding amongst the suppliers creating serious doubts
about the quality of the rations supplied besides causing loss to the exchequer. Further,
despite a large number of registered vendors, purchase of tender documents by only
one or two vendors pointed strongly towards serious problem of cartelization in ASC
procurements as also registration of unsuitable vendors without proper verification of
their capacity. The Committee had also noted that in the Western Command during the
last three years, about Rs. 5 crore worth of meat and chicken was annually procured for
Delhi station on a single vendor basis despite the fact that 12 of the 99 vendors
registered for the supply of meat and chicken in the Western Command were Delhi
based. Similarly, in Chandimandir, only two vendors responded for meat and chicken
during tendering in 2005-06 and the contract was awarded to one particular vendor.
Surprisingly, in the next two years the same vendor responded and bagged the contracts
with annual orders value of Rs. 2.34 crore. This was despite the fact that eight of the 99
registered vendors were based at Chandimandir. The Committee, had, recommended
that all these cases should be investigated into and suitable action taken against
persons responsible for award of such contracts. The Committee had further
recommended that the Army Headquarters should take all possible measures to foster
competition and expand the vendor base for supply of quality fresh rations to the
troops. The Committee urged that ASCs prescribed procedure for conclusion of contract
should be reviewed, and if necessary amendments be carried out for fostering
competition by enlarging the vendor base and participation of reputed vendors in the
process of tendering. The Committee impressed upon the Ministry of Defence to set
clear targets for expansion of vendor base and closely monitor the progress in this
regard.



11

15, In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have submitted as under:—

"(i) QMG, Army HQ has been asked to investigate cases of sanction of meat
dressed contract for the period 2005-06 to 2007 and forward a comprehensive
report to the Ministry.

(1) There is no restriction in the number of participants for a particular contract.
Irrespective of the number of tenders, rate at which the contract is sanctioned
does not cross the RR (Reasonable Rates) as fixed by Panel of Officers prior
to opening of the tenders, thereby safeguarding the interest of the state.
The meat group contracts are operated in the premises of Army butchery
under strict supervision, hygienic & laid down specifications and quality
parameters are ensured. Therefore, number of tenderers has no bearing as
long as other above mentioned parameters are being fulfilled.
Nothwithstanding above, efforts are made to further increase the vendor
base. Recently Government sanction has been issued to include frozen
Meat/Broiler as substitute for Meat dressed. This will enable participation
of reputed vendors to supply Meat/Broiler frozen in future.

(iii) Directions have been passed to all Command HQ to take positive action for
expansion of vendor base.

(iv) All command ‘HQ's insert advertisements annually, during the month of
Nov./Dec., giving the types of contract concluded in that command and
inviting potential suppliers to register themselves as ASC contractors. The
advertisement is published in two national and two regional newspapers.

(v) All commands forward an annual report which includes details of all
registered vendors. The report is uploaded in Army Intranet and on Army
Web Page in Internet.

(vi) Acommittee has been formed under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary
to review DPM-2009. One of the issue is to review the procurement norms
related to Dry and Fresh supplies.

(vii) Based on the DPM-2009 revision a Pilot project in Southern Command on
Theatre Based Contract Procedure would be initiated.

(viii) Department is considering systemic change by moving towards a further
outsourcing based supply chain management and will also examine the
possibility to switch over to Ration Money Allowance (RMA) in major
stations so that the ASC supply chain can focus on providing healthy food
to the troops in remote and operational areas.”

16. Though the Ministry have initiated a number of measures for the expansion
of the vendor base and review of the procurement norms for supply of dry and fresh
food articles, the Committee would like to point out that determining the Reasonable
Rate (RR) much below the level of Average Local Market Rate (ALMR) renders it
grossly unrealistic and raises suspicion of possible nexus/collusion between the
contract awarding authorities and the tenderers besides compromising the quality of


12

fresh ration being supplied/to be supplied. Needless to mention, this aspect is to be
looked into with utmost care and prudence. The Committee also desire that vendors
should be registered for fresh rations not as a whole, but specific to items in which
they are genuinely interested and have been dealing with within their normal course
of profession, as envisaged in the ASC procedure. The Committee would further like
to be apprised of the findings of the investigation of the cases of sanction of meat
dressed contract for the period 2005-06 to 2006-2007 and the action taken by the
Ministry thereon, as and when the comprehensive report of the QMG, Army HQis
received in the Ministry.

Modifications of the Procurement Procedure
Recommendation (Para No. 10)

17. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that with a view to
determine the reasonable rates of various items of fresh rations, a Board of Officers
had been constituted by the Station Commander to determine the Average Local Market
Rates (ALMR). Before opening of tenders, Reasonable Rates (RR) were worked out by
a panel of officers for each item and station. However, there were various discrepancies
in calculating ALMR,RR and Accepted Rates (AR) and the accepted rates were far
below the ALMR in procurement of fresh rations. The Committee had further observed
unusual variations in the contracted rates in the same and adjacent locations and also
a wide variation of up to 186 per cent in procurement rates. For example in B.D. Bari of
Northern Command the ALMR of fresh vegetable was %1320/- per 100 kg, RR was
₹ 591/- per 100 kg and AR was % 610/- per 100 kg. The Committee found that no
rationale method had been designed as yet to determine the ALMR. the RR or the AR.
In yet another case. for the supply of meat on hoof in Chandimandir in 2006-07 the
ALMR was  40/- per kg and RR @ 24/- whereas the AR fixed was हैं 10/-, which was
ridiculously a low price. The Committee concluded that the calculation methodology
adopted by the Army for arriving at actual rates of fresh rations was quite unusual and
defies logic as the Committee came across several other examples where patently
absurd rates were accepted by the Army. Taking note of the Defence Ministry's
confession that the existing SOPs were ‘Faulty’ and in many cases ‘absurd’, the
Committee, had recommended that the procurement procedure be suitably modified
urgently and definitely within a fixed time-frame so that all the anomalies pointed out
and conceded by the Ministry were rectified.

18. In their Action Taken Note, that Ministry have stated as follows:—

"(i) Ascertaining rates of fresh items is peculiar and complex phenomenon. For
any fresh item, there would be a wide price range within which it would be
available, at a particular time. These rates are published in newspapers. The
rates achieved in contract in the previous years in a station and the rates
achieved in neighbouring stations also give a clearer picture of what can be
accepted as RR by Panel of Officers. Other factors like the quantum of
demand, the economies of scales achieved, transportation restrictions if
any, competition at the time of conclusion of contracts could also play a
major role in the rates finally achieved in a contract. A detailed instruction



13

for fixation of RR gives out the relevant factors to be considered. ALMR is
just one of the inputs out of total of 20 other inputs. Therefore comparing
the RR only with the ALMR could be misleading.

(ii) The entire procurement procedures for procurement of perishable items
have been reviewed and are in the process of revision.”

19. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry that
comparing Reasonable Rates (RR) only with the Average Local market Rates (ALMR)
could be misleading as ALMR is just one of the inputs out ofa total of 20 other inputs.
The Ministry have failed to furnish reasons as to why comparison of RR with ALMR
could be misleading. The Committee's primary concern is about the unusually low
rate arrived at by the Army Authorities in comparison to the market rate which is
fraught with several risks including supply of inferior quality of food articles.
Moreover, in view of the Ministry's own admission that the existing procurement
procedures are ‘faulty’ and in many cases ‘absurd’, in the considered view of the
Committee, the Government are duty bound to review and bring in suitable
improvements in the procurement procedure within a definite time line so as to
ensure supply of quality food items to the jawans.

VI. Independent survey for Determing the Satsfaction Level of the Troops
Recommendation (Para No. 12)

20. In their Forty-seventh Report, the Committee were concerned to note that the
internal study, carried out by the Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences
(DIPAS) from 2001 to 2005 to assess the nutritional status of the Services, had revealed
that satisfaction level of troops regarding quality, quantity and taste of rations in
general was very low and in particular with respect to the quality of meat and fresh
vegetables. Out of 224 feedback reports received from the Northern and Western
Commands, in 68 per cent cases the quality of rations was granded as SATISFACTORY
and below, in 31 per cent the grading was GOOD and in only one per cent the grading
was EXCELLENT. The Committee had further noted that in 14 out of the 50 selected
cases pertaining to Corps in Northern Command, the quality of rations supplied to
troops was POOR and sub-standard. Concurring with the findings of the DIPAS study,
the Ministry had assured the Committee that annual, and independent survey would
be conducted either by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) or DIPAS for
determining the satisfaction level of the troops. Since the satisfaction level of the
troops was of paramount importance and formed an important yardstick to assess the
efficiency of the supply Chain Management System, the Committee had recommended
that in addition to the internal data generated by Army's own feedback system on
quality of rations, an external validation by an independent agency/entity should also
be undertaken by the Army without compromising the security and other operational
aspects. Since AHQ had the primary responsibility to provide wholesome and nutritious
food to troops to meet their calorific and nutritious requirements so as to enhance their
performance in various terrains and climatic conditions, the Committee had reiterated
that under no circumstance sub-standard and inferior quality of rations shall be served
to the troops and the Defence Food Specifications of all the rations should be revised


14

and superior Specifications laid down to meet the nutritional, climatic and conditional
requirement of the troops. The Committee specifically desired that the food
specifications, of all the rations needed to be reviewed after every three years.

21. The Ministry, in their Action taken Notes, have stated as under:—

"(i) Ministry is considering to undertake independent survey by the Indian
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and DIPAS for determining the
satisfaction level of the troops and to suggest alteration in rations depending
upon nutritional requirement, development of food technology and
preference of troops. Ministry has asked ICMR whether they would like to
undertake study this year on satisfaction levels.

(ii), Defence Food Specifications are continuously reviewed and are revised
through a Technical Standardisation Committee (TSC) which meets
annually."

22. The Committee regret to note that an independent survey by the Indian
Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied
Sciences (DIPAS) for determining the satisfaction level of troops as well as to suggest
alteration in rations depending upon the nutritional requirement, development of
food technology and preference of troops is still under the consideration of the Ministry,
though assurance to that effect was given in 2011 when the subject was under
examination of the Committee. Deprecating such inordinate delay, the Committee
impress upon the Ministry to initiate urgent measures for undertaking the proposed
survey without any further delay to gauge the satisfaction level of the troops taking
into consideraion their calorific, nutritional and conditional requirements. The
Committee would also like to be assured in no uncertain terms that under no
circumstances sub-standard and inferior quality of rations shall be served to the
troops.

VII. Implementation of the Recommendations of the High level Committee (H LC)
Recommendation (Para No. 15)

23. In their earlier Report the Committee had noted that following the CRAG
Report on Performance Audit of Supply Chain Management of Rations in the Indian
Army, a High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of Quarter Master General
(QMG) was constituted by the Ministry of Defence to analyse the recommendations
of the C&AG review relevant policies/procedures for provisioning, procurement of
dry supplies and fresh rations and suggest necessary measures required to effect
desired improvement. Based on the recommendations of the High Level Committee,
the Army Headquarters forwarded 18 proposals to the Ministry of Defence for their
consideration. Out of these, 5 proposals were stated to have been approved by the
Ministry of Defence in principle and action was under way to implement the same. The
rest of the proposals were stated to be under consideration and were also proposed to
be taken up and time lines had been ascribed in consultation with the AHQ for finalizing
the action to be taken. The Committee desired to be apprised of the decisions taken on
the rest of the recommendations of the Expert Committee, the action taken to implement



15

them and the timelines prescribed. They also desired that the progress made in the
implementation of the recommendations of the High Level Committee and the adherence
to the timelines fixed be intimated to the Committee within three months of the
presentation of their Report. The Committee made it clear that they would not rest
content till they were satisfied that the gallant soldiers, the sons of the soil, guarding
the frontiers, and the bulwarks of the safety and security of the nation, were supplied
with wholesome and nutritious rations on regular basis and that they were being well
cared for and looked after deservedly commensurate with the daunting call of duty.

24. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Note, have deposed as under:—

"The status of progress on proposals of High Level Committee under the
Chairmanship of QMG is as under: —

SI. No Subject Present Status
1 2 3
1, Review of SOP on the The review of SOP on the provisioning,

N

we

provisioning, review and
quantity vetting for
procurement of ration items
through APO and other
central agencies.

Procurement of Milk td &
Cheese td by the APO from
member Co-op. Unions of
NCDFI through negotiated
contracts instead of open
tendering.

Review of provisioning ratio
of Fruit tinned: Fruit dried
from 75:25 to 60:40.

Procurement of improved
quality of Rice as per Def.
Food Specification No. 168.

Upgradation of appointment
of ADST in 20 x HQ. Sub-areas
presently tenanted by Lt. Col. to
the appt. of Col. ST to be tenanted
by a selection grade col.

review and quantity vetting for procurement
of ration items through APO and other central
agencies is done. The approximate annual
requirement which were earlier calculated on
of posted strength is now being calculated
5/6th at 3/4th of the posted strength with
provisions of mid-course review.

Action is completed.

AHQ's experience with NCDFI had been very
positive and the proposal would considerably
ease the supply situation while also continuing
the association with the co-operatives. The
matter has been agreed upon.

Action is completed.

The necessary sanction has been issued. The
provisioning has been started as per the new
promulgated ratio.

Action is completed.

The necessary sanction has been issued.

Action is completed.

Case is under active consideration of
Ministry.



2

3

Establishment of a Resource
Mapping and Market Research
Cell at each of the Six Comd. HQs.

Upgradation of four FIUs loc at
Bengdubi, Guwahati, Lucknow
and Chennai into CFLs and
raising of a CFL at 'N' Area
Chandigarh dedicated for 14
Corps.

Nomination of ASC officers on
professional courses.

Review of procedure of registration
and re-verification of vendors and
procedure for Formulation of RR.

Analysis of option of concluding
perishable items contracts of less
than one year based upon flush
season of seasonal varieties both
of vegetables and fruits fresh.

Review of existing instructions
on drawl/issue of veg. and fruit
fresh as per laid down variety
percentage schedule.

Conduct of DIPAS study every
two years to suggest alteration
in rations depending upon
development of food technology
and preference of troops.

A considered view has been taken to outsource
the methodology by AHQ in view of the
total ban on accretion.

Action is completed.

A proposal is under active consideration
for upgradation of some of the existing
FIUs into CFL and raising one new CFL
at Chandigarh.

‘In principle’ approval has been accorded for
ASC officers to attend professional courses
on regular basis.

Action is completed.

A Committee has been formed under the
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary to
review DPM-2009. One of the issue is to
review the procurement norms related to Dry
and Fresh supplies.

A committee has been formed under the
chairmanship of Additional Secretary to
review DPM-2009. One of the issue is to
review the procurement norms related to Dry
and Fresh supplies

A Committee has been formed under the
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary to
review DPM-2009. One of the issue is to
review the procurement norms related to Dry
and Fresh supplies.

Ministry is considering to undertake
independent survey by the Indian Council
of Medical Research (ICMR) and DIPAS for
determining the satisfaction level of the troops
and to suggest alteration in rations depending
upon nutritional requirement, development
of food technology and preference of troops.
Ministry has asked ICMR whether they
would like to undertake study this year on
satisfaction levels.



2

3

Authorization of in lieu items
in the existing ration scales
for Officers and JCOs/OR.

Modernisation of CFLs by
procurement of state of the
art testing equipment and its
budgetary support during life
cycle of the equipment.

Testing of food samples for

cross validation and carrying

out scientific interaction with
NABL (National Accreditation
Board for Testing and Calibration
Laboratories, Department of
Science and Technology, Govt. of
India) accredited Testing
Laboratories.

Integration of the food
inspection organization
(ST-7'8) of Dte. Gen. Supplies
and Transport, OMG's Branch,
Integrated HQ of MoD (Army)
with Food Safety & Standards
Authority of India (FSSAI) as
amember.

Revision of terms and
conditions of APO contracts
as per DPM- 2009.

Opening up procurement of
pulses, Edible oil and Animal
rations to reputed bulk producing
Companies.

The necessary sanction has been
issued.
Action is completed.

‘In Principle’ approval has been
accorded to procure and the expenditure
would be met through the internal
budget of Army.

Action is completed.

The case is under active consideration.

Case for granting permanent
membership is being taken up with
FSSAI.

A Committee has been formed under the
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary to
review DPM-2009. One of the issue is to
review the procurement norms related to Dry
and Fresh supplies.

The case is under active consideration
of Ministry of Defence."



18

25. The Committee deplore to observe that out of the 18 recommendations made
by the High Level Committee (HLC), only upon eight recommendations action has
been completed by the Ministry whereas the remaining ten recommendations are
under different stages of consideration, since 2011. Taking into consideration the
far reaching import of the recommendations made by the HLC for the supply of
quality Dry and Fresh rations to the troops, the Committee exhort the Ministry to

accord utmost urgency for the expeditious implementation of the remaining
recommendations of the HLC so that our brave soldiers guarding the safety and
security of the nation are supplied with wholesome, nutritious and quality rations
uninterruptedly.



CHAPTER-II

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE.
GOVERNMENT

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee note that the supply chain management of rations in Indian
Army involves provisioning, procurement, dispatch, receipts, storage accounting,
quality control and issue of various items of dry supplies and fresh rations to troops
located in various peace and field stations including high altitude areas and remote
locations. The Army Service Corps. (ASC). in conjunction with the Army Purchase
Organization (APO), undertakes the task of provisioning. procuring. supplying both
dry and fresh rations on a daily basis to about 14 lakh personnel of the Army. It is the
primary responsibility of the Corps to provide wholesome and nutritious food to
troops to meet their calorific and nutritious requirements so as to enhance their
performance in various terrains and climatic conditions. The examination of the
functioning of supply chain management of rations in the Indian Army by the Committee
has revealed several glaring deficiencies and inadequacies. These. amongst others,
include dated procurement procedures adopted by the ASC for provisioning of dry
rations, issual of rations to troops even after the expiry of original Estimated Storage
Life (ESL), highly non-competitive procurement procedure for fresh rations and
deviation from the laid down norms of tendering process etc. Rampant shortcomings
were noticed in contracts for procurement of rations leading to excess and short
procurements. non-adherence to tendering instructions, discrepancy in issue and
receipt of various items, etc. The Committee's examination of the subject has also
revealed certain disquieting aspects viz., poor satisfaction level of troops regarding
quality, quantity and taste of rations and insufficient number of Defence Food Labs for
checking the quality of rations. These deficiencies. 'argely accepted by the
representatives of the Ministry/Army, as correct during evidence, have been examined
in details in the succeeding paragraphs and suitable remedial and corrective measures
recommended.

[Para | of Part II of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army’]

Action Taken by the Government

These are observations, no comments required.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence.


20

Observations/Recommendations

Startingly, different quantities were worked out by different agencies using
different figures of the feeding strength of the troops and more importantly of the
opening stock balance. Despite the fact the scale of rations are laid down and the data
relating to opening stock balance and feeding strength is verifiable, yet the critical
data, on the basis of which the provisioning was done, varied at different levels
causing the risk of over and under provisioning. Further, the Committee note that the
estimated opening stock as on 01 April of the ensuing year at the start of the
provisioning period, as adopted by the Ministry was different from that of the Army
HQs. Thus the total requirement was centrally determined more on a normative basis
rather than on actual data as neither DGST nor the Ministry had at their disposal the
correct figures of feeding strength and opening balance. The Ministry also claimed
that the failure on the part of the suppliers sometimes distorts the well laid down
procedures for provisioning/procurement. In order that such lapses or shortcomings
do not recur, the Committee recommend that the terms & conditions of APO contracts
be suitably revised and made unambiguously stringent to provide for cancellation of
non-performing contracts by forfeiture of their Performance Bank Guarantee and
conclusion of fresh contracts so that there is no disruption in the supply chain and the
quality of rations. The Committee also notice that Standard Operating Procedure (SOP)
had become outdated and needed to be revisited and updated in consonance with the
constantly changing requirements of the time. The Committee note that the report of
the High Level Committee appointed by the Army in the wake of the C&AG report has
recommended various measures including amendment of the SOP on the provisioning,
review and quantity vetting for procurement of ration items. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the recommendations and the steps taken for implementation of the
proposal for assured, uninterrupted and quality supply of food articles to the Army
within three months from the date of presentation of this Report.

{Para 2 of Part 1 of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army” |

Action Taken by the Government

1. Stringent measures have been initiated to make Army Purchase
Organisations(APOs) procurement system vibrant, robust and responsive
to overcome the lacunae in the existing procedures as also to ensure a-high
degree of contract compliance by suppliers, thereby reducing the gap
between indented/contracted and supplied quantities.

nN

The terms and conditions of APO contract procedure are under final stages
of revision with following salient features: —

(a) The terms and conditions have been aligned with provisions of Defence
Procurement Manual (DPM) 2009.

(b) It has been made more stringent including forfeiture of Performance
Bank Guarantee (PBG), Liquidated Damages (LD), General Damages
(GD) and appropriate Risk Purchase (RP) clause in the event of failure
of central procurement.



(०

21
Expansion of the vendor base for sourcing each commodity and
opening of procurement to reputed and established players in addition
to the existing vendor base to bring in competitiveness, product
improvement and assured supply commitments.

3. The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has been revised and following
steps have been taken for realistic provisioning and implementation of the proposal
for assured, uninterrupted and quality supply of food articles to the Army:—

(a)

(b

(c)

(५.

(e)

The approximate annual requirement which were earlier calculated on
5/6th of posted strength is now being calculated at 3/4th of the posted
strength to account for drawal of Ration Money Allowance (RMA)
with a provision of mid-course review to avoid over/under provisioning.

The methods being adopted are as under:—

(i) Annual Stock Return and Demand Statement (SRDS) for dry
supplies is prepared carefully with vetting of provisioning quantites
done ina meticulous manner at Supply & Transport (ST) Directorate
and staff level at Corps/Command HQ.

(ii) As an additional input on posted strength of troops the details of
actual strength posted with the units/formations is also drawn
from Management Information System Organisation (MISO), Army
Statistical Organisation, General Staff(GS) Branch Integrated HQ
of MoD (Army). The same data base of MISO is being utilised at
all levels. The holding strength of personnel and recruits under
training are also taken from MISO.

(iii) The data of holding strength of personnel and recruits and
anticipated wastage rate are obtained from Adjutant General (AG)
branch for accurate estimation of provisioning.

A conscious effort is being made to bring convergence in provisioning
figures projected by Command Headquarters and Army Headquarters
so as to avoid any over/under provisioning.

To put in place adequate checks and balances, the annual demands
projected by Army Headquarters are cross checked and verified with
data being maintained by the Internal Financial Advisor (IFA) ofArmy
and Ministry so as to ensure that the provisioning proposals are vetted
keeping in view the past consumption, anticipated future requirements
as worked out by the Integrated HQ of MoD (Army), duly factoring
requirement of new raisings/disbandment's and increase/decrease in
strength of troops.

Vetted quantities are concurred by IFA (Army/Q) and Defence Finance
as applicable and then approved by respective Competent Financial
Authority (CFA) in Army Headquarters and Ministry following due
procedures.


2

(f) A centralised data of annual demands and consumption pattern is being
maintained in the ST Directorate. This data is being shared on a regular
basis with the MISO in Army Headquarters.

(g) To ensure that there is no excess/under provisioning of rations, 8
close check is kept on various inputs in the form of fortnightly. monthly.
quarterly and annual reports & returns submitted by Command
Headquarters and lower formations to ST Directorate regularly
intimating details of stocks held, consumption pattern and anticipated
requirements for future. Based upon these reports, appraisal of stocks
held with the Commands depots is carried out in relation to consumption
pattern of various items.

During the actual procurement/stocking period. if necessitated. the
contracted quantities are reviewed by ST Directorate and APO is
approached to re-schedule delivery periods of contracted items to match
the actual consumption requirement.

(h

(i) Dry supplies being scaled items are strictly issued to troops as per their
entitlement and there is no loss to the State due to any minor over
provisioning. Thus the entire provisioning and procurement procedure
is being operated like a dynamic process and well oiled machinery.

Sdi-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee regret to note that the procedure adopted for procurement of dry
rations was not aligned with provisioning estimation which led to excess procurement
of sugar, short procurement of dal and tea and failures of large contracts pertaining to
dal and tea. While there was 25 percent excess procurement of sugar over and above
the provisioned requirements dui 2006-2007. the excess expenditure incurred for
procurement of various dry rations was Rs. 9.99 crore in 2005-2006 and Rs. 18.42 crore
in 2006-07. The Committee are deeply dismayed to observe recurrent shortfalls in
procurement of tea and dal in all the three years 1.८. 2005-06 to 2007-08. The shortfall
were made good through local procurement at an avoidable extra expenditure of
Rs. 7.48 crore during 2005-06, Rs. 10.92 crore during 2006-07 and Rs. 11.66 crore during
2007-08. Asked to furnish justification, the Committee were informed by the Ministry
that the local purchase by Commands was resorted in order to mect immediate
requirements of troops since the risk purchase contracts were difficult to materialise in
the desired time frame due to legal obligations and procedures involved in invoking
contractual clauses. The Ministry however submitted that a new policy was
promulgated ॥:०/ January, 2009 which envisages procurement of tea through open
tendering system by APO with stringent quality contro! mechanism. While welcoming
the steps taken by the Ministry, the Committee would like to be apprised of the impact
of the new policy measures on the procurement of rations and avoidance of excess
purchases or short purchases. .

{Para 3 of Part 1] of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army}



N
Oo

Action Taken by the Government

1. The impact of the new policy measures on the procurement of rations is
explained as below:—

Sugar

2. Levy Sugar is procured by APO as released by Sugar Directorate. As and
when procurement of Sugar will be decontrolled by Ministry of Consumer
Affairs and Public Distribution, it would be procured by APO through limited

or open tender enquiry System. The same issue was explained to the PAC
and was agreed upon.

Tea
3. Procurement of Tea ४८. Jan., 2009 onwards has been done under the new
policy. The salient points of the new policy are as under:-——

(a) To broaden and develop a quality vendor base, large business houses
dealing in trade of Tea have been contracted

(b) The quality parameters of specification of Tea have been enhanced.

(०) A Tea Taster report has been added as an additional parameter of
declaring Tea ‘Fit’ for consumption, apart from the report of Composite
Food Laboratories(CFLs) on the confirmation of Tea quality on the
Defence Food Specification.

4, The revised policy is effectively responsive and procurement of Tea has
stabilised. The impact of new policy is as under:-—

(a) The adoption of the new tea policy has given a stable vendor base with
product specific specialisation.

(७) Since the time of promulgation of new policy, the availability of Tea has
increased and the requirement of the local purchase of Tea has
progressively been brought down over the years: The consequent
burden on the exchequer is also brought down.

The table as given below enumerates the same:—

Year Indented Materialised Shortfall Remarks
(MT) (MT) (MT)
2009-10 3639 2416 1223 The effect of policy took
some time to stabilize.
2010-11 2900 2900 Nil
2011-12 27758 2775.8 Nil

5. Consequent to the turbulence faced in the procurement and provisioning of
Dals during 2005-06 and 2006-07, a holistic approach was adopted to undertake


24
systemic changes. The salient features of the policy are as under:—

(a) Army Service Core (ASC) specifications of pulses were revised in 2008.

(b) Approximately 80000 MT pulses as per superior revised specifications have
been procured by APO are released to Commands.

(c) The indenting procedure of Dal was given a de novo look. The indenting
process of dal was aligned to the two major crop seasons of our country i.e.
Rabi and Kharif.

(d) The indents are being placed on APO in three phases to align with the crop

seasons.

(e) Stringent quality contro! measures are instituted at all levels to ensure only
good quality of Dal is issued to the troops.

6. The impact of the changed policy is enumerated as below:—

(a) A detinite improvement in the availability has taken place, thereby obviating
any need to resorting to local purchase.

The table given below enumerates the fact:—

Year Indented Materialised Shortfall Remarks
(MT) (MT) (MT)
2009-10 36000 25442 10558 The effect of policy took
some time to stabilize.
2010-11 34000 34000 Nil
2011-12 35755 34639 109 3.06% of the shortfall is

already made up in the
present provisioning year.

(b) The impact of the changed policy has been most pronounced in the area of
local purchase. No local purchase was resorted to for procurement of Dal in
2010-11. Inthe year 2011-12, the shortfall of the quantity materialized against
the indented quantity is less than 5%, which as per the contract rules can be
waived off being unviable for the vendors to tender and supply.

7. To improve the condition further, a more proactive step has been taken by
adopting the option of procurement of Dal from private vendors having bulk production
capacity along with the existing vendors from PSUs/State Federations/Kendriya
Bhandars. A Pilot Project for procurement of 20% of total requirement for 2012-13 from
such private vendors before adopting the same on regular basis from 2013-14 onwards
is under active consideration of Ministry.

Sd/-

Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence



25

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee are perturbed to note that out of 343 contracts that were signed
for annual procurement of dry rations for the troops, during the period 2005-06 to
2007-08, 80 contracts, i.e. 23 percent had to be cancelled by the APO due to the non-
performance of the contracts. The Committee note that many of the national Federation
and PSUs, who were contracted, failed to supply dal and tea and as a result local
procurements/purchases for high value items had to be resorted to by the Supply
Depots to meet the deficit. Further, the Committee observe that due to the higher prices
of local procurements vis-a-vis Central procurements, Army incurred an excess
expenditure of Rs. 30.06 crore on account of local purchase of dal and tea to meet the
shortages caused due to failure of Central supplies. The Ministry have attributed the
failure of contracts mainly to abnormal rise in prices of the items of rations and the
volatility of market forces. The plea advanced is unacceptable as the Committee consider
it obligatory on the part of the Ministry to have anticipated the price rise of items,
volatility in the market etc. and factor these aspects in the terms and conditions of the
agreement entered into with contractors/suppliers. The Committee, therefore, demand
that the causes of failure of a large number of contracts and the possibility of unholy
collusion/nexus between the contractors and local traders to create artificial shortages
in the stocks of food articles and market volatility may be investigated. The possibility
of any nefarious deals between the purchasing authorities and the supplier/contractors
also need to be probed into. The Committee recommend that the Ministry and the
Army take urgent steps to strengthen the procurement procedures to overcome wide
variations between provisioning and procurement are avoided. Further, the Ministry
and APO should consider introduction of risk purchase clauses in the Central
Procurement contracts which will cover the local purchases made by the Supply Depots
in case of non-performance of the Central Contract. The Committee were informed by
the Ministry that the High Level Expert Committee constituted by them have
recommended opening up procurement of pulses, edible oil and animal rations to
reputed bulk producing Companies. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
decisions taken on the recommendation of the Expert Committee and the impact of the
implementation of the recommendations on the assured and uninterrupted supply of
food articles to the Army, within three months from the date of presentation of this
Report.

[Para 4 of Part I] of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army’)

Action Taken by the Government

1. The direction of the Committee has been noted and the causes of failure of a
large number of contracts and the possibility of unholy Nexus between
Contractors and local vendors during the period 2005-06 to 2007-08 will be
investigated.

2. There are occasions where slippages occur due to rejection of stocks, non-
performance of vendors leading to cancellation of contracts.


26

3, However, having known these facts, adequate measures have been instituted
to cover such failures. APO procedures have been made more stringent and
punitive to deter such vendors which include forfeiture of Performance Bank
Guarantee (PBG), Liquidated Damages (LD), General Damages (GD) and
appropriate Risk Purchase (RP) clause. Cancelled contracts are covered by
placing RP contracts at the risk and cost of defaulted vendors.

4, Due to institution of such measures, the situation in case of Dal and Tea has
improved significantly.

5. The situation is likely to improve even further due to opening up the
procurement system to the private vendors having bulk production capacity
along with the existing vendor base of PSUs/National Federations. A
systematic change will be brought about and it is envisages to move towards
a further outsourcing based supply chain management, which will reduce the
supply time frame and the need for stocking of high levels of inventory. A
pilot project will be done by APO to test such an outsourced supply chain for
some commodities and tinned products.

6. Following actions have been initiated to overcome wide variations between
provisioning and procurement:—

(a) The approximate annual requirement which were earlier calculated on 5/6th
of posted strength is now being calculated at 3/4th of the posted strength
with provisions of mid-couse review.

(b) The methods being adopted are as under:—

(i) Annual Stock Return and Demand Statement (SRDS) for dry supplies
is prepared in a deliberate manner with vetting of provisioning quantities
done in a meticulous manner at ST and staff level at Corps/Command
HQ.

(ii) As an additional input on posted strength of troops the details of
actual strength posted with the units/formations is also drawn from
MISO, Army Statistical Organisation, GS Branch Integrated HQ of MoD
(Army). The same data base of MISO is being untilised at all levels. The
holding strength of personnel and recruits under training are also taken
from MISO under Army.

(iii) The data of holding strength of personnel and recruits and anticipated
wastage rate are obtained from AG's Branch for accurate estimation of
provisioning.

(c) A conscious effort is being made to bring convergence in provisioning
figures projected by Command Headquarters and Army Headquarters so as
to avoid any over/under provisioning,

(d) To putin place adequate checks and balances, the annual demands projected
by Army Headquarters are cross checked and verified with data being
maintained by the IFA (Army/Q) and Ministry so as to ensure that the



27

provisioning proposals are vetted keeping in view the past consumption,
anticipated future requirements as worked out by the Integrated HQ and
MoD (Army), duly factoring requirement of new raisings/disbandment's
and increase/decrease in strength of troops.

(e) Vetted quantities are concurred by IFA (Army/Q) and Ministry as applicable

0)

and then approved by respective CFAs in Army Headquarters and Ministry
following due procedures.

A centralised data of annual demands and consumption pattern is being
maintained in the ST Directorate. This data is being shared on a regular
basis with the MISO in Army Headquarters.

(g) To ensure that there is no excess/under provisioning of rations, a close

(ah

@

0)

7.

check is kept on various inputs in the form of fortnightly, monthly, quarterly
and annual reports & returns submitted by Command Headquarters and
lower formations to ST Directorate regularly initimating details of stocks
held, consumption pattern and anticipated requirements for future. Based
upon these reports, appraisal of stocks held with the Commands depots is
carried out in relation to consumption pattern of various items.

During the actual procurement/stocking period, if necessitated, the
contracted quantities are reviewed by ST Directorate and APO is approached
to re-schedule delivery periods of contracted items to match the actual
consumption requirement.

Dry supplies being scaled items are strictly issued to troops as per their
entitlement and there is no loss to the state due to any minor over
provisioning. Thus the entire provisioning and procurement procedure is
being operated like a dynamic process and well-oiled machinery.

For the correct information on data, an automation programme of ST
Directorate is on-going under the aegis of Management Information System
for ASC (MISA). On completion of the project, the entire supply depots
would be connected with Corps/Command HQ for the data sharing which
would be further integrated with Integrated HQ of MoD (Army). Even the
CFLs and APO would be connected to the same server. The same would
enable real time data sharing from the lowest level of execution unit to the
apex body of estimation, provisioning and procurement. Thereby obviating
any chances of data duplication or any slippage to occur.

The risk purchase clause is already included in APO contracts. The details of
contracts of Dals cancelled during the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 due to non-
performance and Risk Purchase Contracts concluded are as under:—

Year Nos. of Risk Purchase Quantity materialism ex FeTTo of Risk Purchase Quantity materialism ex Risk
Contracts concluded Purchase contracts (in MT)

2010-11 07 Nos. 3120

2011-12 11 Nos. 3423



28

8. New measures have been instituted wherein quantities purchased locally by
Supply Depots against non-performance of contracts, are being intimated to
APO regularly for affecting the recoveries of excess expenditure incurred. The
Risk Purchase clauses in APO contracts have been recommended to be
strengthened.

9. The outcome of the decision taken on the recommendations of Expert Committee
in the case of Dals and Edible oils is as under:—

(a) APO has been asked to expand the base for sourcing each commodity and
opening of procurement to reputed and established playdrs in addition to
the existing vendor base to bring in competitiveness, product improvement
and assured supply commitments.

(b) A Proposal is under active consideration of Ministry for procurement of
20% of total requirement of Dal and Edible oils for the financial year 2012-13
as a pilot project in selected stations to enlarge the vendor base in a calibrated
manner, through an advertised/open tender system from reputed and genuine
vendors who have bonafide and quantifiable establishment, inventory and
turnover, in addition to existing suppliers.

SdJ-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence
Observations/Recommendations

The Committee note that the present practice of procurement, transportation
and grinding of wheat into Atta at the floor Mills by the Army is very uneconomic and
the rates for grinding of Atta at various stations not only varied but were also
inconsistent. A comparative analysis by the Audit at one of the Supply Depots proved
that the cost of 50 Kg. bags of a branded Atta as given in the offer submitted by one
branded Atta company was much less than the cost of Atta produced through the
present practice of grinding of wheat into Atta by the Army. The average cost difference
between obtaining Atta from grinding of wheat and procuring branded Atta readily
available in the market was Rs. 2 per Kg. During the course of examination, the committee
were informed that the Government accorded sanction on 24 December 2009 to introduce
the revised procurement procedure of Wheat Atta Whole Meal for the Army and
branded Atta was now being procured directly at the maximum stations. The Committee
would like the Ministry to take measures to ensure that wholesome, unadulterated
whole Wheat Atta is procured at competitive prices for supply to the Army well in time.

[Para 5 of Part II of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army']

Action Taken by the Government

1. Aproposal was sanctioned on 24 Dec., 2009 for adoption of revised procedure for
procurement of Wheat Atta Whole Meal from reputed vendors having bonafide
and quantifiable establishment, inventory and turnover and has a market presence
with a product patented with Registrar of Trade Marks, Government of
India, through open tender by conclusion of contracts at Command level.



29

2. Since then, Pilot project (in 2010-11) and Experimental phase (in 201 1-12) have
been successfully undertaken for procurement of Wheat Atta Whole Meal.

3. Sanction for procurement of Wheat Atta Whole Meal from the reputed vendors
having bonafide and quantifiable establishment, inventory and turnover and
also having a market presence with a product patented with Registrar of
Trade Marks, Government of India, through open tender enquiry for the current
financial year is already granted.

4. Positive Outcomes.

(a) During the pilot project in 2010-11 a small quantity of 5809 MT of Wheat
Atta Whole Meal was purchased at selected major stations. During the
experimental phase in 201 1-12, the procurement was expanded to even remote
stations and a saving of approximately Rs. 27 crore has been achieved by
shifting the system of obtaining atta from grinding system to revised
procurement of Wheat Atta Whole Meal.

(b) The logistics and procedural aspects have become very convenient.

(c) The new Wheat Atta Whole Meal has generated a very positive feedback
from the troops and the consumer satisfaction has increased exponentially.

Sd./-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence

Observations/Recommendations

Taking note of the fact that wheat is the staple food and biggest item of
consumption by the defence personnel. As per the Director General of Supplies and
Transport (DGST) technical instructions, the Supply Depots are to ensure that food
items are issued in accordance with their Estimated Storage Lite (ESL). The instructions
also state that food stuffs must be consumed when they are sound, wholesome and fit
in all respects and not at the last stages of storage. The Committee were informed that
in special circumstances ESL may be extended by a maximum period of 3 months. ‘The
Committee deplore that out of the | 1346 samples of rations sent to the Composite Food
Laboratories (CFLs) for extension of ESL, extension was granted in respect of 11330
cases that means almost 100%. The Committee are startled to note that ESL. of a
number of dry rations was extended by Composite Food Laboratory, Jammu beyond
its permissible limit and in some cases even upto 28 months. Still worse. these dry
rations were consumed by the troops even 6 to 28 months after expiry of their normal
Estimated Storage Life (ESL). The Committee reject outrightly the contention of the
Ministry that the life of the rations was extended based on the scientific analysis and
meeting the requirements of the stipulated quality parameters. The Committee strongly
feel that there is a case for revisiting/amending the existing provision of the Army
Service Corps Technical Instructions under which the extension of ESL is carried out.
They also recommend that in future extension of ESL should be kept to the barest
minimum time after rigorous test having regard to the nature of the rations and the
climatic conditions. The reports of micro logical and chemcial analysis in respect of



30

each item by the Food Testing Labs should be communicated invariably to the
Operational level before extension of ESL but in no case, the Committee reiterate, the
consumption of such items be allowed beyond the extended life of 3 months.

[Para 6 of Part I] of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army']

Action Taken by the Government

1, The existing instructions on the extension of ESL are time tested and cater to
the operational requirement of snow bound areas with restricted approach
for to and from movement of rations and that too for limited period of the year.
The provision have been made after due consideration and studies of shelf
life of processed rations stored at high altitude with sub-zero temperature
and low humidity, supporting an extended shelf life of food stuffs. This is
further supported by carrying lab analysis before extending the shelf life of
the food stuff.

nN

. Strict instructions have been passed to all Commands (ST) and units of Food
Inspection Organisation (FIO) to adhere to Technical Instruction 1/05 with
regards to consumption of stocks held with Commands, and that all cases of
ESL extension are dealt with in accordance with provision contained in technical
instruction. It is further confirmed that now no routine extension of ESL is
granted. Only in exceptional cases, where the quality parameters are found to
be conforming to the Defence Food Specifications, owing to the prevailing
climatic conditions and the nature of ration, extension of an additional period
of 90 days is being grantéd. While extending ESL the following factors are
taken into account:—

(3) Items of Advance Winter Stocking (AWS) in the 14 & 15 Corps Zone are
stocked in sub-zero temperatures, wherein no deterioration of the quality
parameters takes place. The extreme cold climatic conditions existing in
High Altitude Areas (HAA) in 14 Corps Zone favours prolonged storage
and quality/food value is retained for longer periods.

(b) Some amount of stocking necessitated at remote locations at times lead to
under consumption if troops as planned are not deployed. Such unconsumed
stocks, owing to favourble storage conditions existing, do not deteriorate
and are considered fit for extension of ESL if found meeting all the quality
parameters. Accordingly, based on the quality checks, controlled extension
of ESL is accorded to ensure that troops get the desired wholesome nutrition
and no loss is caused to the State. The extension of ESL is carefully
monitored and granted judiciously.

3. The provisioning and distribution management has also been tailor made
such that the items are consumed within the ESL period and no need for
extension arises.

4, Department is considering systemic change by moving towards a further
outsourcing based supply chain management to obviate the necessity for
large inventories which leads to ESL extension in the first place.

५-3५). ७.०० ५...५-.. ५... ३... 34७०. ९७...



31

5. The reports of analysis in respect of each item by the Food Testing Labs are
being communicated invariably to the Operational level before extension of ESL.

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee were informed by the Ministry that the High Level Committee
constituted to examine C&AG recommendations has recommended upgradation of
four FIUs located at Bengdubi, Guwahati, Lucknow and Chennai into CFLs and raising
ofa CFL at 'N' Area Chandigarh dedicated for 14 Corps. Further, it was assured that two
CFLs, one at Chandigarh (new raising) and other at Guwahati (upgradation of existing
FIU) would be recommended for approval of Ministry of Finance. The Committee were
further informed by the Ministry that they have also agreed to the proposal of the
Expert Committee for modernization of all the CFLs with state-of-the-art automated
scientific testing equipment and also for the review of equipment holding to be carried
out every five years through a specialist board of officers. While expressing their
satisfaction over these initiatives of the Government, the Committee would like to be
apprised of the implementation of these measures within three months of the
presentation of this Report.

(Para 8 of Part I] of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army’]

Action Taken by the Government

1. A proposal is under active consideration for upgradation of some of the
existing FIUs into CFL and raising one new CFL at Chandigarh.

2. Inaddition, Ministry has approached Food Safety and Standards Authority of
India (75541) for membership to Food Inspection Organisation (FIO) of Army.
Case for permanent membership is being pursued with FSSAI.

Observations/Recommendations

The Army Service Corps (ASCs) procedure for conclusion of contracts for
procurement of fresh rations stipulates that contract concluding authorities should
make all out efforts to generate adequate competition and analyse the rates from all the
available sources. However, the Committee found that the competition in tendering
and contracts for fresh rations by the ASCs was quite limited and the procurement
process was non-competitive. The Committee are dismayed that approximately 64 per
cent of the cases where open tenders were invited from the registered firms during the
period 2005-06 to 2007-08, only one or two vendors responded to the Notice Inviting
Tender and purchased the tender documents. In 36 per cent of the cases only one
vendor made a bid for the contract and in 46 per cent of cases only two vendors made
thebids. Worse, 82 per cent of the procurement was based on less than three quotations.
Intriguingly, this had happened despite the fact that the number of vendors registered
annually in all the three years 2005-06 to 2007-08 ranged from 110 to 112. Apparently,
there seems to be cartelization or collusive bidding amongst the suppliers creating
serious doubts about the <uality of the rations supplied besides causing loss to the


32

Exchequer. Further, despite a large number of registered vendors, purchase of tender
documents by only one or two vendors points strongly towards serious problem of
cartelization in ASC procurements as also registration of unsuitable vendors without
proper verification of their capacity. The Committee also note that in the Western
Command during the last three years, about Rs. 5 crore worth of meat and chicken was
annually procured for Delhi station on a single vendor basis despite the fact that 12 of
the 99 vendors registered for the supply of meat and chicken in the Western Command
were Delhi based. Similarly, in Chandimandir, only two vendors responded for meat
and chicken during tendering in 2005-06 and the contract was awarded to one particular
vendor. Surprisingly, in the next two years the same vendor responded and bagged the
contracts with annual orders value of Rs. 2.34 crore. This was despite the fact that
eight of the 99 registered vendors were based at Chandimandir. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that all these cases should be investigated into and suitable action taken
against persons responsible for award of such contracts. The Committee further
recommend that the Army Headquarters shoutd take all possible measures to foster
competition and expand the vendor base for supply of quality fresh rations to the
troops. They also recommend that ASCs prescribed procedure for conclusion of
contracts should be reviewed, and if necessary amendments should be carried out for
fostering competition by enlarging the vendor base and participation of reputed vendors
in the process of tendering. Further. the Ministry of Defence should set clear targets
regarding expansion of vendor base and progress should be closely monitored. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of these initiatives.

[Para 9 of Part II of 47th Report of the Public Account Committee on 'Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army']

Action Taken by the Government

1. QMG, Army HQs has been asked to investigate cases of sanction of meat
dressed contract for the period 2005-06 to 2007 and forward a comprehensive
report to the Ministry.

1

There is no restriction in the number of participants for a particular contract.
Irrespective of the number of tenders, rate at which the contract is sanctioned
does not cross the RR (Reasonable Rates) as fixed by Panel of Officers prior to
opening of the tenders, thereby safeguarding the interest of the State. The
meat group contracts are operated in the premises of Army butchery under
strict supervision, hygienic and laid down specifications and quality parameters
are ensured. Therefore, number of tenders has no bearing as long as other
above mentioned parameters are being fulfilled. Notwithstanding above, efforts
are made to further increase the vendor base. Recently Government sanction
has been issued to include frozen Meat/Broiler as substitute for Meat dressed.
This will enable participation of reputed vendors to supply Meat’Broiler frozen
in future.

. Directions have been passed to all Command HQs to take positive action for
expansion of vendor base.

we



33

4, All commands HQ's insert advertisements annually, during the month of Nov/
Dec, giving the types of contract concluded in that command and inviting
potential suppliers to register themselves as ASC contractors. The
advertisement is published in two national and two regional newspapers.

5. All commands forward an annual report which included details of all registered
vendors. The report is uploaded in Army Intranet and on Army Web Page in
Internet.

6. ACommittee has been formed under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary
to review DPM-2009. One of the issue is to review the procurement norms
related to Dry and Fresh supplies.

7. Based on the DPM-2009 revision a pilot project in Southern Command on
Theatre based Contract Procedure would be initiated.

8. Department is considering systemic change by moving towards a further
outsourcing based supply chain management and will also examine the
possibility to switch over the Ration Money Allowance (RMA) in major stations
so that the ASC supply chain can focus on providing healthy food to the
troops in remote and operational areas.

Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee note that the proportion in which different varieties of vegetables
and fruits are to be issued to the consuming Units is prescribed for each month, for
each station by the respective Station Commanders depending upon the troop's
preference and local availability. The Committee decry that 74 percent of fresh vegetables
and fruits issued to the Units by the Supply Depots was not in accordance with the
prescribed norms. Worse, the items received by the consuming Units were different
from what was shown to have been issued to the unit by the supply Depot. Regrettably,
there was no system for reconciliation of supplies issued and received between the
Units and Depots. Table 10 shows the serious anomalies in receipt and supply of
vegetables found in test check at one station alone. The Committee note that in the
Northern Command rations worth Rs. 1.92 crore remained untraceable as on 31 March
2008. Of this, rations worth Rs. 1.20 crore was issued during 2005-06, the receipt of
which was yet to be traced. Obviously, deficiencies noticed in test check are reflective
of the deep rooted and widespread malpractices in the supply chain management of
ration Indian Army. While deploring the wide mismatch/malpractices in issue and
receipt of rations both in terms of items and quantities to the units which is
inconceivable without complicity or connivance on the part of officers concerned, the
Committee Recommend that the Ministry develop an efficient and effective computerized
system connecting all the Supply Depots and supply points to avoid discrepancies in
receipts by the units and supply by the Depots. Responsibility should also be fixed on



34

the concerned officers for the serious discrepancies and shortages noticed in the
issue and receipt of rations and stringent prophylactic and punitive measures taken to
ensure that such serious lapses do not recur.

[Para 11 of Part II of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
‘Supply Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army']

Action Taken by the Government

1, A comprehensive computerized automation project for management of rations
has been planned and is in advance stage of development.

2. The application under development will be hosted on a network wherein
maximum supply depots/supply points will be networked, online and connected.

3. Software module for issues, receipts, Inventory management, procurement
and other aspects of supply chain management have been developed and
being trial evaluated at Delhi and Ambala.

4. Apilot project is on to develop the application for monitoring and management
of rations. On successful completion of the pilot project, the application will be
rolled out to all units including supply depots/supply points handling rations.

5. The issue and receipt of rations is being closely monitored at all headquarters
and also by the audit authorities. Discrepancies if any are probed at respective
headquarters and necessary action initiated

6. The C&AG team had observed untraced vouchers of Nothern Command as
mentioned in Table 10 of its report. The concerted and relentless efforts have
been taken to trace the unlinked voucher and out of the rations worth Rs. 1.92
crores shown as untraceble in HQ Northern Comd., vouchers worth Rs. 1.58
Crores have been traced out, linked and resolved. All out efforts are on to trace
out the balance vouchers and settle them expeditiously. In case any voucher
is found untraceable, responsibility would be fixed in the concerned officer
and necessary measures would be taken to ensure that such serious lapses do
not recur.

Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee are concerned to note that the functioning of the Management
Information Systems Organization (MISO) in Army headquarters, charged with the
responsibility for collection, compilation and maintenance of data on various aspects
of the Armed Forces, including health of troops and consumption of rations, is far from
satisfactory and leaves much to be desired. Further, the Committee are surprised to
note that the Crops are not keeping any kind of robust data-base on the variations in
food intelligence. Mindful of the glaring deficiencies in issue, receipt and inventory
management of various items of rations, the Committee recommend that the Ministry



35

and the Army headquarters should urgently draw up a detailed action plan and
computerize the management of rations in the Army. They also recommend that the
potential of Informaiton Technology should be leveraged upon to create a network
system connecting all the supply depots and supply points. Issues, Receipts, Inventory
management, procurement and other aspects of supply chain management should be
brought under this system. Besides, contracted prices of various items of dry and
fresh rations should be invariably posted on the exclusive website of the Army and the
list of vendors be also put on the website of the ASCs. The Committee also recommend
that the Ministry should take measures to put up the data regarding price variation
rates at different locations on the website of the Army for the concurrent knowledge of
different command/authorities tasked with the responsibility of procurement and
provisioning for the troops. Last Purchase Price of procurement of fresh rations in
Army should also be displayed on the website of ASC, which could be accessed by
the Supply Depots.

[Para 13 of Part II of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
‘Supply Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army’']

Action Taken by the Government

1. A comprehensive computerized automation project for management of rations
has been planned and is in advance stage of development.

2. The application under development will be hosted on a network wherein max
suply depots/supply points will be networked, online and connected.

3. Software module for Issues, Receipts, Inventory management, procurement
and other aspects of supply chain management, have been developed and
being trial evaluated at Delhi and Ambala.

4. A pilot project is on to develop the application for monitoring and management
of rations. On successful completion of the pilot project, the application will be
rolled out to all units including supply depots/supply points handling rations.

5. The current contract rates, last purchase price of fresh items is being displayed
in the Army Web Page on the Internet which can be assessed by all persons on
internet and on Army Intranet.

Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee are dismayed to note that though the draft report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) on 'Supply Chain Management of
Rations in Indian Army' was made available to the Ministry for their comments as early
as January 2009, the Ministry didn't furnish their comments to the Audit till finalization
of their comments to the Audit till finalization of their Report as of March 2010. Had the
Ministry of Defence taken speedy action to attend the draft Audit objections, much of
the corrective action would have been taken in time. The Committee, therefore, reiterate


36
that prompt response must be given to the draft audit observations well in time and
complete Action Taken Notes furnished to the C&AG on all the Audit findings.

[Para 14 of Part I] of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
‘Supply Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army']

Action Taken by the Government
Ministry will ensure reply of all the findings of C&AG in time in future.

Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence



CHAPTER Hl

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
THEGOVERNMENT.

-Nil-

37


CHAPTER IV

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN REPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRED REITERATION

Observations/Recommedations

Admittedly, all the items of Central procurement on tendering against contracted
quantities are qualitatively analysed for their conformity with Defence Food
Specifications by the Food Inspection Organisation in the DGST, comprising three
Composite Food Laboratories (CFLs) and four Food Inspection Units (FLUs) at various
locations. The Committee are however, surprised to note that when compared with
large size and vast geographical outreach of the Army, setting up of only three important
labs is grossly inadequate. Since all other labs are minor in size and besides their
quality of scientific instruments need upgradation/modernization. The Committee also
find that in spite of tremendous advancement made in the field of science and
technology, Army are not using the latest state-of-the-art technology for testing the
food items/articles. Further, the Committee are surprised to find that there is no Scientific
or Medical Advisor at the apex level in the Army for rendering advice for procurement
of quality rations as also for checking the quality of rations. The Committee, therefore
recommend that Ministry should take immediate steps for appointment of eminently
qualified ‘Scientist/Medical officer at the AHQ level, who can supervise/monitor the
quality control mechanism. Since the food technology is advancing at a rapid pace, the
Committee hardly need to emphasize that Army have to leverage on the emerging
technology for preservation of food and induct latest technology for testing in all the
Defence Labs.

[Para 7 of Part |] of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on
‘Supply Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army'}

Action Taken by the Government

This recommendation of the PAC is already addressed. A very senior medical
officer to the rank of Brigadier, who is a Preventive and Social Medicine (PSM) specialist,
is the Deputy Director General Supplies and Transport (Food Inspection) DDGST (FI)
is already posted in the ST Directorate at the integrated HQ of MoD (Army) level. He
heads the quality control organization of the Directorate and exercises his technical
control over all the CFLs and FIUs.

Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence

38



39

Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 13 of Chapter-I
Observations/Recommendations

With a view to determine the reasonable rates of various items of fresh
rations, a Board of Officers has been constituted by the Station Commander to determine
the Average Local Market Rates (ALMR). Before opening of tenders, Reasonable
Rates (RR) are worked out by a panel of officers for each item and station. However, the
Committee note that various discrepancies in calculating ALMR, RR and Accepted
Rates (AR) and the accepted rates were far below the ALMR in procurement of fresh
rations. Further, the Committee observed unusual variations in the contracted rates in
the same and adjacent locations and also a wide variation of up to 186 per cent in
procurement rates. For example in B.D. Bari of Northern Command the ALMR of fresh
vegetable was Rs. 1320/- per 100 Kg,, RR was Rs. 591/- per 100 kg and AR was Rs. 610/-
Further, the Committee note that no rationale method has been designed as yet to
determine the ALMR, the RR or the AR. In yet another case, for the supply of meat on
hoof in Chandimandir in 2006-07 the ALMR was Rs. 40/- per Kg and RR Rs. 24/-
whereas the AR fixed was Rs. 10/-, which is ridiculously a low price, The Committee
observe that the calculation methodology adopted by the Army for arriving at actual
rates of fresh rations is quite unusual and defies logic. Besides, the Committee came
across several other examples where patently absurd rates were accepted by the Army.
The representative of Ministry of Defence admitted before the Committee that the
existing SOPs were ‘faulty’ and in many cases ‘absured'. The Committee, therefore
recommend that the procurement procedure be suitable modified urgently so that all
the anomalies pointed out and conceded by the Ministry are rectified, The revised
procedure may be finalized within the fixed time frame and the Committee informed.

[Para 10 of Part II of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on "Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army']}

Action Taken by the Government

1. Ascertaining rates of fresh items is peculiar and complex phenomenon. For
any fresh item, there would be a wide price range within which it would be
available, at a particular time. These rates are published in newspapers. The
rates achieved in contract in the previous years in a station and the rates
achieved in neighbouring stations also give a clearer picture of what can be
accepted as RR by Panel of Officers. Other factors like the quantum of demand,
the economies of scales achieved, transportation restrictions if any, com petition
at the time of conclusion of contracts could also play a major role in the rates
finally achieved in a contract. A detailed instruction for fixation of RR gives out
the relevant factors to be considered. ALMR is just one of the insputs out of a
total of 20 other inputs. Therefore comparing the RR only with the ALMR
could be misleading.

i

.. The entire procurement procedures for procurement of perishable items have
been reviewed and are in the process of revision.

Sd/-

Joint Secretary (01५)
Ministry of Defence


40

Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 19 of Chapter-I

Observations/Recommendations

The Committee are saddened to note that the internal study, carried out by
the Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences (DIPAS) from 2001 to 2005 to
assess the nutritional status of the Services, had revealed that satisfaction level of
troops regarding quality, quantity and taste of rations in general was very low and in
particular with respect to the quality of meat and fresh vegetables. Out of 224 feedback
reports received from the Northern and Western Commands, in 68 per cent cases the
quality of rations was graded as SATISFACTORY. and below, in 31 per cent the grading
was GOOD and in only one per cent the grading was EXCELLENT. The Committee
further note that in 14 out of the 50 selected cases pertaining to Corps in Northern
Command, the quality of rations supplied to troops was POOR and sub-standard.
Concurring with the findings of the DIPAS study, the Ministry assured the Committee
that annual, and independent survey would be conducted either by the Indian Council
of Medical Research (ICMR) or DIPAS for determining the satisfaction level of the
troops. Since the satisfaction level of the troops is of paramount importance and forms
and important yardstick to assess the efficiency of the supply Chain Management
System, the Committee recommend that in addition to the internal data generated by
Army's own feedback system on quality of rations, and external validation by and
independent agency/entity should also be undertaken by the Army without
compromising the security and other operational aspects. Since AHQ has the primary
responsibility to provide wholesome and nutritious food to troops to meet their calorific
and nutritious requirements so as to enhance their performance in various terrains and
climatic conditions, the Committee reiterate that under no circumstance sub-standard
and inferior quality of rations shall be served to the troops. The Committee also
recommend that the Defence Food Specifications of all the rations should be revised
and superior Specifications laid down to meet the nutritional, climatic and conditional
requirement of the troops. Further, the food specifications, of all the rations need to be
reviewed after every three years.

[Para 12 of Part II of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army’.]

Action Taken by the Government

1. Ministry is considering to undertake independent survey by the Indian Council
of Medical Research (ICMR) and DIPAS for determining the satisfaction level
of the troops and to suggest alteration in rations depending upon nutritional
requirement, development of food technology and preference of troops.
Ministry has asked ICMR whether they would like to undertake study this year
on satisfaction levels.

2. Defence Food Specifications are continuously reviewed and are revised through
a Technical Standardisation Committee (TSC) which meets annually.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence



41

Comments of the Committee
Please see paragraph No. 22 of Chapter - 1

Observation/Recommendation

The Committee note that following the C&AG Report on Performance Audit of
Supply Chain Management of Rations in the Indian Army, a High Level Committee
under the Chairmanship of Quarter Master General (QMG) was constituted by the
Ministry of Defence to analyse the recommendations of the C&AG review relevant
policies/procedures for provisioning, procurement of dry supplies and fresh rations
and suggest necessary measures required to effect desired improvement. Based on
the recommendations of the High Level Committee, the Army Head Quarters forwarded
18 proposals to the Ministry of Defence for their consideration. Out of these, 5 proposals
are stated to have been approved by the Ministry of Defence in principle and action is
under way to implement the same. The rest of the proposals are stated to be under
consideration and are also proposed to be taken up and time lines have been ascribed
in consultation with the AHQ for finalizing the action to be taken. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the decisions taken on the rest of the recommendations of
the Expert Committee, the action taken to implement them and the timelines prescribed.
They also desire that the progress made in the implementation of the recommendations
of the High Level Committee and the adherence to the timelines fixed may be intimated
to the Committee within three months of the presentation of their Report. Since, as the
undisputed adage goes, the Army marches on its belly, it is the foremost and inviolable
duty of the Government to guarantee that our jawans are well nourished and get
necessary wherewithal in order to maintain their high morale, to instill a sense of trust
and confidence in their families and to inspire and motivate our talented youths to join,
and be part of the honour and glory of, the armed forces. The Committee would not rest
content till they are satisfied that our gallant soldiers, the sons of the soil, guarding the
frontiers, and the bulwarks of the safety and security of the nation, are supplied with
wholesome and nutritious rations on regular basis and that they are being well cared
for and looked after deservedly commensurate with the daunting call of duty.

[Para 15 of Part Il of 47th Report of the Public Accounts Committee 'Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army’.]

Action Taken by the Government

1, The status of progress on proposals of High Level Committee under the
Chairmanship of QMG is as under:—

Sl.No. Subject Present Status

1 2 3
1.

The review of SOP on the provisions, review and
quantity vetting for procurement of ration items

quantity vetting for through APO and other central agencies is done.
procurement ofration items The approximate annual requirement which were
through APO and other earlier calculated on 5/6th of posted strength is
central agencies now being calculated at 3/4th of the posted

strength with provisions of mid-course review. _ Strength with provisions of mid-course review.



42

2 3

Action is completed.

Procurement of Milk td& | AHQ's experience with NCDFI had been very
Cheese td by the APO from _ positive and the proposal would considerably
member Co-op. Unions रण. ease the supply situation while also continuing
NCDFI through negotiated _ the association with the co-operatives.
contracts instead of open The matter has been agreed upon.

tendering. Action is completed.

Review of provisioning ratio The necessary Sanction has been issued. The
of Fruit tinned: Fruitdried provisioning has been started as per the new
from 75:25 to 60:40. promulgated ratio.

Action is completed.

Procurement of improved — The necessary Sanction has been issued.
quality of Rice as per Def__—_Action is completed.
Food Specification No. 168

Upgradation of appointment Case is under active consideration of Ministry.
of ADST in 20 x HQ Sub Areas

presently tenanted by Lt. Col.

to the appt. of Col ST to be

tenanted by a selection

grade Col.

Establishment of a Resource A considered view has been taken to outsource
Mapping and Market the methodology by AHQ in view of the total ban
Research Cell at each of the on accretion.

Six Comd. HQs. Action is completed.

Upgradation of four FIUs loc A proposal is under active consideration for
at Bengdubi, Guwahati, upgradation of some of the existing FIUs into
Lucknow and Chennai into CFI and raising one new CFL at Chandigarh.
CFLs and raising of a CFL at

'N' Area Chandigarh dedicated

for 14 Corps.
Nomination of ASC officers on 'In principle’ approval has been accorded for ASC
professional courses. officers to attend professional courses on regular
basis.
Action is completed.
Review of procedure of A committee has been formed under the

registeration and reverification chairmanship of Additional Secretary to review

of vendors and procedure © DPM-2009. One of the issue is to review the

for Formulation of RR. procurement norms related to Dry and Fresh
supplies.



43

1 2 3

10. Analysis of option of A committee has been formed under the
concluding perishable items chairmanship of Additional Secretary to review
contracts of less than one = DPM-2009. One of the issue is to review the
year based upon flush season procurement norms related to Dry and Fresh
of seasonal varieties both of supplies.
vegetables and fruits fresh.

Il. Review of existing A committee has been formed under the
instructions on drawal/issue of chairmanship of Additional Secretary to review
veg, and fruit fresh as per laid DPM-2009. One of the issue is to review the
down variety percentage procurement norms related to Dry and Fresh
schedule. supplies.

12. Conduct of DIPAS study Ministry is considering to undertake
every two years to suggest independent survey by the Indian Council of
alteration in rations Medical Research (ICMR) and DIPAS for
depending upon determining the satisfaction level of the
development of food troops and to suggest alternation in rations
technology and preference depending upon nutritional requirement,
of troops. development of food technology and

preference of troops. Ministry has asked ICMR
whether they would like to undertake study
this year on satisfaction levels.

13. Authorization of in lieu items The necessary Sanction has been issued.
in the existing ration scales Action is completed.
for Officers and JCOs/OR.

14. Modernisation of the CFLs ‘In Principle’ approval has been accorded to
by procurement of state of procure and the expenditure would be met
the art testing equipment _ through the internal budget of Army.
and its budgetary support —_ Action is completed.
during life cycle of the
equipment.

15. Testing of food samples for The case is under active consideration.

cross validation and carrying
out scientific integration with
NABL (National Accreditation
Board for Testing and
Calibration Laboratories,
Department of Science and
Technology, Govt. of India)
accredited Testing
Laboratories.



44

2 3

18.

Integration of the food Case for granting permanent membership is
inspection organization (ST- being taken up with FSSAI.

7/8) of Dte. Gen. Supplies and

Transport, QMG's Branch,

Integrated HQ of MoD (Army)

with Food Safety & Standards

Authority of India (FSSAI) as a

member.

Revision of terms and A committee has been formed under the

conditions of APO contracts chairmanship of Additional Secretary to review

as per DPM 2009. DPM-2009. One of the issue is to review the
procurement norms related to Dry and Fresh
supplies.

Opening up procurement of The case is under active consideration of Ministry
pulses, Edible oil and Animal of Defence.

rations to reputed bulk

producing Companies.

Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 25 of Chapter-I

Sd/-
Joint Secretary (O/N)
Ministry of Defence



CHAPTER V

OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED

INTERIM REPLIES
Nik
New DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

45


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD
ON 19TH MARCH, 2013

The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th March, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman

MEMBERS
Lok Sabha

. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul

. Shri Sandeep Dikshit

|. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik

. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee

'. Shri Ashok Tanwar

Dr. Girija Vyas

2 के ४ PF ७ ०

Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri Prakash Javadekar
11. Shri J.D. Seelam
12. ShriN.K. Singh

‘SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Devender Singh _ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar _ Director

3. ShriM.L.K. Raja _— Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty जप Deputy Secretary
5, Smt. A. Jyothirmayi - Deputy Secretary
6. ShriS.L. Singh _ Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja जप Under Secretary



47

Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India

1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
2. Shri Venkatesh Mohan — Director General of Audit

3. Ms. Anim Cherian — Principal Director (ST)

4, Shri Rajiv Kumar Pandey — Principal Director of Audit

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then,
apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider the following Draft Reports
of the Committee:

(yer wees weet,
(iy see wane
(iis fees weet
(ivyeee ers ene,

(v) Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Forty-seventh Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ‘Supply
Chain Management of Rations in Indian Army’;

(winner wane wens,
(vine wane wane
(viii sent wee,
(ieee sees on
(weer . tHe wee,

3. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/suggestions
of the Members.

4, After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, the, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to Parliament
on a convenient date.

5, The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Reports

The Committee, then, adjourned

ee Al—enee


APPENDIX II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THEACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS,
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i) _ Total No. of Observations/Recommendations: 15
(ii) | Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:

Total : 11

Para Nos. 1-6, 8,9, 11, 13 and 14 Percentage—73.34%

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire the
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:

Total : 0

-NIL- Percentage — 0%

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the

Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

Total : 04

Para Nos. 7, 10, 12 and 15 Percentage—26.66%

(Vv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:

Total : 0
NIL- Percentage—0%

GMGIPMRND—36LS—14.05.2013.
48

७ + 3 >पतमकमन्‍्भन्कमभभ-> joc