REVIEW OF GRANT NO.  1 —
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
AND COOPERATION
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
EIGHTY-SIXTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
86

EIGHTY-SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
REVIEW OF GRANT NO. 1 — DEPARTMENT
OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERA TION
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
(DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COOPERATION)
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.04.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.04.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIA T
NEW DELHI
April, 2013/Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka)

PAC No. 2013
Price:  ` 37.00
© 2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIA T
Published under Rule 382 of  the Rules of  Procedure and Conduct of  Business
in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government
of  India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13) . . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ( V)
CHAPTER I Report. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which  the  Committee do
not  desire  to  pursue  in  view  of  the replies received from
Government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
APPENDICES
I. Minutes   of   the   Twenty-ninth   Sitting of  Public  Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 29th April, 2013 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations  of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Fifty-sixth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-2013)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Y esso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija Vyas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
†Elected w.e.f . 6th December, 2012 vice  Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Eighty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Review of Grant No.
1—Department of Agriculture and Cooperation'.
2. The Fifty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
27th April, 2012. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received from the Ministry of Agriculture (Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation). The Public Accounts Committee considered and
adopted Eighty-sixth Report at their sitting held on 29th April, 2013. Minutes of
the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
29 April, 2013 Chairman,
9 V aisakha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Fifty-sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on ' Review of
Grant No. 1—Department of Agriculture and Cooperation' based on C&AG Report
No. 1 of 2010-11, Union Government, Accounts of the Union Government (Paras 8.1
to 8.12 of Chapter-VIII), relating to the Ministry of Agriculture.
2. The Fifty-sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha) was presented to the Lok Sabha/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 27th April, 2012. It contained 9 Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have
been received from the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation) and these have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8 and 9
Total: 07
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
—NIL—
Total: NIL
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph No. 2
Total: 01
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
Paragraph No. 5
Total: 01
Chapter V

2
3. During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee had found
various deficiencies and shortcomings in the utilization of Financial resources
allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture. Broadly, these deficiencies included
unrealistic and defective budgeting leading to entire and/or large portion of funds
being unspent; faulty and poor anticipation of disbursement leading to unnecessary
Supplementary Grants; improper and indiscriminate use of delegated powers of re-
appropriation of funds thereby diluting the process and procedure and parliamentary
authorization; non-receipt/delayed receipt of utilization certificates; incredible
internal audit mechanism etc. The Committee had accordingly given their
Observations/Recommendations in the Fifty-sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha).
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Agriculture (Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation) to each of the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Fifty-sixth Report have been reproduced in the
relevant chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have
dealt with the action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations.
5. The Committee desire that Government should furnish final/conclusive
action taken replies to the Recommendations for which interim replies have been
furnished.
A. Surrender of unspent provisions
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. In their 56th Report (15th Lok Sabha), the Committee had observed that the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation had surrendered a large part of its
unspent provisions under revenue and capital sections of Grant No. 1 on the last
day of all the financial years from 2007 to 2010. The Ministry attributed the delay to
the States who had informed the Department about the savings only in the latter
part of the financial year. Expressing their grave displeasure over the failure on the
part of the Department in surrendering unspent provisions as and when noticed
under revenue and capital sections, the Committee had recommended that the release
of funds and pace of expenditure be strictly monitored by the Department so as to
overcome the situation of underspending or delays in their surrender.
7. The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) in
its Action Taken Note has stated as under:—
“Although total savings required to be surrendered are known on the
basis of revised estimates approved by Ministry of Finance (intimation
regarding approved RE is generally received from Ministry of Finance in
December end/January); the particular schemes and object-heads under
which savings are available are known only towards the end of the financial
year. This is due to the fact that funds sought under Supplementary
Demands for Grants (last batch) becomes available after these are passed
by Parliament and re-appropriation proposals are approved by Ministry of

3
Finance which is generally in the fag end of the financial year. However,
taking note of the observations of Committee during oral evidence,
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation have surrendered funds in
two batches during 2011-12.
The Department regularly reviews release of funds in the weekly Senior
Officers Meeting and the pace of expenditure is kept within the Monthly
Expenditure Plan/Quarterly Expenditure Allocation as appended to Detailed
Demands for Grants”.
8. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry of Agriculture far from
satisfactory as no tangible measures have been instituted to obviate situations
leading to unspent provisions. Since the Ministry has apportioned the blame partly
to the Ministry of Finance regarding delayed release of Revised Estimates, the
Committee would like to have the considered views of the Ministry of Finance as
well in the matter so that effective measures are instituted and corrective measures
taken conjointly to ward off situations like underspending and delayed surrender
of unspent provisions. Further, the mechanism of quarterly review of release of
funds and their utilization may be done vigorously to achieve the intended objectives.
B. Unspent Provisions
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
9. In their 56th Report (15th Lok Sabha), the Committee had found that large
re-appropriation of funds were made by the Department between the different primary
units of appropriation. During the year 2009-10, a total of 135 re-appropriation order
were issued by the Department in the Grant No. 1—Department of Agriculture and
cooperating involving  ` 3, 875.48 crore thereby distorting the authorization approved
by the Parliament. Taking cognizance of large scale re-appropriation of funds, the
Committee had desired that re-appropriations be overcome with streamlining the
Budget allocation process and reorienting the priorities given to different schemes
based on ground realities and the ability of the implementing agencies to deliver
within the given timelines. The Committee had also opined that there is a need to
convince the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance with regard to the
number of Central Schemes and the flexibility needed by the Department for their
successful implementation.
10. The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
in its Action Taken Note to the above-said recommendation has stated
as under:—
“As observed by PAC, a total number of 135 re-appropriation for ` 3875.48
crore were issued during 2009-2010. Of this, 102 re-appropriation orders
for  ` 2018.27 crore were for transferring of funds from different sub-heads,
while 33 re-appropriation orders were for transferring of ` 1857.21 crore to
different sub-heads. This includes re-appropriation of funds for the benefit
of NES out of provision kept under Major Head 2552/4552 as per extant

4
instructions of Ministry of Finance. Re-appropriation of funds for
enhancement of provisions under some schemes had to be resorted to
during this period in order to meet requirement due to countrywide drought
viz. National Agriculture Insurance Scheme (` 716.90 crore), Reimbursement
of losses of NAFED ( ` 425 crore), Diesel Subsidy (` 22.94 crore), Integrated
Oilseeds, Oilpalm, Pulses and Maize Development (` 145.53 crore), etc.
It is informed that weekly monitoring of crop condition, reservoir position,
weather, supply of inputs, pests/diseases and related aspects is done by
Crop & Weather Watch Group in the Department of Agriculture &
Cooperation. National Crop Forecasting Centre (NCFC) of the Department
is also involved in crop forecasting through assimilation of the information
generated by different organizations such as IMD, Medium Range Weather
Forecasting of Department of Science and Technology, Department of
Space (DOS), Central Statistical Organization (CSO), Indian Agriculture
Statistics Research Institute (IASRI), Field Operations Division of the
National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) and the State Agriculture
Statistics Authorities (SASAs), State Agriculture Departments etc.
Forecasting of Agriculture outputs through Satellite, Agro Meterology
and Land based observations (FASAL) is also funded by Ministry of
Agriculture & Cooperation and executed by DOS.
Regarding number of schemes, it may be stated that the Department is
already in the process of restructuring the various plan schemes to be
implemented during 12th Five Year Plan in consultation with Planning
Commission and other stakeholders.”
11. The Committee note that the reply of the Ministry merely explains the
circumstances leading to reappropriation. The Committee expect a firm assurance
that there would be no injudicious reappropriation in future and that where the
situation so warrants, they would follow the prescribed procedure and seek prior
approval of competent authority for reappropriations. Further, the Committee find
that pursuant to their recommendation, the Department has initiated the process
of restructuring the various plan schemes to be implemented during 12th Five
Year Plan in consultation with Planning Commission and other stakeholders. The
Committee urge the Government to expedite all the activities for restructuring of
various plan schemes and apprise them of the progress at the earliest.
C. Unspent Provisions
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
12. In their Fifty-sixth Report, the Committee had noted that Department of
Agriculture could not spend funds to the tune  `1313.80 crore under various sub-
heads of Grant No. 1—Agriculture, during the years 2007—10. The Committee had
also found that the Ministry had shifted the responsibility on the beneficiaries for
these unspent provisions and absolved itself of the responsibility of monitoring

5
and overseeing the implementation vis-a-vis utilization of earmarked funds. The
Committee had, therefore, desired that the Ministry remove all infirmities and
bottlenecks that slowed the pace of expenditure so that funds approved by Parliament
are spent on the approved schemes and within the given financial year.
13. The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
in its Action Taken Note has stated as under:—
“Keeping note of the observations of PAC, this Department has initiated
the following steps in addition to already available monitoring mechanisms
in the Department in the following schemes:—
Horticulture
1. The frequency of meeting of Empowered Committee of National
Horticulture Mission has been increased to clear project based
proposals. Besides, the State Horticulture Missions are being
impressed upon to pre-position inputs in advance for season based
activities. They have also been advised to get State share released
during the first quarter of the financial year.
2. State have been sensitized to submit proposals for release, provisional
Utilisation Certificates for the previous year and Audited Utilisation
Certificates for the year previous to previous year well in time.
3. Steps have been taken to delegate more powers at the State level to
approve projects based activities so that expenditure on such activities
could be accelerated.
4. National Horticulture Mission Scheme was revised w.e.f. 2010-11
wherein pattern of assistance was revised and the requirement of credit
linkage was removed from some of the Post Harvest Management
components.
Crops (National Food Security Mission)
NFSM Division has been in constant dialogue with the States and based
on the feedback from the States various modifications in the guidelines of
the scale have been made to simplify the procedures by removing
bottlenecks in implementation.
The physical and financial expenditure incurred by the States is captured
regularly through MIS and monthly progress reports submitted by the
States. Implementation at ground level is monitored through field visits of
Project Management Teams, National Level Monitoring Teams (NALMOT)
and officers of Crop Development Directorates of Department of Agirculture
and Cooperation. The apex Committee of NFSM, General Council
(NFSMGC) under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble AM and Executive

6
Committee (NFSMEC) under the Chairmanship of Secretary (A&C) also
meet at regular intervals to monitor the progress of the program. Third
party mid-term evaluation of the programme has also been carried out
recently.
Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA)
In the year 2008-09, Macro Management of Agriculture Scheme was revised
to improve its efficacy in supplementing/complementing the efforts of the
States towards enhancement of agricultural production and productivity.
From the table below it may be seen that the utilization of funds under this
scheme during 2007-08 to 2009-10 is above 94% w.r.t. Re:—
(` in crore)
Year Budget Revised Release % age % age
Estimates Estimates w.r .t. BE w.r.t. RE
2007-08 1100.00 1047.55 1001.07 91.00 95.56
2008-09 950.00 981.00 922.69 97.13 94.06
2009-10 950.00 930.00 921.49 96.99 99.08
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Y ojana (RKVY)
RKVY has put into place a web-based monitoring mechanism in which the
States are required to enter the project details of all the approved projects
in the RKVY Databased & Management Information System (RDMIS) from
time to time."
14. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation, the
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation) has initiated
several measures to streamline their budget estimation process such as increasing
the frequency of meetings of the Empowered Committee of National Horticulture
Mission to clear project based proposals, releasing of State share during the first
quarter of the Financial Year, sensitizing the States to submit proposal of release
of provisional Utilization Certificates well in time, delegation of more power to
States to approve project based activities so as to accelerate the expenditure, etc.
The Committee desire that the measures so initiated be constantly reviewed in
order to ensure that the under/non-utilisation of funds particularly under the
capital-heads of the Grant does not recur. The Committee also urge the Ministry
to ensure receipt of the monthly progress statements of expenditure from the
States which would facilitate realistic Budget Estimation and effective monitoring.
D. Outstanding Utilisation Certificates
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
15. In the Fifty-sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha), the Committee had expressed
serious concern over the outstanding 373 Utilisation Certificates (UCs) involving

7
an amount of  ` 1757.70 crore. The Committee had observed that this was an
indication of the Department's failure to devise any mechanism to tackle the
phenomenon of non-submission of UCs by the organization that were receiving
grants. The Committee had also noted that Department's procedure that was in
vogue about releasing the second instalment of funds only on receipt of
provisional UCs was not being strictly followed. Turning down the Ministry's
request to do away with the requirement of submission of UCs on the ground that
it would lead to financial indiscipline, the Committee had underlined the need for
simplification of procedure, strict adherence to the prescribed financial procedure
and greater reliance on e-governance so as to bring transparency and efficiency.
In respect of the problem faced by the Ministry in obtaining audited UCs from
agencies which had taken one time grant-in-aid, the Committee had recommended
that all these cases be enquired into to ascertain whether there was any
misappropriation.
16. In its Action Taken Note the Ministry of Agriculture (Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation) has stated as under:—
“The following steps have been taken for liquidation of outstanding
Utilisation Certificates:—
1. PAOs have been directed not to make any payment for grants where
UCs are pending.
2. Special Audit Team has been created in Pr. Accounts Office to
physically monitor the target and outcome of the grants utilized and
the settlement of the UCs by the grantee institution by visiting the
States where schemes are being implemented. The audit of UCs is
alredy under process.
3. The special audit of UCs for the States of Haryana, Bihar, Delhi,
Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra has already been taken up.
4. All States have been provided with detailed references in respect of
the UCs pending with them as per CCA's record. Similarly all Programme
Divisions have been provided State-wise UC pending details for a
reconciliation drive. This is expected to bring down the pending figure
substantially. This exercise is proposed to be repeated every six
months.”
17. The Committee are pleased to note that the Department has initiated several
measures for liquidation of outstanding Utilization Certificates (UCs) and that the
special Audit of UCs for the States of Haryana, Bihar, Delhi,  Andhra Pradesh and
Maharashtra has already been taken up. However, the Ministry's reply is silent
about the outcome of these Audits. The Committee would like to be specifically
apprised of the findings of the Special Audit of these States, observations made by
them and Action Taken thereon by the State Governments/Ministry. They would
also like to be informed about the Audit of the remaining States and the proposed

8
time by which the same would be completed. Regarding the direction of the Ministry
to Pr. Account Offices (PAOs) not to make any payment for Grants where UCs are
pending, the Committee call upon the Ministry to ensure that these directions are
scrupulously followed by all the PAOs. Further, the Committee would like to be
apprised about the reconciliation drive undertaken by the Ministry and its
effectiveness within three months of the presentation of this report.
E. Field Visits
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
18. Deploring the oversight mechanism prevalent in the Ministry to ensure
accountability with regard to financial management and appropriate use of Public
funds, the Committee had desired that the progress of expenditure be reviewed
more meticulously whereby the scope for defective internal budgeting is eliminated
or drastically reduced. Regarding progress of implementation of schemes, the
Committee had asked the Ministry to instruct 'inspecting teams to visit the farmers'
field across the country in different climatic zones and submit their comprehensive
findings to the Government.
19. The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation)
in its Action Taken Notes stated as under:—
“The Monitoring mechanism available in the various Plan Schemes of
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation is given below:—
(i) Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH)
Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH)
is being  implemented in all the 8 NE States and 3 Himalayan States
namely Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. At
National Level implementation of HMNEH is being regularly reviewed
by Central Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary
(A&C), besides monitoring of Mini Mission wise programmes by
concerned Chairman of Steering Committees viz. DIG, ICAR for Mini
Mission-IV . In addition, State Level Steering Committee headed by
Chief Secretary of concerned State regularly monitors the programmes
at the State level. Apart from this, senior officers of the Department
also make field visit to the HMNEH States for assessment of the
implementation of MHNEH. About 45 visits were undertaken by the
senior officers of DAC/Chief Consultant (HMNEH) during the last
two years. The outcomes of the report of the visits have been
communicated to the concerned States for effective implementation of
the programmes in a time bound manner.
During the year 2011-12, complete review of the mission including
assessment of availability of quality planting material under area
expansion was carried out for all the beneficiary States. As a follow up

9
of these visits, Secretary, DAC had written to the Chief Secretaries of
the beneficiary States to take suitable action as suggested in the Tour
Reports. Second round of review visits for actual implementation of
actionable points has been completed in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Meghalaya, Tripura, Nagaland, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu
& Kashmir and Mizoram.
(ii) National Horticulture Mission (NHM)
DAC (Hort. Division) has constituted Joint Inspection Teams (JITs)
for all States having members from State Government Horticulture
Department, State Agriculture Universities (SAUs), ICAR institutions,
Precision Farming Development Centres (PFDCs), Directorate of
Cashew and Cocoa Development and Directorate of Arecanut and
Spices Development and concerned States under the Chairmanship of
senior officers of the Division. Regular JITs visits are organized and
JIT reports are being shared with the State Governments.
Year-wise monitoring visits undertaken are as under:—
Name of the State No. of visits
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Andhra Pradesh 1 3 3
Bihar 4 2 1
Chhattisgarh 3 2 3
Goa — — 2
Gujarat 1 — 2
Haryana 3 2 2
Jharkhand — 4 2
Karnataka 2 5 3
Kerala 2 3 5
Madhya Pradesh 1 1 2
Maharashtra 3 4 3
Odisha 2 2 3
Punjab — — 3
Rajasthan — 5 1
Tamil Nadu — 1 2
Uttar Pradesh 3 4 6
West Bengal 4 1 3
Andaman & Nicobar Islands 1 1 1
Puducherry — 1 —
Total 30 41 47

10
JIT reports from the year 2010-11 onwards are uploaded on NHM's
website (www.nhm.nic.in).
Other than JIT, visits are made to States for inspection, monitoring
and interaction with State officials periodically by the DAC officers.
Apart from reviewing the progress while considering the Annual Action
Plans, regular meetings are held with individual/group of States to
review the component-wise progress. A few meetings are arranged for
sanctioning of horticulture infrastructure/Post Harvest Management
projects in which physical and financial progress is also discussed.
(iii) Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA)
The Monitoring Mechanism is as under:
/circle6The performance under the MMA Scheme is reviewed during the
Work Plan discussions held under the Chairmanship of the
Joint Secretary with the Officers of the State Government.
/circle6A regular review of the Programme is taken to assess the
preparedness of States for undertaking Rabi and Kharif operations
along with a stock-taking of all the development initiative including
utilization of funds.
/circle6Crop Directorates of the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
dealing with various crops guide the State Governments in
formulation, implementation and monitoring of production
programmes as also the implementation of scheme by the States.
(iv) Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Y ojana (RKVY)
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) was appointed as
national consultant upto 2010-11 for close monitoring & evaluation of
implementation of RKVY in the States. The monitoring reports
submitted by NIRD were sent to the State Government concerned to
take corrective measures.
DAC has also put in place a web-based Management Information
System (MIS) for RKVY in order to identify and collect essential
information and data related to each RKVY project and also to collect
the progress and completion details during the project life cycle. Details
of projects, including their progress, and targets, expected outputs
and outcomes, along with actual achievements are entered online by
the States in the RKVY website www.rkvy.nic.in This webiste is in
public domain and implementation and progress status of each of
RKVY projects can be seen by all concerned at this website”.

11
20. The Committee had desired that the Ministry instruct inspecting teams to
visit the farmers' fields in different climatic zones across the country as against
luxuries visits confined to campuses, and submit their comprehensive findings to
the Government. However, the Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry does
not find any mention regarding the steps taken to ensure that senior level officials
visit farmers' fields. The Committee reiterate that senior officials entrusted with
the task of monitoring and appraisal of programmes visit different climatic zones
across the country so as to take stock of the programme implementation and the
difficulties faced by the farmers.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE  GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Department of Agirculture and Cooperation under the Ministry of
Agriculture is responsible for formulating and implementing national policies and
programmes aimed at achieving rapid agricultural growth and development through
optimum utilization of India's land, water, soil and plant resources. The Department
essential supplements and complements the efforts being made by the State
Governments to promote agricultural production and productivity as well as to
raise farmers' income. It also directly intervenes in matters connected with trade,
price policy, credit etc.
While examining the Grant No. 1 of Chapter 8 'Review of Selected Grants' of
Audit Report No. 1 of 2010-11, the Committee found various deficiencies viz,
unrealistic and defective budgeting leading to entire/large amounts being saved;
unnecessary supplementary grants which were entirely unspent; indiscriminate
use of delegated powers of re-appropriation of funds, diluting the process of
Parliamentary authorization; non-receipt of utilization certificates in time, weak
internal audit control mechanism and so on. The Committee's examination of these
deficiencies and their findings have been dealt with in detail in the succeeding
paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 1 of Part-II, Para 1 of 56th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken by the Ministry of Agriculture
(D/o Agriculture and Cooperation)
No Comments.
Sd/-
(Raghav Chandra)
Additional Secretary
& FA (A&C)
[Ministry of Agriculture/Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation,
O.M. No. 1-6/2012-Budget, dated 5th December, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee in their earlier Report (88th Report—10th Lok Sabha) had
specifically recommended that supplementary grants be obtained in emergent cases
only. Further, it was also recommended that supplementary demands were to be
restricted and confined to genuine unforeseen expenditure which could not be
\\192.168.3.1\E\REPORT 2013\838LS_1
12

13
envisaged at the time of preparation of annual budget. The Committee are perturbed
to note that despite the instructions of the Ministry of Finance to that effect, the
Ministry of Agriculture sought supplementary grants under sub-heads in anticipation
of higher disbursement but a large portion of the grant remained unutilized at the
end of the financial year. The Committee are appalled to note the cavalier approach
of the Ministry while seeking supplementary grants as the entire supplementary
grant of Rs. 4 crore was surrendered during 2007-08 and Rs. 3.64 crore was
surrendered as against the supplementary grant of Rs. 1.05 crore during 2008-09.
The Committee wish to reiterate that the supplementary grants be obtained in
exceptional circumstances and justify the same by appropriating the grants within
required time and for approved purposes. Further, it is necessary that the Ministry
project requirement of funds on realistic assumptions at the estimate stage itself
which could thus prevent supplementary grants being sought.
[Sl. No. 3 of Part -II, Para 3 of 56
th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Agriculture
(D/o Agriculture and Cooperation)
Supplementary Grant is proposed in emergent cases and is restricted to genuine
unforeseen expenditure which cannot be envisaged at the time of preparation of
budget or to meet the requirements on account of post budget decisions of the
Government. As far as instances pointed out by the Committee, position is clarified
as under:—
2007-08
Launch of Additional Central Assistance Scheme to State Plan for Agriculture
(Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana) in August, 2007 was a post budget decision. Entire
provision of Rs. 1000 crore kept under RE 2007-08 was met through supplementary
demands for grants and re-appropriations. Rs. 4 crore provided under sub head
2401.00.800.35, under various object-heads, through Supplementary Demands for
Grants remained unutilized as none of the UTs. (without Legislature) could utilize
RKVY allocation during 2007-08. It may, however, be stated that during 2007-10 to
2009-10 utilization of funds under the scheme was about 99% of the allocation with
reference to R.E.
2008-09
Supplementary Grant (1st batch) for Rs. 1.05 crore was obtained for payment of
arrears of salaries on account of recommendations of 6th C.P.C. under sub head
2401.00.105.18—National Project on Promotion of Organic Farming. However, this
amount could not be fully utilized and Rs. 40 lakh was surrendered as some of the
officers on deputation in the organization were relieved. Total amount of Rs. 3.64
crore, under various object-heads, was surrendered from this sub-head owing to
change in the mandate of the scheme under which direct intervention for funding
projects for Promotion of Organic Farming was suspended. Both these savings
could not be anticipated at the time of proposal for Supplementary Demands for
Grants (1st batch).

14
However, as observed by the Committee, the department will be more vigilant,
in future, while framing proposals for Supplementary Demands for Grants.
Sd/-
(Raghav Chandra)
Additional Secretary
& FA (A&C)
[Ministry of Agriculture/Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation, O.M. No. 1-6/
2012-Budget, dated 5th December, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee deplore that during the year 2009-10, a total of 135
re-appropriation orders involving Rs. 3875.48 crore were issued between the different
primary units of appropriations issued by the Department which had the effect of
distorting the authorization approved by the Parliament. Reasons for such large
scale re-appropriations of funds by the Department were attributed to the vagaries
of nature, straitjacketing of schemes and the procedure hurdles in dealing with the
States. Taking cognizance of the reasons advanced by the Department, the
Committee are sanguine that these hurdles can certainly be overcome if proper
scientific studies of weather conditions are done with regular coordination with the
Department of Agriculture Research and Education (DARE), National Remote
Sensing Agency (NRSA) and the Department of Meteorology. Taking note of such
large scale re-appropriations, the Committee hardly need to stress that there is an
imperative need to streamline the budget allocation process and to reorient the
priorities given to different schemes based on ground realities and the ability of the
implementing agencies to deliver within the given timelines. Further, based on the
requirements, the Department need to convince the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance with regard to the number of Central Schemes and the flexibility
needed by the Department for their successful implementation.
[Sl. No. 4 of Part - II, Para 4 of 56th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Agriculture
(D/o Agriculture and Cooperation)
As observed by PAC, a total number of 135 re-appropriation for  ` 3875.48 crore
were issued during 2009-2010. Of this, 102 re-appropriation orders for  ` 2018.27
crore were for transferring of funds from different sub-heads, while
33 re-appropriation orders were for transferring of  ` 1857.21 crore to different
sub-heads. This includes re-appropriation of funds for the benefit of NES out of
provision kept under Major Head 2552/4552 as per extant instructions of Ministry
of Finance. Re-appropriation of funds for enhancement of provisions under some
schemes had to be resorted to during this period in order to meet requirement due to
country wide drought viz. National Agricultural Insurance Scheme (` 716.90 crore),
Reimbursement of losses of NAFED (` 425 crore), Diesel Subsidy ( ` 22.94 crore),
Integrated Oilseed, Oilpalm, Pulses and Maize Development (Rs. 145.53 crore), etc.

15
It is informed that weekly monitoring of crop condition, reservoir position,
weather, supply of inputs, pests/diseases and related aspects is done by Crop &
Weather Watch Group in the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation. National
Crop Forecasting Centre (NCFC) of the department is also involved in crop
forecasting through assimilation of the information generated by different
organizations such as IMD, Medium Range Weather Forecasting of Department of
Science & Technology, Department of Space (DOS), Central Statistical Organization
(CSO), Indian Agricultural Statistics Research Institute (IASRI), Field Operations
Division of the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) and the State
Agriculture Statistics Authorities (SASAs), State Agriculture Departments etc.
Forecasting of Agriculture outputs through Satellite, Agro Meterology and Land
based observations (FASAL) is also funded by Ministry of Agriculture and
Cooperation and executed by DOS.
Regarding number of schemes, it may be stated that the Department is already
in the process of restructuring the various plan schemes to be implemented during
12th Five Year Plan in consultation with Planning Commission and other
stakeholders.
Sd/-
(Raghav Chandra)
Additional Secretary
& FA (A&C)
[ Ministry of Agriculture/Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation,
O.M. No. 1-6/2012-Budget, dated 5th December, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 6)
Mindful of the crunch of resources and the competing  claims of various
Departments for allocation of resources, the Committee are perturbed to note that
the Department of Agriculture could not spend funds to the tune of Rs. 1313.80
crore under various sub-heads during 2007-10 thereby affecting adversely the
implementation of the Schemes/Projects. The Committee are not inclined to accept
the reasons advanced by the Department as there are always causes and reasons
having their effect on the implementation of the Scheme. In their considered view
the Department need to adopt a deterministic approach based on causes and effects
to avoid situations of underspending/overspending/re-appropriation. The
Committee also find that the Ministry has shifted the responsibility on the
beneficiaries for Savings that were noticed during 2007-2010, and absolved itself of
the responsibility of monitoring and overseeing the implementation vis-a-vis
utilization of earmarked funds. The Committee, therefore, consider it incumbent
upon the Ministry to remove all infirmities and bottlenecks that slow down the pace
of expenditure so that funds approved by Parliament are spent on the approved
schemes and within the given financial year based on strict monitoring of the
physical outcome.
[Sl. No. 6 of Part-II, Para 6 of 56th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

16
Action Taken by the Ministry of Agriculture
(D/o Agriculture and Cooperation)
Keeping note of the observations of PAC, this Department has initiated the
following steps in addition to already available monitoring mechanisms in the Deptt.
in the following schemes:—
Horticulture
1. The frequency of meeting of Empowered Committee of National Horticulture
Mission has been increased to clear project based proposals. Besides, the
State Horticulture Missions are being impressed upon to pre-position inputs
in advance for season based activities. They have also been advised to
get State share released during the first quarter of the financial year.
2. States have been sensitized to submit proposals for release, provisional
UC for the previous year and Audited UC for the year previous to previous
year well in time.
3. Steps have been taken to delegate more powers at the State level to approve
projects based activities so that expenditure on such activities could be
accelerated.
4. National Horticulture Mission Scheme was revised w.e.f. 2010-11, wherein
pattern of assistance was revised and the requirement of credit linkage
was removed from some of the Post Harvest Management components.
Crops (National Food Security Mission)
NFSM Division has been in constant dialogue with the states and based on
the feedback from the states various modifications in the guidelines of the scale
have been made to simplify the procedures by removing bottlenecks in
implementation.
The physical and financial expenditure incurred by the states is captured
regularly through MIS and monthly progress reports submitted by the States.
Implementation at ground level is monitored through field visits of Project
Management Teams, National Level Monitoring Teams (NALMOT) and officers of
Crop Development Directorates of DAC. The apex committees of NFSM, General
Council (NFSMGC) under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble AM and Executive Committee
(NFSMEC) under the chairmanship of Secretary (A&C) also meet at regular intervals
to monitor the progress of the program. Third party midterm evaluation of the
program has also been carried out recently.
Macro Management of Agriculture (MMA)
In the year 2008-09, Macro Management of Agriculture Scheme was revised to
improve its efficacy in supplementing/complementing the efforts of the States

17
towards enhancement of agricultural production and productivity. From the table
given below it may be seen that the utilization of funds  under this scheme during
2007-08 to 2009-10 is above 94% w.r.t. RE:—
(` in crore)
Y ear Budget Revised Release % age % age
Estimates Estimates w.r .t. BE w.r.t. RE
2007-08 1100.00 1047.55 1001.07 91.00 95.56
2008-09 950.00 981.00 922.68 97.13 94.06
2009-10 950.00 930.00 921.49 96.99 99.08
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Y ojana (RKVY)
RKVY has put into place a web-based monitoring mechanism in which the
States are required to enter the project details of all the approved projects in the
RKVY Database & Management Information System (RDMIS) from time to time.
Sd/-
(Raghav Chandra)
Additional Secretary& FA (A&C)
[Ministry of Agriculture/Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation,
O.M. No. 1-6/2012-Budget, dated 5th December, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee's examination of submission of Utilisation Certificates in respect
of grants-in-aid released by the Department (upto 31.03.2009) revealed that 373 UCs
involving Rs. 1757.70 crore were still outstanding. This clearly indicated that the
Department had failed to devise any mechanism to tackle the phenomenon of non-
submission of UCs by the Organizations that were receiving grants. Though the
Ministry has stated that State Governments and Implementing Agencies were being
regularly reminded to submit pending UCs, the Committee find the reply rather
routine without any assurance whether the grants disbursed by the Department
were being utilized for the purposes for which they were meant. Further, the
Committee also note that the Department's procedure in vogue about releasing the
second installment of funds only on receipt of provisional UCs is not being strictly
followed. The plea of the Ministry to do away with the requirement of submission
of UCs on the ground that the grants given to State governments are audited by
CAG is not acceptable, as the CAG conducts only test check. The Committee are
apprehensive that doing away with utilization certificates would lead to financial
indiscipline. The Committee therefore underline the need for simplification of
procedure, strict adherence of the prescribed financial procedure and greater reliance
on e-governance so as to bring transparency and efficiency. In respect of the
problem faced by the Ministry in obtaining audited UCs from agencies which had
taken one time grant-in-aid, the Committee recommend that all these cases be
enquired into to ascertain whether there was any misappropriation. Appreciating
the Ministry's efforts with regard to setting up of a Special Audit Team to audit
defaulting units, the Committee would like to be apprised about the outcome of this
measure.
[Sl. No. 7 of Part-II, Para 7 of 56th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

18
Action Taken by the Ministry of Agriculture
(D/o Agriculture and Cooperation)
The following steps have been taken for liquidation of outstanding utilization
certificates:—
1. PAOs have been directed not to make any payment for grants where UCs
are pending.
2. Special Audit Team has been created in Pr. Accounts Office to physically
monitor the target and outcome of the grants utilized and the settlement of
the UCs by the grantee institution by visiting the states where schemes
are being implemented. The audit of UCs is already under process.
3. The special audit of  UCs for the states of Haryana, Bihar, Delhi, Andhra
Pradesh & Maharashtra has already been taken up.
4. All States have been provided with detailed references in respect of the
UCs pending with them as per CCA's record. Similarly all Programme
Divisions have been provided state-wise UC pending details for a
reconciliation drive. This is expected to bring down the pending figure
substantially. This exercise is proposed to be repeated every six months.
Sd/-
(Raghav Chandra)
Additional Secretary & FA (A&C)
[Ministry of Agriculture/Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation,
O.M. No. 1-6/2012-Budget, dated 5th December, 2012]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 8)
Detailing the oversight mechanism that was prevalent in the Ministry in order
to ensure accountability with regard to financial management and appropriate use
of public funds, the MInistry apprised the Committee that expenditure was being
reviewed through weekly Senior Officer's meetings chaired by Secretary of the
Department. The Committee were apprised that each and every proposal for release
of plan expenditure was thoroughly scrutinized by Internal Finance Wing headed
by the Financial Adviser. About the progress of expenditure, the Committee find
that regular monitoring at the level of AS&FA/Secretary was being carried out
along with weekly audio-visual conferences held with States for reviewing crop
situation, availability of inputs and so on. Inspite of all this, the Committee find that
there are systemic deficiencies which have remained unaddressed for long. The
Committee desire that the Ministry review the progress of expenditure more
meticulously whereby the scope for defective internal budgeting is eliminated or
drastically reduced. About implementation of Schemes, the Ministry informed the
Committee that it organized field visits to monitor the progress. Asked to share the
details of field visits, the representative of the Department conceded that most of
these visits were confined to Universities rather than to farmers' fields. The
Committee would like the Ministry to desist from such 'luxury visits' and instead the

19
inspecting teams be directed to visit the farmers' fields across the country in different
climatic zones and submit their detailed findings to the Government. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the names of officers who undertook field visits
during the last three years, the fields they visited and the report they submitted to
the Department and the follow up action taken thereon.
[Sl. No. 8 of Part-II, Para 8 of 56th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Agriculture
(D/o Agriculture and Cooperation)
The Monitoring mechanism available in the various Plan Schemes of DAC is
given below:—
(i) Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH)
Horticulture Mission for North East and Himalayan States (HMNEH) is
being implemented in all the 8 NE States and 3 Himalayan States namely
J&K, HP and Uttarakhand. At National Level implementation of HMNEH is
being regularly reviewed by Central Steering Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (A&C), besides monitoring of Mini Mission-
wise programmes by concerned Chairman of Steering Committees viz. DIG,
ICAR for Mini Mission-IV . In addition, State Level Steering Committee
headed by Chief Secretary of concerned State regularly monitors the
programmes at the State level. Apart from this, senior officers of the
Department also make field visit to the HMNEH states for assessment of
the implementation of HMNEH. About 45 visits were undertaken by the
senior offices of DAC/Chief Consultant (HMNEH) during the last two
years. The outcomes of the report of the visits have been communicated to
the concerned States for effective implementation of the programmes in a
time bound manner.
During the year 2011-12, complete review of the mission including
assessment of availability of quality planting material under area expansion
was carried out for all the beneficiary States. As a follow up of these visits,
Secretary, DAC had written to the Chief Secretaries of the beneficiary
States to take suitable action as suggested in the Tour Reports. Second
round of review for actual implementation of actionable points has been
completed in Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Nagaland,
Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Mizoram.
(ii) National Horticulture Mission (NHM)
DAC (Hort. Division) has constituted Joint Inspection Teams (JITs) for all
States having members from State Government Horticulture Development,
State Agriculture Universities (SAUs), ICAR institutions, Precision Farming
Development Centers (PFDCs), Directorate of Cashew and Cocoa
Development and Directorate of Arecanut and Spices Development and
concerned States under the Chairmanship of senior officers of the Division.
Regular JITs visits are organized and JIT reports are being shared with the
State Government.

20
Year-wise monitoring visits underatken are as under:—
No. of visits
Name of the State 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Andhra Pradesh 1 3 3
Bihar 4 2 1
Chhattisgarh 3 2 3
Goa - - 2
Gujarat 1 - 2
Haryana 3 2 2
Jharkhand - 4 2
Karnataka 2 5 3
Kerala 2 3 5
Madhya Pradesh 1 1 2
Maharashtra 3 4 3
Odisha 2 2 3
Punjab - - 3
Rajasthan - 5 1
Tamil Nadu - 1 2
Uttar Pradesh 3 4 6
West Bengal 4 1 3
Andaman & Nicobar  Islands 1 1 1
Puducherry - 1 -
Total 3 0 4 1 4 7
JIT reports from the year 2010-11 onwards are uploaded on NHM's website
(www.nhm.nic.in).
Other than JIT, visits are made to States for inspection, monitoring and
interaction with State officials periodically by the DAC officers.
Apart from reviewing the progress while considering the Annual Action
Plans, regular meetings are held with individual/group of States to review
the component-wise progress. A few meetings are arranged for sanctioning

21
of horticulture  infrastructure/Post Harvest Management projects in which
physical and financial progress is also discussed.
(iii) Macro Management of Agriculture
The Monitoring Mechanism is as under:—
/circle6The performance under the MMA Scheme is reviewed during the Work
Plan discussions held under the Chairmanship of the Joint Secretary
with the Officers of the State Government.
/circle6A regular review of the Programme is taken to assess the preparedness
of States for undertaking Rabi and Kharif operations along with a
stock-taking of all the development initiatives including utilization of
funds.
/circle6Crop Directorates of the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
dealing with various crops guide the State Governments in formulation,
implementation and monitoring of production programmes as also the
implementation of scheme by the States.
(iv) RKVY
National Institute of Rural Development (NIRD) was appointed as national
consultant upto 2010-11 for close monitoring & evaluation of implementation
of RKVY in the States. The monitoring reports submitted by NIRD were
sent to the State Government concerned to take corrective measures.
DAC has also put in place a web-based Management Information System
(MIS) for RKVY in order to identify and collect essential information and
data related to each RKVY project and also to collect the progress and
completion details during the project life cycle. Details of projects, including
their progress, and targets, expected outputs and outcomes, along with
actual achievements are entered online by the States in the RKVY website
www.rkvy.nic.in. This website is in public domain and implementation and
progress status of each of RKVY projects can be seen by all concerned at
this website.
Sd/-
(Raghav Chandra)
Additional Secretary & FA (A&C)
[Ministry of Agriculture/Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation,
O.M. No.1-6/2012-Budget, dated 5th December, 2012]

22
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee observe that agriculture has been a way of life in India over
eons and continues to the single most important source of livelihood of the masses.
Notwithstanding the declining contribution to GDP, agriculture continues to be a
critical component from the perspective of income distribution as it accounts for
about 58 per cent employment in the country according to 2001 census. Given the
enormity of the challenge of feeding the 1.2 billion plus people and their nutritional
requirements, the Committee recommend that priority be accorded to agriculture as
food security has implications for macro-economic stability, the national security
and India's Standing in the comity of nations. The nation can ill afford to be oblivious
of the 'ship to mouth' food crisis and the hard fact that food exports can be used to
advance geostrategic aims by the supplier nations(s). Considering the implications
of food security and the multiplier effects of agriculture sector on the economy, the
Committee are of the considered view that comprehensive and coordinated strategies
need to be evolved to enhance agriculture production and productivity with right
admixture of traditional and modern farming practices with greater focus on
sustainable agriculture. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken and the strategies evolved in this behalf.
[Sl. No. 9 of Part-II, Para 9 of 56th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Agriculture
(D/o Agriculture and Cooperation)
In recent years, Government has initiated measures including reorientation of
agriculture policy with objective of improving productivity, profitability and
economic viability of farming and also creating employment opportunities in rural
non-farm sector. The important comprehensive measures inter-alia, include the
following:—
(i) Stepping up public investment in Agriculture:  Keeping in mind the low
growth rates in Agriculture sector during the 10th Five Year Plan,
Government had made conscious efforts in stepping up the allocation to
Agriculture & Allied sectors during Eleventh Five Year Plan by way of
higher allocations and also incentivizing the State Governments to enhance
public investment in these sectors to sustain and maintain capital formation
and agriculture infrastructure. Towards this end, two new schemes were
launched in 2007-08, viz. Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY) and National
Food Security Mission (NFSM) with outlays of Rs. 25,000 crore and
Rs. 4882.48 crore, respectively.
The Plan outlay on various schemes of this Department has increased
substantially from Rs. 6927.94 crore in 2007-08 (RE) to Rs. 16515.05 crore in
2011-12 (RE), the terminal year of Eleventh Five Year Plan. For the current
financial year (2012-13), which is also the first year of the Twelfth Five Year
Plan, the Budget Estimate (BE) is Rs. 20208.00, signifying an increase of
22.36% over the previous year's Revised Estimate (RE). The tentative
allocation for 12th Plan outlay for Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation is Rs. 134746.00 crore (including Rs. 63246 crore for RKVY).

23
(ii) Bridging Yield Gaps & Food Security:  National Food Security Mission
(NFSM) which was started in 2007 with an outlay of ` 4882 crore, could
accomplish the targeted additional production of 20 million tonnes within
4 years of its implementation. As per the 4th Advance Estimate of 2011-12,
an all-time record total foodgrains production of 257.44 million tonnes is
achieved against the pre-NFSM production of 217.28 million tonnes  i.e.
additional production of 39.84 million tonnes achieved against the target
of 20 million tonnes. As per 1st Advance Estimate 2012-13 production of
rice is estimated at 85.59 million tonnes, though lowered as compared to
last year's record kharif production, is higher than the last five year's average
production of 83.17 million tonnes.
(iii) Enhancing Farm Income: Horticulture is being promoted by Government
in mission mode through National Horticulture Mission (NHM) and
Horticulture Mission for North East and Hilly States (HMNEH) for improving
farm income and livelihood security and enhancing employment generation.
(iv) The Minimum Support Prices (MSPs) of various agricultural commodities
have been substantially increased over the last few years to ensure
remunerative prices to farmers.
(v) New Schemes:  Many new initiatives like Bringing Green Revolution to
Eastern Regional, Integrated Development of 60,000 pulses villages in
rainfed areas, Promotion of Oil Palm, Initiative on Vegetable
Clusters,Initiative for Nutritional Security through Intensive Millets
Promotion, National Mission for Protein Supplements, and Accelerated
Fodder Development Programme, Vidarbha Intensive Irrigation
Development Programme etc. have been announced in Union Budgets
2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13.
(vi) (a) Increased Availability of Agricultural Credit at Reduced Interest Rates:
Since 2003-04, loan to farmers increased from ` 86,981 crores to
` 4,68,291 crores in 2011-12 while the interest rates came down from
9-12% to 4% (for timely repayment) during this period. The target for
the current year has been fixed at ` 5,75,000 crore, an increase of
` 1,00,000 crore over the target for 2011-12.
(b) To facilitate flow of credit to farmers and increase financial inclusion,
Government is providing Kisan Credit Card (KCC) to all eligible and
willing farmers in time bound manner. State Governments have
accordingly been advised to launch intensive branch/village level
campaign. Up to October, 2011, 10.78 crore KCC have been issued.
(c) Reserve Bank of India has also issued comprehensive guidelines to
banks for providing debt relief to farmers affected by natural calamities
including floods, droughts etc., which, inter-alia, include restructuring
of loans by way of conversion/rescheduling, provision of fresh crop
loans for affected farmers, tratment of converted/rescheduled agriculture

24
loans as 'current dues' and not charging penal interest in respect of
current dues in default, relaxed security and margin norms etc.
(vii) Rehabilitation Package for distressed farmers:  Government of India
approved a rehabilitation package of ` 16978.69 crore for 31 suicide prone
Districts in the four States of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka
and Kerala, in 2006. An amount of ` 19910.70 crore has been released under
this package till 30th June, 2011. After implementation of the Rehabilitation
Package, there has been a declining trend in farmers' suicides.
(viii) National Mission for Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA):  NMSA was
launched to transform agriculture into an ecologically sustainable climate
resilient production system and also exploiting its fullest potential and
thereby ensuring food security, equitable access to food resources,
enhancing livelihood opportunities and contributing to national economic
stability.
Sd/-
(Raghav Chandra)
Additional Secretary & FA (A&C)
[Ministry of Agriculture/Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation,
O.M. No.1-6/2012-Budget, dated 5th December, 2012]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE  REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
\\192.168.3.1\E\REPORT 2013\838LS_1
25

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee observe that the Department surrendered a large part of its unspent
provisions under revenue and capital sections on the last day of the financial years in
all the three years. i.e. during 2007-2010. As per Rule 56(2) of the General Financial
Rules, unspent provisions in a grant or appropriation are required to be surrendered
to the Government as soon as these are foreseen, without waiting for the end of the
financial year. Asked to explain why the financial rule was defied, the representative
of the Department while conceding the delay in surrender of unspent provision,
attributed the delay to the States who informed the Department regarding savings
only in the latter part of the financial year. The plea of the Department is unacceptable
being violative of the General Financial Rules. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Department strictly monitor the release of funds and pace of expenditure so
as to overcome situation of under spending of delays in surrender of unspent
provisions.
[Sl. No. 2 of Part-II, Para 2 of 56th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Agriculture
(D/o Agriculture and Cooperation)
Although total savings required to be surrendered are known on the basis of
revised estimates approved by Ministry of Finance (intimation regarding approved
RE is generally received from Ministry of Finance in December end/January), the
particular schemes and object-heads under which savings are available are known
only towards the end of the financial year. This is due to the fact that funds sought
under Supplementary Demands for Grants (last batch) becomes available after these
are passed by Parliament and re-appropriation proposals are approved by Ministry
of Finance which is generally in the fag end of the financial year. However, taking
note of the observations of Committee during oral evidence, DAC have surrendered
funds in two batches during 2011-12.
The Department regularly reviews release of funds in the weekly Senior Officers
Meeting and the pace of expenditure is kept within the Monthly Expenditure Plan/
\\192.168.3.1\E\REPORT 2013\838LS_1
26

27
Quarterly expenditure Allocation as appended to Detailed Demands for
Grants.
Sd/-
(Raghav Chandra)
Additional Secretary
& FA (A&C)
[Ministry of Agriculture/Deptt. of  Agriculture & Cooperation,
O.M. No. 1-6/20-12-Budget, dated 5th December, 2012]

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED  INTERIM REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 5)
While examining the issue of unrealistic budgeting, the Committee observe
that excessive provisions under various sub-heads had resulted in ` 233.96 crore
remaining unutilized during the year 2007-2010. Strangely, the Ministry informed
the Committee that non-utilisation of funds under some schemes such as Rainfed
Area Development Programme was due to the non-approval of the scheme. The
Committee find that the Planning Commission accorded approval to the scheme
only after 3 years of budgetary provision for the same being approved by Parliament
in 2007-08. Asked to explain the anomaly, the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture
admitted that it was pathetic that three years had been lost in getting a Scheme
sanctioned. The Committee deplore that such an important scheme approved by
Parliament was delayed in implementation. The Committee wish to caution the
Government not to rush to Parliament for launching a new Scheme without necessary
inter-departmental consultation and concurrence and ensure that once funds are
approved for a Scheme by Parliament, the Scheme must be implemented without
delay. The Committee note with serious concern the delay on the part of the Planning
Commission in approving the RADP Scheme and the unusually long time it took to
merge the various watershed development programmes into one Centrally Sponsored
Scheme, being implemented by different Departments. Further, the Secretary, Ministry
of Agriculture while deposing before the Committee suggested that there had to be
flexibility in the Budget and Budget releases should be in two tranches which
would match with the 'Rabi' and 'Kharif' crop patterns. Considering the merit of
the observation, the Committee, recommend that the matter be taken up with the
Ministry of Finance for feasibility of passing the budget during July-August so
that money is released by October thereby coinciding with the 'Rabi' season and
the second allocation may be released in March-April coinciding with the 'Kharif'
season.
[Sl. No. 5 of Part-II, Para 5 of 56th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Agriculture
(D/o Agriculture and Cooperation)
The process of obtaining approval of Competent authority to RADP Scheme
was always in currency. Provisions were, therefore, made for this scheme in each
financial year. However, due to non-approval of the scheme in the circumstances
already intimated to the Committee, provision could not be utilized.
\\192.168.3.1\E\REPORT 2013\838LS_1
28

29
In this respect it is also added that the Group of Ministers while considering
the proposal of Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) of Deptt.
of Land Resources, recommended for merger of all watershed programmes and
converging schemes of identical nature. Department of Economic Affairs and
Planning Commission also advised to restructure Rainfed Area Development
Programme (RADP) to benefit from such convergence with IWMP. Accordingly it
was restructured into a farmer centric-farming system based programme and was
introduced on pilot basis in ten major rainfed States of the country through window
of RKVY . Rs. 250 crore was released during 2011-12 and for 2012-13, Rs. 150 crore
has been provided for implementation of the programme.
The concern of the Committee with regard to passing the budget during
July-August has been communicated to Ministry of Finance and Planning
Commission and their response is still awaited.
Sd/-
(Raghav Chandra)
Additional Secretary
& FA (A&C)
[Ministry of Agriculture/Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation,
O.M. NO. 1-6/2012-Budget, dated 5th December, 2012]
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
29 April, 2013 Chairman,
9 Vaisakha, 1935 ( Saka) Public Accounts Committee .

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY -NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 29TH APRIL, 2013
The Committee sat on Monday, the 29th April, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs.
in Room No. '51', (Chairman's Chamber) Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. M. Thambidurai
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Shri Prakash Javadekar
8. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
9. Shri J.D. Seelam
10. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General
2. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director
3. Ms. Athoorva Sinha — Director
4. Shri Likhariya — Director
\\192.168.3.1\E\REPORT 2013\838LS_1
30

31
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the C&AG of India to the last sitting of the Committee (2012-13).
Giving an overview of the performance of the Committee in the year 2012-13 as well
as in the 15th Lok Sabha, the Chairman observed that the years have been very
productive due to the hard work of the C&AG and his team, the PAC Secretariat led
by the Joint Secretary and above all the cooperation and active participation of the
Members in the deliberations.
The Committee unanimously endorsed the views of the Chairman.
3. The Chairman, then, apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider
the following Draft Reports of the Committee:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
(vii) Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in the Fifty-sixth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on
‘Review of Grant No. 1—Department of Agriculture and Cooperation’.
4. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the
comments of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/
suggestions of the Members.
5. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalize the Reports in
the light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to
Parliament on a convenient date.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Draft Reports. The Members also conveyed their
thanks to the Chair for his able leadership in conducting the meeting of the
Committee in a probing and educative manner.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Not related to this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) The No. of Observations/Recommendations 09
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1,3,4,6,7,8 and 9 Total: 07
Percentage—77.78%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire the pursue in view of the replies received
form the Government: Total: 0
-NIL- Percentage-0%
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration: T otal: 1
Para No. 2 Percentage-11.11%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies: T otal: 1
Para No. 5 Percentage 11.11
32
GMGIPMRND—838LS(S-3)—05.07.2013.