49
ADMINISTRATION OF UNIVERSAL
SERVICE OBLIGATION (USO) FUND
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Fourteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY   OF   COMMUNICATIONS   &
INFORMATION   TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FORTY-NINTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FORTY-NINTH  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ADMINISTRATION OF UNIVERSAL SERVICE
OBLIGATION (USO) FUND
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fourteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28 December, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 December, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa, 1933 (Saka)

PAC  No.  1958
Price:  ` 68.00
© 2012  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012)  . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
CHAPTER I Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/ Recommendations  which  have  been
accepted by the Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations  which the Committee
do  not desire to pursue in view of  the replies received
from the Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
replies of  the Government  have not been accepted  by
the Committee and which require reiteration  . . . . . . . . . 51
CHAPTER V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies  . . . . . . . . . . 56
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the Sixth Sitting  of Public Accounts Committee
(2011-12) held on 23rd September, 2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
II. Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2011-12) held on 21st December, 2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
III. Analysis  of  the  Action  Taken  by  the  Government
on  the  Observations/Recommendations  of  the  Public
Accounts Committee contained in their  Fourteenth  Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
(iii)
* Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Forty-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Administration of
Universal Service Obligation (USO) Fund’.
2. The Fourteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
29th April, 2010. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 7th January, 2011. The Public Accounts
Committee considered this Report at their sitting held on 23rd September, 2011 but the
adoption was deferred. The Committee considered and adopted the revised Report at
their sitting held on 21 st December, 2011. Minutes of both the sittings are given at
Appendix I & II.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix III.
N
EW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
23 December, 2011 Chairman,
2 Pausa, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER   I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Administration of Universal
Service Obligation (USO) Fund' based on Chapter - I of C&AG Report No. PA 1 of 2008
for the year ended March, 2007.
2. The Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 29th April, 2010. It contained 14 Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been
received from the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
(Department of Telecommunications) and categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 3-9, 11, 12 and 14
Total: 11
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para No. 13
Total: 1
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 2 and 10
Total: 2
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
Total: NIL
Chapter V

2
3. The Fourteenth Report of the Committee pertains to the remedial/corrective
Action Taken Notes on the Audit Paragraphs pending with the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology, (Department of Telecommunications).
Out of the 3450 Chapters/Paragraphs pending with various Ministries/Departments,
100 Chapters/Paragraphs pertained to the Department of Telecommunications. One
of the important Chapters/Paragraphs out of these 100 Chapters/Paragraphs was
Chapter 1 of the Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended March, 2007 — Union
Government, Civil and Postal Departments (No. PA 1 of 2008) relating to the
Performance Audit of the Administration of the Universal Service Obligation Fund in
the Department of Telecommunications. This Chapter was reviewed by a Sub-Committee
of the PAC in order to gauge the compliance of the Department of Telecommunications
to the Audit Observations/Suggestions contained therein alongwith the status of
remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to be furnished by the Department. The detailed
examination of the subject by the Sub-Committee had revealed serious shortcomings/
lapses on the part of the Department of Telecommunications which inter-alia included
failure of the Department in submitting the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on
Audit Paras within the prescribed time limit; diversion of Universal Service Obligation
Fund during 2002-07; failure on the part of the service providers in achieving the
targets for replacement of Village Public Telephones (VPTs) working on Multi Access
Radio Relay (MARR) Technology within the stipulated time frame; non-submission of
the Auditor's Reports to the Controller of Communication Accounts (CCA) concerned
by the Universal Service Providers (USPs) for settlement of claims of different USPs
amounting to Rs. 407.83 crore, violations of the licence agreements by the service
providers in some States, etc. The Committee had accordingly given their Observations/
Recommendations in the Fourteenth Report.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Communications and
Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications) to each of the
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee contained in their Fourteenth Report
have been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.
A. Diversion of the Proceeds to the Universal Service Obligation Fund
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
5. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee had observed that a Universal Service
Obligation (USO) Fund was formed with effect from April, 2002 for raising resources by
means of a Universal Service Levy (USL) to cater to the USO activities in the process
of the achievements of universal service objectives like increase in rural teledensity,
provision of voice and low speed data service in the uncovered villages and telephone
on demand in the rural areas. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee
had revealed serious lapses on the part of Government on crediting the full amount
collected as USL, which was five per cent of the Adjusted Gross Revenue (AGR)
earned by all the operators, under various licences, to the USO Fund, during the years
2002-07. Not convinced with the reasons adduced by the Department of
Telecommunications, the Committee had observed that the Government should not
have any problem in crediting the full amount collected as Universal Service Levy to

3
the USO Fund when proceeds to the fund were meant to be utilized exclusively for
meeting the Universal Service Obligation. The Committee had also desired that the
Department should make efforts to ensure that the proceeds to the USO Fund were not
diverted under any circumstances, even temporarily for purposes other than those for
which the funds were collected.
6. The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology,  (Department of
Telecommunications), in their Action Taken Notes, have stated as under:—
"As per provisions of Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003, 'the sum of
money received towards the USO under section 4 shall first be credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central Government may, if Parliament
by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides, credit such proceeds
to the fund from time to time for being utilized exclusively for meeting the
Universal Service Obligation'. Hence the entire collection on account of
Universal Service Levy gets credited to Consolidated Fund in India and made
available to the USO Fund through Parliamentary approvals.
As recommended by the PAC and also observed by the Standing Committee
on Demands for Grants for 2009-10 in their Twelfth Report on Action Taken
by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
contained in their Fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha), the Department had taken
up the matter with Ministry of Finance regarding allocation of transfer to
USOF. It has been stated by the Ministry of Finance vide their letter
No. F.No. 2(35)-B(AC)/2009 dated 22.03.2010, that while considering the
proposal of Department of Telecommunications (DoT) for the constitution of
USOF initially, Cabinet had directed the DoT to consult Ministry of Finance
at the time of finalizing the amount to be transferred to USOF and thus the
Ministry has the authority to decide the quantum of funds to be transferred
to USOF. Ministry of Finance's observations in this regard are reproduced
below. ‘It may also be mentioned that the license fee from telecom service
providers is an important component of Non-tax Revenue of the Union
Government. The amount towards transfer to USOF, is provided on the basis
of claim pending with the Department of Telecommunications for releases
from USOF. As the Government is committed to finance various flagship
programmes of the Government, the resources can not be locked by simply
lodging them in the Public Account of India. However the concerns of the
Standing Committee are noted for necessary action during the RE 2010-11’."
7. The Committee are highly dissatisfied with the indifferent reply of the DoT.
The Fourteenth Report of the Committee was presented to the House on 29th April,
2010. The Department furnished their Action Taken Notes on 12th November, 2010.
In response to the recommendation of the Committee regarding utilization of the
USO Fund exclusively for meeting the Universal Service Obligation, the Department
have cited a letter dated 22nd March, 2010 containing the observation of the Ministry
of Finance on the matter. Obviously, the DoT instead of taking up the recommendation
of the PAC with the Ministry of Finance furnished the stock reply which they received
from the Ministry of Finance to a similar recommendation of the Standing Committee

4
on IT. The Committee deplore such a languid approach bordering on callousness, to
say the least. More so, it would have been only in the interest of the DoT, had they
brought the recommendation to the notice of the Ministry of Finance for their earnest
consideration. The Committee wish to caution the DoT to desist from such casual
attitude and non-serious approach when dealing with the recommendation of the
PAC.
8. The Committee note that as per the provisions of the Indian Telegraph
(Amendment) Act, 2003, the sum of money received towards the USO is meant for
being utilized from time to time exclusively for meeting the Universal Service
Obligation. That is what the PAC precisely recommended in their earlier Report. But
the Ministry of Finance, who have been jointly entrusted with the responsibility of
finalizing the amount to be transferred to the USO Fund as per the Cabinet direction,
have stated that as the Government is committed to finance various flagship
programmes, the resources cannot be locked by simply lodging them in the Public
Accounts of India. The Committee do not approve of the Ministry of Finance diverting
the funds exclusively meant for USO activities to other programmes. The Committee,
therefore, urge upon the DoT to once again take up the matter with the Ministry of
Finance so that proceeds from the USO Fund are made available for USO activities in
general and for provision and expansion of rural telephony in particular, in accord
with the provisions of the Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003.
B. Non-filing of the Auditor's Report by the Universal Service Providers
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
9. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee had noted that there was a failure on
the part of Universal Service Providers (USPs) in the submission of the Auditor's
Reports to the USO Headquarter for the year 2004-05 for all the service areas and a
subsidy of Rs. 7.59 crore remained pending to be certified by the Auditors even after a
lapse of two years. Expressing their surprise over the non-submission of the Auditor's
Reports by the USPs despite they being based on the self-certification of the USPs
themselves, the disbursement of the subsidy without the  Auditor's Reports and no
action against the defaulting service providers, the Committee had recommended that
the Department should ensure that the USPs submitted the Auditor's Reports within a
definite time frame to the concerned Controller of Communication Accounts (CCAs)
who in turn should expeditiously forward the same to the Headquarters for
reconciliation with the claims. The Committee also desired that the Department should
take suitable action against the defaulting USPs and the CCAs for non-compliance
and ensure further tightening of the measures for proper and timely verification of the
claims submitted by the USPs so that the subsidy support from the USO Fund was
released only for the services actually commissioned by the service providers.
10. The Department of Telecommunications in their Action Taken Notes have
stated as under:—
"The procedure prescribed, as per instruction issued to CCA offices vide
letter No 1-7/2007/USOF- Auditor's Reports'/1027-1061 dated 11.9.2007 and
corrigendum dated 14.09.2007 is being followed for authentication of subsidy
claims for subsequent years also.

5
In view of the observations of the PAC and the remarks of DG P&T Audit, to
ensure that the service providers submit the Auditor's report within a definite
time frame to the concerned CCAs so as to enable timely verification of the
claims submitted by the service providers, instructions have been issued to
all USPs/ IPs vide letter No. 1-7/2008-USOF/Auditors' Reports/1110-1158
dt. 28.06.2010 with copy to all CCAs impressing upon them the requirement of
strict observance of the due dates for submission of the Auditors' reports
with the CCAs of the concerned service areas/USOF (HQ) as per provisions
of USO Agreements. It has been specifically mentioned that in case of non-
filing of Auditors' Reports within the stipulated time limit, the subsidy
disbursed based on quarterly claim statements of previous year(s) may not
be considered to be finally adjusted. As such subsidy paid would be liable to
recovered/adjusted along with interest at the PLR of the SBI from the subsidy
claims of subsequent period/any other claims (including invoking of set of
clause of the USO Agreements), by treating the entire amount as
 'excess payment' being not certified by the Auditors. Suitable instructions in
this regard have also been issued to the CCAs for acting upon these
directions. This office has reiterated the instructions to concerned CCAs and
IPs/USPs to ensure the timely submission of Auditors' Report and intimate
recovery particulars to Headquarter  vide this office letter No. 1-7/2007-USOF
dated 1.9.2010 resultant that the Auditors' Report from all CCAs for 2007-08
have been received and excess payment pointed out by Auditors have been
recovered in all cases. The Auditors Reports due for 2008-09 have largely
been received from CCAs and in the small number of cases where the same
have not been received recoveries are being effected. Thus, it may kindly be
seen that in pursuance of recommendations of PAC the system of monitoring
has been suitably tightened further to ensure that all Auditors certificates
due are received and necessary action for reconciliation/recovery is effected
in time."
11. The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation to tighten the
monitoring system for proper and timely verification of the claims submitted by the
Universal Service Providers (USPs), the DoT issued instructions on 28th June, 2010
and reiterated the same on 1st September, 2010 to all the USPs/IPs, with copy to all
the CCAs, to ensure timely submission of the Auditors  Report and intimate the
recovery particulars to the Headquarters. Admittedly, as a result, the Auditors Report
from all the CCAs for the year 2007-08 have been received and excess payment
recovered in all the cases. The Committee hardly need to emphasise that the DoT
would maintain strict vigil and ensure that the service providers submit the Auditors'
Report within a definite time frame so that appropriate verification of the claims is
made in time and timely reconciliation/recovery of excess payments is ensured.
C. Delay in the Settlement of Claims of Universal Service Providers
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
12. The Committee, in their Fourteenth Report, had observed that claims of
` 407.83 crore pertaining to different USPs were pending for settlement due to delay on
the part of the service providers in furnishing the requisite clarifications or additionial

6
information as well as on the part of the USO Headquarters in providing clarifications
sought for by the Controller of Certifying Authorities (CCAs). Having not been
convinced with the argument of the Department that the delay was inevitable as the
process of settlement of claims of the USPs was a protracted one, the Committee had
impressed upon the Department and the USO Fund Administration to adhere to a
clear-cut and definite time schedule for settlement of claims and resort to a foolproof
verification mechanism to avoid delays in settlement of genuine claims.
13. The Department of Telecommunications in their Action Taken Notes have
stated as under:—
"As per financial conditions of Agreement, the USO claims should generally
be settled within thirty days of receipt. This fact has been impressed upon to
the CCA offices.
Detailed instructions were issued vide letter No. 1-1/2008-USOF (Payments)/
206-230 dt. 17.04.2008 for observance of prescribed time schedule for
settlement of claims. The instructions in this regard were reiterated vide letter
No. 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./1364-1385 dt. 10.09.2009. It was also specified
in the letter ibid that even in exceptional    circumstances the process should
be completed before receipt of claims of subsequent quarters. However, there
may be occasions that due to various reasons some amount is kept withheld
for want of certain information/document from the USP,  which causes delay
in final settlement of such claims.
Vigorous pursuance is made by USO Administration for timely settlement of
USO subsidy claims. In this connection repeated instructions have been
issued to CCAs, including recently issued instructions vide letters No. 1-1/
2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./714-736 dt. 02.06.2010 and No. 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-
Corr./1060-1082 dt. 28.06.2010.
In the All India CCAs conference held on May, 10-11, 2010 in USO (HQ), the
status of unsettled/withheld claims was also discussed in detail and a definite
time schedule has been drawn for final settlement of all claims up to Q.E.
Dec. 2009 and submission of compliance report thereof to USO (HQ).
As a result of vigorous pursuance, no claim up to Q.E. Dec. 2006 (as pointed
out in the C&AG report) is lying unsettled. In fact, no claim up to
Q.E. Mar. 2009 is lying unsettled. However, claims for a small amount of
Rs. 19.35 cr. up to Q.E. Dec. 2006 are lying withheld for the clearance of which
a definite time schedule has been drawn and is being monitored.
The timely settlement of unsettled/withheld claims is thus being closely and
effectively monitored."
14. The Committee appreciate that due to the vigorous efforts made by the USO
Administration through repeated instructions issued to the CCAs including the
instructions issued in the month of June, 2010 subsequent to the recommendations
of the PAC in this regard, no claims of the USPs up to the Quarter Ending March,
2009 are lying unsettled. Claims for only the amount of Rs. 19.35 crore pertaining to

7
the Quarter ending December, 2006 are lying withheld for the clearance of which a
definite time schedule has been drawn and is reportedly being monitored. As the USO
claims should generally be settled within thirty days of their receipt as per the
financial conditions of the Agreement, the Committee impress upon the DoT to
expeditiously settle the remaining claims of  
` 19.35 crore and adhere to a definite
time schedule with an effective montoring mechanism in place for final settlement of
all the pending claims after the Q.E. March, 2009 as well as the claims that would
crop up in future.
D.  Violation of Licence Agreements by the Universal Service Providers
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
15. In their Fourteenth Report, the Committee had observed that Reliance
Communication Ltd. and Tata Teleservices Ltd. had provided Rural Community Phones
(RCPs ) and Rural Direct Exchange Lines (RDELs) in Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh (West)
and Uttar Pradesh (East) Telecom Circles without ensuring inter connectivity with the
other operator i.e. BSNL, which was a violation of the Licence agreements signed by
the USPs with the Department of Telecommunications as well as agreements between
the USPs and the USO Fund Administration. The Department clarified that while creating
the network for provision of RCPs/RDELs, the two USPs requested BSNL for Point of
Interconnections (PoIs) and in the meanwhile, they kept on providing RCPs/RDELs
under various schemes with limited connectivity with the network of other operators.
Terming the Department's agrument untenable, the Committee had impressed upon the
Department to take firm steps to ensure that BSNL and other USPs speed up the
provision of interconnectivity while creating network for various schemes towards
expansion of rural telephony. The Committee also recommended that the Department
should take corrective, remedial and penal action against the defaulters responsible
for the violation of the licence agreement.
16. The Department of Telecommunications in their Action Taken Notes have
stated as under:—
"USO Fund has been taking up the matter of providing points of
Interconnection (PoIs) with USPs from time to time. BSNL has also been
requested to provide PoIs to M/s. TTL, M/s. TTL (Maharashtra) and
M/s. Reliance for the required SDCAs as per the Interconnection Agreement
signed with them at the earliest.
In compliance with the recommendations of the PAC, instructions have been
issued to M/s. Reliance, M/s. TTL and M/s. TTL (Maharashtra) to expedite
Interconnection and resolve PoI issue. M/s Reliance has reported to have
already resolved all its PoI  issues with regard to USOF RDELs. M/s. TTL and
M/s. TTL (Maharashtra) have also reported to have resolved PoI issues with
regard to USOF RDELs in most of the SDCAs. Hence the matter is being
pursued and the issue has been resolved in most of SDCAs. Further the
RDELs Scheme stands closed on 31.03.2010."
17. The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation, the DoT issued
instructions to Reliance, Tata Teleservices Ltd. and Tata Teleservices Ltd.

8
(Maharashtra) to expedite interconnection and resolve the Points of Interconnection
(Pol) issues.  As a result the defaulting companies were reported to have resolved the
issues in most of the Short Distance Charging Areas (SDCAs). The Committee
would  like to know the  exact  number of  SDCAs where PoI issues have been
resolved. Strangely, however, the Department have remained silent as regards  the
action taken against the defaulting service  providers.  In the opinion of the Committee,
violation of the licence agreement in any form, whether by the licensor or by the
licensees, which utlimately leads to financial irregularities and under performance
in meeting the avowed objectives of the Government, is too serious an issue. The
Committee, therefore, exhort the Department to spell out in no uncertain terms that
there would be zero tolerance for any violation of or deviation from the licence
agreements. Further, the RDEL scheme which was closed on 31st March, 2010 does
not in any way prevent the Department from taking action against the service providers
who violated the licence agreement in the provision of telephone facilities in the rural
areas under that scheme. In fact, the Department ought to discard their attitude of
treating the past violations and wrongdoings as closed chapters and take effective
action both retrospectively and prospectively so that exemplary punishment is meted
out to all the wrongdoers, past being no exception, to be ignored or condoned. The
Committee would like to be expeditiously  apprised of the precise action taken in this
regard by the DoT.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 1)
With effect from March, 1996 the Ministries/Departments are required to furnish
the remedial/corrective  Action Taken Notes to the Public Accounts Committee through
the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on all those Paragraphs of the
Reports of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India, which are not formally taken up
by the Committee for examination and Reports presented thereon. Such remedial/
corrective Action Taken Notes are be furnished within four months of the laying of the
Audit Reports in Parliament. But the Committee's examination of the subject has
revealed that as on 28th February, 2010 remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on a
total number of 3450 Audit Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/
Departments. Out of that, 100 Paragraphs were pending with the Ministry of
Communications and Information Technology (Department of Telecommunications)
as on 19th March, 2010, the breakup being first reply not sent-01; under modifications-
39; sent for copy-58; and sent to Audit-02. It is pertinent to mention here that after the
first reply is sent to Audit by the Ministry/Department concerned, the former seeks
certain clarifications on the replies and the latter are required to furnish such
clarifications in a time bound manner. The Department of Telecommunications cannot
draw solace from the fact that only one paragraph is pending with them so far as the
first reply is concerned. In real terms, as many as 98 paragraphs are pending with them
as on 19th March, 2010, their status not withstanding and only on two paragraphs
remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes have been sent to the Audit. Further, not a
single remedial/corrective Action Taken Note has been furnished to the Public Accounts
Committee. The Department's claim that a procedure has been developed at both the
field and Headquarters level and regular quarterly reviews are being conducted by the
Telecom Commission to ensure timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the Audit
Paragraphs, does not inspire confidence in view of the number of paragraphs still
pending with them. Similarly, the contention that the time limit of four months for
submission of remedial Action Taken Notes seems inadequate for the Department, it
being a vast and big organization, does not find merit with the Committee. Because, the
time limit is prescribed by law and is achievable and also because there are other
Ministries/Departments which are adhering to the time line in furnishing remedial
Action Taken Notes on Audit Paras. The explanation by the Department for delay is
untenable. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department of
Telecommunications to streamline the procedure and strengthen the monitoring systems
with a view to ensuring that the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on audit Paras
are invariably submitted within the prescribed time frame. The Committee further desire
that responsibility be fixed, which has not been done so far, for the inordinate delay in
submission of Action Taken Notes on the Audit Paras in view of the invaluable
9

10
inputs/remedies suggested by the Audit for prompt and appropriate corrective action
on the part of the Ministries/Departments concerned. The Committee also hope that
the remedial/corrective Action Taken Note on the pending audit Paras will be obtained
from the Nodal officers  within one month, as assured, and furnished to the Audit
expeditiously thereafter. Action taken to fix responsibility be informed to the Committee
at the earliest.
[Para No. 1, Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Out of the 100 paragraphs that were pending with the Department of
Telecommunications as on 19th March 2010, 55 Audit paras have been finally closed
after final vetting by the Audit and submission of requisite number of copies in English
and Hindi to the Monitoring Cell in the Ministry of Finance and to the Audit.
The breakup of the balance 45 paras on which A TNs are yet to be submitted is as
follows:
First reply not sent: 0
Under modification: 17
Sent to Audit: 16 (CDOT)
Sent for Copies: 12
The Department would like to apprise the Committee that apart from the quarterly
reviews conducted by the Telecom Commission, a Standing Audit Committee (SAC)
has been constituted to monitor and review the progress of submission of ATNs on a
monthly basis and to take remedial measures. DG Audit is a special invitee to the SAC
which is chaired by the Secretary of the Department. The SAC would ensure that the
remaining ATNs on Audit paras are submitted to the Audit within the shortest possible
time. The Department is also in constant touch with the Audit to ensure proper
coordination and reconciliation of ATNs on Audit Paras.
Nodal Officers of the level of Joint Secretaries and above were nominated in the
Department to ensure timely submission of the ATNs on Audit paras concerning their
sphere of work. Also in accordance with the decision taken in the first meeting of the
Committee of Secretaries, on the delay in submission of ATNs on Audit paras, all the
Nodal Officers have been asked to organize ATN Adalats/workshops every quarter
inviting representatives of the Audit, to resolve and finalize pending ATN/ATRs. The
Nodal Officers have also been directed to fix responsibility for the delay in submission
of ATNs.
Efforts are also being made to ensure that the ATNs on all new Audit paras are
submitted within the stipulated time frame.
The Department again assures the Committee of its commitment in submission of
pending ATNs on all Audit paras within the shortest possible time.
[Ministry of Communications & Information Technology/Department of
Telecommunications No. 27-5/2010-AC/PAC, dated 19.10.2010]

11
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF AUDIT, P&T, DELHI-110054
Ministry may refer to their communication No. 27-9A/2008-AC dated 20.10.2010
forwarding therewith Action Taken Note on Recommendations/Observations on
Para No. 1, 14th Report of 15th Lok Sabha on Administration of USO Fund. The Para
No. 1 of  14th Report of 15th Lok Sabha on Administration of USO Fund are returned
with the following remarks:
"Para 1 of Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned with the remarks ‘No Comments’.”
This issues with the approval of the Director General of Audit, P&T.
Sd/-
Deputy Director (Report)
Ambika Prasad,  ADG (AC), Department of Telecommunications, Sanchar Bhawan,
New Delhi.
DGAP&T U.O. No. Rep-Civil/2(d)8621/266 Dated: 26 October, 2010
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF AUDIT, P&T, DELHI-110054
Ministry may refer to their communication No. 27-9A/2008-AC dated 1 September
2010 forwarding therewith Action Taken Note on Recommendations/Observations/
para raised in 14th Report of 15th Lok Sabha on Administration of USO Fund. The ATN
is returned with the remarks as shown in the enclosed Annexure.
This issues with the approval of the Director General of Audit, P&T.
Sd/-
Deputy Director (Report)
Ambika Prasad,  ADG (AC), Department of Telecommunications, Sanchar Bhawan,
New Delhi.
DGAP&T  U.O. No. Rep-Civil/2(d)8621/185 Dated: 20 September, 2010

ANNEXURE
Para No. Audit Remarks
Para  2,  part  II  of  the Para 2, part-II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Fourteenth Report of Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
the Public Accounts with the remarks "Ministry may continue to make
Committee (Fifteenth efforts to get the full amount collected as Universal
Lok Sabha) Service Levy credited to the USO Fund".
Para  3,  part  II  of  the Para 3, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Fourteenth Report of  Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
the Public Accounts with the remarks "No Comments".
Committee (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha)
Para 4, part II of the
Fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
Para 5, part II of the
Fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
Para 6, part II of the
fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
Para 7, part II of the
Fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
Para 8, part II of the
Fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
Para 9, part II of the
Fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
12
Para 4, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks "No Comments".
Para 5, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks "No Comments".
Para 6, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks "No Comments".
Para 7, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks "No Comments".
Para 8, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks that all efforts be made to ensure that
the USPs submit the Auditors Reports within a definite
time frame to the concerned CCAs who, in turn, should
expeditiously forward the reports to the Headquarters
for reconciliation with the claims.
Para 9, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks "No Comments".

13
Para 10, part II of the
Fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
Para 12, part II of the
Fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
Para 13, part II of the
Fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
Para 14, part II of the
Fourteenth Report of the
Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
Para  Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14 are duly vetted by DG Audit (P&T) and  Para
Nos. 2, 8, 10 under modification vide DGAP&T U.O. No. Rep.-Civil/2(d)8621/185,
Dated : 20.9.2010.
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee note that the available balance in the USO Fund as on 31st  March,
2009 was Rs. 12,811.28 crore including the allotted fund of Rs. 2400 crore during the
financial year 2009-10. The collection of USL since inception  i.e. from 2002 is
Rs. 25331.36 crore. It implies that utilization of USO Fund has been around fifty
per cent only in all these years. The Committee, however, find that some schemes like
Second and Third Phases of Mobile Infrastructure, Non-conventional Energy for Rural
Area, Broadband connectivity on wireless and Augmentation of  Optical Fibre  Network
and Pilot Projects towards support for renewable energy resources and solar mobile
charging stations in villages are under formulation and planned to be executed in the
next three to five years time frame. The department expects that once the above schemes
are operationalised, the outflow from the USO Fund would increase. In this context,
the Committee would like to point out that there should not be any let up in the optimal
utilization of the funds, especially when eight important on-going activities viz. Provision
of  Village Public Telephones (VPTs), Rural Community Phones (RCPs), Rural Direct
Exchange Lines (RDELs), replacement of Multi Access Radio Relay (MARR) VPTs etc.
Para 10, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks "Department should impress upon
BSNL and other USPs to speed up provision of
interconnectivity while creating network for various
schemes towards expansion of rural telephony to ensure
that the purpose is well served. It is further suggested
that violations of the licence agreement by those
concerned need to be accounted for in terms of
corrective, remedial and penal action against defaulters".
Para 12, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks "No Comments".
Para 13, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks "No Comments".
Para 14, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public
Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned
with the remarks "No Comments".
Para No. Audit Remarks

14
are getting subsidy support from the USO Fund. The Committee, therefore, impress
upon the Department and the USO Fund Administration to ensure that USO Fund is
purposely disbursed towards the ongoing activities for faster expansion of rural
telephony. The Committee also desire that the planned schemes, as stated above, be
executed expeditiously and efficiently towards better utilization of the USO Fund and
consequently better telecom infrastructure in the rural areas in the years ahead.
[Para 3, Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
In respect of ongoing activities, USO fund is being disbursed towards operation
and maintenance of VPTs, replacement of MARR, VPTs, provision of RCPs, VPTs in
uncovered villages, provision of Rural House hold Direct Exchange Lines (RDELs)
and Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme.
USOF has in the recent past launched following new schemes:
(i) Rural Wireline Broadband Scheme.
(ii) Provision of VPTs in the newly identified uncovered villages.
(iii) Optical Fibre Network Augmentation, Creation and Management of Intra-
District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in service area of ASSAM.
(iv) Pilot project for use of Renewable Energy Resources (Solar, Wind, Diesel
Hybrid) solutions in USOF's Mobile Infrastructure-Phase I sites.
(v) Pilot project for solar mobile charging stations in villages through TERI's
project of Lighting a Billion Lives (LaBL).
Further, in order to optimally utilize USO Fund, following schemes are under
formulation, which are planned to be executed during the next three to five years time
frame.
(i) Second Phase of Mobile Infrastructure Scheme.
(ii) Support for use of  Non-Conventional Energy for Rural Telecommunications.
(iii) Rural Wireless Broadband Scheme-Phase I.
(iv) Satellite Broadband connectivity for Rural & Remote Areas.
(v) Creation of General Infrastructure like OFC-Augmentation, Creation and
Management of Intra-District SDHQ-DHQ OFC Network in States other than
Assam.
(vi) OFC connectivity to 2.5 lakh Village Panchayats.
(vii) Pilot Projects for induction of new technological developments in rural
telecommunications.

15
Once the schemes are made operational, it is assumed that outflow from the Fund
will increase.
The Para is vetted by D.G . Audit (P&T)  with no Comments vide his Letter No. D6(A)
(P&T) U.O. No. Rep-Civil/2(d) 8621/185, dated 20-09-2010.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
F.No. 30-3/2010-USOF (PAC) dated 9.8.2010]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 4)
When Audit carried out the performance review of the Department of
Telecommunications for the year ended March, 2007, it pointed out that rural tele-
density in the States/Service Areas such as Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh,
Assam, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal ranged from merely 0.88 to
1.81 per cent. A representative of the Department of Telecommunications clarified in
evidence that the tele-density in Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Assam and combinedly in
Madhya Pradesh & Chhattisgarh stood at 12.26; 23.04; 16.37; and 12.59 per cent
respectively as on 31st December, 2009. As on the same date, the all India rural
tele-density was 21 per cent whereas  it was a mere 0.98 percent in 1998. The Committee
feel that rural tele-density has not kept pace with the massive expansion in the Telecom
sector in the country in general and the impressive growth in the urban connectivity in
particular. The Committee were informed that in order to bridge the rural-urban divide,
the Department, through the USO Fund, have taken up a number of schemes/activities
like installation of Rural Household Direct Exchange Lines (RDELs) in 1685 Short
Distance Charging Areas (SDCAs); launching of Shared Mobile Infrastructure Schemes
to provide subsidy support for setting up and managing 7383 sites/towers in 500
Districts spread over 27 States for provision of mobile services in the specified rural
and remote areas where there is no fixed wireless or mobile coverage; and proposals to
set up additional 10,000 towers in rural and remote areas in 2010-11 under phase II of
the Shared Mobile Infrastructure Schemes and setting up of 5,000 more towers under
Micro Telecom Systems' in isolated and remote uncovered villages/cluster of villages
having scattered population. The Committee feel that these are steps in right direction
and the momentum should be maintained throughout to give a fillip to rural
tele-density. The rate of increase in rural tele-density has been picking up since the last
few years when provision of affordable mobile telephones in rural areas gained
momentum. In that context, Shared Mobile Infrastructure scheme, where a number of
service providers can share one site/tower is an idea which should be seriously
implemented so that the gap between rural tele-density and urban connectivity is
bridged faster and significantly.
[Para 4, Part II of the Fourteenth  Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
As on 30.04.2010, the rural tele-density in Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Assam and
combined tele-density in Madhya Pradesh & Chhattisgarh stood at 15.21, 25.96, 18.99

16
and 16.11 per cent respectively. The overall rural tele-density of the country was
24.97%. Thus rural tele-density has increased significantly. The figures are tabulated
below:—
Name of State Rural Tele-density as on 30.04.2010
Assam 18.99
Bihar (Jharkhand) 15.21
Jammu & Kashmir 25.96
Madhya Pradesh (including Chhattisgarh) 16.11
All India Average 24.97
The various USO Fund schemes such provision of individual rural DELS, Phase I
of Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme etc. have contributed in improving the
tele-density in rural areas.
At the time of setting up of USO Fund, the thrust was on Public access as large
number  of villages did not have any telephone connectivity. Even the public phones
connected in a large number of villages were not functioning properly. The operational
expenses being incurred by the service providers were also very high for the VPTs
working in rural and remote areas. To overcome these difficulties, the Universal Service
Support Policy (USSP) adopted by DoT focused on Public Access facility to be provided
to the villages in form of VPT, RCP and Replacement of non-functional VPTs.
Subsequently these guidelines of the USSP were reflected in the Rural governing USO
Fund. To implement various streams defined in the said Rules, provison of Public
Access under Stream-I was taken up on priority.
Further, in order to bridge the rural-urban divide, Stream-II was taken up where the
focus was on provision of individual telephone lines in the rural and remote areas. In
the first two years of the launch of the scheme, the service providers were required to
create the requisite infrastructure like setting up of rural exchanges, WLL equipment,
towers, backhaul, PoIs, core network and associated infrastructure for providing the
rural lines in the eligible 1685 SDCAs in the country. In all about 25 Lakh rural lines
were provided by the service providers during the period 01.04.2005 to 31.03.2007 out
of which about 4 lakh lines were provided in the first year while about 21 lakh lines were
provided in the second year. Taking into consideration the overwhelming response to
the scheme and to utilize the infrastructure thus created for provision of more number
of rural lines, the scheme was extended till 31.03.2009, which was further extended up
to 31.03.2010. As on 31.03.2010, 79.3 lakh RDELs were provided under this scheme with
the subsidy support from USOF.
Parallely, under Stream III another scheme was launched in June 2007 to provide
subsidy support for setting up and managing 7871 (revised to 7387) number of
infrastructure sites spread over 500 districts in 27 States for provision of Mobile
services in the specified rural & remote areas. The infrastructure so created is being
shared by three service providers for provision of mobile services including other
Wireless Access Services like Wireless on Local Loop (WLL) using Fixed/Mobile

17
terminals in the specified rural and remote areas, where there is no existing fixed wireless
or mobile coverage. About 2 lakh villages are likely to be covered under this scheme.
The agreements signed with the successful  bidders are effective from 01.06.2007. It is
estimated that additional capacity of 24 million new lines shall be created through the
infrastructure so created under this scheme. As on 31.05.2010, 7163 towers have been
set up under this scheme.
The above measures have formed part of the overall increase in the rural tele-
density from an insignificant figure of 0.40 in 1998 to 24.97 as on 30.04.2010. USO Fund
is making all out efforts to implement Phase-II of Shared Mobile Infrastructure in a
timely manner during the period 2010-12. All these above schemes help in creation of
Infrastructure in rural and remote areas of the country which in turn shall enable
further increase in the rural tele-density and bridging the gap between rural and urban
tele-density. The basic aim of USO Fund schemes is to seed the rural areas thereby
creating enabling environment for the market forces to take over.
The Para is vetted by Audit with no comments vide DG (A)  P&T U.O. No.
Rep. Civil/2(d) 8621/185 dated 20.09.2010.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications,
F.No. 30.3.2010 USOF (PAC) dated 9.8.2010)]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note that out of the target of 62, 302 Village Public Telephone
(VPTs) under Bharat Nirman Programme, 61,526 VPTs have already been provided as
on 31st January, 2010. Similarly, BSNL, which has been given time till February, 2011 to
provide 62,443 VPTs in the remaining uncovered villages as per the 2001 census
irrespective of their population and geographical location, has been able to provide
37,325 VPTs as on 31st January, 2010. As provision of VPTs is one of the most important
measures towards expansion of rural telephony, the Committee desire the Department
of Telecommunications and the USO Fund Administration to effectively monitor the
progress in this regard so as to ensure that approximately 1000 VPTs under Bharat
Nirman Programme and approximately 25,000 VPTs in the remaining uncovered villages
as per the 2001 census are provided by February, 2011, the target date as given to
BSNL. The Committee also recommend that the Department should impress upon the
service provider to take adequate measures for the upkeep and maintenance of the
VPTs already provided so that all the 5.93 lakh inhabited villages avail effective telecom
facilities and the subsidy support from the USO Fund is appropriately utilized.
[Para 5,  Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
As on 31.05.2010, 61704 VPTs out of 62302 VPTs to be provided under Bharat
Nirman have been installed. The remaining 598 VPTs are expected to be set up by
September 2010. As regards the VPTs to be provided in the newly identified uncovered
villages as per Census 2001, 39199 VPTs have been provided as on 31.05.2010 out of
the 62443 VPTs to be provided under this Agreement. Thus in all about 5.7 Lakh

18
villages out of the 5.93 lakh inhabited villages as per Census 2001 have been provided
with VPT facility as on 31.05.2010. The remaining villages are likely to be provided with
VPT facility in a phased manner by February 2011. Regular review meetings are being
carried out at the level of Administrator, USO Fund with CMD, BSNL to provide the
balance VPTs expeditiously.
Terms and conditions of the agreements signed with USPs provide for proper
maintenance and performance monitoring of VPTs. The USPs are supposed to maintain
a record of faults and rectification reports and other related details in respect of the
service rendered. Further, as per Agreement, the USPs shall be responsive to the
complaints lodged by its customers. They are required to rectify the deficiencies and
maintain history sheets for each installation apart from statistics and analysis on the
overall maintenance status. Further proper arrangement shall be made by the USPs for
reporting/booking faulty service and its regular testing. Print out of line tests and
records of Metered Call Units (MCUs) are to be preserved by the Universal Service
Provider.
CCAs also verify the functional status of the services being provided by the
USPs by carrying out regular field visits and prescribed inspections on regular basis.
In the context of monitoring of facilities to be provided in VPTs, based on inputs
received from CCA offices, effective measures have been taken by USOF Administration
towards improvement in the maintenance of VPTs as briefly outlined below:
I. Reference was made from the Administrator, USOF to the CMD, BSNL vide
DO letter dated 12.9.2007, pointing out certain shortcomings based on the
feedback on functioning of VPTs, received from field units of DoT and to
remove such shortcomings. In particular BSNL was requested to review the
position regarding provision of STD facilities and charge indicators to VPTs,
commission rates and security deposit for VPTs, powering of VPTs/RCPs on
CDMA Technology, disconnection of VPTs and possibility of prepaid mode
of payment for VPTs, creation of public awareness & ensuring public access
for VPTs and provision of genuine and effective grievance redressal
mechanisms etc.
II. Meeting was held by Administrator, USOF with the CMD, BSNL on 16.12.2007
regarding improvement in functioning of VPTs. Minutes of the meeting were
forwarded to BSNL vide letter dt. 4.12.2007 for time bound action plan agreed
upon in the meeting.
III. In order to take follow up action on the decisions taken in the meeting of
Administrator, USOF with CMD, BSNL to discuss remedial actions needed
for improving the performance of VPTs, a D.O. reference was made by BSNL
Corporate office to the Chief General Manager, BSNL circles vide letter
dt. 30.11.2007.
IV . All CCA offices were addressed vide letter dt. 20.12.2007 enclosing therewith
a copy of letter dt. 30.11.2009 from BSNL to CGMs of BSNL circles, for
monitoring the action points decided in the meeting of Administrator, USOF
with CMD, BSNL and to furnish feedback to USOF (HQs.) regarding the
performance of USOF sponsored schemes.

19
V. Vide USOF letter dt. 1.4.2008, DDG (RN) was requested to furnish progress
on each of the agenda items discussed in the meeting dt. 16.11.2007 with
CMD, BSNL.
VI. Feedback in reference to USOF letter dt. 1.4.2008 was received from BSNL
Corporate office vide letter dt. 23.4.2008.
VII. On review of feedback received from BSNL, it was noticed that some of the
issues highlighted in the meeting dt. 16.11.2007 of the Administrator, USOF
with CMD,  BSNL had not been followed up entirely in keeping with the spirit
of the decisions made in the meeting. A, D.O. reference was therefore, made
by Administrator, USOF to the CMD, BSNL vide letter dt. 8.5.2008 for personal
attention on certain issues so as to ensure that the VPT becomes a self-
sustaining and financially viable means of public access to the rural
population.
VIII. Based on the progress report submitted by BSNL w.r.t. the agenda points of
the meeting dt. 16.11.2007, CCA offices were requested to provide detailed
feedback on the various agenda points, vide letter dt. 13.5.2008.
IX. A reference was made to CMD, BSNL vide letter dt. 18.9.2008 pointing out
poor functioning of VPTs in Tamil  Nadu circle, with the request to take urgent
action towards proper implementation of the terms and conditions of the VPT
Agreements and the instructions issued by USOF (HQs) and BSNL C.O. for
improving the functioning of VPTs.
X. A D.O. reference was made from Administrator, USOF to the CMD, BSNL vide
letter dt. 9.1.2009 with the request inter alia to ensure that due care is taken
by BSNL towards proper field level implementation of USO schemes and
correct submission of subsidy claims.
As stated above, concerted efforts are being made to bring about improvement in
the functioning and performance of VPTs and the entire system is being closely and
effectively monitored. Further, based upon past experience and inputs of field units, in
subsequent VPT Agreements, conditions relating to subsidy payment have been further
tightened to ensure adherence by USPs to provisions relating to aspects such as
public access, solar chargers, charge indicators and sign boards etc.
Further, in addition to above, a new sample based procedure for physical
inspection and verification of VPTs has been evolved vide letter No. 30-12/2007-USOF
dt. 28.10.2009 and is being implemented.
Review is carried out on regular basis to bring about improvement in system.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
F.No. 30-3/2010-USOF (PAC) dated 9.8.2010]
The para is vetted by D.G. Audit (CP&T) with no comments vide his letter No. DG
P&T U.O. No. Rep-Civil/2(d) 8621/185, dt. 20.9.2010.

20
Observation/Recommendation  (Para No. 6)
Replacement of dysfunctional VPTs working on Multi Access Radio Relay (MARR)
technology is another activity which gets subsidy support from the USO Fund. Audit
pointed out that the service providers could not achieve the targets for replacement of
MARR VPTs even after one year of the extended period. The Department have clarified
that as on 31st July, 2009, 1,37,906 MARR VPTs, out of a total number of 1,38,406 such
VPTs have already been replaced. The Committee is informed that as on 31st January,
2010, 1,84,521 MARR VPTs, out of a total number of 1,85,121 such VPTs have been
replaced. In this context, the Committee would like to point out that the Department/
USO Fund Administration have perhaps not yet been able to identify the exact number
of MARR VPTs that needs to be replaced with alternate technologies. This could be
corroborated from the above facts and figures furnished by the Department which
indicates that approximately 50,000 more MARR VPTs have surfaced between
July, 2009 and January, 2010. It is, therefore, imperative that the total number of
dysfunctional VPTs working on the faulty MARR technology in the entire country be
clearly identified and yearly targets be fixed for their replacement with other reliable
technologies in a time-bound manner. The Committee is of the view that the exercise of
the replacement of MARR based VPTs, which was initiated long back should now be
taken to its logical conclusion in view of the extensions already granted to the service
provider as well as the subsidy support given from the USO Fund.
[Para 6, Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Two Agreements were signed with BSNL for the replacement of dysfunctional
MARR VPTs. One was for 45649 MARR VPTs replaced between 01.04.2002 & 30.06.2003
while the other one was for the replacement of 1,41,223 MARR VPTs to be replaced
after 01.07.2003. Thus in all 1,86,872 MARR based VPTs were to be replaced in
different Service Areas. M/s BSNL carried out reconciliation of the total number of
MARR based VPTs, which had already been replaced between 01.04.2002 & 30.06.2003
as well as MARR VPTs to be replaced after 01.07.2003. As a result of this exercise, the
figures were revised in October, 2008 for already replaced MARR VPTs to 47,075 and
also for MARR VPTs to be replaced after 01.07.2003 to 1,38,046. Thus the overall
figures of MARR VPTs to be replaced were revised from 1,86,872 to 1,85,121.
All the 47,075 MARR VPTs to be replaced between 01.04.2002 and 30.06.2003 have
been replaced. Out of the 1,38,046 MARR VPTs to be replaced after 01.07.2003;
1,37,446 MARR VPTs have been replaced so far. Thus there is no ambiguity with
regards to the number of MARR VPTs to be replaced. The overall number of MARR
VPTs that have been replaced so far is 184521 out of 185121. BSNL is being impressed
upon to replace the remaining 600 MARR VPTs in a time-bound manner.
BSNL has reservations in replacing the remaining 600 MARR VPTs with feasible
technology like DSPT within the ambit of the present Agreement as technology specific
rates are not defined in the present MARR Agreement as DSPT technology was not an
option at the time of signing of the Agreement. BSNL has requested for DSPT

21
rates for the replacement of the pending 600 MARR VPTs stating that there is no
possibility of network reaching these locations in the near future being extremely
remote and techno commercially non-viable. As these dysfunctional MARR VPTs
need to be replaced to meet the Governments' objective of providing Village Public
Telephone facility in all inhabited villages by Feb., 2011, the request of BSNL for
providing DSPT rates for replacement of the pending 600 MARR VPTs has been
agreed to.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
F. No. 30-3/2010-USOF (PAC) dated 9.8.2010]
The para is vetted by DG  Audit with no comments vide his letter No. DG P&T
U.O. No. Rep-Civil/2(d)8621/185, dt. 20.9.2010.
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee note that as a result of the Audit verification in some service areas,
there has been a difference of 38,072 VPTs i.e. between the VPTs eligible for subsidy
and the VPTs for which subsidy has actually paid. It has resulted in excess disbursement
of Rs. 9.25 crore and no recovery has been made. The Committee also find that subsidy
has been paid in some service areas like Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan and Madhya
Pradesh despite the fact that the VPTs in these areas recorded zero/non-incremental
meter reading for the entire quarter. It has resulted in excess payment of subsidy to the
tune of Rs. 2.18 crore. That the Department have recovered/adjusted excess subsidy
payment of Rs. 5.09 crore, Rs. 1.60 crore, Rs. 46 lakh, Rs. 13.85 lakh and Rs. 10.95 lakh
in West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh and Tamil Nadu Telecom
circles respectively is no consolation to the Committee as excess payment of subsidy
should not have been made at all and whenever it is made it implies that subsidy
payment is disbursed without proper verification of records. The Department have
reported that the affidavit by the Universal Service Providers (USPs), Auditors' Reports,
post-payment verification of claim, field inspection, clauses existing in the USOF
agreement and a number of instructions issued are adequate safeguards in ensuring
disbursement of appropriate subsidy. But the Committee feel that all the above reported
measures will be of little use unless the monitoring system is strengthened. The
Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department to further tighten the monitoring
mechanism at every level to ensure that subsidy is disbursed only to eligible VPTs and
there is no recurrence of cases of excess payment from the USO Fund. The Department's
deposition that based on Audit input, they are trying to tighten the system is encouraging
and that is precisely why the Committee desire that compliance Action Taken Notes,
indicating corrective action taken on the observations/suggestions contained in the
C&AG Reports, should be furnished within the prescribed time frame.
[Para 7, Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
USOF payments for VPT Agreements are made upon submission of quarterly
claims by service providers and are spread over the period of the concerned Agreement
(7-8 years). The USPs are required to submit subsidy claims with the respective CCA
offices for VPTs already commissioned at the end of the concerned quarter in accordance

22
with the provisions contained in the concerned USO Agreements and instructions
issued from USO HQ from time to time. Along with the claims an affidavit duly signed
by the authorized signatory of the USP and the supporting documents such as billing
records etc. in support of VPT having been installed and/or functional, are also to be
submitted. If at the time of scrutiny of the claims it is noticed that prima facie the claims
are ineligible because of contravention of USO Agreements and extent instructions,
such claims are disallowed. The affidavit is an undertaking which essentially states
that the claim has been prepared as per agreement. Post-payment verification of claims
and field inspections are also conducted as per the prescribed procedures. These
procedures are reviewed periodically and additional checks prescribed where required,
based on the inputs received from CCAs. Wherever excess subsidy payment is noted,
it is adjusted from subsequent claims along with interest where due. The Auditors'
report submitted every financial year by the service provider in support of the
authenticity of the claim is an added safeguard over and above the prescribed checks
and procedures mentioned above.
Taking cognizance of the fact that in some cases, subsidy claims being submitted
by BSNL were at variance with the billing data (and the resultant wrong claims
submissions), the following measures have been taken to improve the claims submission
and verification process:
(i) Instructions had already been issued for hundred percent verification of
claims with reference to billing record/SRC vide letter No. 30-15/2004-USOF (V ol. III)
dated 16.12.2004, to weed out in-eligible numbers. However, upon finding that the
work was incomplete in some CCAs, detailed instructions were issued for completion
of verification of VPTs with reference to the SRCs vide letter No. 30-15/2004-USOF
dated 23.5.2008.
(ii) Instructions were issued vide letter No. 1-1/2007-USOF dated 19.11.2007 to
the effect that the claims from Q.E. December 2007 onward are required to contain
separate list of Non-Incremental Meter Reading (NIMR)/Closed/Disconnection Due
to Non Payment (DNP) numbers. This list is to be based upon billing data and is
required to be duly certified by the concerned officer incharge of billing.
(iii) As per instructions issued vide letter No. 1-1/2008/USOF-337 to 362 dated
6.5.2008, the claims from Q.E. June 2008 onwards are required to be certified by concerned
GM/DGM (TR) of concerned BSNL circles to the effect that information furnished in
the claims tallies with the billing records.
However, in view of the observations/recommendations of PAC, in order to further
tighten the monitoring mechanism to ensure that subsidy is disbursed only to eligible
VPTs, instructions have been issued to CCAs vide letter No. 30-15/2004-USOF
(Vol. III)(Pt)/1401-1423 dated 20-07-2010 that w.e.f. Q.E. June 2010, the subsidy
claims under VPT Agreement (s) may be settled only after conducting 100%
verification of VPTs claimed against the billing records.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
F. No. 30-3/2010-USOF (PAC) dated 9.8.2010]
The para is vetted by DG P&T with no comments vide his letter No. DG P&T
U.O. No. Rep-Civil/2(d) 8621/185, dated 20.9.2010.

23
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that the USPs are required to submit the Auditors' Reports
to the CCA offices concerned. But the Committee find out that the Auditors' Reports
for the year 2004-05 of all the service areas were not available at the USO Headquarter
and the disbursement of subsidy of Rs. 1314 crore to six service providers was to be
reconciled vis-a-vis the Auditors' Reports. The Committee also find that BSNL,
Reliance Communications Ltd. and Tata Teleservices Ltd. did not submit the Auditors'
Reports for the year 2005-06 within the stipulated time schedule and disbursement of
subsidy of Rs. 7.59 crore remained to be certified by the Auditors even after a lapse
of two years since the C&AG carried out the performance audit. The Department
have submitted before the Committee that subsequent to the Audit observations all
the Certificates/Auditors' Reports have been received and recoveries, wherever due
have been effected/adjusted and thus, the disbursement of the subsidy amount and
relevant claims stand reconciled. The Committee are not satisfied with the Department's
deposition. In fact, the Committee are surprised over the fact that even when the
submission of Auditors' Reports by the USPs is based on self-certification basis, the
service providers defaulted on that count. More astonishingly, subsidy was disbursed
even in the absence of the Auditors' Reports and no actions were taken against the
defaulting service providers, as candidly admitted by the representative of the DOT
in evidence. In view of the fact that timely submission of the Auditors' Reports is a
safeguard to ensure no excess payments of subsidy, the Committee desire the
Department to ensure that the USPs submit the Auditors’ Reports within a definite
time frame to the concerned CCAs who, in turn, should expeditiously forward the
Reports to the Headquarters for reconciliation with the claims. The Committee desire
that the entire process should be further tightened and suitable action taken against
the defaulting USPs and the CCAs for non-compliance. The Committee also
recommend that the measures initiated by the Department to ensure proper and
timely verifications of the claims submitted by the USPs should be intensified further
so that subsidy support from USO Fund is released only for the services actually
commissioned by the service providers.
[Para 8, Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Audit Remarks
DG P&T Audit, has returned the ATN to the above para stating that “All efforts
be made to ensure that the USPs submit the Auditors' Report within a definite time-
frame to the concerned CCAs who, should expeditiously forward the report to the
headquarters for the reconciliation of claims”.
Action Taken by the Government
The procedure prescribed, as per instructions issued to CCA offices vide letter
No. 1-7/2007/USOF- Auditors’ Reports/1027-1061 dated 11.9.2007 and corrigendum

24
dated 14.9.2007 is being followed for authentication of subsidy claims for subsequent
years also.
In view of the observations of the PAC and above remarks of DG P&T Audit, to
ensure that the service providers submit the Auditors' Report within a definite time
frame to the concerned CCAs so as to enable timely verification of the claims submitted
by the service providers, instructions have been issued to all USPs/IPs vide letter No.
1-7/2008-USOF/Auditors' Reports/1110-1158 dt. 28.6.2010 with copy to all CCAs
impressing upon them the requirement of strict observance of the concerned service
areas/USOF (HQ) as per provisions of USO Agreements. It has been specifically
mentioned that in case of non-filing of Auditors' Reports within the stipulated time
limit, the subsidy disbursed based on quarterly claim statements of previous year(s)
may not be considered to be finally adjusted. As such subsidy paid would be liable to be
recovered/adjusted along with interest at the PLR of the SBI from the subsidy claims
of subsequent period/any other claim (including invoking of set off clause of the USO
Agreements), by treating the entire amount as 'excess payment' being not certified
by the Auditors. Suitable instructions in this regard have also been issued to the
CCAs for acting upon these directions. This office has reiterated the instructions to
concerned CCAs and IPs/USPs to ensure the timely submission of Auditors' Report
and intimate recovery particulars to Head quarter vide this office letter No. 1-7/2007-
USOF dated 1.9.2010 resultant that the Auditors' Report from all CCAs for 2007-08
have been received and excess payment pointed out by Auditors have been recovered
in all cases. The Auditors’ Reports due for 2008-09 have largely been received from
CCAs and in the small number of cases where the same have not been received,
recoveries are being effected. Thus, it may kindly be seen that in pursuance of
recommendations of PAC the system of monitoring has been suitably tightened further
to ensure that all Auditors certificates due are received and necessary action for
reconciliation/recovery is effected in time.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
F. No. 30-3/2010-USOF (PAC) dated 12.10.2010]
The para 8 of part II of the 14th Report of the PAC (15th Lok Sabha) has been
vetted with the remarks "No Comments" vide DGA P&T U.O. No. Rep-Civil/2(d) 8621/
263, dated 20.10.2010.
Comments of the Committee
Please see paragraph No. 11 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 9)
When the performance audit of the USO Fund Administration was carried out it
was found that claims amounting to Rs. 407.83 crore pertaining to different USPs were
pending for settlement due to delays on the part of the service providers in furnishing
the requisite clarifications or additional information as well as on the part of the USO
Headquarters in providing clarifications sought for by the CCAs. However, pursuant
to the Audit observations, vigorous efforts have been made by the Department and

25
the system has reportedly been improved considerably. As a result of the maintenance
of an accurate data base and its scrupulous monitoring in regard to receipt of claims,
settlement and pending prosition thereof, the pending claims have come down to
Rs. 24 crore as on 11 March, 2010. The Committee are not convinced with the argument
that as the process of settlement of claims of the USPs is a protracted one some delay
in this regard is inevitable. It is true that withholding the claims is a form of internal
control exercised by the CCAs to ensure accuracy, but it is also a fact that the need for
withholding the claims arises only when there are deficiencies in the pre and post claim
verification method. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Department and the
USO Fund Administration to streamline the system of settlement claims by adhering to
a clear-cut and definite time schedule and resorting to a foolproof verification mechanism
so that settlement of genuine claims are not delayed inordinately. Steps in this direction
may be brought to the attention of the Committee.
[Para 9, Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
As per financial conditions of Agreement, the USO claims should generally be
settled within thirty days of receipt. This fact has been impressed upon to the CCA
offices.
Detailed instructions were issued vide letter No. 1-1/2008-USOF (Payments)/206-
230 dt. 17.4.2008 for observance of prescribed time schedule  for settlement of claims.
The instructions in this regard were reiterated vide letter No. 1-1/2009-USOF/
Claim-Corr./1364-1385 dt. 10.9.2009. It was also specified in the letter ibid that even in
exceptional circumstances the process should be completed before receipt of claims of
subsequent quarters. However, there may be occasions that due to various reasons
some amount is kept withheld for want of certain information/document from the USP,
which causes delay in final settlement of such claims.
Vigorous pursuance is made by USO Administration for timely settlement of USO
subsidy claims. In this connection repeated instructions have been issued to CCAs,
including recently issued instructions vide letters No. 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./
714-736 dt. 2.6.2010 and  No. 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./1060-1082 dt. 28.6.2010.
In the All India CCAs Conference held on May, 10-11, 2010 in USO (HQ), the
status of unsettled/withheld claims was also discussed in detail and a definite time
schedule has been drawn for final settlement of all claims up to Q.E. Dec. 2009 and
submission of compliance report thereof to USO (HQ).
As a result of vigorous pursuance, no claim up to Q.E. Dec. 2006 (as pointed out
in the C&AG report) is lying unsettled. In fact, no claim up to Q.E. Mar. 2009 is lying
unsettled. However, claims for a small amount of Rs. 19.35 Cr. up to Q.E. Dec. 2006 are
lying withheld for the clearance of which a definite time schedule has been drawn and
is being monitored.

26
The timely settlement of unsettled/withheld claims is thus being closely and
effectively monitored.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
F. No. 30-3/2010-USOF (PAC) dated 9.8.2010]
The para is vetted by DG (P&T) Audit with No Comments vide his letter No. DG
P&T U.O. No. Rep-Civil/2(d) 8621/185, dated 20.9.2010.
Comments of the Committee
Please see paragraph No. 14 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that in the Andhra Pradesh Telecom Circle, none of the
service providers, except Tata Teleservices Ltd., had furnished operator-wise detail of
pass through charges in the Adjusted Gross Revenue (AGR) Statements for the years
2005-06 and 2006-07. The Department have stated that as per the proforma prescribed,
the operator-wise details on account of pass-through charges from other operators is
not required. The Committee feel that the contention of the department is not tenable
as Para D-IV of the format submitted alongwith the Action Taken to Audit specifies
that operators have to depict the pass-through charges in Revenue section of the
format ibid. As in the absence of the details of the pass-through charges in the AGR,
the authenticity/correctness of the amount of USL collected cannot be vouched for in
audit, the Committee recommend that henceforth the operator-wise details on account
of pass-through charges from other operators should invariably be included in the
AGR. Non-insistence/enforcement of this condition is a serious default on the part of
the Department.
[Para No. 11, Part-II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Necessary amendments have been made by the licensing branch in the license
agreement vide order No. 20-271/2010-AS-I-UASL dated 31.8.2010 and order No. 20-
271/2010-AS-I-CMTS. The extracts of the same are reproduced as under:—
1. “In pursuance of Condition 5.1 of the UAS License Agreement(s), the Licensor
hereby substitute the APPENDIX-II to ANNEXURE-II— Format of Statement
of Revenue and License Fee of the Unified Access Services (UAS) License
Agreement with the APPENDIX-II to ANNEXURE-II Format of statement of
Revenue and License Fee as annexed to this amendment with effect from
1.9.2010.” (Copy enclosed)
2. “In exercise of the power conferred in the Cellular Mobile Service (CMTS)
license agreement, the LICENSOR hereby substitutes the APEENDIX-II to
ANNEXURE-II— 'Format of Statement of Revenue and License Fee' of the
Unified Access Services (UAS) License Agreement with the 'Format of
Statement of Revenue and License Fee' as annexed to this amendment with
effect from 1.9.2010.” (Copy enclosed)

27
In this connection, reply in the A TN format in respect of CAG Para No. 1.7.2.1 of
C&AG Report No. PA of 2008 has also been revised and sent for vetting remarks vide
letter No. 27-9A/2008-AC, dated 17.9.2010. (Copy enclosed)
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
File No. 5/2010/LF-I, dated 01.10.2010)]
Para No. 11, Part-II of PAC has been vetted by DG Audit (P&T) vide U.No.
Rep-Civil/12 (d) 8621/219, dated 1.10.2010.
Action Taken Note on the Report of C&AG of India  for the year ended
31st March, 2008
Sl. No. Item No. Para-wise Remarks
I. (a) Ministry/Department Min istry of Communications & IT
Department of Telecommunications.
(b) Subject/Title of the Non-furnishing of operator-wise details
review/paragraph of pass-through charges in collection of
Universal Service levy.
(c) Paragraph No. 1.7.2.1.
(d) Report No. and year PA 1 of 2008.
II.(a) Date of receipt of the Draft Audit 16.03.2009 and 08.09.2010.
Paragraph/Review in the Ministry
(b) Date of Ministry's reply 08.07.2009 subsequently revised on
19.02.2010 and 15.09.2010.
III. Gist of Paragraph/Review Non-submission of operator-wise details
of pass-through charges received from
and paid to other operators.
IV . (a) Do the Ministry agree with facts No
and figures included in the
paragraph
( b ) If not, please indicate the areas However, format of  'Statement of
of disagreement and also attach Revenue and License Fee (AGR)' given
documents in support in the License agreement, has been
revised vide Circular No. 20—271/2010-
AS-I-UASL/CMTS dated 31.08.2010 with
the amendments indicating 'to submit
operator-wise details on account of pass-
through charges for revenue receipt as well
as in the deduction side’. (copy enclosed)
V . (A) Main Audit conclusion:—
1. Deficiency in the existing system Not applicable.
2. Failure to follow the system Not applicable.
3. Failure of individuals Not applicable.
4. Amount of loss/short Amount has not been mentioned in the
assessment/short key para.

28
(B) Does the Ministry agree with the Y es.
Audit conclusion? If not, please
indicate specific areas of
disagreement, reasons for,
disagreement and also attach
copies of relevant documents
VI. Remedial Action Taken:—
(i) Improvement in system and Since the AGR is arrived at after allowing
procedures including internal deductions on account of pass through
controls charges and resultant License fee is
collected accordingly as per the
prescribed License fee rates, as such there
is not short recovery of US Levy.
(ii) Recovery of over payment as Not applicable.
pointed out by Audit
(iii) Recovery of under assessment, Not applicable.
short levy of other dues
(iv) W rite off of amount of Not applicable.
losses/wasteful
Expenditure/Irrecoverable amount
(v) Modification in the scheme, Not applicable.
including financing pattern
(vi) Review of similar cases/complete Not applicable.
scheme
(vii) Review of similar cases/complete Not applicable.
scheme/project in light of findings
of sample check by Audit
This issue with the approval of Members (F).
Sd/-
Director (LF-I)
Sl. No. Item No. Para-wise Remarks

No. 20-271/2010-AS-I-UASL
Government of India
Ministry of Communications & IT
Department of Telecommunications
(Access Services Division)
1203, Sanchar Bhavan, Ashok Road, New Delhi-110 001
31st August, 2010
To,
All the UAS Licensees Company
Subject: Amendment of  Unified  Access  Services (UAS)  Licence Agreement
regarding Format of Statement of Revenue and Licence Fee.
In pursuance of Condition 5.1 of the UAS Licence Agreement(s), the LICENSOR
hereby  substitutes the 'APPENDIX-II TO ANNEXURE-II- Format of Statement of
Revenue and Licence Fee' of the Unified Access Services (UAS) Licence Agreement
with the 'APPENDIX-II TO ANNEXURE-II—Format of Statement of Revenue and
Licence Fee' as annexed to this amendment with effect from 01.09.2010.
2. All other terms and conditions of the UAS Licence Agreement including
amendments and instructions issued from time to time shall remain unchanged.
3. Please acknowledge receipt.
Sd/-
Encls.: As above. (R.K. Gupta)
Director (AS-I)
For and on behalf of the President of India
Ph. No. 2303 6284
Copy to:
1. Administrator USOF/Wireless Advisor/Sr. DDG(TEC)
2. JS(T)/DDG (Securit y)/DDG ( Security-Term)/DDG(CS)/DDG(DS)/DDG
(LF-I)/DDG(LF-II)/DDG(WPF)
3. Secretary, TRAI
4. Director (IT) may kindly arrange to upload this letter on the website of DoT.
29

APPENDIX II TO ANNEXURE II
Format of Statement of Revenue and Licence Fee
_______________(Name and address of operator)
Unified Access Services in___________________(Service Area)
Statement of Revenue and Licence Fee for the Quarter
..............................................................
of the financial year.........................................................
(Amount in Rupees)
S.No. Particulars Actuals Actuals Cumulative
for the for the upto the
previous current current
quarter quarter quarter
12 3 4 5
1. Revenue from services
A. Revenue from wireline
subscribers
(i) Rentals
(ii) Call revenue within service
area
(iii) National LONG DISTANCE
CALL revenue
(iv) International LONG
DISTANCE CALL revenue
(v) Pass-through revenue for usage
of other networks (give
OPERA TOR-wise details)
(vi) Service tax
(vii) Service charges
(viii)Charges on account of any
other value added services,
Supplementary Services etc.
(ix) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
30

31
wireline subscribers
B. Revenue from WLL
subscribers (Fixed)
(i) Rentals
(ii) Call revenue within service
area
(iii) National long distance
call revenue
(iv) International long distance
call revenue
(v) Pass-through revenue for usage
of other networks (give
operator-wise details)
(vi) Service tax
(vii) Service charges
(viii)Charges on account of any
other value added services,
Supplementary Services etc.
(ix) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
WLL subscribers
C. Revenue from WLL
subscribers (Handheld)
(i) Rentals
(ii) Call revenue within service
area
(iii) National long distance
call revenue
(iv) International long distance
call revenue
(v) Pass through revenue for usage
of other networks (give
operator-wise details)
(vi) Service tax
(vii) Service charges
12 3 4 5

32
(viii)Charges on account of any
other value added services,
Supplementary Services etc.
(ix) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
WLL subscribers
D. Revenue from Mobile
Services
D. (a) Revenue from GSM and 3G
spectrum based Mobile
Services
D. (a)1.Post paid options
(i) Rentals
(ii) Activation Charges
(iii) Airtime Revenue
(iv) Pass through charges
(provide operator-wise
details)
(v) Service Tax
(vi) Roaming charges
(vii) Service Charges
(viii)Charges on account of any
other value added services,
Supplementary Services etc.
(ix) Any other income/post-paid options
D. (a) 2. Pre-paid options
(i) Sale of pre-paid SIM cards
including full value of all
components charged therein.
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
pre-paid options.
D. (a) 3.  Revenue from Mobile
(i) Community phone service
including full value of all
components charged therein.
12 3 4 5

33
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
Mobile Community phone
service.
D. (b) Revenue from CDMA based
Mobile Services
D. (b) 1. Post-paid options
(i) Rentals
(ii) Activation Charges
(iii) Airtime Revenue
(iv) Pass through charges
(provide operator-wise
details)
(v) Service Tax
(vi) Roaming charges
(vii) Service charges
(viii)Charges on account of any
other value added services,
supplementary Services etc.
(ix) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
post-paid options.
D. (b) 2. Pre-paid options
(i) Sale of pre-paid SIM cards
including full value of all
components charged therein.
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
pre-paid options.
D. (b) 3. Revenue from Mobile
(i) Community phone service
including full value of all
components charged
therein.
12 3 4 5

34
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
Mobile Community phone
service.
D. (c) Revenue from BWA
Services
D. (c) 1. Post-paid options
(i) Rentals
(ii) Activation Charges
(iii) Airtime Revenue
(iv) Pass through charges
(provide operator-wise
details)
(v) Service Tax
(vi) Roaming charges
(vii) Service Charges
(viii)Charges on account of any
other value added services,
Supplementary Services etc.
(ix) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
post-paid options.
D. (c) 2.  Pre-paid options
(i) Sale of pre-paid SIM cards
including full value of all
components charged therein.
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
pre-paid options.
D. (c) 3. Revenue from Mobile
(i) Community phone service
including full value of all
components charged
therein.
12 3 4 5

35
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
Mobile Community phone
service.
E. 1. Revenue from Voice Mail Service
2. Income from trading
activity (all including of
sales tax)
(i) Sale of handsets
(ii) Sale of accessories etc.
(iii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
trading activity.
3. Revenue from roaming
(i) Roaming facility revenue from
own subscribers.
(ii) Roaming revenue from own
subscriber visiting other
networks including
STD/ISD/pass through charges
for transmission of incoming
call during roaming.
(iii) Roaming Commission earned.
(iv) Roaming revenue on account
of visiting subscribers from
other networks (provide
operator-wise details).
(v) Service Tax if not included
above.
(vi) Any other
income/miscellaneous receipt
from roaming.
4. Income from investments
(i) Interest income
(ii) Dividend income
(iii) Any other miscellaneous
receipt from investments.
12 3 4 5

36
5. Non-refundable deposits
from subscribers.
6. Revenue from franchisees/
resellers including all
commissions and
discounts etc. excluding
the revenues already
included in IA & IB.
7. Revenue from sharing/
leasing of infrastructure.
8. Revenue from sale/lease of
bandwith, links, R&G
cases, turnkey projects etc.
9. Revenue from other
operators on account of
pass through call charges
(provide operator-wise
details).
10. Revenue from other
operators on account of
provisioning of
interconnection (provide
operator-wise details).
11. Miscellaneous revenue
AA. GROSS REVENUE OF THE
LICENSEE COMPANY:
(Add 1-11)
BB. DEDUCT:
1. Charges actually paid to
other Service Provider(s)
 (operator-wise).
2. Roaming revenues actually
paid to other CMSPs and
GMPCS service providers
(operator-wise).
3. Service Tax paid to the
Government.
12 3 4 5

37
4. Sale Tax paid to the
Government
BB. TOTAL  DEDUCTIBLE
REVENUE (1+2+3+4)
CC. ADJUSTED GROSS
REVENUE (AA-BB)
REVENUE SHARE @.......... OF ADJUSTED GROSS REVENUE
12 3 4 5

No. 20-271/2010-AS-I-CMTS
Government of India
Ministry of Communications & IT
Department of Telecommunications
(Access Services Division)
1203, Sanchar Bhavan, Ashok Road, New Delhi-110 001.
31st August, 2010
To,
All the CMTS Licensees
Subject: Amendment of Cellular Mobile Telephone Service (CMTS) Licence
Agreement regarding Format of Statement of Revenue and Licence Fee.
In exercise of the power conferred in the Cellular Mobile Telephone Service (CMTS)
licence agreement, the LICENSOR hereby substitutes the 'Format of
Statement of Revenue and Licence Fee' of the Unified Access Services
(UAS) Licence Agreement with the 'Format of Statement of Revenue
and Licence Fee'  as annexed to this amendment with effect from
01.09.2010.
2. All other terms and conditions of the CMTS licence agreement including
amendments and instructions issued from time to time shall remain unchanged.
3. Please acknowledge receipt.
Encls.: As above.
Sd/-
(R.K. Gupta)
Director (AS-I)
For and on behalf of the President of India
Ph. No. 23036284
Copy to:
1. Administrator USOF/Wireless Advisor/Sr. DDG(TEC)
2. JS(T)/DDG(Security)/DDG(Security-Term)/DDG(CS)/DDG(DS)/DDG
(LF-I)/DDG(LF-II)/DDG(WPF)
3. Secretary, TRAI
4. Director (IT) may kindly arrange to upload this letter on the website of DoT.
38

Format of Statement of Revenue and Licence Fee
.............................(Name and address of operator)
Cellular Mobile Telephone Service in.....................(Service Area)
Statement of Revenue and Licence Fee for the Quarter
...................................
of the financial year................................
(Amount in Rupees)
S.No.          Particulars Actuals Actuals Cumulative
for the for the upto the
previous current current
quarter quarter quarter
1          2      3      4     5
1. Revenue from Services
A. Revenue from GSM and
3G spectrum based Mobile
Services:
A. (a) Post-paid options:
(i) Rentals
(ii) Activation Charges
(iii) Airtime Revenue
(iv) Pass through charges
(provide operator-wise
details)
(v) Service Tax
(vi) Roaming charges
(vii) Service charges
(viii) Charges on account
of any other value
added services,
Supplementary Services
etc.
(ix) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt
from post-paid options.
39

40
A. (b) Pre-paid options:
(i) Sale of pre-paid SIM
cards including full
value of all components
charged therein.
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt
from pre-paid options.
A.  (c) Revenue from Mobile:
(i) Community phone service
including full value of all
components charged
Mobile Community
phone service.
B. Revenue from CDMA
based Mobile Services:
B.  (a) Post-paid options:
(i) Rentals
(ii) Activation Charges
(iii) Airtime Revenue
(iv) Pass through charges
(provide operator-wise
details)
(v) Service Tax
(vi) Roaming charges
(vii) Service charges
(viii) Charges on account of
any other value added
services. Supplementary
Services etc.
(ix) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt
from post-paid options.
B.  (b) Pre-paid options:
 (i) Sale of pre-paid SIM
cards including full
value of all components
charges therein.
1          2      3      4     5

41
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt
from pre-paid options.
B.  (c)  Revenue from Mobile:
(i) Community phone service
including full value of
all components charged
therein.
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt
from Mobile Community
phone service.
C. Revenue from BWA Services:
C.  (a)  Post paid options:
(i) Rentals
(ii) Activation Charges
(iii) Airtime Revenue
(iv) Pass through charges
(provide operator-wise details)
(v) Service Tax
(vi) Roaming charges
(vii) Service charges
(viii)Charges on account of
any other value added
services. Supplementary
Services etc.
(ix) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt
from post-paid options.
C.  (b)  Pre-paid options:
(i) Sale of pre-paid SIM
cards including full
value of all components
charged therein.
1          2      3      4     5

42
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt
from pre-paid options.
C. (c) Revenue from Mobile
(i) Community phone service
including full value of all
components charged therein.
(ii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt
from Mobile Community
phone service.
D. Revenue from Voice
Mail/any other value
added service
2. Income from trading
activity (all including
of sales tax)
(i) Sale of handsets
(ii) Sale of accessories etc.
(iii) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt
from trading activity.
3. Revenue from roaming
(i) Roaming facility revenue
from own subscribers.
(ii) Roaming revenue from
own subscribers visiting
other networks including
STD/ISD/pass through
charges for transmission
of incoming call during
roaming.
(iii) Roaming Commission earned.
(iv) Roaming revenue on
account of visiting
subscribers from other
networks (provide operator-
wise details).
1          2      3      4     5

43
(v) Service Tax, if not included
above.
(vi) Any other income/
miscellaneous receipt from
roaming.
4. Income from investments
(i) Interest income
(ii) Dividend income
(iii) Any other miscellaneous
receipt from investments.
5. Non-refundable deposits
from subscribers
6. Revenue from franchisees/
resellers including all
commissions and discounts
etc. excluding the revenues
already included in IA&IB
7. Revenue from sharing/
leasing of infrastructure
8. Revenue from sale/lease
of bandwidth, links, R&G
cases, turnkey projects etc.
9. Revenue from other
Operators on account
of pass through call
charges (provide
operator-wise details)
10. Revenue from other
Operators on account
of provisioning of
interconnection (provide
operator-wise details)
11. Miscellaneous revenue
AA. Gross revenue of
the Licensee Company
(Add 1-11)
1          2      3      4     5

44
B.B. DEDUCT:
1. Charges actually paid to
other service provider(s)
(operator-wise)
2. Roaming revenues actually
paid to other CMSPs And
GMPCS service providers
(operator-wise).
3. Service Tax paid to the Government
4. Sales Tax paid to the Government
B.B. T otal Deductible Revenue
(1+2+3+4)
C.C. Adjusted Gross Revenue
(AA-BB)
Revenue Share @...................
of Adjusted Gross Revenue
1          2      3      4     5

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF AUDIT, P&T, DELHI-110 054
Ministry may refer to their communication no. 27-9A/2008-AC, dated 27 September
2010 forwarding therewith Action Taken Note on Recommendations/Observations on
para no. 11 of 14th Report of 15th Lok Sabha on Administration of USO Fund is
returned with the following remarks.
Para 11, part II of the fourteenth report of the Public Accounts Committee (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) is returned with the remarks “No Comments”.
This issue with the approval of the Director General of Audit, P&T.
Sd/-
Deputy Director (Report)
Ambika Prasad ADG (AC), Department of Telecommunications, Sanchar Bhawan,
New Delhi DGAP&T U.O. No. Rep-Civil/2(d) 8621/219, dated 20.09.2010
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that there is a provision for imposition of Liquidated Damages
(LD) in the Agreement for non-fulfilment of roll out obligations by the USPs within the
stipulated time period and are constrained to observe that recoverable Liquidated
Damages of Rs. 2 crore not been recovered from BSNL, Reliance Communications Ltd.,
and Tata Teleservices Ltd., even though these companies failed to honour their
respective contractual obligations within the prescribed time line till the Department
swung into action after PAC took up the subject for examination. Here, the Committee
would like to point out that the amount of Liquidated Damages to be imposed upon the
defaulting USPs should be calculated after careful scrutiny and verification in order to
avoid loss to the exchequer and embarrassment for the Ministry.
[Para 12, part II of the Fourteenth report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Instructions were issued to CCA offices vide USOF letter No. 30-15/2004/USOF
(V ol. III) dt. 28-05-2007 for levying of liquidated damages (LD) for non-fulfilment of roll
out obligation by USPs. Further, instructions were also issued from time to time for
calculation of LD and recovery thereof keeping in view the provisions of USOF
Agreements and amendments thereof. The instructions for recovery of LD and its
45

46
correct booking in the accounts of DoT have also been reiterated in the recent past
vide USOF letters mentioned below:—
I. No. 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./1364-1385dt. 10-09-2009
II. 30-15/2004-USOF(Vol.III)(Pt)/3497-3579 dt. 02-03-2010
III. 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./714-736 dt. 02-06-2010
IV . 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./1060-1082 dt. 28-06-2010
In the All India CCAs conference held in DoT (HQ) on May, 10-11, 2010, the issue
regarding recovery of LD in all cases of non-fulfilment of roll out obligation by USPs in
respect of various USO activities and its correct booking in the DoT accounts was
inter alia discussed in detail  and all CCAs were directed to effect recovery of LD for
non-observance of provisions in the USO Agreement (including amendments made
from time to time) regarding roll out obligation.
Up to the year ending 31-03-2010, LD of Rs. 6.05 Cr. has been recovered for
non-fulfilment of roll out obligation in respect of various USOF activities and booked
in the Accounts DoT.
The matter is under close and regular monitoring of USOF.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
F.No. 30-3/2010-USOF (PAC), dated 9-8-2010]
The Para is vetted for DG P&T with no comments vide his letter No. DG P&T UON.
Rep-Civil/2(d) 8621/185, dt.2009-10
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that although there is a provision in the Agreements for the
Administrator, USO Fund to carry out the performance tests either directly or through
the authorized agencies and also evaluate the quality of service parameters for the
VPTs at any time during the tenure of the Agreement, yet the Administrator, USO Fund
has not undertaken any such evaluation in respect of each of the Agreements entered
into with the service providers. The Department's contention that Telecom Regulatory
Authority of India (TRAI) is regularly conducting the QoS tests of the telecom network
created by different USPs does not entitle the Administrator, USO Fund to abdicate its
duties. The Committee feel that evaluation by the USO Fund Administrator would
rather provide valuable inputs to TRAI helping the latter in coming to a more meaningful
conclusion in their consultation papers/recommendations. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the USO Fund Administrator carry out periodical evaluation of the telecom
network created by the USPs in rural areas so that the outflow from the USO Fund is
commensurate with quality provision of telecom connectivity and services.
[Para 14, part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]

47
Action Taken by the Government
Under the VPT Agreement, the USPs are required to work within the technical
conditions of basic service licence and Quality of Service (QoS) parameters are to be
maintained for basic telecommunication services as prescribed by TRAI.
As per provisions of TRAI Act 1997, the functions of TRAI, inter alia, include
monitoring the quality of service and conduct the periodical survey of such services
by the service providers in both rural and urban areas. TRAI is regularly conducting
the Quality of Service (QoS) tests of the Telecom network created by the different
service providers in various service areas. The QoS parameters for basic telephone
services include provision of telephones after registration of demand, fault incidences,
mean time taken to repair and call completion rate etc. (as pointed out by audit.).
As regards the matter of proper functioning of VPTs in accordance with the
specific terms & conditions of USO Agreements, including aspects such as functional
status of VPTs, public access, display boards grievance redressal etc., these issues are
being regularly monitored by field units.
At the time of preliminary checking of claims before subsidy payment various
supporting documents inter alia the affidavit and the billing records etc. are verified
to establish conformity with Agreement conditions and claims are disallowed
accordingly. Post payment verification carried out by CCA Offices also stresses upon
verification of these aspects. Based upon the inputs from field units non-provision of
STD facilities, sign boards, public access charge indicators and other problems such
as ineffective grievance redress, billing and payment issues, power problems affecting
functioning of CDMA Fixed Wire less Terminal VPTs etc. effective measures have
been taken by USOF Administration towards improvement in the performance of VPTs
as briefly outlined below:—
I. Reference was made from the Administrator, USOF to the CMD, BSNL vide
D.O. letter dated 12.9.07, pointing out certain shortcoming based on the
feedback on functioning of VPTs, received from field units of DoT and to
remove such shortcomings. In particular BSNL was requested to review the
position regarding provision of STD facilities and charge indicators to VPTs,
commission rates and security deposits for VPTs, powering of VPTs/RLPs on
CDMA Technology, disconnection of VPTs  and possibility of prepaid mode
of payment for VPTs creation of public awareness and ensuring public access
for VPTs and provision of genuine and effective grievance redressal
mechanisms etc.
II. Meeting was held by Administrator USOF with the CMD, BSNL on 16.12.07
regarding improvement in functioning of VPTs. Minutes of the meeting were
forwarded to BSNL vide letter dt. 4.12.07 for time bound action plan agreed
upon in the meeting.
III. In order to take follow up action on the decisions taken in the meeting of
Administrator, USOF with CMD, BSNL to discuss remedial actions needed
for improving the performance of VPTs, a D.O. reference was made by BSNL
Corporate office to the Chief General Manager BSNL circles vide letter
dt. 30.11.2007.

48
IV . All CCA offices were addressed vide letter dt. 20.12.2007 enclosing therewith
a copy of letter dt. 30.11.2009 from BSNL to CGMs of BSNL circles, for
monitoring the action points decided in the meeting of Administrator, USOF
with CMD, BSNL and to furnish feedback to USOF (HQs) regarding the
performance of USOF sponsored schemes.
V. Vide USOF letter dt. 1.4.2008, DDG (RN) was requested to furnish progress
on each of the agenda items discussed in the meeting dt. 16.11.2007 with
CMD, BSNL.
VI. Feedback in reference to USOF letter dt. 1.4.2008 was received from BSNL
Corporate office vide letter dt. 23.4.2008.
VII. On review of feedback received from BSNL, it was noticed that some of the
issues highlighted in the meeting dt. 16.11.2007 of the Administrator, USOF
with CMD, BSNL had not been followed up entirely in keeping with the spirit of
the decisions made in the meeting. A D.O. reference was therefore made by
Administrator, USOF to the CMD, BSNL vide letter dt. 8.5.2008 for personal
attention on certain issues so as to ensure that the VPT becomes a self-
sustaining and financially viable means of public access to the rural population.
VIII. Based on the progress report submitted by BSNL w.r.t. the agenda points of
the meeting dt. 16.11.07; CCA offices were requested to provide detailed
feedback on the various agenda points, vide letter dt. 13.5.2008.
IX. A reference was made to CMD, BSNL vide letter dt. 18.9.2008 pointing out
poor functioning of VPTs in Tamil Nadu circle, with the request to take urgent
action towards proper implementation of the terms and conditions of the VPT
Agreements and the instructions issued by USOF (HQs) and BSNL C.O. for
improving the functioning of VPTs.
X. A D.O. reference was made from Administrator, USOF to the CMD, BSNL
vide letter dt. 9.1.2009 with the request inter alia to ensure that due care is
taken by BSNL towards proper field level implementation of USO schemes
and correct submission of subsidy claims.
As stated above concerted efforts are being made to bring about improvement in
the functioning and performance of VPTs and the entire system is being closely and
effectively monitored. Further, in subsequent VPT Agreements conditions relating
to subsidy payment have been further tightened to ensure adherence to provisions of
Agreements regarding aspects such as public access, solar chargers, STD, Charges
Indicators and Sign Boards etc.
Further, in addition to above a new sample based procedure for physical inspection
and verification of VPTs has been evolved vide letter No. 30-12/2007- USOF
dt. 28-10-2009 and is being implemented.
Review is carried out on regular basis to bring about improvement in system.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
F.No. 30-3/2010-USOF (PAC), dated 9.8.2010]
The para is vetted by DG P&T Audit with no Comments vide his letter
no. DG PT-Rep-Civil/2(d) 8621/185, dt. 20-9-2010.

49
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 13)
According to the Department, the USPs have been seeking extensions of the roll
out period citing not only natural calamities, difficult terrain, insurgency etc. but also
grounds of technical problems such as non-availability of equipment, power supply,
points of interconnection, transponders etc. The Department, on their part, have been
granting extensions considering the difficulties of the service providers and thus no
Liquidated Damage is being imposed upon the USPs for their inability to meet the roll
out obligations. In this context, the Committee feel that so far as the problems of
natural calamities, difficult terrain and insurgency are concerned, the Department may
sympathetically consider granting suitable extension of time in the fulfilment of the roll
out obligations. But, problems like non-availability of equipment, power supply and
Point of Interconnections should, under no circumstances, be considered valid causes
for extension of time as these imply lack of adequate planning and management. The
Committee are, therefore, of the view that in such cases when the USPs fail to achieve
the roll out obligations within the stipulated time period, Liquidated Damages should
invariably be imposed upon and recovered from them.
[Para 13, Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
USO Funds has been giving extensions in roll out period without the imposition
of LD considering the remoteness, difficult terrain, insurgency related issues. Extensions
without LD have been given on account of non-availability of equipment, to be more
precise satellite transponders (on account of failure of INSAT 4C and DSPTs) in case
of BSNL, non-provision of power supply by State Electricity Boards and issues of
connectivity for establishment Point of Interconnections by incumbent operator only
because such matters were beyond the control of the Service Providers seeking
extensions. As the basic objective of USO Fund is to provide accessibility of telecom
services to people in the rural and remote areas at affordable and reasonable prices, the
roll out period was extended for service providers without imposing Liquidated Damages
keeping in view these difficulties. However, settlement of subsidy claims for the MARR
VPTs provided after March 2009, RCPs provided by BSNL after December 2008, RCPs
provided by Reliance after March 2009, VPTs under Bharat Nirman provided after
November 2009 and towers provided under Shared Mobile Infrastructure Scheme
Phase I after December 2009 (in respect of BSNL and KEC) and after May 2009

50
(in respect of other operators) is being done after imposition of the LD charges as per
the terms and conditions of the Agreement.
Instructions have been issued to CCA offices for recovery of LD charges for
non-fulfilment of roll out obligation by USPs as per USO Agreements (including
amendments made from time to time) and its correct booking in the accounts of DoT
vide USOF letters mentioned below:—
I. No. 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./1364-1385, dt. 10-09-2009
II. 30-15/2004-USOF (V ol. III) (Pt)/3497-3579, dt. 02-03-2010
III. 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./714-736, dt. 02-06-2010
IV . 1-1/2009-USOF/Claim-Corr./1060-1082, dt. 28-06-2010
In the All India CCAs conference held in DoT (HQ) on May, 10-11-2010, the issue
regarding recovery of LD in all cases of non-fulfilment of roll out obligation by USPs in
respect of various USO activities and its correct booking in the DoT accounts was
inter alia discussed in detail and all CCAs were requested for recovery of LD for
non-observance of provisions in the USO Agreement (including amendments made
from time to time) regarding roll out obligation.
Up to the year ending 31-03-2010, LD of Rs. 6.05 Cr. has been recovered for
non-fulfilment of roll out obligation in respect of various activities and booked in the
accounts DoT.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications
F. No. 30-3/2010-USOF (PAC), dated 9.8.2010]
The para is vetted by GD P&T Audit with no Comments vide in letter No. 40,
no  Report-Civil/2 (d) 8621/185, dt. 21.9.2010.

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT  HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 2)
Pursuant to the emphasis laid on the Universal Service Obligation (USO)  for
achievement of universal service objectives like increase in rural tele-density, provision
of vice and low speed data service in the uncovered villages in the country and
telephone on demand in the rural areas, as enunciated in the New Telecom Policy
(NTP), 1999, the Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) was formed with effect
from April, 2002 for raising resources by means of a Universal Service Levy (USL) to
cater to the USO activities. The USL i.e. five per cent of the Adjusted Gross Revenue
(AGR) earned by all the operators under various licences is first credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India and subsequently the Central Government credits such
proceeds to the Fund in Public Account of India from time to time for being utilized
exclusively towards USO activities. As far as the Universal Service Obligation (USO)
Fund is concerned, the Committee's examination of the subject has revealed that the
amount collected as USL from the service providers during the years 2002-07 was not
credited fully to the USO Fund by the Government. The Department has contended
that transfer of the entire collection under USL to USO Fund is not a matter of course,
instead, credits to the Fund shall be of the amount as received through Parliamentary
approvals. The Committee is, however, not convinced with the reasoning because as
is known credits to the Fund are made after due appropriation made by Parliament. The
Committee are of the view that Government should not have any problem in crediting
the full amount collected as Universal Service Levy in the USO fund, more so when
proceeds to the fund are meant to be utilized exclusively for meeting the Universal
Service Obligation. The Committee further desire that the proceeds to the USO Fund
should not be diverted under any circumstances, even temporarily, for purposes other
than those for which funds are collected.
[Para 2, Part II of the fourteenth report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Audit Remarks
DG P&T Audit, has returned the A TN  to the above para stating that “Ministry
may continue to make efforts to get the full amount collected as Universal Service levy
credited to the USO Fund”.
Action Taken by the Government
As per provisions of Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Act, 2003, “the sum of money
received towards the USO under section 4 shall first be credited to the Consolidated
51

52
Fund of India, and the Central Government may, if Parliament by appropriation made
by law in this behalf so provides, credit such proceeds to the fund from time to time for
being utilized exclusively for meeting the Universal Service Obligation”. Hence the
entire collection on account of Universal Service Levy gets credited to Consolidated
Fund of India and made available to the USO Fund through Parliamentary approvals.
As recommended by the PAC and also observed by the Standing Committee on
Demand for Grants for 2009-10 in their Twelfth Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendation/Observation of the Committee contained in their
Fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha), the Department had taken up the matter with Ministry
of Finance regarding allocation of transfer to USOF. It has been stated by the Ministry
of  Finance vide their letter No. F.No. 2(35)-B(AC)/2009 dated 22.03.2010, that while
considering the proposal of Department of Telecommunications (DoT) for the
constitution of USOF initially, Cabinet had directed the DoT to consult Ministry of
Finance at the time of finalizing the amount to be transferred to USOF and thus the
Ministry has the authority to decide the quantum of funds to be transferred to USOF.
Ministry of Finance's observations in this regard are reproduced below:—
“It may also be mentioned that the license fee from telecom service providers is
an important component of  Non-tax Revenue of the Union Government. The
amount towards transfer to USOF, is provided on the basis of claim pending with
the Department of Telecommunications for releases from USOF. As the
Government is committed to finance various flagship programmes of the
Government, the resources cannot be locked by simply lodging them in the
Public Account of India. However the concerns of the Standing Committee are
noted for necessary action during the RE 2010-11.”
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications F. No.
30-3/2010-USOF (PAC), dated 12.10.2010]
Para 2 of  Part II of the Fourteenth report of the PAC (15th Lok Sabha) has been
vetted with remarks. “No comments” vide DGA P&T U.O. No. Rep. Civil/2(d) of 8261/
263, dated 20/10/10.
Comments of the Committee
Please see  paragraph Nos. 7 & 8 of Chapter I.

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF AUDIT, P&T DELHI-110 054
Ministry may refer to their communication no. 27-9A/2008-AC dated 15.10.2010
forwarding therewith Action Taken Note on Recommendations/Observations on para
Nos. 2 and 8 of 14th Report of  15th Lok Sabha on Administration of USO Fund. The
para Nos. 2 and 8 of 14th Report of 15 Lok Sabha on Administration of  USO Fund are
returned with the following remarks.
Para 2 and 8 of Part II of the fourteenth report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned with the remarks “No Comments”.
This issues with the approval of the Director General of Audit, P&T.
Sd/-
Deputy Director (Report)
Ambika Prasad ADG(AC), Department of Telecommunications, Sanchar Bhawan,
New Delhi, DGA P&T U.O. No. Rep.-Civil/2(d) 8621/263, dated 20th October, 2010.
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that as per the license agreement signed by the USPs with
DoT as well as agreements signed between the USPs and the USO Fund Administration,
it is the responsibility of the service providers for arranging the Point of
Interconnections (Pois) with the incumbent as well as other operators. But, Rural
Community Phones (RCPs) and Rural Direct Exchange Lines (RDELs) have been
provided by Reliance Communication Ltd. and Tata Teleservices Ltd. in Rajasthan,
Uttar Pradesh (West) and Uttar Pradesh (East) Telecom circles without ensuring
interconnectivity with the other operator i.e. BSNL. Although the provision of RCPs
and RDELs in the abovementioned telecom circles has not served the purpose, yet
subsidy to the tune of Rs. 84.50 crore has been paid to the service providers for these
connections. The Department have contended that while creating the network for
provision of RCPs/RDELs, the two USPs requested BSNL for PoIs and in the meanwhile,
they kept on providing RCPs/RDELs under various schemes with limited connectivity
with the network of other operators. The Department have further submitted that
telecom access has, however, been made available to the rural customers in one form or
the other. The Committee are not satisfied with the contention of the Department as
every scheme meant for expansion of rural telephony has it own significance and each
one of them gets subsidy from the USO Fund. So, to say that telecom access has been
provided in rural areas in one form or the other even if the provision of RCPs and
RDELs did not serve the purpose is to undermine the avowed objectives. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Department, instead of depicting a callous attitude,
should impress upon BSNL and other USPs to speed up provision of interconnectivity
while creating network for various schemes towards expansion of rural telephony to
ensure that the purpose is well served. Violations of the license agreement by those
53

54
concerned need to be accounted for in terms of corrective, remedial and penal action
against defaulters.
[Para 10, Part II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)]
Audit Remarks
DG P&T Audit, has returned the ATN to the above Para stating that “Department
should impress upon BSNL and other USPs to speed up provision of interconnectivity
while creating network for various schemes towards expansion of rural telephony to
ensure that the purpose is well served. It is further suggested that violation of the
license agreement by those concerned need to be accounted for in terms of corrective,
remedial and penal action against the defaulters”.
Action Taken by the Government
USO Fund has been taking up the matter of providing Points of Interconnection
(PoIs) with USPs from time to time. BSNL has also been requested to provide PoIs to
M/s. TTL, M/s. TTL (Maharashtra) and M/s. Reliance for the required SDCAs as per
the Interconnection Agreement signed with them at the earliest.
In compliance with the recommendations of the PAC, instructions have been
issued to M/s. Reliance and M/s. TTL and M/s. TTL (Maharashtra) to expedite
interconnection and resolve PoI issues. M/s. Reliance has reported to have already
resolved all its PoI issues with regard to USOF RDELs. M/s. TTL and M/s. TTL
(Maharashtra) have also reported to have resolved PoI issues with regard to USOF
RDELs in most of the SDCAs. Hence the matter is being pursued and the issue has
been resolved in most of SDCAs. Further the RDEL Scheme stands closed on 31.03.2010.
[Ministry of Communications & IT, Department of Telecommunications F. No.
30-3/2010-USOF (PAC) dated 12.11.2010]
The Para has been vetted by P&T Audit vide their letter No. U.O. No. Rep.-civil/
2(d) 8621/283, dt. 29-11-10 with the remarks “No comments”.
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 17 of Chapter  I.

OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF AUDIT, P&T, DELHI - 110054
Ministry may refer to their communication No. 27-9A/2008-AC dated 12.11.2010
forwarding therewith Action Taken Note on Recommendations/Observations on
Para No. 10, Part-II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on Administration of USO Fund. The Para No. 10, Part-II of the Fourteenth
Report of the Public Accounts Committee (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Administration of
USO Fund is returned with the following remarks.
Para 10 of Part-II of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is returned with the remarks “No Comments”.
This issues with the approval of the Director General of Audit, P&T.
Sd/-
Deputy Director (Report)
Ambika Prasad ADG (AC), Department of Telecommunications,  Sanchar Bhawan,
New Delhi, DGA P&T U.O. No. Rep.-Civil/2(d) 8621/283 Dated 29th November, 2010.
55

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-NIL-
NEW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR  JOSHI
23 December, 2011 Chairman,
2 Pausa, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
56

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12) HELD ON 23rd SEPTEMBER 2011
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 23rd September, 2011 from
1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Room No. '53' Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
8. Shri Adhi Sankar
9. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
10. Shri K. Sudhakaran
11. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Naresh Gujral
15. Shri Prakash Javadekar
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
6. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
57

58
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri K.P. Sasidharan — Director General (AB)
2. Ms. Subha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
3. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director (ESM)
4. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director (AFN)
5. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Principal Director (Railway Audit Board)
2 . * * *** *
3 . * * *** *
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports, one by one, for
consideration and adoption:—
(i) * * * * * *
(ii) * * * * * *
(iii) * * * * * *
(iv) * * * * * *
(v) * * * * * *
(vi) * * * * * *
(vii) Draft Report on Action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on ‘Administration of Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF)’; and
(viii) * * * * * *
5. * * * * * *
6. As regard the consideration of the Draft Report mentioned at Sl. No. (vii) some
Members suggested that the matter of diversion of USO Fund for other activities
needed further examination and the representatives of the Ministry of Finance should
be called to explain the position to the Committee. Some other Members were of the
view that since it was an Action Taken Note on an original Report of the previous
Committee and in view of the reply furnished by the Department of Telecommunications,
the Committee should adopt and present the Report asking the DoT to furnish their
reply to the recommendation of the Committee within a shorter period and the same
could be analysed then. One Member sought more time to study the Draft Report. The
Chairman observed that he himself would first like to go through all the relevant
documents to see whether there was a need to take further evidence in the matter. The
adoption of the Draft Report was, therefore, deferred.
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the adopted Draft Reports in
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to the
House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matters not related with this Report.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 21st DECEMBER 2011
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 21st December, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to
1545 hrs. in Chairman's Room (No. 51), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai
10. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Prakash Javadekar
14. Prof. Saif-ud-Din  Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
59

60
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India
1. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General (Defence Services)
2. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Principal Director (Railway Audit Board)
3. Shri V . Patwardhan — Director (Defence)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee convened to consider and
adopt the following Draft Reports.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following Draft Reports,
one by one and adopted the same without any modifications:—
(i) * * * * * *
(ii) * * * * * *
(iii) Revised Draft Report on Action Taken on 14th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of
PAC on ‘Administration of Universal Service Obligation (USO) Fund’ (Ministry of
Communications & Information Technology);
(iv) * * * * * *
(v) * * * * * *
4. Thereafter, the Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports in
the light of factual verification done by the Audit and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
*Matters not related with this Report.

APPENDIX III
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR  FOURTEENTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations — 14
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the — Total : 11
Committee which have been accepted Percentage—78.57
 by the Government:
Para Nos. 1, 3-9, 11, 12 and 14
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the — Total : 1
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage—7.14
the replies received from the Government:
Para No. 13
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of — Total : 2
which replies of  Government  have  not been Percentage—14.29
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 2 and 10
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of — Total : 0
which Government have furnished interim Percentage—0
replies:
-NIL-
61
GMGIPMRND—3737LS(S-3)—02.03.2012.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. N ame of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006.
(A.P)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co. Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28 Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2621,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.