8
IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL
RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE ACT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2009-2010
EIGHTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)

EIGHTH   REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL RURAL
EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE  ACT
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 11 March  2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10 March 2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February 2010/Phalguna 1931(Saka)

PAC No. 1903
Price: Rs. 45.00
© LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10)........................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (v)
PART-I
Report—Background Analysis
I. Introductory ................................................................................... 1
II. Audit Review .................................................................................. 2
III. Resource Support ........................................................................... 4
IV . Registration and Issue of Job Cards ............................................... 6
V. Works ............................................................................................. 7
VI. Employment and Wages ................................................................. 10
VII. Payment of Wages.......................................................................... 11
VIII. Unemployment Allowance.............................................................. 14
IX. Record Maintenance and Reports .................................................. 15
X. Social Audit, Transparency And Grievance Redressal ................... 18
XI. Monitoring ..................................................................................... 20
PART-II
Observations and Recommendations........................................................... 23
ANNEXURES
I. NREGA—National Overview......................................................... 30
II. Monthly progress report under NREGA Part VI-A ......................... 31
III. Unemployment allowance paid by the States under NREGA ......... 35
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee held on
5th November, 2009........................................................................ 36
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee held on
28th January, 2010........................................................................... 38
(i)

COMPOSITION   OF   THE   PUBLIC   ACCOUNTS   COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
PRESENT
*Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
* Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant Singh
resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee as authorized by the Committee, do
present this Eighth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "Implementation of National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act" based on Report No. PA-11 of 2008 of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India, Union Government (Civil Performance Audit).
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2007, Union Government, No. PA 11 of   2008, (Civil—Performance Audit) was
laid on the Table of the House on 24.10.2008.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Rural Development) on the subject at their sitting held
on 5th November, 2009. The Committee  considered and finalized this Report at their
sitting held on 28th January, 2010. Minutes of the sittings form  Appendices to the
Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the  Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) for tendering
evidence before the Committee and furnishing information that the Committee desired
in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH  MUNDE,
26  February, 2010 Chairman,
6 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

PART-I
REPORT
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
I. Introductory
The  National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, (NREGA) was enacted with the
objective of enhancing livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 days
of guaranteed wage employment in a financial year, to every household whose adult
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The Act aims to supplement wage
employments opportunities in rural areas and provide a safety net to rural poor and to
create sustainable rural livelihoods through rejuvenation of natural resource base
land, water and forests. The Act initially came into force in 200 districts with effect from
2nd February 2006 and was later extended to additional 130 districts in the financial
year 2007-2008. The remaining districts have been notified under the NREGA with
effect from 1st April, 2008. The NREGA thus covers the entire country with the exception
of districts that have a hundred per cent urban population. According to the Act, rural
households have a right to register themselves with the local Gram Panchayats (GPs),
and seek employment. Work is to be provided within 15 days from the date of demand,
failing which the State Government will have to pay unemployment allowance at the
stipulated rates. It is a unique and laudable Act of Parliament which confers a right on
the rural households to demand up to 100 days of employment as a matter of their
statutory right. The Act requires every State to formulate a State Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (REGS), which should conform to the minimum features specified
under the Act. The State Rural Employment Guarantee Schemes are implemented as
Centrally Sponsored Schemes on a cost sharing basis between the Centre and the
States. The Central Government will bear all costs, other than the following:—
• 25 per cent of the cost of material and wages for semi-skilled/skilled worker;
• unemployment allowance; and
• administrative expenses of the State Employment Guarantee Council.
2. The Detailed Operational Guidelines under the Act have been issued by the
Ministry of  Rural Development. Together with the provisions of the Act, they prescribe:
• the types of works that can be covered under NREGA (subject to additions in
respect of different States);
• the minimum entitlements of labour;
• the roles and responsibilities of different functionaries right from the State
Government to the District, Block and Panchayati Level functionaries, including
those of the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) at various levels;
• the detailed procedures for planning, financial management, registration and
employment allotment, execution of works and payment of wages and
unemployment allowance;
1

2
• the detailed records to be maintained at different levels; and
• the mechanisms for social audit, as well as monitoring and evaluation of
outcomes.
3. The Government of India (GoI) has established a fund namely the National
Employment Guarantee Fund, from which grants are released directly to Districts.
Revolving funds are to be set up under REGS at the District, Blcok and Gram Panchayat
Levels, with separate bank accounts being opened for such funds at each level.
II.  Audit Review
4. A Performance review of the implementation of NREGA in the initially notified
200 districts was taken up by the Audit during May-September 2007, in response to a
request from the Ministry of Rural Development, so as to provide assurance that the
processes under the Act were put in place and were being adopted effectively by the
State Governments.
5. The performance audit of the implementation of NREGA was carried out for the
period February 2006 to March 2007, covering 558 Gram Panchayats (GPs) in
141 blocks in 68 districts in 26 States.
6. The main objectives of the Performance Audit were to ascertain whether:—
• Effective preparatory steps for planning, implementation and monitoring/
evaluation of outcomes were taken by the Central and State Governments;
• The procedures for preparing perspective and annual plan at different levels
for estimating the likely demand for work, and preparing a shelf of projects are
adequate and effective;
• There was an effective process for registration of households, allotment of
job cards, and allocation of employment in compliance with the guidelines;
• NREGA works were properly planned, and executed in compliance with the
Act and the guidelines, and durable assets were created and properly
accounted for;
• Wages and unemployment allowance were paid in accordance with the Act
and the guidelines, and the intended objective of providing 100 days of
annual employment at the specified wage rates was effectively achieved;
• Funds released for NREGA were accounted for, and utilized in compliance
with the guidelines;
• There was an adequate and effective mechanism at different level for
monitoring and evaluation of NREGA outcomes; and
• There was an adequate and effective mechanism for social audit and grievance
redressal.
7. The important findings of the Performance Audit Review are as under:—
• The Ministry's figures relating to the registration and employment under the
Scheme—3.81 crore household had registered under the Act, out of which

3
2.12 crore households demanded employment and 2.10 crore households
were provided employment during 2006-07, cannot be said to be very reliable
or verifiable, as the record maintenance particularly at GP level, was poor and
there is a high probability of only partial capturing of the demand for work;
• There were significant delays in affixing of photographs on job cards which
is  an important control against fraud and misrepresentation;
• The applications for demand for work were not documented or dated, and
dated receipts for such applications were not issued in most cases, as a result
the eligibility of rural households for unemployment allowance, in these  cases,
was unverifiable;
• There were several cases of delayed payment of wages, for which no
compensation was paid. There were also instances of non-payment of
unemployment allowance which became due to the employment seekers;
• Deficiencies were noticed in the set up of implementing machinery, particularly
at the Block and GP levels like non-appointment of Gram Rozgar Sewaks. This
insufficiency of manpower, particularly at GP level, had adverse impact on the
maintenance of records at GP level, which made it difficult to verify compliance
with the legal guarantee of 100 days of employment on demand;
• There were deficiencies in the planning process, particularly in the preparation
of the 5 year District Perspective Plans (DPPs);
• Most States had not prepared District-wise Schedule of Rates and had adopted
the Schedule of Rates of PWD/Rural Development Department, which may
not necessarily ensure minimum wages for seven hours of work by labourers
of weaker build like women in difficult geo-morphological condition;
• The systems for financial management and tracking were deficient, with
significant cases of failure to conduct monthly squaring and reconciliation of
accounts. Several instances of diversion and misutilisation of funds and
non-rendering of Utilisation certificates and expenditure details were noticed.
• The status of inspection of works at the State, District and Block levels was
poor, and most States had not designated State and District Quality Monitors.
Also, in most cases, Gram Sabha was not held twice a year to conduct Social
Audit Forums.
These issues alongwith the other related matters pertaining to the implementation
of the scheme are discussed at length in the succeeding paragraphs.
Physical Performance
8. According to the Ministry's reports, during the year 2006-07, 3.81 crore rural
households had registered under the scheme. While 2.12 crore households demanded
employment under the scheme, 2.10 crore households received employment, 0.22 crore
households received the full 100 days of legally guaranteed employment.

4
Financial Performance
9. The total financial assistance provided by the Government of India to all the
State Governments up to 31 March, 2007 under the scheme was Rs. 12073.56 crore
(including Opening Balance of Rs. 2052.92 crore, Central Share of Rs. 8958.02 crore,
State Share of  Rs. 813.42 crore and Miscellaneous Receipts of Rs. 249.20 crore). Of
this, the State Governments could utilize Rs. 8823.36 crore (73 per cent).
The details of physical and financial performance under the NREG Scheme is
given in Annexure-I.
III. Resource Support
10. According to the provisions of the NREGA, every State Government was
required to appoint a full-time dedicated Programme Officer (PO), not below the rank of
Block Development Officer (BDO), in each Block, with necessary supporting staff for
facilitating implementation of the Scheme at Block level. The Operational guidelines of
NREGA also provided that it would be advisable to appoint an "Employment Guarantee
Assistant" (EGAs) or "Gram Rozgar Sevak" (GRSs) in each GP, in view of the pivotal
role of the GP in the implementation of REGS. The suggested model for administrative
expenses included a technical assistant for every 10 Gram Panchayats. The State
Government could also constitute panels of accredited engineers at the District and
Block levels for the purpose of assisting with the estimation and measurement of
works. The State Government could consider appointing Technical Resource Support
Groups at the State and District levels to assist in the planning, designing, monitoring,
evaluation and quality audit of various initiatives and also assist in training and
handholding, with a view to improving the quality and cost effectiveness of the scheme.
11. Audit review has revealed that in 20 States viz
 Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil
Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal no full-time dedicated
Programme Officers (POs) were appointed in 102 test checked blocks. The existing
Block Development Officers (BDOs) were appointed as POs and given the additional
charge of the Scheme; Further 11 States did not appoint Technical Assistants in 57 test
checked blocks and in 18 States dedicated Gram Rozgar Sevaks were not appointed in
303 test checked GPs. While 18 States did not constitute panels of Accredited Engineers
for the purpose of assisting with the estimation and measurement of work, 22 States
did not set up a Technical Resource Support Group of State/District level.
12. Audit found that in Andhra Pradesh, as a measure of good practice two
computer operators cum assistants per block, three technical assistants per block and
one dedicated technical assistant for 6-7 GPs had been appointed. At the district level,
orders for appointing a panel of 10 engineers as District Resource Persons (DRPs) had
been issued. At the State level, an EGS units and a technical support unit had been
established.
13. In response to the aforesaid Audit observation, the Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Rural Development) has stated that their advisories to
the State Governments to enable them to deploy adequate staff for NREGA at all levels

5
were broad suggestive framework, and the States had the option to determine their
administrative arrangements, based on their own needs/requirements.
14. The Committee desired to know as to what steps the Ministry have taken to
ensure that adequate and full time dedicated staff viz. Programme Officer, Technical
Assistants and Employment Guarantee Assistants/Gram Rozgar Sevaks are appointed
by all States/Uts. In their response,  the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
"Ministry of Rural Development has regularly  directed the States/UTs to
deploy adequate staff at different levels so as to implement the NREGA
effectively and efficiently. Engagement of personnel at different level is
constantly monitored by Ministry through MIS and Monthly Progress
Reports. In addition, Ministry of Rural Development has formulated a proposal
to strengthen management of NREGA through enhancement of administrative
expenditure limit from 4 per cent to 6 per cent. The proposal prescribes a
model core dedicated administrative and technical staff structure at each
level starting from Gram Panchayat up to State. The proposals have been
considered and approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) in its
meeting held on 10th December, 2008. Based on the proposals approved by
EFC, Ministry of Rural Development has moved a Cabinet Note with the
approval of Ministry (Rural Development) and referred it to Ministry of Finance
for taking approval of Finance Minister. Upon receipt of approval, the Cabinet
Note will be placed before Cabinet for consideration and approval. Ministry
of Rural Development has also approved proposal to strengthen technical
support for implementation of NREGA at State level. Funds have released to
the States/UTs to establish NREGA Cell at State level to efficiently and
effectively implement the programme."
15. A Statement showing detailed State-wise position of deployment of different
personnel is given at Annexure-II.
16. On being asked about the initiative taken by the Ministry/State Governments
to ensure that there is reliable assessment of staff requirement for implementation of
NREGA, the Ministry in a note stated that with a view to strengthening State capacity
in ensuring quality, efficiency and transparency in the implementation of NREGA,
States have been issued detailed guidelines on staff assessment. As per guidelines
issued, Gram Rozgar Sevak for each Gram Panchayat for key functional areas like
registration, job card issue, employment demand and provision, work implementation,
payment, social audit and records has been provided for. Similarly at Block level,
Programme Officer for each block, technical assistants pooled to service GPs, Computer
assistant for IT, MIS functions and Accountant for finance has been provided. Provision
for Works Manager with technical assistants, IT Manager with computer assistants,
Accounts Manager with Accounts Assistant, Training Coordinator for training, social
audit, grievance redressal etc. have also been made at district level. One of the proposals
approved by Expenditure Finance Committee related to discussion of Ministry of
Rural Development with each State individually to assess reasonable administrative
support required for implementation of NREGA. Once the proposals are approved by
Cabinet, the exercise of assessing realistic requirement of staff at different levels for

6
implementation of NREGA would be undertaken in consultation with States. States
have been issued detailed guidelines on staff assessment.
IV . Registration and issue of job cards
17. The NREGA Operational Guidelines stipulate that before demanding
employment under the scheme rural households have to register themselves, and get
a job card. The process for registration of households and issue of job cards, involves
that households may submit an application for registration or submit an oral request.
A Gram Sabha shall be convened for the purpose of explaining the provisions of the
Act, mobilize applications for registration and conduct verifications. A door-to-door
survey may also be undertaken to identify persons willing to register under the Act.
Job Cards should be issued within a fortnight of the application for registration.
Photographs of adult member applicants should be attached to the job cards.
18. Audit review has revealed that while an introductory Gram Sabha meeting at
the time of commencement of the Act was to be convened, such a meeting was not
conducted or no documentary evidence of such a meeting was available in 120 GPs in
12 States. Door-to-door survey to identify persons willing to register was not conducted
in 323 GPs in 20 States. Delays in issue of job cards were noticed in 196 GPs in 16 States
and Photographs of the applicants were not attached to job cards in 251 GPs in
13 States.
19. As regards the measures/steps taken by the Ministry of Rural Development
and the respective State Governments to give adequate publicity to the programme so
as to ensure that all the BPL households are registered under NREGA, the Ministry in
a note stated as under:—
"NREGA is open to all and is not confined to BPL households. However,
Ministry of Rural Development has intensified the information. Education
and Communication (IEC) campaign throughout the country to ensure all the
BPL households are registered under NREGA. For this purpose, TV spots,
radio jingles, periodic print advertisements on different aspects of NREGA,
have been developed. In addition, IEC project with department of Posts has
also been taken up to accelerate the awareness particularly about the post
office accounts any payment. Communication folder has also been prepared
for dissemination. In addition, States have also been advised to take all
requisite action to create more and more awareness about the programme.
Monthly monitoring of employment provided as a ration of BPL households
district wise is done and where this is a low ration, States are specifically
directed to ensure better outreach through closer inspection and acceleration
of IEC activities. Regular visits are also being undertaken by Area Officers of
Ministry as well as National Level Monitors to oversight the implementation
of the programme and wherever awareness is required to be intensified States
have been advised accordingly."
20. When asked about the steps taken to ensure affixing of photographs on all Job
cards, the Ministry in a note informed the Committee that they have advised States/
UTs to initiate time bound exercise to ensure affixing of photographs on all job cards.

7
Also, Ministry of Rural Development vide Notification dated 2nd April 2008 has effected
amendments in Schedule II of the NREG Act with inter-alia provides for affixing of
photographs of registered adult members of a household on Job Cards issued.
21. While apprehending that there is scope for misuse of job cards by the
GP/Department officials, the Committee desired to know about the steps taken to
ensure that the job cards are retained by the registered households and not by the
GP/Departmental officials. In their response, the Ministry have stated that they have
brought out amendments through Notification in Schedule II of the NREG Act which
Inter-alia provides that II job cards shall be in the custody of the Job Card holders to
whom they belong. Any violation in this regard shall be considered contravention of
the provisions of Act. In addition, monitoring and review is regularly held to ensure
that job cards are retained by registered households. Through continued and vigorous
IEC activities, NREGA beneficiaries are enlightened in this regard also. Regular social
audit of works also ensure that job cards are retained by the beneficiaries.
V . Works
22. The NREGA Operational Guidelines stipulate that a unique identity number
should be given to each work to avoid duplication; administrative and technical sanction
should be obtained for all works in advance, by December of the previous year;
worksite facilities (medical aid, drinking water, shade and creche, if there are more than
five children below the age of six years) are to be ensured by the implementing agency;
use of contractors is prohibited; as far as practicable, tasks shall be performed by
using manual labour, and not machines; and the ratio of wage costs to material costs
should be not less than 60:40, preferably at the GP, block and district levels.
23. Audit scrutiny has revealed that out of 558 GPs test checked, unique identity
members were not allotted to works in 331 GPs in 19 States; in 19 Districts in 7 States
the wages-material ration of 60:40 was not maintained at the district level. Further,
39 test-checked blocks in 11 States did not maintain a wage-material ratio of 60:40 at the
block level; out to 558 GPs test checked, administrative approval and technical sanction
of works was not obtained in advance in 95 GPs in 12 States; and in respect of 558 GPs
worksite facilities were not provided or only partly provided in 227 GPs in 14 States.
24. When asked about the measures taken to ensure that unique identity number
is given to each work and duplication of work is avoided, the Ministry in a note have
stated that they have effected amendments through notification in Schedule I of the
NREG Act which inter- alia provide that a unique identity number shall be given to
each work. MIS code is also given to each work to facilitate avoidance of duplicate work.
25. On being asked about the steps taken to ensure that administrative and the
technical sanctions are accorded well in advance to the works, the Ministry in a note
stated that as per NREG Act, the District Programme Coordinator shall prepare in the
month of December every year a labour budget for the next financial year containing
the details of anticipated demand for unskilled manual work in the district and the plan
for engagement of labourers in the works covered under the scheme. Ministry of Rural
Development estimates the requirement of funds on the basis of projections, made in
the labour budget. Central Funds are sanctioned after examining the labour budgets

8
and taking into account utilization of funds previously released. It was further stated
that they have also formulated the draft National Rural Employment Guarantee Financial
Rules 2008, where under administration and technical sanctions are one of the necessary
conditions for release of funds.
26. Explaining the steps taken to ensure complicance with the 60:40 ratio of wages
and material cost in respect of the works undertaken under NREGA, the Ministry in a
note have informed the Committee that as per Para 9 Schedule I of NREG Act the cost
of material component of projects including the wages of the skilled and semi-skilled
workers taken up under the Scheme shall not exceed forty per cent of the total project
costs. This is the mandatory requirement and the States are legally bound to ensure its
compliance. Ministry of Rural Development ensure this by way of analyzing the wage
material costs indicated by the State Governments in the monthly progress reports.
MIS developed also capture data in this regard. Release of Central funds is also
subject to compliance with the given ratio of wages and material.
27. The Committee desired to know about the steps taken by the Ministry to
ensure that worksite facilities are provided to all the workers. In response, the Ministry
have stated that schedule II of NREG Act stipulates conditions for guaranted rural
employment under a scheme and minimum entitlements of labourers. Implementing
authorities at different levels are required to ensure that basic minimum facilities are
provided to workers at worksites. As and when any deficiencies are noticed. State
Government concerned is advised accordingly. The guidelines issued for administrative
expenses also provide that worksite facilities are to be provided as per provisions of
the Act. In addition, this aspect is taken care by the periodicial studies conducted by
the Ministry as well as visits of National Level Monitors.
28. The Ministry have further informed the Committee that the States have regularly
been directed to provide facilities of drinking water, sheds for children, creche facilities,
first aid box with adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries and
other health hazards connected with the work being performed and period of rest at the
worksite. In case of number of children below the age of six is more than five at the
worksite, provision shall be made to depute one of such women worker to look after
the children.
29. The Committee expressed their concern that the quality of assets created
under NREGA were by and large very poor and sub-standard. The Committee enquired
about the measures taken to create qualitative, durable and tangible assets under the
scheme. In response, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
"Water conservation and water harvesting are one of the important permissible
works under NREGA. The works undertaken in NREGA are labour intensive
with a 60:40 labour material ratio. The Act also allows for maintenance of
these assets to ensure the assets are reserved and useful.
Convergence for creation of durable and productive assets
In view of the inter-sectorality of NREGA, the need to create durable assets
and the common target group of certain development programmes, possibilities
of convergence were considered by the Ministry of Rural Development.

9
The Ministry has developed and disseminated Guidelines for convergence
of NREGS with different Schemes and specific programmes viz. Indian Council
of Agricultural Research, National Afforestation Programme and other schemes
of the Ministry of Environment & Forests,  Schemes of the Ministry of  Water
Resources, PMGSY (Department of Rural Development), SGSY (Department
of Rural Development), Watershed Development Programmes (Department
of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development). 115 pilot districts in
23 States have been identified by the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
MoWR and ICAR.
Joint Guidelines have also been issued with the Ministry of Agriculture and
Fisheries.
17 Professional Institutions having technical competence & resources have
been enlisted for monitoring of convergence pilots.
Monitoring to ensure quality of assets
• Technical Personnel: the administrative limit under NREGA has been increased
from 4 per cent to 6 per cent. The focus is on deployment of dedicated staff
for NREGA, strengthening of management and administrative support
structures for better implementation and monitoring of the Scheme. The States
have been advised to deploy Gram Rozgar Sahayaks and Technical Assistants
for day to day monitoring and measurement of works.
• Regular Inspections: Inspections are conducted to monitor works at the level
of the block, district and State. Upto October 2009, a  total of 2443183 works
have been inspected at State, District and Block level.
• Social Audits: Social Audit enable the rural communities to monitor and analyse
the quality, durability and usefulness of NREGA works. The Ministry has
accorded utmost importance to the organization of Social Audits by the Gram
Panchayats and issued instructions to the States to make necessary
arrangements for the purpose. The Act was amended to provide for procedures
on conducting social audits. Initiation of social audit in accordance with the
new social audit provision make it mandatory to conduct social audit once in
every 6 months.
• Independent Institutions: A Professional Institutional  Network (PIN) has
been constituted for steady, sustainable interventions that enhance the quality
of the programme.
• National Level Monitors (NLMs)  periodically monitor the execution of works
which helps in supervision and monitoring of NREGA. National Level Monitors
has undertaken 9 round of visit since the inception of the scheme in 2006 and
have submitted a total of 921 reports.
• MIS: Work data including sanctioned shelf of works, work progress,
measurement, status of works/assets are monitored online.
• NSSO Census: A works survey has been taken up in Andhra Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh and Rajasthan.

10
• According to the findings of the pilot study conducted in Chitradurga  district
of Karnataka, there is an increase in groundwater level, increase in water
percolation, improvement in soil fertility leading to improved land productivity.
In addition to this the findings also suggest a reduction in water vulnerability
and livelihood vulnerability in these areas.
Expansion of Scope of Works
As per an Amendment to the NREG Act, work related to provision of irrigation
facility, horticulture plantation and land development facilities may now be
taken up on land owned by small and marginal farmers.
Small & Marginal Farmers account for 80 per cent of all land holdings and
operate about 40 per cent of all cultivated land. Permitting private works on
lands of small & marginal farmer implies coverage of 40 per cent of all cultivated
area. With improved productivity on lands of small and marginal farmers,
more employment will be generated on farmers fields as farmers capacities are
increased through use of modern technologies and agronomic practices.
This is a step in the direction of moving from unskilled manual labour to
skilled farming practices.
In order to encourage creation of social infrastructure under NREGA, Ministry
has notified construction of Bharat Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendra
(BNRGSK) as Village Knowledge Resource Centre at block and panchayat
level and Gram Panchayat Bhavan at panchayat level.”
VI. Employment and Wages
District Schedule of Rates
30. The NREGA operational guidelines stipulate that District Schedules of Rates
(DSRs) should be prepared for each district, and should be posted at worksites in the
local language. The States should prepare exhaustive and detailed list of tasks required
for undertaking works under REGS in diffrent geomorphological conditions, and the
productivity norms for the District Schedule of Rates (DSRs) should be worked for
each locale in such a way that seven hours of normal work earns minimum wages on a
piece rate basis. Implementing agencies may provide a description of daily work
requirements to facilitate the fulfillment of productivity norms.
31. Audit examination of the records have revealed that 16 States viz. Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Kerala, Manipur, Meghalaya, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, and
Uttarakhand did not prepare separate District-wise Schedules of Rates (DSRs)
specifically for NREGA works.
 32. Audit had noticed a good practice in Andhra Pradesh wherein 158 works were
taken up for conduct of time and motion studies by the Engineering Staff College of
India, based on which a Rural Standard Schedule of Rates (RSSR) had been prepared
and notified. Further, tasks were identified for various works under eight categories of
NREGA, and productivity norms devised and circulated in the form of task sheets

11
prepared in the local language. Salient features and rates were also painted on the
Village Information Wall. According to the State Government, use of locally understood
terminologies in the task sheets enabled labour to understand the payment structure
for a given outturn better than displaying DSRs at the worksite.
VII.Payment of Wages
33. Every person working under REGS is entitled to wages at the minimum wage
rate fixed by the State Government for agricultural labourers. Wages may be paid either
on a time rate or piece rate basis. The NREGA Operational Guidelines further stipulate
that:—
• Wages should be paid on time. In the case of delay beyond 15 days, workers
are entitled to compensation as per the provisions of the Payment of Wages
Act, 1936; and
• measurements must be recorded transparently, whereby individuals may verify
their measurement on a daily basis.
34. Audit review has pointed out that in 79 GPs in 12 States, the workers, even after
working for seven hours, were paid wages less than the minimum wage rate. Further in
213 GPs in 17 States, workers were not paid wages on time i.e. within a fortnight of the
date on which the work was done and no compensation was paid to them.
35. Audit found that as a measure of good practice Andhra Pradesh was now
making all payments to NREGA wage seekers through individual postal savings
accounts. 66 lakh postal accounts have been opened, with separate accounts for
women and men. Wage seekers were issued pay slips (indicating the period of work,
No. of days worked and authorized pay) by village-level EGS functionaries. Payment
of wages through postal accounts was also noticed in Karnataka and Jharkhand (one
GP in Hazaribagh District), while payment through bank accounts was  noticed in
Karnataka and Kerala. In Andhra Pradesh, work-wise computer generated measurement
sheets were used for recording measurements; each payment has a corresponding
measurement sheet. In West Bengal the payment of wages in Dakshin Dinajpur District
was now being made entirely through Bank and Post Offices and the system had been
started in Birbhum and Bankura Districts.
36. When asked about the steps taken to ensure preparation of separate District
Schedule of Rates and fixing of productivity norms for tasks in different
geomorphological conditions, the Ministry in a note stated that as per para 7 Schedule I
of NREG Act when wages are directly linked with the quantity of work, the wages shall
be paid according to the schedules of rates fixed by the State Government for different
types of work every year in consultation with the State Council. States may also
evolve  norms for measurement of work. However, while doing so, factors indicated in
Para 6.7 of the Operational Guidelines may be kept in view. Preparation of separate
district schedule of rates and fixing productivity norms for tasks in different

12
geomorphological conditions is the responsibility of State Government and the Ministry
has no significant role in this regard.
37. On being asked to explain as to how timely measurement of work can be
ensured so that wages to the beneficiaries can be paid on time, the Ministry in a note
stated that timely measurement of work is essential to ensure timely payment of wages.
However, this is possible when qualified technical personnel in charge of the worksite
are adequately available. The proposed increase in administrative expenses from
4% to 6% will adequately taken care of this aspect. Measurement of work may be done
on a daily basis and in a transparent manner. However, this should be done by qualified
personnel a week before payment of wages. Measurement is required to be recorded in
the Measurement Book maintained by qualified technical personnel. Ministry of Rural
Development has notified necessary provisions in this regard in Schedule I of NREG Act.
38. The Committee desired to know the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that
payment of wages is not delayed, and in case of delay, suitable compensation is paid
to the workers. To this, the Ministry in a note have stated as under:—
"Section 3(3) of NREG Act provides that the disbursement of wages shall be
made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date
on which such work was done. Similarly, Para 30 of Schedule II of the Act also
provides that in case the payment of wages is not made within the period
specified under the scheme, the labourers shall be entitled to receive payment
of compensation as per the provisions and State Governments/implementing
authorities are responsible for the compliance of the same. Ministry of Rural
Development also constantly monitors this through MIS developed. To
contain any cases of delayed payment in wages, training modules for
functionaries of Department of Posts have also been developed in consultation
with National Institute of Rural development, Hyderabad. Inter-departmental
coordination meetings are regularly held with Department of Posts at the
level of Secretary to facilitate timely payment of wages and to consider other
related issues."
39. When asked how is it ensured that seven hours of work earns at least the
minimum wage rate, and under no circumstances are the workers paid less then the
minimum wage rate, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
"Schedule I of NREG Act prescribes the minimum features of a Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme which are statutorily required to be
incorporated in the Employment Guarantee Scheme by State Governments. In
view it is for the State Governments and other implementing agencies to
ensure compliance with the statutory provisions of NREG Act. Ministry of
Rural Development has also effected amendment in Schedule I of NREG Act
which inter-alia provides that the schedule of rates of wages for various
unskilled labourers shall be so fixed that an adult person working for nine
hours would normally earn a wage equal to the wage rate. Ministry of Rural
Development, based on the feedback received from different sources regularly
advised State Governments on the different aspects of the NREGA so as to
ensure efficient and effective implementation of the programme."

13
40. The Committee desired to know the wage rate under the NREGA and whether
the wage rate stipulated under the Act will correspond to the minimum wage as notified
by the each State. In response, the Secretary, Department of Rural Development during
the Briefing stated as under:—
"On the issue of what is the minimum guaranteed wage per person, I would
like to clarify that there is a provision within the Act under Section 6(1) which
says that the Centre may notify a central wage rate for NREGA and till such
time as it notifies that central wage rate, the minimum wages rate, the minimum
wages which are prevalent in the States will be used as the NREGA wage rate.
Sub-section (2) of that provision given the States the provision of the use of
the minimum wage to be used as NREGA wages. This position continued till
01.01.09 till that time the NREGA wage rate was the same as the wage rates of
the States which they have notified under the minimum wages of their own
State for agricultural labour. On 1st January, 2009, the Central Government
said  that we are now notifying the Central Wage Rate, but they said that the
Central Wage Rate is the same as the minimum wage which existed on 1.12.2008
in that State. That, then, became the central wage till a more recent
announcement by the Finance Minister that we are committed to providing
Rs. 100 real wage as the NREGA wage rate. Under the present circumstances
different wage rates which were notified as on 1.1.2009. A majority of the
States had wage rates less than Rs. 100 during this time period, between
1.01.2009 and now, the States revised their minimum wages upwards. Some
revised it from, say for example, Rs. 70 to Rs. 85 and some revised it from
Rs. 70 to Rs. 110. The general policy which the Ministry followed was that if
the State Governments revised upwards, but below Rs. 100, that is what their
State can take. They have looked at their agricultural position, they have
looked at what their States can afford, what their agricultural real wage can be
looking at the market. So, we agreed to whatever the State is recommending
saying that we will go along with that provided it does not cross Rs. 100 wage
cap which was indicated by the Finance Minister. If a State went beyond
Rs. 100, the Central Government's position was that up to Rs. 100 we will
reimburse, but if you are to go beyond Rs. 100, then the additionality, over
andabove Rs. 100, is something which the State Government must pay from
its own coffers. So, this is the position as far as the issue of wage is concerned.
The matter has been referred for its final decision to the Ministry of Finance,
As soon as we get their final approval on it, we will formally inform the State
Governments."
41. On being asked whether there have been any cases where the minimum wage
paid to the beneficiaries is less than the minimum wage notified in each State, the
Ministry in a note has stated that Section 6(1) of NREG Act delinks Minimum Wages
Act, 1948 from the wage rate to be paid to the workers engaged under NREG Act.
Central Government in accordance with Section 6(1) of NREG Act have notified the
wage rate on 1st January, 2009. The wage rate so notified serve as a cap on the basis of
which funding of the scheme may be done by the Central Government. Wages are paid
as per the task performed by the workers based on the schedule of rates (SORs). In
case the workers do not perform as per the task rate prescribed, naturally they will be
paid less than the minimum wages notified by States.

14
42. As regards the steps taken to ensure that all payment to beneficiaries are made
exclusively through postal savings accounts or bank accounts so as to reduce the
chances of leakage, the Ministry in a note stated that they have made it mandatory for
all States/UTs to disburse payment of wages to NREGA workers through institutional
accounts opened in Post Offices and Banks. States were also instructed to ensure
compliance failing which Central funds shall not be released. As per information received,
all States/UTs are complying with the instructions issued. Ministry of Rural
Development is also contemplating effecting  amendments in Schedule II of NREG Act.
About 5.77 crores accounts have been opened in banks and post offices.
43. The Committee enquired as to how the Ministry propose to make payment to
labourers in respect of those villages where there is no Post Office or Bank. In response,
the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
"Ministry of Rural Development has regularly taken up the limited outreach
of banks and post offices with Department of Financial Services and
Department of Posts so that compliance with statutory payment of wages
through post offices and banks could be ensured and workers do not face
any difficulty in getting their wages timely. The issue has also been taken up
with Reserve Bank of India. Engagement of business correspondent and
mobile post offices/banks is also being encouraged for areas having no post
office or banks. Ministry has also given exemption temporarily in a few
justifiable cases for cash payment."
44. In so far about the difficulties being faced in making timely payment for wages
upfront to the labourers, the Ministry in a note has stated the Section 3(3) of NREG Act
inter alia provides that the disbursement of daily wages shall be made on a weekly
basis or in any case not later than of fortnight after the date on which such work was
done. So the Ministry cannot do payment of wages upfront to the labourers.
VIII. Unemployment Allowance
45. As per NREG Act, the State Government is required to provide employment to
a registered applicant within  15 days of demand, failing which unemployment allowance
at stipulated rates is payable. Unemployment allowance is to be paid from State
Government funds, and not from Government of India funds.
46. However, Audit review has revealed that in 282 GPs in 21 States, dated receipt
of applications for demand for work were not given, and in 329 GPs in 19 States,
Employment Registers were not maintained. In the absence of recorded date of demand,
the entitlement to unemployment allowance could not be easily established. Audit
scrutiny further revealed that in 58 blocks in 17 States unemployment allowance was
not paid to those workers, who could not be provided with employment within 15 days
from the date on which work was requested for.
47. Asked as to whether it is ensured that payment of unemployment allowance is
paid automatically in all eligible cases by the States without requiring applications
from the beneficiaries, the Ministry in a note state as under:—
"NREG Act does not require any application from the beneficiary to claim
unemployment allowance. Section 7(1) of the Act provides that if an applicant

15
for employment under the scheme is not provided such employment within
fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking employment or from the  date
in which the employment has been sought in the case of an advance
application, whichever is later, he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment
allowance in accordance with this section. Payment of unemployment
allowance shall be made or offered not later than fifteen days from the date on
which it became due for payment in terms of Section 7(5) of the Act."
48. The statement showing details of unemployment allowance paid to the
registered applicants, State-wise, is given in Annexure-III.
IX. Record Maintenance and Reports
A. Maintenance of Registers at GP and Block Levels
49. The NREGA operational guidelines envisage maintenance of various records
which is critical to ensure verifiable compliance with the legal guarantee of 100 days of
employment on demand and payment of unemployment allowance. The Guidelines
have specified details of records and registers to be maintained at different levels.
In particular, the most important records are:
• Application Registration Register—which records applications/requests for
registration of households;
• Job Card Register—which gives details of job cards issued to households;
• Employment Register—which records (for each registered household) details
of employment demanded, employment allotted and employment actually
taken up;
• Asset Register—which is a register of all works sanctioned, executed and
completed;
• Muster Rolls—which is a record of attendance and payment of wages for
individual works;
• MR Issue/Receipt Registers—which record issue and receipt of Muster Rolls
(from the PO to the GP/implementing agency); and
• Complaint Register—which records details of complaints made, and action
taken.
50. Audit review has revealed that in 200 GPs in 19 States, the Application
Registration Register was not maintained, or was not properly maintained i.e. it did not
contain, at the very least, the names of the applicant, date of receipt of application/
request and date of issue of job card. In 253 GPs in 14 States,  the photographs of
applicants were not found attached to the job cards, as per the Job Card Register and
in 293 GPs in 21 States, the Job Card Register was not found properly maintained.
Further in 329 GPs in 19 States, the Employement Register was not maintained, or did
not indicate the details of employment demanded, employment allotted and employment
actually taken up. It was also noticed that in 327 GPs of 21 States, dated receipts of applications

16
for demand for work were not given to the applicants. In 223 GPs in 19 States, the
applications for employment did not have the job card registration number, date from
which employment was required, and the number of days of employment required. In
319 GPs in 21 States the Asset Register was not maintained or was incompletely
maintained. In  206 GPs in 16 States the Muster Roll Receipt Register was not maintained
or was incompletely maintained. Also in 312 GPs in 20 States the Complaint Register
was not maintained or was incompletely maintained.
B. Reports
51. The NREGA Operational Guidelines also prescribe detailed monitoring formats
for Monthly Progress Reports (for both physical and financial) performance to be
compiled and sent by the State Governments. In addition to ensuring transparency
and accountability at the local level, the information furnished by the States is
consolidated for public information through the Ministry's Internet website. The
Operational Guidelines also require that procedures be framed to ensure that data on
work requested and allotted by the PO and GP are properly maintained, and also for
sharing of information on employment allotments between the PO and GP on a weekly
basis.
52. However, audit scrutiny revealed that in 89 blocks of 21 States, procedures had
not been framed to ensure sharing of information on employment allotments between
the PO and GP on a weekly basis. It was noticed that in most cases, the information
between PO and GP was not being shared on a weekly basis. Mostly, the information
was being shared on a monthly basis or during meetings. Further deficiencies were
also noticed in furnishing of MPRs by blocks and districts in 7 States.
C. Further Limited Scrutiny of Record Maintenance
53. Subsequent to the original audit, a limited scrutiny of record maintenance for
one month (November, 2007) was conducted by the audit between February and March
2008, covering 24 GPs in 12 blocks in 12 districts in 6 States from within the original
audit sample. The objective of this exercise was to assess the improvement in
maintenance of records as a result of the performance audit.
54. The focus of the limited scrutiny was on:—
(i) Reconciliation of MPRs with the data of basic records submitted at various
levels i.e. GP/Block and District;
(ii) preparation of Annual Plans for 2007-08; and
(iii) checking the maintenance of important records viz. Employment Register,
Applications for Employment, Asset Register, Job Card Register, Muster Rolls
etc.
55. The main findings of the limited scrutiny of records were as follows:—
• At district and block levels there were either instances of excess reporting in
mandays generated, household demanding employment, household provided
employment, and funds utilized or there were no sufficient records to verify
the details, except in Uttar Pradesh, where records were maintained properly.

17
• Annual plan was found to have been prepared and approved by GS in most
of the GPs, except Bihar where data was not available.
• In most of the GPs of West Bengal, photographs of the workers were not
found in the Job Card Register. Uttar Pradesh had all the photographs in
place while in Rajasthan 10-20 per cent photographs were missing.
• Employment register was not maintained in Maharashtra and Bihar. While
other States GPs maintained the register, the crucial data on employment
demanded was missing in both West Bengal and Jharkhand.
• In Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Bihar records of application demanding
employment were poorly maintained. West Bengal had 50 per cent records,
while Rajasthan had all the details.
• Reconcilliation of households demanding work, households provided work
and households with 100 days of employment could not be ascertained from
the employment register of the GPs in 5 test checked states, except in
Uttar Pradesh.
• In Maharashtra and Bihar and 3 out of 4 GPs of West Bengal, Asset Registers
were not maintained properly.
• Photographs of work were missing in most of the States, except Jharkhand.
• Muster Rolls had few details of Job Card Number, classification of labour
(SC/ST, women) in most of the States, except in Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra
where no work was in progress in November, 2007.
56. The scrutiny revealed that while there was a definite improvement in record
maintenance especially in Uttar Pradesh, after the conduct of initial audit, the
maintenance of basic records at the GP level, in particular the employment register was
still deficient and there was considerable scope for improvement. Further, the reliability
of MPRs from the block and district levels was in serious doubt, as they could not be
reconciled with the relevant basic records.
57. Audit has also noticed that as a measure of good practice, the State Government
of West Bengal had now made a provision for outsourcing of maintenance of different
registers at GP level. In Orissa, every GP had since been provided with a digital camera
for pasting of photographs in JCs.
58. Audit has pointed out that as there are deficiencies in the process of reporting
from the GPs to POs, and onwards, and documentary records of transmitting of
information was, in many cases, not produced to audit. In the absence of such
information, the reliability of information being furnished to Ministry is adversely
affected. They have also stated that in the absence of maintenance of critical registers,
especially at the GP level, it  is impossible to authentically verify: How many households
demanded employment; how many households were provided employment, and for
how many days; how many households got 100 days of employment, what was the
break-up of SC, ST and women beneficiaries and how much employment did they
demand and receive; and what was the entitlement of individual households to

18
unemployment allowance. Thus according to audit the compliance with the legal
guarantee of 100 days of employment on demand is not verifiable, based on available
documents. In addition, transparency and accountability is adversely affected.
59. When enquired about the steps take to ensure proper maintenance as well as
online data entry of all necessary records viz. Muster Rolls, Job Card Register,
Employment Register, Complaint Register and Assets Register, the Ministry in a note
has stated as under:—
"Proper maintenance of records is one of the critical success factors in the
implementation of NREGA. Para 20 of Schedule II of NREG Act provides that
the Gram Panchayat shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and
maintain such registers, vouchers and other documents in such form and in
such manner as may be specified in the scheme. The specified registers are
maintained at the level of Gram Panchayat and Programme Officer. Computer
based Management Information System also capture relevant records/
information electronically. Regular monthly review meetings are held with
Nodal Officers of State Governments on MIS. In addition video conferencing
is held with State Governments to review the progress regarding online data
entry of all relevant records."
60. On being asked as to whether any system has been devised to make these
records available publicly, in addition to being available at the PO and GP officers, the
Ministry in a note have stated that as per Notification dated 31st December, 2008 all
accounts and records relating to the scheme shall be made available for public scrutiny
free of cost. Computer based Management Information System also capture relevant
records/information electronically.
X. Social Audit, Transparency and Grievance Redressal
61. Social audits as a means of continuous public vigilance has been assigned a
key role in the implementation of NREGA. The operating guidelines of the scheme
indicate the following two types of social audit:—
(i) Periodic assemblies in the Gram Sabha for scrutinizing details of projects
(which is referred to as "Social Audit Forum"); and
(ii) social audit as a continuous process of public vigilance involving potential
beneficiaries and other stakeholders, which covers verification of 11 stages
of implementation right from registration of families through to evaluation
and the Social Audit Forum.
62. The scheme guidelines also stipulate that:—
(i) Updated data on demand received, registration, number of job cards issued,
list of people who demanded and had been given/not given employment,
funds received and spent, payments made, works sanctioned and works
started, cost of works and details of expenditure on it, duration of work,
person-days generated, reports of local communities and copies of muster
roll should be made available in a predesigned format outside offices of all
agencies involved in implementing REGS; and

19
(ii) Social Audit Forums must be held twice a year at the Gram Sabha level for all
works done in the preceding year.
63. Audit scrutiny has found that in 354 GPs in 20 States, a Gram Sabha once in
every six month to conduct a Social Audit Forum was not held. The updated data on
demand received, registration, number of job cards issued, list of people who demanded
and been given/not given employment, funds received and spent, payments made,
works sanctioned and works started, cost of works and details of expenditure on it,
duration of work, person-days generated, reports of local communities and copies of
muster rolls were not made public in 376 GPs in 21 States.
64. Audit scrutiny of the records has also revealed that no grievance redressal
forum/mechanism has been put in place or devised in respect of 4 States viz
Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand and Rajasthan.
65. When asked about the steps taken to ensure that timely social audit forums are
conducted, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
"Social Audit Forums not only give an opportunity to review compliance
with the ongoing requirements of transparency and accountability but also
serve as an Institutional forum where people can conduct a detailed public
audit of all NREGA works that have been carried out in their area in the
preceding six months. For this purpose, Ministry has effected amendments
through Notification in Schedule I of NREG Act in respect of conducting
social audit. An amendment to Schedule II of Act is also under consideration
to ensure regular holding of Gram Sabha for the purpose of social audit.
Regular conducting of social audit forum is monitored through quarterly
review as well as field monitoring."
66. On being asked about the measures taken to improve the quality of social audit
conducted under the scheme as also the quality of evaluation of the scheme, the
Ministry in a note have stated that detailed instructions have been issued vide
notification dated 31st December 2008 to improve the quality of social audit. Ministry
of Rural Development has prescribed format for conducting of social audit. During
June to September 2009, 37 National Level Monitors were sent to 37 districts in different
States to monitor the social audit.
67. When enquired about the measures taken to ensure setting up as also effective
functioning of grievance redressal mechanism in all the States, the Ministry in a note
states as under:—
"As per Section 19 of NREG Act the State Government shall by rules, determine
appropriate grievance redressal mechanisms at the block and district levels
for dealing with any complaint by any person in respect of implementation of
the scheme and lay down the procedure for disposal of such complaints. To
ensure proper functioning of grievance redressal mechanism, Ministry of
Rural Development has amended Schedule II of NREG Act through
notification. State Governments are repeatedly asked to establish a suitable
mechanism for redressal of grievances and disposal of complaints in
accordance with the relevant provisions of NREG Act. In all cases, of
misappropriation and embezzlement of Government funds, not only

20
disciplinary action are taken but also criminal proceedings are simultaneously
initiated under the Indian Penal code and Prevention of Corruption of Act."
68. The Ministry have further stated:—
"Receipt of compaints and their time bound disposal is constantly monitored
by Ministry of Rural Development so as to make grievance redressal system
more effective and efficient. National level monitors are also deputed to look
into the specific complaints. In addition, Ministry has initiated setting up the
office of ombudsman to expeditiously dispose the complaints within the
statutory prescribed time frame. Instructions have been issued to States in
this regard. Ministry of Rural Development has also set up a national helpline
to facilitate the lodging of complaints and their disposal in a time bound
manner. States have also been advised to set up similar helpline."
XI. Monitoring
69. The Operational Guidelines of the NREGA stipulate the following procedures
for monitoring and reporting:—
• Block-level officials shall inspect 100 per cent of works every year, District-
level officials 10 per cent of works, and State level officials 2 per cent of works;
• Financial audit of all districts is mandatory;
• District Internal Audit Cells shall be constituted to scrutise the reports of the
Gram Sabhas;
• V erification and quality audit by external monitors must be undertaken at the
Central, State and District levels through National State and District Quality
Monitors. Terms of reference for quality monitors have been fixed separately
by the Ministry; and
• Local Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (VMCs), consisting of members
elected by the Gram Sabha, should monitor the progress and quality of work
while it is in progress.
70. Audit scrutiny has revealed that State-level inspection of works was not
conducted, or documented in respect of 19 States. In 43 districts in 19 States, the
district level officials did not conduct 10 per cent inspection of the works Further, in
105 blocks in 22 States, the block level officials did not conduct 100 per cent inspection
of the works. Financial audit was not carried out in 39 districts in 19 States and in
57 districts in 24 States, District Internal Audit Cells were not constituted. It was also
found that both State and District Quality Monitors had not been designated by the
State Governments of 20 States, while District Quality Monitors had not been designated
in West Bengal. Local VMCs were not constituted by 141 GPs in 14 States.
71. Enumerating the system of inspection that has been put in place under the
NREGA Scheme at various levels i.e., Gram Sabha, Block, District and State level, the
Ministry in a note furnished to the Committee have stated as under:—
"The following targets are fixed for internal verification of works at the field
level by the official functionaries to be achieved within a quarter. 100 per cent

21
of works at the Block Level 10 per cent of works at the District level, 2 per cent
at  the State level. Verification and quality audit by National Level Monitors is
also taken up at the Central, State and District levels. Area Officers from the
Ministry of Rural Development undertake regular visits to States to supervise
implementation of the programme. National Level Monitors also make periodic
visits and inspection of NREGA works being carried out in the districts. In
addition, members of the Central Employment Guarantee Council also make
regular visits to districts to oversee the implementation of NREGA."
72. To a query whether any format has been prescribed for conducting the
inspection at various levels, so that there is uniformity in the way the same is conducted,
the Ministry in a note replied in affirmative.
73. On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure conducting of
requisite level of inspection at all levels, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
"Provision for regular inspection and supervision of works taken up under
the scheme are made in Schedule I of NREG Act to ensure proper quality of
work as well as to ensure that the total wages paid for the completion of work
is commensurate with the quality and quantity of work done. Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees are also constituted for each work undertaken to
monitor the progress and quality of work. Ministry has also prescribed targets
for inspection of works viz. 100 per cent at block level, 10 per cent at district
level and 2 per cent at State level by the official functionaries to be achieved
within a quarter. The information in this regard is also obtained through
monthly progress reports, visit of area officers of the Ministry as well as
visits by National Level Monitors. Any deficiency on this account is taken
up with State Government concerned and they are asked to take corrective
and remedial action under intimation to Ministry of Rural Development. An
amendment to Schedule II of the Act is under consideration of the Ministry
whereby High Level Coordination Committee under the Chief Secretary shall
be set up to ensure inter-departmental coordination in the implementation of
the Act. It will also ensure that prescribed percentage of inspection of works
at all levels and records of the scheme at the State/District/Block is conducted
once a quarter and all deficiencies are removed and all grievances are
redressed."
74. Elaborating the measures taken for streamlining/strengthening the monitoring
system under NREGA at various levels, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
"1. Internal Monitoring
(i) Management Information System: A web enabled MIS  www.nrega.nic.in has
been developed. The village level household data base has internal checks
for ensuring consistency and conformity to normative processes. All critical
parameters get monitored in public domain: (a) workers entitlement data and
documents such as registration, job cards, muster rolls, (b) shelf of approved
and sanctioned works, works under execution, measurement (c) employment
provided (d) financial indicators including wage payment;

22
(ii) Monthly Progress Reports from districts on physical and financial performance
indicators;
(iii) Inspections: State, District and block level functionaries conduct regular
inspections of the NREGA works; and
(iv) Soc ial Audits: Social Audits enable the rural communities to monitor and
analyse the quality, durability and usefulness of NREGA works and the overall
implementation of the Scheme. The Ministry has accorded utmost importance
to the organization of Social Audits by the Gram Panchayats and issued
instructions to the States to make necessary arrangements for the purpose.
Act was amended to provide for procedures on conducting social audits.
Initiation of social audit in accordance with the new social audit provisions
makes it mandatory to conduct social audits once in every 6 months.
2.  External Monitoring
(a) Central Employment Guarantee Council: At the National level Central
Employment Guarantee Council has been set up with the statutory mandate
of monitoring and reviewing the Act. The Council members have undertaken
14 visits to the States of Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Orissa, Haryana, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra in the year 2009. Council members have also
actively participated in review, studies and trainings and social audits;
(b) National Level Monitors and Area Officers: The National Level Monitors,
Area Officers and officials of the Ministry of Rural Development undertake
annual field visits to NREGA Phase I, II and III districts. Performance Review
with States. Feedback on programme implementation is discussed and
analysed with State Governments through quarterly Performance Review
Committee meeting and periodic state level reviews. In the current year so far
two Performance Review Meetings have been organized;
(c) Eminent Citizens: The Ministry has initiated a scheme wherein independent
monitoring by eminent citizens for strengthening the implementation of NREGA
will be done;
(d) Professional Institutional Network: A Professional Institutional Network (PIN)
has been constituted for steady, sustainable interventions that enhance the
quality of the programme. The institutions conduct impact assessment,
concurrent monitoring and appraisal, research, capacity building to identify
both good practices factors that have or will limit the optimal performance of
the Scheme. The main focus will be on strengthening the capacity of the
district to implement the programme and create positive impact; and
(e) Currently the network has 18 member institutions including IITs, IIMs, ASCI,
IIPA, IIFM agriculture universities and other professional institutions. In its
first phase 13 institutions have conducted an NREGA appraisal in 13 States
and around 50 districts across the country. Proposals have been received for
the second phase of the network."

PART-II
OBSERVATIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
1. With an objective of enhancing livelihood security in rural areas the National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) was enacted for providing at least
100 days of guaranteed wage employment in a financial year, to every household
whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The Act aims to
supplement wage employments opportunities in rural areas and provide a safety net
to rural poor and to create sustainable rural livelihoods through rejuvenation of
natural resource base—land, water and forests. The Act initially came into force in
200 districts with effect from 2 February 2006 and was later extended to additional
130 districts in the financial year 2007-08. The remaining districts have been notified
under the NREGA with effect from 1st April, 2008. The NREGA thus, covers the
entire country with the exception of districts that have a hundred per cent urban
population. According to the Act, rural households have a right to register themselves
with the local Gram Panchayats (GPs), and seek employment. Work is to be provided
within 15 days from the date of demand, failing which the State Government will have
to pay unemployment allowance at the stipulated rates. It is a unique and laudable Act
of Parliament which confers a right on the rural households to demand up to 100 days
of employment as a matter of their statutory right. The Act requires every State to
formulate a State Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (SREGS), which should
conform to the minimum features specified under the Act.
2. The examination of the NREG Scheme by the Committee has revealed several
deficiencies in its implementation. It was found that the Ministry's figures relating
registration of the households and employment provided to them in the initial phase of
the scheme cannot be said to be very reliable or verifiable given the poor record
maintenance at particularly at the Gram Panchayat (GP) level, besides high probability
of only partial capturing of the demand for work. Significant delays were found in
affixing of photographs on job cards which is an important control against fraud and
misrepresentation. The applications for demand for work were not documented or
dated, and dated receipts for such applications were not issued in most cases, as a
result the eligibility of rural households for unemployment allowance, in these cases,
was unverifiable. There were several cases of delayed payment of wages, for which no
compensation was paid. There were also instances of non-payment of unemployment
allowance which became due to the employment seekers. Deficiencies were noticed
in the set up of implementing machinery, particularly at the Block and GP levels like
non-appointment of Gram Rozgar Sewaks, which had an adverse impact on the
maintenance of records at GP level, thereby making it difficult to verify compliance
with the legal guarantee of 100 days of employment on demand. Apart from deficiencies
in the preparation of the 5 year District Perspective Plans (DPPs), several States had
not prepared District-wise Schedule of Rates and had adopted the Schedule of Rates
of PWD/Rural Development Department, which may not necessarily ensure minimum
wages for seven hours of work. The status of inspection of works at the State, District
and Block levels was poor, and most States had not designated State and District
Quality Monitors. Also, in most cases, Gram Sabha was not held twice a year to
conduct Social Audit Forums. The Committees examination of these deficiencies and
their findings are dealt with at length in the succeeding paragraphs.
23

24
3. The NREG Scheme envisages that as a part of implementing machinery, every
State Government shall appoint a full-time Programme Officer (PO), in each Block;
"Employment Guarantee Assistant" (EGA) or "Gram Rozgar Sevak" (GRS) in each
GP; a technical assistant for every 10 Gram Panchayats; a panel of accredited
engineers at the District and Block levels; and Technical Resource Support Groups
at the State and District levels for facilitating proper functioning of the scheme.
However, the Committee are concerned to note that in 102 test checked blocks in 20
States no full-time dedicated Programme Officers (POs) was appointed and the
existing Block Development Offices (BDOs) were appointed as POs and given the
additional charge of the Scheme. Further 11 States did not appoint Technical Assistants
in 57 blocks and in 18 States dedicated Gram Rozgar Sevaks were not appointed in
303 GPs. While 18 States did not constitute panels of Accredited Engineers for the
purpose of assisting with the estimation and measurement of work, 22 States did not
set up a Technical Resource Support Group at State/District level. The Committee
are of the considered view that successful implementation of NREGA is critically
dependent on the setting up of an adequate infrastructure at the block and Gram
Panchayat level, notably the appointment of full time Programme Officers, Technical
Assistants and Gram Rozgar Sevaks besides constitution of panels of accredited
engineers. The deficiencies in the setting up of the implementation machinery,
particularly at the Gram Panchayat Level has had an adverse impact on the provision
of the legally guaranteed 100 days of employment on demand and the proper
maintenance of various associated records and also on the effective conduct of the
social audit and transparency mechanism at the grassroots level. The Committee
recommend that State Governments should assess the staffing requirement for
implementation of NREGA, and accordingly take steps to address the gaps, if any. The
State Governments should particularly consider appointing full-time POs at each
Block, with adequate supporting staff and EGAs for each GP. According to the Ministry,
a proposal to strengthen management of NREGA through enhancement of
administrative expenditure limit from 4 per cent to 6 per cent is stated to have been
cleared by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and after its approval by the
Ministry of Finance the proposal would be placed before cabinet for consideration.
The Committee expect the Ministry to pursue this proposal vigorously so that the
same is approved expeditiously by the Government.
4. Under the NREGA Operational Guidelines rural households before demanding
employment have to register themselves, and get a job card. The Committee are
concerned to note that while an introductory Gram Sabha meeting at the time of
commencement of the Act was to be convened such a meeting was not conducted or no
documentary evidence of such a meeting was available in 120 GPs in 12 States. Door-
to-door survey to identify persons willing to register was not conducted in 323 GPs in
20 States. Delays in issue of job cards were noticed in 196 GPs in 16 States and
Photographs of the applicants were not attached to job cards in 251 GPs in 13 States.
The Ministry are stated to have intensified the information, Education and
Communication (IEC) campaign throughtout the country to ensure that all the BPL
households are registered under NREGA. It was further stated that States/UTs have
been advised to initiate time bound exercise to ensure affixing of photographs on all

25
job cards. Amendments to Schedule II of the NREG Act have been made which
inter alia provides for affixing of photographs of registered adult members of a
household on Job Cards issued and that all job cards shall be in the custody of the Job
Card holders to whom they belong. The Committee recommend that Ministry should
not be just content with mere issue of instruction to States. They should hold frequent
meetings with the States so as to ensure that they take steps to provide adequate
publicity to the programme and to persuade as many BPL households as possible to
register under NREGA. The door-to-door surveys, even at this stage, would be useful.
The Committee are of the view that since the beneficiaries under the scheme are
mostly rural households and are susceptible and gullible to fall prey to the GP and
other department officials and middlemen who may lure them to hand over their job
cards, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to issue strict instructions to the States
to ensure that under no condition are job cards retained by GP/other Department
officials for any purpose.
5. As per NREGA Operational Guidelines, unique identity number should be
given to each work to avoid duplication and administrative and technical sanction
should be obtained for all works in advance, by December of the previous year. Worksite
facilities such as medical aid, drinking water etc. are to be ensured by the
implementing agency. Use of contractors is prohibited and as far as practicable,
tasks shall be performed by using manual labour, and not machines. The ratio of wage
costs to material costs should be not less than 60:40; preferably at the GP, block and
district levels. However, the Committee are concerned to note that out of 558 GPs test
checked, unique identity members were not allotted to works in 331 GPs in 19 States
and in 19 Districts in 7 States, the wages-material ratio of 60:40 was not maintained
at the district level. Further, 39 test-checked blocks in 11 States did not maintain a
wage-material ratio of 60:40 at the block level and out of 558 GPs test checked,
administrative approval and technical sanction of works was not obtained in advance
in 95 GPs in 12 States. In respect of 558 GPs worksite facilities were not provided or
only partly provided in 227 GPs in 14 States. The Ministry have informed the
Committee that they have effected amendments to NREG Act and Rules framed
thereunder, with a view to rectify/remedify the various deficiencies pointed out by the
Audit. The Committee trust that these measures would help plug the loopholes in the
execution of works under the scheme. The Committee recommend that Government
may consider adding additional/new categories of works for being taken up under the
NREG Scheme and also permit State Government/State Employment Guarantee
Councils to add other region-specific works, after keeping the Ministry informed.
They also recommend that in order to avoid duplication of NREGS works with other
schemes, durable signboards with cement concrete base may be preferred over
temporary/less durable signboards.
A disquieting feature of the programme is the fact that the quality of assets
created under NREGA is by and large very sub-standard, non-durable and
non-productive. It appears that the Government in their eagerness to provide
employment had overlooked the importance of the quality of the assets that are being
created under the scheme. In this connection the Ministry have informed that
guidelines have been formulated and disseminated for convergence of NREG scheme

26
with different schemes/programmes of various Ministries/Departments so as to create
durable and productive assets. For this, 115 pilot districts in 23 States have been
identified by the concerned Ministries/Departments. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the outcome of these initiatives and their impact in creating durable and
tangible assets.
6. The Committee note that every person working under NREG scheme is entitled
to wages at the minimum wage rate fixed by the State Government for agricultural
labourers. The Operational Guidelines further stipulate that wages should be paid on
time and in case of delay beyond 15 days, workers are entitled to compensation as per
the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936. However, the Committee are
constrained to note several discrepancies in the payment of wages to the labourers
under the scheme such as, workers, even after working for seven hours, were paid
wages less than the minimum wage rate in 79 GPs in 12 States. Further in 213 GPs
in 17 States, workers were not paid wages on time i.e. within a fortnight of the date on
which the work was done and no compensation was paid to them. The Committee
deprecate that despite the NREG Act and the Operational Guidelines minimum wages
were not paid to the labourers in a large number of cases. Since non-payment of
minimum wages or delayed payment of wages is a clear violation of the NREG Act, the
Committee recommend that the offenders need to be identified and punished in terms
of provisons of the Act.
The Ministry have informed the Committee that they have now made it mandatory
for all States/UTs to disburse payment of wages to NREGA  workers through
institutional accounts opened in Post Offices and Banks. State Governments have
also stated to be instructed to ensure compliance failing which Central funds shall
not be released. While appreciating this move of the Government the Committee
recommend that Ministry of Rural Development should take up the matter with the
Ministry of Finance and Department of Posts so that adequate staff is posted at the
rural branches to meet the additional work load of disbursement of wages to the
beneficiaries. Keeping in view the poor financial condition of the rural households,
the Committee would like the Government to consider per-account payment to the
Department of Posts as handling charges, to ensure that no minimum account balances
are stipulated for REGS postal account holders. The Committee have been given to
understand that REGS works were not being measured on daily basis. In this regard,
Andhra Pradesh and Orissa have stated that it was not practicable to measure works
on daily basis. To counter such difficulties, the Ministry may consider the feasibility
of amending the NREGA guidelines for measurement of works on a weekly basis,
keeping in view the availability of technical staff and other practical considerations.
7. As per NREG Act, the State Government is required to provide employment to
a registered applicant within 15 days of demand, failing which unemployment allowance
at stipulated rates is payable by the State Government from their funds. However,
Audit review has revealed that in 282 GPs in 21 States, dated receipt of applications
for demand for work were not given, and in 329 GPs in 19 States, Employment Registers
were not maintained. The Committee note that in the absence of recorded date of
demand, the entitlement to unemployment allowance could not be easily established.
It was also found that in 58 blocks in 17 States unemployment allowance was not paid

27
to those workers, who could not be provided with employment within 15 days from the
date on which work was requested for. The Committee feel that undated applications
and non-maintenance of employment registers leads to a situation where the right to
unemployment allowance cannot be verified defeating the very purpose of the Act to
provide employment guarantee. Proper maintenance of records at GP level, needs to
be given top priority. For this, Ministry should impress upon the State Governments
to appoint Employment Guarantee Assistant (EGA) in each GP. The EGAs should
ensure that all applications are dated and dated receipts of applications are given to
the job applicants. The Ministry should also suitably take up the matter with the State
Governments for ensuring suo moto payment of unemployment allowance to the
eligible labourers. The Ministry may also consider suitable amendment to the NREG
Act for partial reimbursement out of Government of India funds of payment of
unemployment allowance while instituting controls to minimize need for payment of
unemployment allowance by the States.
8. With a view to ensuring verifiable compliance with the legal guarantee of
100 days of employment on demand and payment of unemployment allowance under
NREG Scheme, proper maintenance of various records and registers such as
Application Registration Register, Job Card Register, Employment Register, Asset
Register etc. assumes critical importance. The Committee regret to observe that
there have been innumerable instances where either the records were not maintained
or the records did not contain requisite details. The audit scrutiny has revealed that
the maintenance of basic records at the GP level, in particular the employment register
was deficient and the reliability of MPRs from the block and district levels was in
serious doubt, as they could not be reconciled with the relevant basic records.
Deficiencies were also noticed in the process of reporting from the Gram Panchayats
to Programme officers, and onwards and documantary records of transmitting of
information was, in many cases, not produced to them, the reliability of information
being furnished to Ministry has been adversely affected. The Committee are
constrained of observe that in the absence of maintenance of critical registers,
especially at the GP level, it is impossible to authentically verify as to how many
households demanded employment, how many households were provided employment
and for how many days and how many households got 100 days of employment. As a
result, the compliance with the legal guarantee of 100 days of employment on demand
is not verifiable, based on available documents besides the transparency and
accountability is also adversely affected. The Committee therefore recommend that
suitable steps are necessary to ensure that online data entry of the various documents
is done to increase transparency and accountability and minimize fictitious/duplicate
entries, besides providing a basis for physical verification of Muster Rolls (with job-
card numbers and other details), Job Card Register, Employment  Register (to indicate
employment demanded) and Asset Register. Further, National Quality Monitors may,
during their visits, be asked to cross-verify MPRs furnished by POs alongwith the
documents furnished by GPs to POs for specified months, specifically for households
demanding and provided employment.
9. As a means of continuous public vigilance Social audits have been assigned a
pivotal role in the implementation of NREGA. The Operating Guidelines of the scheme

28
indicate two types of social audit — (i) Periodic assemblies in the Gram Sabha for
scrutinizing details of projects, commonly referred to as "Social Audit Forum" and
(ii) social audit as a continuous process of public vigilance involving potential
beneficiaries and other stakeholders, which covers verification of 11 stages of
implementation right from registration of families through to evaluation and the
Social Audit Forum. The Scheme guidelines also stipulate that social Audit Forums
must be held twice a year at the Gram Sabha level for all works done in the preceding
year. The Committee noticed that in 354 GPs in 20 States, A Gram Sabha once in
every six months to conduct a Social Audit Forum was not held. The updated data on
demand received, registration, number of job cards issued, list of people who demanded
and been given/not given employment, funds received and spent, payments made,
works sanctioned and work started cost of works and details of expenditure on it,
duration of work, person-days generated, reports of local communities and copies of
muster rolls were not made public in 376 GPs in 21 States. The scrutiny of the
records has also revealed that no grievance redressal forum/mechanism has been
put in place or devised in respect of 4 States viz Arunachal Pradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, Jharkhand and Rajasthan. The Ministry have informed the Committee that
they have effected amendments to NREG Act in respect of conducting social audit and
another amendment to Schedule II of Act is also under their consideration to ensure
regular holding of Gram Sabha for the purpose of social audit. The Committee are of
the considered view that since social audit and Social Audit Forum in Gram Sabha are
important means of ensuring transparency and accountability at the GP level, the
State Governments should therefore, ensure conduct of Social Audits Forum
mandatorily in all Gram Sabhas, twice a year. They also recommend that the Ministry
of Rural Development should release funds to the State Governments and implementing
agencies on the pre-condition of holding regular Social Audits by them. If necessary,
the Ministry may also make suitable amendments in the Act to this effect.
10. The Operational Guidelines of the NREGA stipulate that Block-level officials
shall inspect 100 per cent of works every year, District-level officials 10 per cent of
works, and State level officials 2 per cent of works. Financial audit of all districts is
mandatory and District Internal Audit Cells shall be constituted to scrutinise the
reports of the Gram Sabhas. Verification and quality audit by external monitors must
be undertaken at the Central, State and District levels through National, State and
District Quality Monitors. Local Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (VMCs)
consisting of members elected by the Gram Sabha, should monitor the progress and
quality of work while it is in progress. The Committee are constrained to point out
that Audit Scrutiny has revealed number of instances in different States where these
guidelines have not been followed. The Ministry have informed the Committee that an
amendment to the Act is under consideration whereby High Level Coordination
Committee under the Chief Secretary shall be set up to ensure inter departmental
coordination in the implementation of the Act. It will also be ensured that prescribed
percentage of inspection of works at all levels and records of the scheme at the State/
District/Block is conducted once a quarter and all deficiencies are removed and all
grievances are redressed. The Committee expect that the Ministry will carry out
necessary amendments to the NREG Act expeditiously. They also expect that the
various measures taken by the Ministry for strengthening the monitoring system

29
will yield desirable results and help in proper functioning of the scheme. The Committee
recommend that Ministry should direct State Government to ensure that the requisite
level of inspection by different levels of officials are conducted at all the levels and
VMCs should be formed, wherever these are not formed as yet.
11. During the course of implementation of the initial phase of NREG Scheme,
the audit has brought to light several good practices being followed by some States
such as Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Orissa, Karnataka and Kerala. The Committee
recommend that Ministry should conduct a detailed study of these good practices with
a view to examine the feasibility of incorporating the same in the operational guidelines
of the scheme so that these can be followed by other States.
12. The Committee are given to understand that in Several States, during the
agricultural crop season, labourers are not available for agricultural operations, due
to their employment under NREGA works, and as a result agricultural operations
are in the dock. In this regard the Ministry have informed the Committee that NREG
scheme guarantees only 100 days of employment, hence the workers are free to work
anywhere in the rest of the year. The average person day per household in the year
2008-09 was only 48 days which means a worker had the leverage to work anywhere
for the remaining days. The Committee do not accept the contention of the Ministry
and recommend that they may in coordination with other concerned agencies should
conduct a season-wise survey of the number of days on which employment was provided
to the labourers including agricultural season so as to assess the extent to which
NREGA had adversely affected Agricultural activities. The Ministry may consider
the feasibility of amending the operational guidelines with a view to ensure that the
labourers are engaged in NREGA works only during Non-Agricultural season.
13. The Committee are concerned to note that there is a regional disparity in the
implementation of NREG Scheme. While certain States like Andhra Pradesh and
Rajasthan have performed very well, the performance of other States such as
Maharashtra, Punjab and Haryana are far from satisfactory. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry should conduct a comprehensive reivew to examine the
reasons for such wide variations in the implementation of scheme in consultation
with the State Governments concerned and immediate corrective measures should be
taken to ensure that the programme is implemented uniformly across the States.
14. As per the NREG, if a person employed under the Scheme dies or becomes
permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of employment, he
shall be paid by the implementing agency any ex-gratia payment at the rate of twenty-
five thousand rupees shall be paid to the legal heirs of the deceased or the disabled, as
the case may be. The Committee are of the considered view that since the compensation
paid to the victim or the next of kin of the decesed, as the case may be, is very paltry the
Committee therefore, recommend that this amount should be enhanced to Rs. 1 lakh
by suitably amending the Act.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
26 February, 2010 Chairman,
6 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE - I
NREGA - NATIONAL   OVER  VIEW
(FY 2006-07) (FY 2007-08) (FY 2008-09) (FY 2009-10)
200 Districts 330 Districts 615 Districts 619 Districts
up to Sep. 09
Employment provided to 2.10 crore 3.39 crore 4.51 crore 3.37 crore
households:
PERSONDAYS (in crore)
Total: 90.5 143.59 216.32 135.85
SCs: 22.95 [25%] 39.36 [27%] 63.36 [29%] 40.92 [30%]
STs: 32.98 [36%] 42.07 [29%] 55.02 [25%] 29.11 [21%]
Women: 36.79 [41%] 61.15 [43%] 103.57 [48%] 69.97 [52%]
Others: 34.56 [38%] 62.16 [43%] 97.95 [45%] 65.81 [48%]
Average personday per household 43 Days 42 Days 48 Days 40 Days
FINANCIAL DETAIL
Budget Outlay (Rs in crore): 11300 12000 30000 39100
Central Release (Rs in crore): 8640.85 12610.39 29939.60 16790.86
Total available fund 12073.55 19,305.81 37397.06 29611.81
[including OB]: (Rs. in crore)
Expenditure (Rs. in crore.) 8823.35 15856.89 27250.1 16747.4
Average wage per day Rs. 65 Rs. 75 Rs. 84 Rs. 89
WORKS DETAIL
Total works taken up (In Lakhs): 8.35 17.88 27.75 25.74
Works completed: 3.87 8.22 12.14 6.85
Water conservation: 4.51 [54%] 8.73 [49%] 12.79 [46%] 13.44 [52%]
Provision of Irrigation facility
to land owned by
SC/ST/BPL/ S & MF and IAY 0.81 [10%] 2.63 [15%] 5.67 [20%] 4.22  [16%]
beneficiaries:
Rural Connectivity: 1.80 [21%] 3.08 [17%] 5.03 [18%] 4.27 [17%]
Land Development: 0.89 [11%] 2.88 [16%] 3.98 [15%] 3.47 [14%]
Any other activity: 0.34 [4%] 0.56 [3%] 0.28 [1%] 0.33 [1%]
30

31
ANNEXURE - II
MONTHLY PROGRESS REPORT UNDER NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT (NREGA) PART VI A
Capacity Building—Personnel under NREGA DURING THE YEAR 2009-10 Upto The Month
Gram Panchayat Block
Level Level
Gram Rozgar Accountant Engineers/Technical Programme Computer
Sahayak Assistants Officer Assistant
Sl. State Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Achieve-
No. ment ment ment ment ment
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2
1. Andhra Pradesh 21942 20630 1098 889 3099 3037 1098 1063 1098 1061
2. Arunachal Pradesh 137 2 14 5 11 4 14 7 6 0
3. Assam 2378 1445 1344 775 1286 859 202 199 1564 1034
4. Bihar 8460 6780 530 431 1265 857 528 368 548 339
5. Chhattisgarh 9756 8723 146 98 578 276 153 114 293 216
6. Gujarat 13590 9941 203 67 1021 701 223 205 409 276
7. Haryana 2640 1788 165 151 149 145 102 100 43 38
8. Himachal Pradesh 1077 1045 103 103 1126 971 77 77 78 77
9. Jammu and Kashmir 2515 1365 72 49 464 250 82 80 139 98
10. Jharkhand 4556 4273 213 141 570 276 433 321 245 157
11. Karnataka 3674 2832 125 93 859 752 113 112 613 377
12. Kerala 2022 1992 152 151 151 139 131 89 8 8
13. Madhya Pradesh 39192 34329 535 402 2173 1517 394 341 633 358
14. Maharashtra 26508 22549 498 445 4427 2697 401 355 542 455
15. Manipur 1871 1815 32 17 71 41 24 24 35 20

32
1 2 34 56789 1 0 1 1 1 2
16. Meghalaya 4820 4468 61 48 184 130 39 39 82 67
17. Mizoram 336 301 21 21 79 79 36 33 43 43
18. Nagaland 1122 914 52 47 86 54 88 65 75 45
19. Orissa 6198 6021 202 80 835 735 303 303 338 304
20. Punjab 4368 1640 56 11 374 61 128 100 159 119
21. Rajasthan 9153 8680 520 413 1280 935 235 131 689 564
22. Sikkim 163 163 8 0 27 21 8888
23. Tamil Nadu 12758 12675 396 365 893 862 385 385 874 632
24. Tripura 1926 1260 55 42 154 135 38 38 56 44
25. Uttar Pradesh 50597 43272 2367 1130 15055 4725 784 571 716 336
26. Uttarakhand 2616 752 78 41 665 265 89 59 95 84
27. West Bengal 2875 2334 282 231 784 646 333 333 333 324
28. Andaman and Nicobar 86 86 99999999
29. Dadar & Nagar Haveli 10 10 10111111
30. Daman & Diu 0000000000
31. Goa 235 227 28 28 32 18 23 23 63 42
32. Lakshadweep 10 10 1060 1 00 1 10
33. Puducherry 26 26 11440033
34. Chandigarh 0000000000
Total 237617 202348 9368 6284 37718 21202 6484 5553 9809 7139

33
(contd.)
MONTHLY PROGRESS REPORT UNDER
Latest
District Level
Works Manager & IT Manager & Coordinator for
Technical Computer Accounts Training Social Audit and
Assistants Assistant Manager C oordinator Grievance Redressal
Sl. State Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Achieve- Target Achieve-
No. ment ment ment ment ment
1 2 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
1. Andhra Pradesh 44 41 44 38 22 18 813 766 484 439
2. Arunachal Pradesh 40404020 1 20
3. Assam 89 57 53 32 36 21 43 27 138 68
4. Bihar 304 214 86 28 71 64 2225
5. Chhattisgarh 3 3 10 87487 1 9 1 6
6. Gujarat 45 40 25 21 31 27 4010
7. Haryana 9 6 28 24 13 12 4 4 15 15
8. Himachal Pradesh 5 3 13 12 771032
9. Jammu and Kashmir 31 6 16 7 7 2 18 0 18 0
10. Jharkhand 16 8 13 11 3 1 274 272 855 90
11. Karnataka 21 14 151 76 24 21 29 22 40 33
12. Kerala 10 1 24 21 440000
13. Madhya Pradesh 132 59 119 87 125 75 33 5 37 12
14. Maharashtra 186 169 113 95 87 82 116 106 138 136
15. Manipur 32 19 33 12 13 7 9 7 11 6

34
1 2 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
16. Meghalaya 10 6 19 17 10 6 21 12 25 12
17. Mizoram 9999118833
18. Nagaland 39 34 35 31 26 23 17 17 26 20
19. Orissa 21 19 22 22 11 1 4 4 18 18
20. Punjab 15 5 22 14 18 4 9 4 11 5
21. Rajasthan 56 34 106 77 58 42 34 23 40 24
22. Sikkim 4332211010
23. Tamil Nadu 31 29 48 27 31 30 1100
24. Tripura 66 65 24 24 22 21 20 20 21 21
25. Uttar Pradesh 184 158 61 32 48 12 44 23 41 40
26. Uttarakhand 3063132110
27. West Bengal 49 43 36 31 19 13 8 7 17 16
28. Andaman and Nicobar 3333333300
29. Dadar & Nagar Haveli 1111000000
30. Daman & Diu 0000000000
3 1 . G o a 1 0 1 020201000
32. Lakshadweep 2000000000
33. Puducherry 0000000000
34. Chandigarh 0000000000
Total 1434 1059 1129 765 716 515 1529 1341 1977 981

35
ANNEXURE-III
UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE PAID BY THE STATES UNDER NREGA
Sl. Name of State Details of Un-employment allowance paid
No.
1. Madhya Pradesh During 2006-07, In Badwani district, 1574 applicants were
paid a sum of Rs. 4,75,386 as unemployment allowance.
2. Orissa A total of 543 job seekers have been paid Rs. 1,03,462 as
unemployment allowance in three districts
viz. Nawarangpur, Kalahandi and Bolangir.
3. Karnataka 679 applicants have been paid Rs. 1,68,068 as
unemployment allowance in 8 Gram Panchayats of
Raichur district.
4. West Bengal Eight job card holders in South 24-Parganas district of
the State have been paid 14 days unemployment
allowance each in 2007-08.
5. Kerala An amount of Rs. 1063 was sanctioned to a job seeker
(Sri. A.P. Vimlan, Ajnailikkal House, Padichira P.O.,
Pulpally, Wayanad district) as unemployment allowance
for 32 days during the year 2006-07.
6. Tripura Unemployment allowance has been paid by the
Government of Tripura during the year 2008-09 upto
31st December, 2008 to 51 registered job seeker.
7. Jharkhand Unemployment allowance of Rs. 138330.00 paid to
78 workers of Jerua & Kope villages in Latehar district
of Jharkhand.
8. Maharashtra Unemployment allowance has been paid in Bhandara
district in November 2007. Rs. 2,72,272 were paid to
1144 labours.
35

APPENDIX-I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
 COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 5TH NOVEMBER, 2009
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. on 5th November, 2009 in Room
No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Jaswant Singh — Chairman
 MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal
3. Shri Satpal Maharaj
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
6. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
9. Shri Ashwani Kumar
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri K.R. Shriram — Principal Director
2. Shri Bhavani Shankar — Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Rural Development)
1. Dr. Rita Sharma — Secretary
2. Ms. Anita Sharma — Joint Secretary
36

37
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members, Officers of
Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the Representatives of the Ministry of
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development) to the sitting of the Committee.
The Chairman then stated that the sitting had been convened to hear the views of the
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural
Development) on Report No. PA 11 of 2008, Union Government (Civil—Performance
Audit) relating to "Implementation of National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
(NREGA)".
3. The Secretary, Department of Rural Development gave a detailed powerpoint
presentation highlighting, the salient features of the 'National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (NREGA)' and its implementation at the field level and also clarified the
Ministry's position with regard to the various observations made in the Audit Report.
4. Thereafter, Members raised various queries on the subject some of which were
duly explained by the Secretary. The Hon'ble Chairman, then, directed the
representatives of the Ministry to furnish detailed written information to all the points
raised by the Members, at the earliest for consideration of the Committee.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX-II
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
 COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 28TH JANUARY , 2010
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 28th January, 2010 from 1130 hrs. to
1415 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri K. Sudhakaran
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
14. Dr. K. Malaisamy
15. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
38

39
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller & Auditor General of India
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy.  C & AG (Report Central)
3. Shri H. Pradeep Rao — Director General of Audit
(Central  Expenditure)
4. Shri P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (Report Central)
5. Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit
(Economic & Service Ministries)
Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Department of Health and Family Welfare)
1. Ms. K. Sujatha Rao — Secretary (Health and Family Welfare)
2. Shri R.K. Srivastava — DGHS
3. Shri Naved Masood — Additional Secretary (Finance)
4. Shri V . V ekatachalam — Additional Secretary
5. Shri B.K. Prasad — Joint Secretary
6. Shri Vineet Chawdhry — Joint Secretary
7. Ms. Shakuntala Gamlin — Joint Secretary
8. Dr. H.C. Goel — Addl. DG . DGHS
2. *** *** *** ***
3. *** *** *** ***
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The representatives of the Ministry then withdrew.
5. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft
Reports:—
(i) C&AG's Report No. PA-11 of 2008—Union Government (Civil—performance
Audit) relating to "Implementation of National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act";
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
6. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the same with some
modifications/changes and authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the
light of suggestions made by the Members and the consequential changes arising out
of  factual verification by the Audit and present the same to the Parliament.
7. *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Matters not related to this Report.
GMGIPMRND-1436LS-17-4-2010