ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL REMOTE SENSING
CENTRE
DEPARTMENT  OF  SPACE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
2012-2013
SIXTIETH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
60

SIXTIETH  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL REMOTE
SENSING CENTRE
DEPARTMENT  OF  SPACE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.8.2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.8.2012
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1976
Price: `  73.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)........................ (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12)........................ (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-II OF PAC (2011-12)............................ (vii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (ix)
REPORT
PART-I
I. INTRODUCTORY ........................................................................ 1
II. AUDIT REVIEW .......................................................................... 1
III. UTILISATION  OF REMOTE   SENSING   SATELLITES,   DATA
ACQUISITION AND PROCESSING............................................ 3
Capacity utilization of Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellites.... 3
Recovery of expenditure/Return on Investment.......................... 6
Data Need Assessment ............................................................... 9
Utilisation of acquired data ......................................................... 11
NRSC archival policy................................................................... 12
Data processing facility ............................................................... 14
National Remote Sensing Coordination Committee ..................... 15
IV . SALE OF DATA PRODUCTS...................................................... 16
V. AERIAL REMOTE SENSING PROJECTS.................................... 20
Delay in completion of Projects and Underperformance of Aircrafts 20
Security vetting from various agencies ....................................... 23
VI. REMOTE SENSING APPLICATION PROJECTS......................... 24
Projects of National Importance under NNRMS  coordinated by the
Standing Committees of NNRMS ................................................ 26
(i)

Projects of National Importance Directly Implemented by NNRMS
through DoS/ISRO Units Including NRSC .................................. 29
Operational Projects for ACL ....................................................... 33
Other operational projects ........................................................... 34
VII. TRAINING IN REMOTE SENSING............................................. 44
VIII. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT.................................................... 45
Excessive release of grants .......................................................... 45
Budgeting and Budgetary control ............................................... 45
Work centre advances, dues from ACL and dues from the sale of
Satellite Products......................................................................... 47
Internal control and internal audit system ................................... 48
Commission charges to ACL ....................................................... 48
PART II
Observations and Recommendations .......................................... 50
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the  First  Sitting  of  the  Sub-Committee-II  of  PAC
(2011-12)  held on 11.1.2012......................................................... 60
II. Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of  PAC (2012-13)  held on 23.8.2012..... 62
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
11. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
13. Dr. Shashi Tharoor
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija Vyas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
21. *Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
*Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide  the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
(v)

COMPOSITION  OF  SUB-COMMITTEE-II  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
Dr. Girija Vyas — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
4. Shri K. Sudhakaran
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Tariq Anwar
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Sixtieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Activities of
National Remote Sensing Centre' based on the C&AG Report No. 21 of 2010-11
(Performance Audit), relating to the Department of Space (DoS).
2. The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
was laid in Parliament on 18th March, 2011.
3. The predecessor Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) took up the subject for
detailed examination and report. A Sub-Committee headed by Dr. Girija Vyas, MP and a
Member of the Committee was specifically constituted for the purpose. The
Sub-Committee procured written reply and took evidence of the representatives of the
Department of Space on the subject at their sitting held on 11.01.2012. The subject was
subsequently carried forward by the successor Committee (2012-13) for examination.
The Draft Report was placed before the main Committee for consideration and adoption.
The Committee adopted the Draft Report at their sitting held on 23.08.2012. The Minutes
of the sittings are appended to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part-II of
the Report.
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committee and the Sub-Committee for
taking oral evidence of the Department of Space and obtaining the requisite information
on the subject.
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Department of Space for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and
furnishing information that the Committee desired in connection with the examination
of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 August, 2012 Chairman,
6 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

REPORT
PART - I
I.  INTRODUCTORY
National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), a unit of Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) is the nodal agency for remote sensing activities, which involves
acquisition and archival of satellite/aerial remote sensing data and its dissemination.
NRSC is also a vital unit in the chain of activities involved in the design, development,
realization, launch and utilization of remote sensing satellites in the country. Erstwhile
National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) was an autonomous organisation under the
Department of Space (DoS) upto August 2008. It was converted into a Government
organisation with effect from 1st September 2008. The Remote Sensing Data Policy of
India, 2001 vested NRSC with the sole authority to acquire and disseminate all remote
sensing data in the country subject to specific guidelines stipulated to protect national
security interests.
2. During the years 2003-04 to 2008-09, NRSC received grants from the DoS and
incurred an expenditure of ` 657.78 crore which was exclusive of the cost of satellites
and their launching. During the same period, NRSC generated internal revenue of
` 528.25 crore from the sale of data products and remote sensing application projects.
From 1st September 2008, NRSC became a centre of DoS and, therefore, received
money as budget allocation from DoS instead of grants-in-aid.
3. The major objectives of the NRSC are acquisition and processing of remote
sensing data from various Indian and foreign remote sensing satellites and their supply
to users in India and abroad; airborne remote sensing for aerial photography,
aero-magnetic survey and aerial laser terrain mapper etc.; and remote sensing application
projects.
II.   AUDIT REVIEW
4. The Performance Audit of the activities of NRSC was conducted by the C&AG
between June 2008 to May 2009 covering six years, from 2003-04 to 2008-09. The main
objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess:—
• Effectiveness of utilisation of the remote sensing satellites, acquisition and
processing of remote sensing satellite data.
• Whether the sale of data products resulted in maximisation of revenue.
• Effectiveness of airborne remote sensing and completion of projects on time.
• Whether the remote sensing application projects were helping in the efficient
management of national resources in the fields of agriculture, water resources,
urban development and disaster management.
1

2
• Whether adequate training on remote sensing was imparted.
• Whether the financial management was effective in aiding NRSC in carrying
out its mandated activities.
5. The critical Audit observations are as under:
• Performance of three out of the seven remote sensing satellites were below
their maximum capacity in terms of the number of remote sensing satellite
data captured by them. The revenue realised from seven satellites in operation
was not up to the desired level. The satellites were planned without adequate
thematic data need assessment. Idling of acquired IRS data was high due to
non-adoption of appropriate marketing strategy. There were also delays in
data processing impacting the delivery of available data products.
• The efforts of NRSC were not adequate in customising the data according to
the needs of private users and also in exploring the possibility of widening
the customer base. The sale of data products to private users did not improve
as recommended by the Standing  Committee of Parliament of DoS. Further,
there was scope for enhancing the rates of IRS data products in line with
international rates.
• Aircrafts performing the task of aerial remote sensing could not be put to use
to their maximum capacity.
• NRSC did not adequately co-ordinate with various agencies for effective
implementation of remote sensing application projects . Further, there were
instances of deficiencies in planning and implementation, non/partial
achievement of the objectives, delays in completion of projects etc., which
adversely impacted on the success of these projects.
• There was shortfall in the enrolment in long term courses. Further, the number
of private persons trained for promoting the sale of data products was lower
than participants from the Government sector.
• There was substantial amount of unutilised balances available with NRSC
under Government projects, despite which it continued to receive advances
for special projects from DoS and from other Government users. Budgeting of
NRSC was not realistic indicating lack of control on income and expenditure
and poor monitoring of projects. There was reduction of revenue/loss of
interest due to irregular fixation/delayed fixation of agency commission payable
to Antrix Corporation Limited (ACL) in the sale of satellite data. Internal
control and internal audit were not commensurate with the requirement of
NRSC.
6. Against the aforesaid backdrop, the Public Accounts Committee (2011-12)
selected the subject for detailed examination and Report. For this purpose a
Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Girija Vyas, MP and a Member of the
PAC was constituted to examine the issue in detail. The Sub-Committee obtained

3
background material and detailed written reply from the DoS. They also took oral
evidence of the representatives of the DoS on 11.01.2012 and sought Post Evidence
Replies from them. Based on these oral and written depositions by the DoS, the
Committee examined the performance of the NRSC and identified some very important
issues and pinpointed certain lacunae as discussed in the succeeding paras.
III.  UTILISATION OF REMOTE SENSING SATELLITES, DATA ACQUISITION
AND PROCESSING
Capacity utilization of Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellites
7. During the period of Audit review, NRSC was mainly acquiring remote sensing
data from seven Indian Remote Sensing satellites and a few other foreign satellites.
Audit review revealed that three remote sensing satellites-IRS-P3, IRS-1C and
IRS-P4—could utilize only 32, 45 and 50 per cent of their maximum capacity due to
technical problems in the spacecrafts. The performance of these three out of the seven
remote sensing satellites was below their maximum capacity in terms of remote sensing
satellite data captured by them.
8. In the above context, the Secretary, DoS explained during evidence:—
"..........there was reference about three satellites. One was the experimental satellite
IRS-P3. In IRS-P4 satellite, there was a power failure and we had to stop one of
the sensors working in those days. Another satellite was at the end of its life.
In fact, the designed life is three to five years but we went up to 10 years. It was
in bad shape. This is one thing which could be kept in mind."
9. On being asked specifically that whether the lower capacity utilization of these
three remote sensing satellites had an impact on remote sensing application projects
of national importance and assessment made by the DoS regarding the same, the DoS
in a written reply submitted as follows:
"The three remote sensing satellites referred to in the audit were IRS-P3, IRS-1C
and IRS-P4 (Oceansat-1). The details of their performance are given below.
Satellite Launch Date Designed Decommission Period of Purpose
Life Date service
IRS-1C December 3 years September 21, 11 years and Operational
28, 1995 2007 8 months
IRS-P3 March 21, 3 years January, 2006 9 years and Experimental
1996 10 months
IRS-P4 May 26, 1999 5 years August 8, 2010 11 years and Operational
(OCEANSAT) 2 months

S-3/E/REPORT 2012/2720LS/2720LS
4
All the three satellites referred to in question have performed beyond their
designed life time of 3/5 years. The satellites have not under performed, but have
provided vital data for management of land, water and ocean related studies.
IRS-P4, as against the designed life of 5 years, has continued to function beyond
10 years.During the period of audit (2002-2008), IRS-P4 completed the nominal
life and there was reduction in spacecraft power, which was quite expected, and
hence had resulted in limited data acquisition. However, the data over Indian
region including Indian Ocean was being covered and hence did not affect the
data requirements of Indian users. As the satellite worked well beyond its life
and continued to provide important data of ocean applications, the overall
performance of the satellite exceeded the designed capacity of the mission. The
data has been operationally used for the Potential Fishing Zone forecast and
serving the fishermen community.
Similarly, IRS-1C did operate for nearly 12 years, as against the designed life of
3 years. During period of audit it had completed nominal mission life period and
hence showed variations in annual data acquisition numbers. IRS-1D was
launched to ensure continuity of service by IRS-1C. The data from IRS-1C & 1D
supported the requirements of the user community and there has been no deficit
in terms of meeting the data requirements of the users. IRS-1C was particularly
used for applications related to land resources, urban and rural development in
India and also there was global demand for this satellite data."
DoS, claiming that the user data needs were met from these satellites, further
explained:—
"The Remote Sensing application projects did not suffer during the operational
period of the above satellites. The major projects serviced with these satellites
are:
(i) Potential Fishing Zone (PFZ) forecast: The project was initiated prior to the
launch of IRS-P4. After the launch of IRS-P4, the required products for fishing
community were derived continuously and serviced regularly on an
operational basis. This satellite also attracted a lot of global attention and
many users from other countries were provided with this data. The project is
still ongoing and services are continued with Oceansat-2, the follow on satellite
of IRS-P4.
(ii) Many applications projects, including national missions, were carried out
during the IRS-1C/1D time frame: Crop Acreage and Production Estimate
(CAPE), Rajiv Gandhi Drinking Water Mission, Integrated Mission for
Sustainable Development (IMSD), National Wasteland mapping, National
Land Use Mapping, Wetland mapping, Coastal Zone Mapping, Urban Sprawl
studies etc. In addition, many projects were carried out by different State
Governments, Academia and NGOs addressing locale specific requirements.
Particularly, Watershed development and monitoring was one such project.

5
All these projects were successfully implemented using IRS-1C/1D datasets
and some of the projects are still continuing with follow on satellite data like
Resource sat-1 (IRS-P6)."
10. The Committee desired to be apprised of the mechanism formulated by the
DoS for utilisation of remote sensing satellites to their full potential. The DoS explained
as under:—
(a) "Considering the importance of Natural Resources Management in the
country, the Planning Commission, Govt. of India has set up National Natural
Resources Management System (NNRMS), in 1985, with Department of Space
(DoS) as the nodal agency. The NNRMS framework has been established as
a unique network involving Central & State Government agencies, private
sectors, academia and non-governmental organisations. NNRMS facilitates
integration of satellite remote sensing data with conventional techniques
towards management of natural resources and development planning in the
country. The Planning Committee of NNRMS (PC-NNRMS) along with
Standing Committees has been addressing the greater utilization of application
of remote sensing in the country. NNRMS, has since evolved into an
operational set-up wherein the various users like Central/State Governments,
private/voluntary agencies, industries, universities/research institutions, are
partners towards providing vital inputs for decision making at all levels
(national, state/regional, district, taluk/block, panchayat/village), towards
management and development of natural resources.
(b) Apart from the above, a large number of interaction meetings are being held
with various users ministries/departments on the need basis to address the
issues concerning utilization of remote sensing for natural resources
development.
(c) Due to such mechanisms, many ministries/departments have started
institutionalization of remote sensing within their own departments. For
example, Ministry of Forest and Environment has set up a good remote sensing
applications and data processing infrastructure for providing biennial forest
cover of the country; Ministry of Earth Science has setup a similar mechanism
under Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS),
Hyderabad which provides necessary information to the fishermen and coastal
user community with respect to ocean resources. Many such
institutionalization activities are happening in other user ministries too. This
is one of interesting outcome of the concept of National Natural Resources
Management System whose objective is to see that the user ministries
internalize the remote sensing applications while ISRO/DoS provides all
technical guidance/assistance and also provide required satellite data for
national development.
(d) The Earth Observation satellite missions are designed primarily to cater to
Indian region with the required revisit cycles, based on the applications and
swath/resolution of the sensors. However the satellite will have capability to

6
operate in every orbit subject to power availability/balance and this capacity
can be offered to International Ground Stations. ANTRIX has been
coordinating such activity and over 30 ground stations have been established
internationally for utilization of data from IRS satellites in their visibility cone.
NRSC also acquires some global data by using polar ground station at Svalbard,
Norway for IRS-P6 & IRS-P5 satellites. Thus the overall acquisition from
these satellites exceeds the designed requirements of covering the Indian
region.
(e) The number of scenes acquired itself is a function of several parameters like
payload, power demand, resolution, swath, repeat coverage cycle, scene
size, besides the cloud cover limitations due to imaging in optical region.
Essentially it is based on the mission management strategy to ensure optimum
use of available resources to meet the user requirements and at the same time
to enhance the mission life. It is this strategy that enabled most of the IRS
satellites to work much beyond the designated mission life."
Recovery of expenditure/Return on investment
11. The proposal to launch remote sensing satellites is approved taking into
account user requirements and data needs. For calculating Return on Investment
(RoI), the capital expenditure on launch of remote sensing satellites and the yearly
expenditure on operations and maintenance of satellites are compared with the
revenue to be generated from the sale of data products generated from each satellite.
While no benchmark relating to recovery to expenditure incurred or RoI was fixed
by DoS, as brought out by Audit, the total capital expenditure on the seven satellites
in operation during the Audit review period i.e. 2003-08 was ` 1468.59 crore. The
Committee were informed that operational returns were negative in all the years
2003-08 and ranged from ` 96.87 crore to 134.27 crore indicating that realization
from sale of data products was not sufficient to match even its yearly operational
expenditure.
12. In the above context, the Committee enquired from the DoS to furnish the
figures of operational returns from remote sensing satellites from 2008 onwards. In
response, DoS provided following data:
Financial Data Sales Access Fee/Royalty
year from IRS Earned through
Missions International
(` in Lakhs) Ground Stations by
ANTRIX
(` in Lakhs)
2008-09 3890 5040
2009-10 2278 2969
2010-11 3898 2893

7
The total revenue for the financial years 2008-2009, 2009-2010 and 2010-2011 work
out to ` 8930, 5247, 6791 lakhs respectively with the grand total working out to be
` 20,968 lakhs for the three years. However, the vetted comments of the Audit on this
reply of DoS are reproduced below:—
"According to the information furnished by the Principal Pay and Accounts
Office of DoS, it received the non-tax receipts from the sale of data products and
Access Fee/Royalty credited to DoS revenue receipt major head of account
'1425-102—Space research' in the Finance Accounts of DoS as follows:
 Financial Year Revenue from the data Sales from IRS Missions and access
Fee/Royalty earned through International Ground Stations
by (` in Lakhs)
 2008-2009 2612
 2009-2010 2409
 2010-2011 6176.50
 Total 11197.50
 Difference 9770.5 (87.25%)
From the above two tables there is a total difference of ` 9770.5 lakhs which is
87.25 percent of the receipt credited in Finance Accounts of DoS. Considering
the fact that Antrix transfers 60 percent of the revenue received by it from the
royalty income to DoS, the difference would work out to ` 5409.70 lakhs which is
48.31 percent."
13. Asked to enumerate the reasons for the downward trend displayed in the
Access Fee Royalty earned through International Ground stations by Antrix, the DoS
stated that due to reasons related to spacecraft operations, available downlink time
from the satellites earmarked for International Ground Stations (IGS) got reduced,
which led to reduction in overall earnings  with respect to access fee and royalty.
Further, from 2009 the number of IGS receiving data from IRS-P6 and Cartosat-1 also
got reduced.
14. When enquired further about the action taken  or proposed    to be taken to
improve returns from remote sensing satellites, the DoS in a written note submitted
that:—
“(a) The data from Earth Observation satellites is only an input to  the applications
related to natural resource management, disaster  information support and
the return on investment primarily is the benefit  accrued   from such
applications. Accordingly the satellite, its launch, etc., are viewed as
infrastructure created by government for public good  services and expenditure
is not expected to be recovered from only the sale  of data products.

8
(b) As per the approved Remote Sensing Data Policy (RSDP-2011) of Department
of Space, Government  of India, the spacecraft systems are considered to be
public good infrastructure  in space for national   development  and the
emphasis  is on the outreach of the data products rather than cost recovery.
As per this Policy, NRSC strives to recover only the costs involved in the
ground  segment operations and addresses  elements such as the depreciation,
maintenance, and consumables  as  well as the overheads. The overall data
products prices are determined  by a high-power Pricing  Committee set up by
Deptt. of Space.
(c) In addition, there are increasing  global  trends to make data freely  available
for public good services as seen in the data policy of National  Aeronautics
and Space Administration (NASA)/ National  Oceanic  and Atmospheric
Administration  (NOAA)  for Landsat, Brazil and China  for  China-Brazil Earth
Resources  Satellite  (CBRES) data,  SPOT-VEGETATION Programme and
Global  Monitoring  for Environment  and  Security (GMES) services  of
European  Space Agency (ESA) etc,. It can thus be seen that NRSC's  pricing
policy is in tune with the global  trend  with respect to public  funded
organisations. Internationally, GEO, the Group on Earth Observation, of which
India is a founder member has also prepared  guidelines for data supply/
sharing and ensuring  free data supply. For example, today  Oceansat 2 satellite
with its Scatterometer  plays  a unique role of providing  data to global user
community through European Organisation for the Exploitation  of
Meteorological Satellites  (EUMETSA T)/EUMETCAST mechanism.
Availability of Scatterometer data within three hours  of acquisition  and
processing is essential for  assimilation in atmospheric  models, an important
activity, worldwide and ISRO has  a mandate (through ISRO-EUMETSAT
cooperation  agreement) to support  this activity. Hence an operational setup
was devised  to meet these austere timing requirements. The operational
setup comprises of,  Data capture system, data exchange  gateway, high-
speed data link and the processing systems  at Shadnagar and EUMETSAT.
The high  speed 45 Mbps IPLC dedicated  network link between Svalbard and
Shadnagar ground  stations was established  in December 2010 and
operationalized. All the 14 orbits  for SCAT acquisition  at Svalbard are
scheduled and the Raw  data acquired  at TROMSO & Svalbard Ground
Stations is transferred to Shadnagar through  high speed network link from
Jan. 2011. The data products generated at Shadnagar were transferred  to
EUMETSAT using  this link. During  contingencies like link failures, transfer
of raw  data files from Svalbard to EUMETSAT ADP and DPGS systems  shall
be enabled.
(d) Antrix Corporation Ltd., provides  earth station and data receiving facilities
to many users outside the country which does  provide revenue to ANTRIX.
This has made  IRS satellite  series  a popular competitor in the international
market  and the data and other services provided is well sought after  in the
international   market."

9
15. To a related concern of action taken  or proposed to be taken by  the DOS to
generate  optimum operational returns  from Remote Sensing Satellites, the Committee
were apprised  as under:—
"As per the Remote Sensing Data Policy (RSDP-2001 & 2011) of Government of
India, the spacecraft  systems are considered as public  good infrastructure   for
national development. Hence, the emphasis  is on enhancing the outreach of the
data products  and recover only  the remote sensing data  products  generation
cost. The costing  and pricing   of satellite data products  are finalised by a high-
power  committee setup  by Deptt. of Space."
Data  Need Assessment
16. Data need assessment  in various remote  sensing applications, such as
resources survey, mapping applications, oceanographic application etc., is to be made
to help in planning the payloads of operational remote sensing satellites prior to their
launch. NRSC delivers its satellite products  for thematic remote sensing applications
in the areas of urban planning, drought monitoring , land  use and land cover mapping,
underground  water  resource mapping, mineral prospecting, environmental impact
analysis etc. The Audit  pointed  out the  NRSC, however,did not assess the number of
data products  required  in these thematic sectors  to plan remote-sensing satellites
realistically. The satellites were planned without adequate thematic data need
assessment. The extent of data gap against the data need in specific areas could not,
therefore, be assessed.
17. Taking note of the above Audit observation, the Committee desired to know
the mechanisms put in place in NRSC to ensure that remote sensing satellites are
planned after assessment of the need in thematic sectors so that the plans are realized.
In a written note, DoS elucidated the mechanism as under:—
(a) "Deptt. of Space plans & realizes satellites after a detailed exercise which
includes feasibility studies, joint experiments, technical aspects, national
technical committees and discussions in ISRO Council and Space Commission
before satellites are launched.
(b) A unique mechanism under NNRMS exists which was decided by the
Government about three decades back. Accordingly, there are 9 standing
Committees (each one of) which is chaired by the Secretary of the respective
user ministries with member secretaries drawn from different centres of ISRO/
DoS. These committees represent almost all the important themes that the
line departments would like to have. The chairmen of these committees and
other secretaries under the chairmanship of Member (Science), Planning
Committee form a Planning Committee, NNRMS (PC-NNRMS) which reviews
the various programs of the user ministries and also looks at the newer
applications requirements, which in turn could lead to newer satellite missions,
payloads and sensors. The current status of applications (in the country and
global scenario) under various themes is discussed in the standing committee

10
meetings, during their regular meetings with stakeholders. The requirements
of datasets of the users form the basis for feasibility studies for new missions.
(c) The data products procured by useres are utilized for multiple themes/
applications and the users always do not indicate the exact end use. It could
also be due to the fact that users are optimizing the data use across
multi-disciplines in terms of synergistic and simultaneous usage. That is,
once the satellite remote sensing data is procured, it could be used for not
only agriculture related aspect, it could also be used for urban sprawl study,
forest cover, land degradation, general land use pattern etc.
(d) A study team was constituted by Chairman, ISRO in July, 2009 to critically
examine various Indian Earth Observation (EO) requirements and generate a
strategic plan document for Indian Earth Observation programme by examining
the observations requirements vis-a-vis existing/proposed satellite missions,
availability of data from International missions, technological advances and
indigenous capabilities.
Preliminary recommendations of the committee were presented in the recently
held PC-NNRMS meeting as well as in Standing Committees and DoS is in
process of consolidating all feedback before prioritizing new missions.
(e) Efforts are being made to collect information on the intended use for data
products disseminated by NRSC. Towards this, a Customer Relations
Management (CRM) module is being developed under Integrated Multi-
Mission Ground Segment for Earth Observation Satellites (IMGEOS) project
to monitor and manage user requirements with the scope for acquiring
theme-wise requirement as well as utilization of Earth Observation data.
(f) Regular feedback is taken from users during the regular user interaction meet
organized by NRSC."
18. Elaborating the IMGEOS project, the Director, NRSC explained during
evidence:—
"One of the activities which relates to the turnaround time, capacity to generate
and supply products is the Integrated Multi-mission Ground Segment for Earth
Observations Satellites (IMGEOS) which is being implemented at NRSC. The
first phase has been commissioned. There, one of the objectives is that within
one hour of the completion ofS a pass, we would be able to place on web a
product for a user to download. This is one thing which we actually have done.
Simultaneously, it has a three-tier storage structure which has all the work
elements to sue the data from the storage so that the number of products which
can be generated per day will also be significantly larger."
19. On being asked by the Sub-Committee to state the status of the CRM module
that is being developed under IMGEOS project, the DoS explained that the CRM
software development has been taken up in collaboration with an academic institute. It
was further stated that detailed discussions on the requirements, design and
implementation of the pilot software were completed and based on the feedback,

11
modifications are being carried out in the software which is expected to be delivered
for beta testing during 1 st quarter of 2012 and the CRM will be put in operation in
2012.
Utilisation of acquired data
20. The Audit review revealed that the percentage of idling of the acquired data
from Indian Remote Sensing Satellites ranged from 53 to 95 per cent. Since the operation
remote sensing satellites were launched with a specific designed capacity to meet the
data needs of the country and the region, data acquired should have been adequately
utilized if the data need assessment was realistic. In addition, the Tenth Five Year Plan
document had also envisaged a quantum jump in technological ability, application
expansion, aggressive marketing and virtual dissemination of knowledge keeping in
mind the requirements of remote sensing user community in the country and the
region. Audit further observed that idling of acquired IRS data was high due to non-
adopting of appropriate marketing strategy and failure to conduct the need assessment
prior to launching satellites.
21. In the abvoe context, the Sub-Committee asked the DoS to state specifically
actions initiated for fixing targets for utilization of acquired scenes. In reply, the DoS
clarified that NRSC fixes the annual targets for data dissemination and sales taking into
account the capability to provide data with respect to data processing and the user
requirements. The DoS also submitted the target fixed and achieved for the past three
years as follows:—
Sl. No. Financial Year Tar gets Fixed Realised
(Number of (Number of
products) products)
1. 2008-09 35,000 41,000
2. 2009-10 45,000 50,000
3. 2010-11 55,000 67,000
DoS further stated that in order to improve the data sales/utilization, following
actions have been initiated:
(i) Satellite data products' price level was reduced by more than 50% with
respect to the price of 2006-07, keeping in view national development and
service to societal development purposes.
(ii) Increasing awareness on Indian Earth Observation data through Bhuvan
web portal, which has attracted the attention of lot of users, organizations
and common man of the IRS capabilities.
(iii) NRSC's participation & exhibition stalls in all major National & International
symposiums.

12
(iv) Advertisements in professional journals in the area of remote sensing &
Geographic Information System (GIS).
(v) Establishment of web portals for scientific data dissemination from satellites
such as OCEANSAT-2, MODIS, IMS-1 etc.
(vi) Supply of Global Area Coverage data from Oceansat-2 freely on web.
(vii) Proactive development of newer applications in various fields and interac-
tion with other ministries for utilizing the satellite data in their developmental
plans through standing committees.
(viii) Conduct of user interaction meeting/open forum meetings at least once every
year.
(ix) Publication of promotional materials like brochures/bulletins/news letter etc.
22. In the same context of utilization of acquired data, Director, NRSC while deposing
before the Sub-Committee explained as follows:—
"The second important thing is the total data off-take, the utilisation. For that, as
you may be aware, we have established a website called 'Bhuvan'., 'Bhuvan' has
put in three dimension and two dimension, one coverage of India and resolution
of the whole world which the people can see. Then, in the past six months, what
we have done is that the data which is more than two years old, coverage has
been put for free download by users because we found that 90 per cent of the
data is only pertaining to the past two years. Earlier that data off-take is not
there. So, to encourage more use, we have put that. Then, to make available the
results of the remote sensing application programme, we have put the entire
national land-use, land-covered dataset also for people freely to use from the
web In fact, we have consciously, in the past six-eight months worked very hard
to increase the accessibility and usage of the data and products."
NRSC archival policy
23. NRSC has a system of archiving the data acquired by the operational Indian
and foreign satellites. According to NRSC archival policy, the policy is to be revised
once in five years. However, as specifically pointed out by Audit, NRSC did not revise
its archival policy after December 2004, as of January 2010.
24. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to know the status of
availability of archived data in NRSC. The DoS responded as under:—
"Remote Sensing data is a comprehensive, permanent, and impartial record of
the land surface. Archival of satellite data is a national asset which keeps historical
record of the condition of the resources, such as natural, man-made, climatic/
weather etc. and provides a clear & consistent record of observable surface
phenomena. Such archived data is important to monitor the environmental/climatic
change, to quickly understand temporal changes in deforestation, disertification,
environmental changes, disasters and natural hazards.

13
(a) NRSC has been acquiring and archiving data from various satellites since
1980's.
Satellite Duration No. of scenes
LANDSAT MSS 1983-1992 11990
LANDSAT TM 1986-2001 43692
SPOT 1988-1990 14000
ERS 1991-2004 32500
IRS-1A 1988-1991 28880
IRS-1B 1991-1999 64980
IRS-1C 1996-2007 357674
IRS-1D 1998-2009 543755
IRS-P4 1999-2010 17129
IRS-P6 2004-2011* 509748
IRS-P5 2005-2011* 695095
CARTOSAT-2 2007-2011* 92448
IMS-1 2008-2011* 55289
OCEANSAT-2 2009-2011* 4822
*Currently operating satellites.
(b) Based on the recommendation of Archival Policy Committee for IRS
satellites, four season cloud free data from IRS satellites for each year have
been archived till 2004. Considering the data requirements for studies on
climate change, long-term change detection, legal issues, etc. and the recent
advances in the technology for data archival, including the media for storage,
all data acquired since 2004 have been archived systematically. The total
available in the archives, scene-wise Meta data information about the data
acquired including Quick Look is available to the user community through
NRSC website. There is a special committee formed on the data Archival for
all IRS data at NRSC."
25. Asked to explain the provisions to upgrade the archival system in NRSC, DoS
submitted that:—
"Archival systems are being upgraded periodically based on the need and
contemporary technologies. Historically data was archived on High Density
Digital Tapes (HDT), which were read using High Density Digital Tape Recorders
(HDTR). As these became obsolute, all the archived data has been transcribed

14
on to Digital Linear Tapes (DLTs). At present, the data is archived on DLTs,
DVDs and CDs. The media is decided depending on the volume of data. Currently
the project "Integrated Multi-mission Ground segment for Earth Observation
Satellites (IMGEOS)" is being implemented in which all the data that is acquired
will be archived on a three-tier Storage Area Network (SAN), which has a LTO-5
tape library as the third tier."
26. In response to another specific query of the Sub-Committee about the efforts
made to spread awareness in the concerned and interested sectors about availability
of information in NRSC, DoS replied that for this purpose, NRSC has made wide
publicity to the user community on the availability of archived data sets through web,
advertisements, workshops and awareness programmes. DoS further stated that data
older then the specified period are supplied at a discount and it is also planned to offer
selected coarser data free on web.
Data processing facility
27. The Audit scrutiny revealed that there were delays in data-processing impacting
the delivery of available data products. Time taken in the delivery of satellite products
increased during the period 2002-09 indicating decline in the efficiency of data
processing.
28. When the Sub-Committee sought details about the steps taken to fix targets
for optimizing the time taken for the data processing at NRSC, the DoS explained:—
“(a) In or der to streamline data processing, DoS has approved a project on
'Integrated Multi-mission Ground Segment of earth observation satellites
(IMGEOS)'. This project has been conceived to enable faster and efficient
data products and services for the users, both online and media transfer. The
Interim Facility is already in place in Shadnagar Complex for Resourcesat-2
and Oceansat-2 satellites.
The major performance goals are:
• Deliver data products to user within 60 minutes of acquisitions for
emergency needs and within a day for any other standard requests.
• Create user friendly browsing, product ordering and delivery environment
though web portal and delivery of products to the user when he wants,
where he wants, and in a form that is useable by him.
• Develop mission independent operations environment.
• Re-engineer entire chain with state-of-art facility realizing Integrated Multi-
mission processes/systems adapting to future missions with mininum
lead time from satellite launch-to-product launch.
(b) The turnaround time for Standard Products is 3 days and 5 days for special
products. With the implementation of IMGEOS, the turnaround time will
improve and all standard products will be supplied within 24 hours and
emergency products within 1 hour of acquisition.

15
(c) The scientific data of Oceansat-2 such as Ocean Colour Monitor (OCM)
sensor's Global Area Coverage (GAC) data and derived product such as
Chlorophyll, Diffused Attenuation Coefficient, Suspended Sediments and
Aerosol Optical Depth are being made available within 150 minutes of
acquisition for the global scientific users.
(d) Similarly the data from Scatterometer on-board Oceansat-2 is being supplied
within 120 minutes after acquisition."
National Remote Sensing Coordination Committee
29. While conducting the audit review of the NRSC, the Audit highlighted the
observations of the Standing Committee of Parliament on Department of Space
contained in their 129th Report on Demand for Grants presented to the Houses on
26th August, 2004 that in order to increase accuracy of IRS data and also for more
realistic interpretation of acquired data, the DoS needed to set up National Remote
Sensing Coordination Committee to facilitate holistic implementation of the following
proposals: (i) integration of Geographical Information System (GIS), Global Positioning
System (GPS) and IRS technology to enhance accuracy of derived data, (ii) production
and distribution of satellite data, (iii) processing of remote sensing data, (iv) using
functional approach towards difficulties faced by departments for accurate
interpretation of the data retrieved, (v) updating of technology at par with world
standards, (vi) promotion of remote sensing applications in coordination with
universities and research centres, (vii) maintenance of national archive on remote
sensing data with a view to preserving data and also constantly updating it.
30. In light of this observation of the Standing Committee of Parliament on the
DoS, the Sub-Committee desired the Department to furnish reasons as to why National
Remote Sensing Coordination Committee (NRSCC) was yet to be set up. Responding
through a written note, the DoS replied as under:—
"Setting up of National Remote Sensing Coordination Committee, proposed by
Standing Committee of Parliament on Department of Space, may not serve the
purpose. The proposals as suggested for implementation under this committee
are diverse in nature and mutually exclusive and it is difficult to address by a
single committee.
However, the suggested proposals are being addressed by various high level
inter-ministerial and intra-departmental committees set up by the Department,
like:—
1. Planning Committee of National Natural Resources Management System
(PCNNRMS): Chaired by Member (Science), Planning Commission with
Secretaries of various ministries as members for effective utilisation of space
based remote sensing data for mapping, monitoring management and devel-
opment of various natural resources.
2. Standing Committee of National Natural Resource Management System
(SCNNRMS): Nine theme oriented Standing Committees of NNRMS addresses

16
utilisation of remote sensing data in various areas like agriculture, water
resources, bio-resources, cartography, geology, ocean and meteorology,
urban planning, rural development and capacity building.
3 . Earth Observation Applications Management Council (EOA-MC)
periodically reviews and recommends means and methods of integration of
different technologies for resource mapping and management; critically
examines the user need and suggests appropriate methodology, tools and
techniques development. It also recommends required space system for
addressing the user needs.
4. Indian Remote Sensing Satellite Management Council (IRS-MC) and NRSC
Data Centre—Data Processing Coordination Committee review  and
recommends the latest technology for design and development of space
systems as well as data production, distribution and archival of remote
sensing data from various missions.
5. The Committees such as (i) Respond Management Council,  (ii) Joint Policy
Committee for Space Technology Cells, and (iii) NNRMS Standing Committee
on Training and Technology address promotion of remote sensing applications
in coordination with universities and research centres."
IV . SALE OF DA TA  PRODUCTS
31. Remote Sensing Data Policy, 2001 opened up the sale of data products on
non-discriminatory basis to customers. This provided an opportunity to NRSC to
customize its products to suit the requirement of private customers thereby increasing
the sale of data products. The Standing Committee of Parliament on DoS in their 42nd
Report presented to the Houses on 13.03.1997 felt that more and private entrepreneurs
should be associated in the process of remote sensing data utilization programme.
However, the Audit scrutiny revealed that the average sales to the private sector were
less than 20 per cent whereas the sales to the Government Sector were more than 80 per
cent during the period 2003—09.
32. In this context, when asked to state the steps taken by the DoS to increase sale
of data products to private sector, the DoS stated as under:—
"Private sectors procure data for (a) projects it undertakes on behalf of
government/public sector organizations, and (b) projects relevant to private
sector business activities. The data sales of (a) are counted as government
sector sales. However, NRSC as part of the data promotion and marketing activities
conducts various programmes as below:
(a) User Interaction Meet: it is an annual event, wherein large number of users
including the private sector participates and benefit. During these meet, new
missions, data services, procedure for data ordering and downloads and
price discounts are presented and discussed. Feedback collected during the
meet is used for improving the services.

17
(b) Participation in the Workshops and Exhibition: Various products and services
are displayed during the Annual Meet of major professional societies like
Indian Society of Remote Sensing, Indian National Cartographic Association,
Indian Society of Geomatics, Engineers Association, University programmes
etc.
(c) Advertisements: The details on the new products, services are made available
through advertisements in scientific journals/magazines.
(d) NRS/ISRO offers products and services through various portals such as
Bhoosampada, Indian Forest Fire Response and Assessment System
(INFFRAS), Decision Support Centre (DSC), BHUV AN, NNRMS etc."
33. DoS further submitted that due to the various promotional activities initiated,
the private sector data sales has been increasing year after year as indicated by the
number of new users registered for data purchase since 2006-07:—
Sector/ Private
Y ear Users
2008-2009 37
2009-2010 94
2010-2011 119
34. The Committee were further apprised the international market rate of high
resolution satellite data was about six times that of the price of comparable IRS products.
There was, therefore, scope for enhancing the revenue from the sale of data products
to international customers by Rs 47.49 crore during the period 2004—08.
35. When enquired specifically about the reasons for fixing prices of IRS products
lower than those of similar Products of foreign satellites, the DoS stated through a
written note as under:—
"(a) The objective of the space activities in the country is concentrated on
achieving self reliance and developing capability to build and launch satellites
including remote sensing satellites for management of natural resources.
Hence, the remote sensing activities are pursued for supporting the
developmental activities taken up by the government, rather than as commercial
activities. In addition, remote sensing is treated as a public good service
rather than commercial towards providing valuable and irreplaceable data for
the purpose of monitoring disasters, weather forecasting, climate change and
resource monitoring and planning.
(b) The Remote Sensing Data Policy considers satellite data as ‘public good’,
and the Government of India recognizes the importance of affordable access
to Earth Observation data for national development. The prices are therefore
fixed balancing the market conditions as well as adherence to the Government

18
Policies. The lower price is only applicable for Indian and Bay of Bengal
Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC)/
South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) countries as
decided by pricing Committee.
(c) The IRS data available are not comparable with foreign satellite data with
respect to spectral and spatial resolution. For e.g. the Geoeye-1/Worldview 2
data are available with 0.5m resolution with multispectral and stereo capability.
There is no equivalent data from IRS. Hence the prices are not comparable.
(d) While the price of satellite data for Indian users is low in order to promote
remote sensing data utilization, for International users, the IRS prices are
determined by ANTRIX and are on par with equivalent international satellite
missions as indicated below:—
Satellite/Sensor Resolution Price Per Sq. Km. Remarks
(in USD)
SPOT 2.5 m 3.59 Multispectral
CARTOSAT-1 2.5 m 2.72 Panchromatic
IKONOS 1 m 10 Multispectral
EROS-A/B 1.9 m /0.7 m 7.6-14.2 Multispectral
CARTOSAT-2 1 m 8.6 Panchromatic’’
Adding to this reply, the DoS further submitted that the prices of IRS products to
international customers are comparable with the international trend and therefore there
is no loss of revenue and in order to maximize the sale, marketing efforts through ACL
will be carried out.
36. The Sub-Committee also desired to know the action taken or proposed to be
taken by the DoS to keep the prices of IRS data products at par with the International
rate. The Department of Space, in this context, reiterated their position and stated as
under:—
"The objective of the space activities in the country is concentrated on achieving
self reliance and developing capability to build and launch satellites including
remote sensing satellites for management of natural resources. Hence, the remote
sensing activities are pursued for supporting the developmental activities taken
up by the Government, rather than as commercial activities. In addition, remote
sensing is treated as a public good service rather than commercial towards
providing valuable and irreplaceable data for the purpose of monitoring disasters,
weather forecasting, climate change and resource monitoring and planning. Hence
for Indian users the lower rates are fixed.
However, for international users, the rates of Indian Satellite data are on par with
International rates."

19
37. When enquired about the pricing policy followed in the DoS to revise and
restructure the price of data products and service and factors taken into consideration
while making such revision, the Department replied as under:—
"The satellite data products pricing is revised annually/on required basis by the
Inter Centre Pricing Committee constituted by Secretary, DoS/Chairman, ISRO
for Indian as well as neighbouring, BIMSTEC and SAARC countries. The
Committee recommends the sensor-wise pricing considering the costing table,
product demands, market strategy, equivalent products available in the market etc.
• The costing table is worked out based on Machine Hour Rate (MHR) of all
the work centres/systems involved in product generation. The MHR were
computed considering four elements i.e.  Depreciation, Manpower,
Consumables, and Services with additional overhead elements.
• Differential pricing is also implemented for academic/research community to
encourage student and researchers to use the data in their research projects.
Free data is also provided on need basis.
• The affordability and increasing the Earth Observation satellite data use is
one of the prime determinant of price for the Indian users."
38. In the above context, the Secretary, DoS deposed:—
" The world over, remote sensing is considered a public good. In contrast to
communication, where a transponder is in the orbit and you have a business
model of utilizing it, pricing it as an internal rate of return, you can look at for
these aspects. Historically, in USA, when they started the LANDSAT Programme
in the 1980s as a commercial venture, whether they can survive as an industry
and they found it is impossible. So, the satellite cost, launch vehicle cost,
everything is subsidised by the Government because remote sensing data is
essentially used for developmental applications in the country by various
governmental departments and when it comes to pricing, we consciously took a
decision and we are only looking at the cost related to the generation of this data
products by NRSC and the price should be such that the developmental projects
of the country should be enthused to take them and use it. If I may give an
example, about 10 years ago, NRSC was able to give 20,000 data products to the
users, but today they have gone to the level of about 65,000 data products per
year. It has been a very steep increase. This rises because of the ability of the
system to  convince the users that remote sensing is useful, the capacity we
have generated in the user departments to use them effectively and of late
institutional mechanisms have been set up."
39. Touching the same aspect of pricing policy in NRSC, Director NRSC stated
during evidence:—
"The other  issues which have been mentioned relate to prices. In the Committee
Chaired by the JS, we have worked at the total cost components because earlier
we were only looking at the costs which pertained to generation within NRSC.

Now, in the Committee, we have tried to put all components of the cost in the
entire chain. And, as far as the price is concerned, we are trying to work on a
model where we make available the products at differentiated price for different
users like Government users, DoS users, academic users and the private users.
The cost of this itself is being vetted by a Director, Costs which the Secretary
has also identified. So we are going through this entire exercise for that."
40. Alluding to this reply, the Secretary, DoS deposed during evidence:—
"As we explained initially, when it comes to the remote sensing satellite systems,
we were only comparing the price with the cost that we have incurred for
generating the data products. The cost of the satellites and the cost of launching
them were not considered while calculating the cost of generation. That has
been the international practice.
As Dr. Dadhwal explained, now we are doing an excercise to find out as to what
is the total cost. Once, we know that, then we can fix a price as a matter of policy.
So, we are doing this exercise at the present moment. This includes two things.
We know the life of a satellite to which we can assume; how many products we
can get out of it in an ideal situation; and then work out per product as to what
would be the total cost incurred by the Government of India. This exercise is on.
We also wanted this vetting to be done through an external agency. The Advisor
(Cost) has been approached to help us and advise us on this subject. So, we will
say that this is the cost. As he said, for the academic users, for private users and
others, we will have a differentiated pricing policy. So, we would take up this as
an action and go ahead with it."
V . AERIAL REMOTE SENSING PROJECTS
Delay in completion of Projects and Underperformance of Aircrafts
41. NRSC is the sole civilian provider of aerial remote sensing services in the
country. These aerial projects are meant for remote sensing specific areas at required
times, which is not possible through satellites. Two beach-craft aircraft equipped with
navigation aids, state-of-the-art sensors like Light Detection and Ranging (LIDAR),
digital camera based aerial photography systems and airborne magnetometer for aerial
data acquisition and ground instrumentation were utilized for airborne remote sensing.
Audit selected 36 out of 67 aerial remote sensing projects for detailed scrutiny based
on materiality and also the performance of the two aircrafts in operation in terms of
actual flying hours during the review period. Audit examination revealed delay in
completion of aerial projects and under performance of the aircrafts due to their non-
utilization to their maximum capacity as a result of non-availability of pilots and technical
snags in the aircrafts. 12 aerial projects (33 per cent) costing Rs. 45.85 crore were
delayed from 8 to 54 months.
42. In the above context, the Secretary, DoS stated in evidence:—
"There was a reference also to aerial remote sensing. We have two aircrafts
which are used for aerial remote sensing. They go at very low altitude and
conduct a very high resolution survey. We can do this only when there is fair
20

21
weather condition about four to six months in a year. Only at that time, we can
use it. Certainly, in this period, there were problems in the maintenance of aicraft
in some years. That was a national situation. There were not agencies having
spares with them. These aircrafts are old now. They were bought in the early 90s
and 2000. So, we had a problem in maintenance. In some years, especially in
2006-07 the utilisation of the aircraft was less. But we have picked up and one of
the major things which we have done over the last few years for the national
urban information system is we flew over 130 towns all over the country. When
you identify the pockets, the aircraft has to go there, conduct the survey and
bring back the data and do the analysis of the data........In the time of disaster
specially, such information becomes very useful. We have two aircraft now well
maintained."
43. On being enquired about non-availability of pilots in NRSC and reasons for
the same, the Secretary, DoS deposed as under:—
"At the moment we have three pilots who have been seconded by the Indian Air
Force. Of course, we pay remuneration to them as per the agreement that we
entered into with the Indian Air Force because they are entitled to certain
allowances. From the open market we are not getting the pilots. In fact, by the
year 2007, three pilots that we had either were retired or left because the market
was very lucrative for them. But we still require these aircraft services for certain
types of high resolution remote sensing. That is why, we are keeping that system."
44. In the course of the oral examination, the Sub-Committee pointed out that
non-availability of pilots should not be the reason as there are so many pilots who are
waiting for the job. The Secretary, DoS, in deposed as under:—
"But during the years 2005 to 2007 there was a boom available and even the two
pilots whom we had — they are younger people — had left, and they are supposed
to give a service for six months after they decide to quit. So, we could only get
that much service. So, we had to keep these aircraft idle. That is why, we went to
the Air Force and made this institutional arrangement. But today, the situation
would be different because many of them are coming out of the market. But what
happens is this. When you have the Air Force pilots with us, there is one kind of
discipline for the Service. In fact, our experience has been that we have been
more productive with the Air Force pilots. So, if they are available with us, it is
well and good. The idea is that the two aircraft have to be utilized to the maximum
extent possible during the flying period. He is taking his efforts also to get
additional people.
Sir, aircraft will not fly for want of the pilots. He wants to avoid that. Sir, your
suggestion is certainly to be taken note of."

22
45. The DoS in its written note further assured to increase the availability of
pilots:—
"An institutional arrangement has been established with Indian Air Force (IAF)
for obtaining pilots on deputation. Started initially in 2007 with 2 pilots for
2 years tenure each, IAF has now agreed to depute up to 4 pilots, each for
3 years deputation. Request has been made to increase the deputation period to
4 years, so as to have higher stability in operations."
46. Drawing attention to the problem of maintenance and scarcity of the spare
parts for the aerial remote sensing aircraft, the Sub-Committee desired to know the
efforts made by DoS in this regard. The Secretary, DoS responded in oral evidence as
under:—
"We have identified agencies in the country. In fact, there are a very few of them.
We try to get a comprehensive maintenance arrangement with them. When it
comes to very costly spare parts like navigation system, etc. we have
arrangements to get those things outside the maintenance contract. Otherwise,
there are a couple of agencies who are able to do that. That is how we are now
managing it. That is a difficult process. As the market changes, as the agencies
change, due to the non-availability of maintenance engineers for the aircraft, we
have suffered in the past for a few years."
47.  As regards problem of technical snags in the aircraft, the DoS in a written reply
submitted that:—
"Snag rectification needs to have proper maintenance arrangement along with
quick procurement procedure for spares. Towards the same following
arrangements have been made:
• A long term (3 years) comprehensive contract is signed with a Maintenance
agency which has the capability to meet all the maintenance schedules of the
aircraft and can also procure and supply spares.
• Earlier aircraft maintenance was done in Mumbai (except for some smaller
activities in Hyderabad). With a new contract, it was made mandatory that all
the schedules of aircraft be carried out in Hyderabad. This has greatly reduced
the delays in fixing the snags and also facilitated better supervision on the
maintenance process.
• To reduce the problems in avionics and inherent delays in sourcing the spares
most of which are no longer manufactured and have to be sourced from
suppliers of overhauled items, Retrofit of avionics system of the current
aircraft is planned to be upgraded to modern full glass cockpit avionics suite.
This is planned to be carried out on both aircraft owned by NRSC in a phased
manner. Currently the retrofit activity on one aircraft is in the stage of evaluation
of price bids by the vendors."

23
48. Asked about mechanism to replace the ageing aerial sensing aircrafts with
latest ones and ensuring continuous flow of spares, the DoS submitted as under:—
"DoS has taken up extending existing aircrafts life by upgrading the avionics to
modern full glass cockpit avionics for both the aircrafts in a phased manner. At
an appropriate time the aspect of aircraft replacement will also be critically
examined.
A comprehensive aircraft maintenance contract has been signed with an aircraft
maintenance agency, which has resulted in better flow of spares to meet all the
maintenance schedules of the aircraft. Avionics related spares requirement for
failure maintenance is also expected to reduce after the planned avionics
upgrade."
49. In the light of deficiencies noticed in utilization of aircrafts, the Sub-Committee
enquired about the measures initiated by NRSC to improve operational efficiency of
aircraft performing the task of aerial remote sensing. The DoS, in response, reiterated
their reply as reproduced in paras 46 and 47 above.
Security vetting from various agencies
50. The Sub-Committee's examination of the subject revealed that delays in getting
clearance from Ministry of Defence, Survey of India and other authorities was one of
the reasons for considerable delay in completion of aerial projects. In this regard, the
Secretary, DoS putforth in his oral deposition:—
"......issues related to the security clearance come because if in any area we have
to do aerial remote sensing, we have to wait till seven agencies in MHA and
MoD to give the clearance. We have to wait for it. Once the flying is done, again
it has to be vetted by these agencies for the vulnerable areas and vulnerable
points. It is a time consuming affair but we have been doing our best."
51. Elucidating this aspect of delay of completion of aerial projects, the DoS in its
written reply informed as under:—
"The time required for statutory clearnace of a project cannot be estimated and
is not under the control of NRSC. Therefore to ensure that the user is aware of
delays in commencing the project and realization of project deliverables, the
following clauses are included in all MoU/agreements with the user.
1. "Project duration commences from the date of receipt of advance payment or
receipt of security clearance from Ministry of Defence whichever is later".
2. "The date of delivery of products is subjected to final classification and
security vetting and clearance by Ministry of Defence for data supply. If any
delay occurs on account of this factor in the project schedule, it would be
considered due to inevitable procedure."

24
52. The DoS further reiterated their stand and submitted that:—
"Considering the time involved, NRSC applies for security clearance for
conducting aerial survey to the controlling authorities before signing of MoU
with user. However, it is not possible to obtain advanced clearance to deliver
data products to user because security vetting is a visual interpretation process
by MoD after submission of data by NRSC."
VI. REMOTE SENSING  APPLICATION  PROJECTS
53. NRSC is responsible for enhancing the use of modern remote sensing technique
by providing support for conceiving the idea of use  of remote sensing techniques,
planning, execution and ultimate use of outputs in various areas. Further, NRSC was
also responsible for providing operational resource survey services to users by utilising
modern remote sensing techniques. In this background, the National Natural Resources
Management System (NNRMS)  was set up in 1983 under the  aegis of Planning
Commission, Government of India to carry out the Indian Earth  Observation Activities
and was mandated to address the specific issues pertaining to  applications of remote
sensing in different thematic areas. Explaining the background  and role of NNRMS,
Director, DoS stated during evidence:—
"...the National Natural Resource System which was conceived as back  as 1983
addressed this issue that the data which come from the satellites and if it gets
converted into certain level of information, how it has to be used both by the
Central Government agencies, the State Government agencies as well as the
Non-Governmental Organisations or the voluntary organisations in actual
implementation was conceived and as a follow-up of that, the Standing
Committees for various resource  disciplines like agriculture, rural development,
environment and forests, oceanography were, in fact, formulated and the
Secretary of the department concerned, the user Ministry concerned, would
Chair these  Standing Committees and generally in order to facilitate this process
of using this information, a person from the Department of Space, the concerned
Scientist would be made the Member-Secretary so that he could coordinate with
that particular Ministry to formulate what kind of  programmes that need to be
taken up. As a part of this process, for example, in the Ministry of Agriculture, in
fact one of the most important  things that the space has done is to give you the
crop production forecast for wheat, rice, rapeseed, mustard etc. much before the
harvest so that the Government  can take policy decisions on import, export,
pricing, support prices or even transportation from one place to the other and on
the basis of the success of this particular experiment, today the Ministry of
Agriculture is setting up its own National Crop Forecasting  Centre in Delhi so
that they would take over the responsibility of  producing, on their  own, this
data and the Department of Space can, in fact, concentrate more on developing
new techniques of using this for much better forecast and accuracies etc.
On the other hand, the Ministry of Environment and Forests which has been
extremely active has its own budget head and has used this technology for
making, for example, the entire inventory of a large number of glaciers, to be
precise, about 32,000 glaciers which are there in the Himalayas and how many of
them are retreating, all this has been done."

25
54. Department of Space is the nodal agency responsible for carrying out mandate
of NNRMS and the Secretariat of NNRMS is housed in the ISRO Headquarters,
Bangalore. The Planning Committee of NNRMS (PC-NNRMS) oversees the end-to-
end programme and provides necessary guidance for the implementation of the
programme. Nine high-power Standing Committees constituted under NNRMS are
mandated to address the specific issues pertaining to applications of remote sensing
in different thematic areas. Each of these Standing Committees is chaired by Secretary
of the respective Government departments and includes experts from major user
departments/agencies. While PC-NNRMS takes up some programmes directly to be
implemented by NNRMS, its Standing Committees take up programmes/projects relating
to thematic areas.
55. NRSC , besides being one of the implementing agencies, was a member/member
secretary of different Standing Committees of NNRMS, which coordinated the projects
of national importance. The role of NRSC, therefore, extended to ensuring, by obtaining
periodical feedback from users, that the deliverables supplied by them to other agencies
implementing the projects of national importance were effectively utilised. Audit,
however, observed that NRSC did not play  a proactive role in ensuring that the project
objectives were fully achieved. This was due to inadequate coordination with other
implementing agencies as the Standing Committees which were to coordinate these
projects did not meet regularly.
56. Drawing the attention of the DoS to the Audit observation that various
Standing Committees on NNRMS did not meet periodically to coordinate and monitor
effective implementation of the projects aimed to achieve vital social objectives, the
Sub-Committee enquired whether the DoS ensure regular meetings of the same. In this
regard, the DoS stated as under:—
"Yes, last one year (2010-11), the following meetings have been held:
Committee Meeting Date
Agriculture & Soils May 26, 2011
Bio-Resources October 20, 2010
February 10, 2010
Cartography & Mapping July 13, 2011
October 8, 2010
Geology & Mineral Resources April 13, 2011
December 23, 2010
February 15, 2010
Ocean & Meteorology January 4, 2011
Rural Development June 28, 2011
Training & Technology June 29, 2011
Urban Management July 06, 2011
Water Resources June 28, 2011
May 20, 2010

26
It may also be noted that the PC-NNRMS met on 18 July, 2011 at New Delhi under
the chairmanship on Member (Science), Planning Commission and all Standing
Committees participated actively and provided varieties of inputs on the
requirements for satellites and sensors for the coming 12th FYP and beyond."
57. Projects undertaken by NRSC were of two kinds i.e., projects of national
importance under NNRMS and operational projects which were undertaken for various
users including ACL. The projects of national importance under NNRMS which were
coordinated by the Standing Committees of NNRMS were:
(i) Study on Command Area Development.
(ii) National Wasteland Mapping.
(iii) Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission.
The projects of national importance directly implemented by NNRMS through
various DoS/ISRO units including NRSC were:
(i) Village Resource Centre Programme.
(ii) Disaster Management Support Programme.
Projects of National Importance under NNRMS coordinated by the Standing
Committees of NNRMS
58. The results of study in three projects of national importance—study on
command area development programme, wasteland mapping mission and Rajiv Gandhi
National Drinking Water Mission—using remote-sensing techniques involving
substantial public spending could not be put to use as envisaged. The project of
study on command area development programme was entrusted to NRSC by Ministry
of Water Resources and the other two were entrusted by the Ministry of Rural
Development. NRSC had assured Audit in February 2010 that efforts would be made
through various NNRMS Standing Committees to urge the respective Ministries to
utilise the remote sensing  technology in planning and implementation of projects.
59. Responding to above Audit observations, the Secretary DoS stated during
evidence:—
"There is also reference that application projects are taking more time. I may
submit that these application projects are done by NRSC where there is no
institutional mechanism for the user department, for example the Ocean,
Agriculture, Forests. They have their own system. The Department of Water
Resources got their own information system. But, there is a prioritization which
the user Ministry provides in consultation with the State Governments.
Phase-10 was done in five phases. Now, there is a periodical assessment of the
waste land. Drinking water project was  done in five phases as an understanding
between the Ministry as well as the State Governments. The 5th phase is going
on. The result of this has been very, very encouraging. For the ground water
targeting by mere use of remote sensing data, the  success rate went up from
40-45 per cent to as much as 90-95 per cent."

27
60. On being asked by the Sub-Committee about the efforts made by the DoS to
impress upon the Ministries concerned to utilize the remote sensing technology in
planning and implementation of projects, the DoS replied as under:—
"Efforts have been made to develop wide user base as well as the needs for
resource management vis-a-vis the capabilities of IRS systems. The thrust for
the utilisation of IRS data in different sectors like Agriculture, Water Resources,
Forest and Environment, Geology, Soils and Land use, Ocean and Marine
Resources, Rural Development, etc. through Standing Committees and State
level application projects, had led to a wide range of applications. This has
resulted in the proliferation of IRS data into the activities of a large number of
user agencies/departments both within and outside the Government and has led
to the establishment of a wide user base at different levels of management and
decision-making. Due to the concerted efforts made through NNRMS, a few
organisations have already established the institutional mechanism for utilisation
of remote sensing data and others are in the process of the same. This is being
ensured through Planning Committee—National Natural Resources Management
System (PC-NNRMS) and theme oriented Standing Committees.
Following projects  of different ministries have been carried out in the recent
past, using Earth Observation satellite data, with extensive use:—
Ministry Project area DoS/NRSC projects
12 3
Min. of Agriculture • FASAL project
Agriculture Drought • National Agricultural Drought Assessment
and Monitoring System (NADAMS)
Min. of Disaster • Near Real Time Flood Mapping and Monitoring
Home Management • Flood Forecasting and Development of Special
Affairs Support Decision Support
• System for Flood Damage Mitigation
• Topographical mapping of Coastline along Indian
coast with 2 km inland
• National Database for Emergency Management
• Monitoring & Evaluation of National Watershed
Development Programme for Rainfed Areas
(NWDPRA) (Phase-III) using RS, GIS and MIS
Min. of Environment
• Biodiversity Characterization at Landscape Level
Environment • Indian Forest Fire Response and Assessment System
and • National Carbon Project
Forests • National Wetland mapping
Snow & Glaciers • Snow and glacier mapping for Himalayas
Min. of Geosciences • Natural Resources Census—National
Mines Geomorphological and lineament mapping on 1: 50,000
Scale

28
Min. of Rural Land Resources • National    Land     use    Land    Cover    Map    using
Development and Rural Multi-temporal    Advanced    Wi de    Field    Sensor
Development (A W iFS)
• Natural    Resources    Census - National    Land    Use
Land   Cover   Mapping   on   1:50,000   scale   using
temporal  IRS-Linear  Imaging  Self-Scanning   Sensor
(LISS) III data
• Nationwide mapping of land degradation using multi-
temporal satellite data
• National  Wastelands  Monitoring  on  1:50,000 scale
using temporal IRS-LISS III data
• National  Wastelands  Change   Analysis  on  1:50,000
Scale using temporal IRS-LISS III data
• Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission
(RGNDWM)
Min. of ITDA • Comparative  Assessment  and  Macro  Level  Planning
Tribal Affairs of  Integrated  Tribal  Development  Areas  using
Geoinformatics
Min. of Power Power & • Topographic   Mapping   from   satellite   images   for
Infrastructure Selapass area adjacent to Tawang basin in Arunachal
Pradesh, for construction of tunnel for all weather
connectivity
• Hydropower Sites Investigation using Geospatial
Techniques
Min. of Urban Urban Studies & • National Urban Information System (NUIS)
Development Rail/Road
Infrastructure
Min. of W ater Irrigation • Assessment  of  Irrigation  Potential  (I.P.)  created  in
Resources AIBP funded
• Irrigation  Projects (53)  in  India  using  Cartosat - 1
Satellite Data
• Satellite  Data  based  Evaluation  of  Irrigation Tanks
Identified under National Project for Repair,
Renovation and Restoration (NPRRR) of Water Bodies
Directly Linked to Agriculture
• Assessment of W aterlogging and Salt and /or Alkaline
Affected Soils in the Commands of all Major and
Medium Irrigation Projects in the country
• Reservoir sedimentation assessment of major
reservoirs
Snow & Glacial • Snowmelt   Runoff   Forecasting   in   Himalayan  River
Lakes Basins using Remote Sensing Inputs
• Inventory  and  Monitoring  of  Glacial  Lakes/Water
Bodies in the Himalayan Region of Indian River Basin
ICT applications • Generation of Database and Implementation of Web
Enabled Water Resources Information System
(India-WRIS) in the Country."
12 3

29
Projects of National Importance Directly Implemented by NNRMS through DoS/
ISRO Units Including NRSC
61. The Committee note that in NNRMS projects viz., Village Resource Centre and
Disaster Management Support Programme, NRSC could not provide desired results.The
review of performance of Village Resource Centre coordinated by NRSC (regional
coordinator in the States of  Andhra Pradesh and Orissa) covering the period from
October, 2007 to August, 2008 revealed that targets for setting up VRC nodes could
not be achieved. Expert centres were utilizing only 51 per cent of the allocated slots
and nodes participating in programme were only 13 per cent. In Disaster Management
Support programme, 92 per cent of the funds amounting to ` 86.90 crore released to
NRSC for the above  programme as well as assets worth  ` 7.80 crore remained unutilized
with NRSC.
62. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to be apprised of the latest
position of setting up of VRC Nodes in various  States of the country. The DoS
intimated to the Committee the following:—
"At present, 473 VRC nodes have set up in 22 States/UTs across the country.
The State-wise details are:  Andhra Pradesh - 34; Assam - 13; Bihar - 19; Delhi - 2;
Gujarat - 15; Jharkhand - 26; Karnataka -58; Kerala - 21; Madhya Pradesh - 24;
Maharashtra - 18; Meghalaya - 1; Nagaland - 8; Orissa - 44; Rajasthan - 21; Tamil
Nadu & Puducherry - 58; Uttarakhand - 18; Uttar Pradesh - 30; West Bengal- 10;
Sikkim - 19; Himachal Pradesh - 30 and Andaman & Nicobar Islands - 4."
63. Asked about the improvement made or suggested by the DoS to achieve
timely delivery of desired results in NNRMS projects, the DoS responded as under:—
"The Department has taken all requisite steps through a series of internal reviews
to ensure that desired results of VRC and DMSP are simultaneously achieved.
There has been some problem in the recent past due to non-availability of satellite
communication bandwidth. However, necessary steps are taken to re-allocate
communication bandwidth through INSAT system and recently launched GSAT
12 satellite. It may be noted that both VRC and DMSP have made significant
impacts in their respective areas. Some of those achievements are brought out
below:
(a) Village Resource Centre (VRC)
VRC Regional node at NRSC was started in October,  2007 to manage, support,
evaluate and improve the societal service programmes including natural resources
utilization in and around the VRCs set up in A.P. and Orissa.
VRCs in A.P. and Orissa are making good impact on the users. It is especially very
good in a number of VRCs in Orissa where the following results are reported:—
• Job opportunities improved.  14 women got road construction work under
NREG scheme.

30
• The forest right committees formed in many villages due to interactions and
follow-up programmes on forest right bill.
• A Self Help Group received claims after interaction programme on RTI Act.
• Special coaching helped 3 girls  pass HS in I class in Kansamari.
• Awareness on AIDS & sanitation improved.
In Andhra Pradesh, the villages served by VRCs were benefited with the
knowledge on tank rehabilitation, micro financing, AIDS control, alternative
livelihoods, etc.
• Agricultural advisories were provided  to farmers by Acharya N.G.. Ranga
Agricultural University.
• Training on painting , weaving, electrical works, computer operations, tailoring,
etc. were provided to local youth by Swamy Ramananda Thirtha Rural Training
Institute.
• Health Camps were conducted by Govt. Ayurveda Hospital and Dhan
foundation to showcase services through VRC network.
• Health and diagnostic services were extended by Byrraju foundation through
VRCs.
Several rural mass awareness camps were conducted in A.P. and Orissa with the
association of concerned NGO partners to provide direct rural services like
health, education, livelihood, agriculture, etc. to showcase the tele-services that
are available through VRC network.
(b) Disaster Management Support Programme (DMSP)
National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) provides aerospace products and
services to the concerned State and Central Governments Departments in respect
of six natural disasters viz.,Floods, Cyclone, Agricultural Drought, Earthquake,
Landslides and Forest fires. Floods, Agricultural Drought and Forest fires are
being executed annually on regular basis whereas Cyclone, Landslides and
Earthquake are being monitored on event basis. Brief details of these activities
are given below:
Floods & Cyclone Disaster
For flood and cyclone disaster management, a close watch is being kept on the
flood situation in the country and major flood events occurred are monitored
using satellite data. Flood inundation maps prepared from analysis of satellite
data are furnished in near real-time to the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA),
Central Water Commission (CWC) and State Disaster/Relief Department.

31
The information is used for flood relief management. List of the flood maps
prepared during last four years is given below:—
                           List of the Flood Maps
Y ear State No. of Satellite data used No. of Maps
2011 Assam 1 0 2 5
Bihar 7 18
Uttar Pradesh 1 1
Orissa 2 2
West Bengal 2 3
Kerala 1 1
Total 50
2010 Andhra Pradesh 7 20
Assam 2 2 103
Bihar 13 65
Uttar Pradesh 15 37
West Bengal 1 1
Chhattisgarh 1 1
Punjab &
Haryana 10 34
Kerala 1 1
Manipur 1 1
Tripura 1 1
Tamil Nadu 4 7
Delhi 4 6
Uttarakhand 1 1
11
Total 279
2009 Andhra Pradesh 4 7
Assam 1 2 3 6
Bihar 17 130
Gujarat 2 2
Uttar Pradesh 8 28
West Bengal 2 9
Karnataka 1 1
Orissa 7 62
Total 275
2008 Andhra Pradesh 4 12
Assam 1 7 3 8
Bihar 37 284
Gujarat 1 1
Punjab 1 1
Uttar Pradesh 14 16
West Bengal 6 22
Orissa 16 110
Total 484

32
Customized software was developed for generation of flood inundation maps
and provide to Government of Bihar which is operationally used by the Flood
Management Information System Cell (FMISC), of Water Resources Department,
Govt. of Bihar.
Further, using the historic flood inundation information derived from satellite
data for the past 10 years, flood hazard atlas for Assam was prepared in association
with NDMA, CWC and Government of Assam. Based on the specific request
from State Governments, information on changes in river configuration, bank
erosion, monitoring flood control works, etc., are also provided for selected river
reaches. The information is used for flood mitigation by respective State
Governments.
Mobile based application for relief management was developed for real time
collection and transmission of ground information to central server for effective
organization of relief management. A prototype live demonstration was organised
at Assam and appraisal on the application was made to NDMA.
Agricultural Drought
Prevalence and severity of agricultural drought is assessed fortnightly and monthly
situation reports are furnished for 13 States during the kharif season (June  to
October). Using various indices, are favourable for sowing is identified. Using the
frequency of drought occurrence along with relevant ancillary information, drought
vulnerability is being done on pilot basis. The Information on agriculture drought
is provided to Ministry of Agriculture and respective State Government and it is
used for contingency crop planning and drought declaration.
Forest Fires
Forest Fire products are being generated during fire season (Feb.-June) from
analysis of satellite  data everyday within a few hours of the satellite pass.
Active fire locations with overlay of  State boundaries are provided to the identified
nodal officers of State forest departments. Based on the specific request from
users, burnt area products are generated using IRS AWiFS and IRS LISS-III data.
Landslides
Landslide hazard zone maps for selected pilgrim routes in the Himalayan region
of Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh States have been prepared and
management maps suggesting suitable measures for reducing the associated
risk have been generated and provided to concerned user departments for taking
necessary measures. These maps were provided to respective State Governments
for implementing suggested management practices to minimize the risk.
Earthquake
V ery High-resolution data are used for post-disaster assessment in the dense
urban clusters. Remote sensing data can provide the basic inputs on the structural
fabric of the terrain. The lineament map is one of the important inputs for
delineating the seismo-techtonic province. For the October 8, 2005 earthquake

33
in J&K, Cartosat-1 stereoscopic data (2.5m resolution) has been used to map the
road blockages due to landslides and the fully collapsed buildings were identified
in the Punch and Uri region of the J&K. The first assessment maps were provided
to MHA.
Web Portal on DSC Services
The information and the products generated from space data sets for disaster
management have been posted on to the exclusive DSC website, on NRSC
website besides ISRO Bhuvan geo-portal for maximum outreach.
Capacity Building
Exclusive one-week training course on 'Space Enabled Geoinformation for Disaster
Management is being organised annually exclusively for the State Government
officers to enable them for better utilisation of products derived from space data
sets for disaster management. In addition, faculty support is provided on regular
basis to the various training programmes for State and Central Government
officials organised by National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM), MHA."
Operational Projects for ACL
64. NRSC undertook projects on behalf of ACL, the commercial arm of  DoS,
towards establishment/upgradation of ground station facility of ACL. It was brought
out by Audit that in four out of seven operational projects of ACL, chargeable overheads
were not levied resulting in under-costing of these projects by Rs. 83.43 lakh. In two
completed projects, NRSC did not raise demand for balance dues of  Rs. 1.85 crore from
ACL.
65. Responding to the above observations by Audit, the DoS submitted to the
Committee as under:—
 “(a) Under-costing, non-levy of chargeable overheads etc. from ACL
NRSC was extending required support of M/s ACL in the establishment of various
international ground stations. One of the activities under this understanding
was the development of required S/W which is unique for each ground station
for data reception/processing, NRSC was undertaking this responsibility, as it
has got the required expertise in this field. The amounts provided for this activity
were not funded by M/s ACL directly. For the support extended, M/s ACL was
transferring a portion of the revenues earned by them from IGS towards access
fee and royalty to NRSC and out of such receipts only, NRSC had earmarked
certain funds (which otherwise should have been provided in centre budget) on
need basis, to meet the expenses related to in house development of S/W. For
effective monitoring of the expenditure a separate project code was given and
the activity was only an in house development. As M/s ACL had not directly
funded for this activity, no overheads were charged.

34
(b) Processing facility for SVAL BARD Data at NRSC at a cost of Rs. 10 Lakhs
on civil works.
Some minor civil works modification costing Rs. 10.00 lakhs (approx) were
undertaken by NRSA in 2006 to establish "Processing facility for SV ALBARD
Data." Subsequently in July 2006, NRSA sent a proposal costing Rs. 65.66 lakhs
to M/s ACL for establishing a total facility inclusive of fixed cost plus recurring
expenditure for one year.
However, NRSC did not receive any clearance from M/s ACL for the proposal.
Hence there were no dues pending with M/s ACL.
(c) Upgradation of existing Data Reception station for IRS P-6 at DIPAC, Delhi.
(PC 1246)
A duly signed MoU was entered into with M/s ACL for the upgradation of
Defence Image Processing and Analysis Centre (DIPAC) facility at Delhi at a
total cost of Rs. 3.50 crores, which includes 15% overhead + 4.5%  Departmental
charges. 50% advance amounting to Rs. 1.75 crores also was received as per
MoU terms.
However, subsequently there was a change in scope of work and M/s ACL
procured and supplied some of the major deliverables such as Servers etc. NRSC
could complete the total work within the 50% advance received. Hence, no
further demand was raised on M/s ACL for transfer of additional funds. Hence,
there was no amount due from M/s ACL.
Adding to this reply, DoS has further submitted:—
"Under costing of other projects
A conscious approach has been adopted to charge reduced rate of overhead on
case-to-case basis depending on the project's criticality, national importance,
scale, promotional requirements to exploit full potential in a particular sector etc.
The abortives (unsuccessful flying due to bad weather, etc.) as a separate line
item will be seen only in projects where the actual quantum of work is known and
the project cost is estimated accordingly. For sensor calibration projects for
users like DRDL and LRDE the actual quantum of work is not known prior to
flying activity and the project cost is recovered by billing after the work is
completed. In such cases the abortive flying is included in the actual number of
flying hours for which billing is done. Therefore in such cases separate line item
of abortive flying will not be seen in project bill/estimate."
Other operational projects
66. The Committee note that NRSC also undertook operational projects for various
users other than ACL for delivery of maps and processing remote sensing data for
urban planning, mining, water resources, impact evaluation of development
programmes, etc. On being asked to intimate the status of completion of operational

35
projects undertaken by NRSC for various users, the DoS in a written note submitted as
under:
"The status of completion of operational projects (of value more than `100
lakhs) undertaken by NRSC for various users since 2001 is given below:
Aerial Application Projects
Sl. Project title Project Project
No. Commencement completion
12 3 4
1. Aerial Photography and Large Jan. 2001 Jan. 2005
scale digital topographic mapping of
28 towns in India under Ph-II
2. LiDAR survey for Krishana- Mar. 2001 Dec. 2006
Godavari river linking project
3. Aerial Photography of Delhi Jan. 2003 Jun. 2004
Development Authority
4. Topographic mapping of Garland Apr. 2003 2011
canal and Service canal diverting water
from Netravati and Bhadravati rivers
5. Aerial Photography of 16 places in Jan. 2004 Feb. 2006
Karnataka
6. Aerial Photography of Kolkata Jan. 2004 Dec. 2004
Municipal Corporation area
7. Aerial Photography and Mapping Feb. 2004 Feb. 2005
of Maldives
8. Aerial Photography of Abhujmad Feb. 2005 Mar. 2007
area
9. Aerial Photography of Mumbai, Apr. 2005 Mar. 2008
Chennai and Ahmedabad cities
10. Aerial Photography and Oct. 2005 Jan. 2008
Orthophoto generation of
Nizamabad district
11. Utility Mapping and Geo Spatial Jan. 2006 Jun. 2011
database generation
12. Development of methodology for volu- Aug. 2006 Apr. 2009
metric analysis of overburden for CMPDI
13. Feasibility assessment study of the Jan. 2007 Jun. 2007
proposed gas pipeline using geospatial
data  and gis techniques (RGTIL)

36
14. Aerial photography of 132 towns spread Oct . 2007 Jan . 2011
all over India for NUIS
15. Topograhical mapping of Coastline of India Jan.  2008 Apr.  2008
using Cartosat-2 data
16. Generating DEM for entire Indian Coast Jan.  2008 Apr.  2008
17. Aerial Photography and Orthophoto Dec . 2010 Aug . 2011
generation for 10 towns in Chhattisgarh
18. Aerial Photography over 10 coal Jan. 2011 July. 2011
mines for Sol
Satellite remote sensing application Projects
Sl. Project title Project Project
No. commencement completion
12 3 4
1. National Wasteland Mapping
Phase I (12 districts) Oct. 86 Apr. 87
Phase II (134 districts) 1987 1988
Phase III (89 districts) 1992 1995
Phase IV (Remaining districts of Madhya 1992 1995
Pradesh not covered under Phase I, II & III)
Phase V (Rest of the country including 1997 1999
Union territories and islands that are not
covered under Phases I to IV)
2. National Wasteland Updation Project 2003 Apr. 2005
 (NWUP-2003)-Entire country
3. National Wasteland Monitoring Project 2 005-06 Dec. 2009
(NWMP-2006)-Entire Country
4. National Wasteland Change Analysis 2 008-09 Feb. 2011
(NWCA-2010)-Entire Country
5. Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water
Mission
Phase I (Andhra Pradesh (part), Dec. 1998 2002
Kerala, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh,
Madhya Pradesh & Rajasthan)
Phase II (Orissa, Gujarat, Jharkhand & Aug. 2001 2005
Himachal Pradesh) (Jharkhand) &
Oct. 2002
(Orissa, Gujarat,
& Himachal
Pradesh)
12 3 4

37
Phase III A (Maharashtra, Uttarakhand, Feb. 2007 2009 (except
Assam, Andhra Pradesh (remaining part Maharashtra &
Jammu & Kashmir and Punjab) J&K by Jun. 2011)
Phase III B Mar. 2008 Dec. 2010
(West Bengal & Uttar Pradesh in part,
Arunachal Pradesh & Haryana)
6. Assessment of Irrigation Potential created April 2007 46 projects were
in AIBP Funded Irrigation Projects- completed by
Phase I (53 nos.) using April 2009.
Cartosat 1 satellite  data (The deferred
7 projects were
completed by
December 2009
as concurred
by User for the
want of field data)
7. Satellite Remote Sensing Based Evaluation April 1998 May 2001
Study of Irrigation Projects Covered
under CAD  Programme
8. Satellite Data based Evaluation of July 2007 Feb. 2010
Irrigation Tanks Identified under
NPRRR of water bodies Directly Linked
to Agriculture
9. Snowmelt runoff forecasting in Sutlej Oct. 2000 Sep. 2009
Basin using RS Inputs for BBMB
10. Inventory of Glacial Lakes/Water Bodies July 2010 15th March 2011
in the Himalayan Region
of Indian River Basins
11. Biodiversity Characterisation at Landscape
Level using Satellite Remote Sensing and GIS
Phase I Jan. 1998 Dec. 2002
Phase II Jun. 2003 Jun. 2007
Phase III Jan. 2008 Jun. 2011
67. Audit scrutiny revealed that in 21 out of 60 user projects test-checked by
Audit, completion was delayed by 8 to 54 months impacting the effective utilization of
12 3 4

38
various users at NRSC. Asked to furnish reasons for delays in these projects, the DoS
submitted as under:
“NRSC prepares maps using aerial and satellite data for use by users. These maps/
projects require inputs/corroborating information from user agencies/other agencies.
When flow of this information is delayed, the project slips.”
Project Project title                 Reasons for delay
code/(Cost [time escalation]
in Lakh of  ` )
 1       2                                3
Aerial Projects
1208 Large Scale Mapping of The  delay in execution of project  was  due
(66.19) 11 towns of Andhra to   non-receipt   of   scheduled    payments
Pradesh Urban Services for from     Govt.   of      AP.  However,  all    the
Poor (APUSP) [34 Months] outstanding    payment  has   been  realized
from APUSP by June 2008.
1120 T opographical survey for The procurement action of LiDAR   system
(63) Godavari-Krishna Link was   in    place  in  line    with   the   project
Project [40 Months] commitments  made.   This   technology   is
new and was hitherto not used in India.
1059 T opographical survey for There were delays  by  US  government   in
(130.32) Godavari-Krishna Link providing  export  license   to    subsystems
Project [54 Months] with sensitive  technology. MoD  clearance
also   took  long  time   which added  further
delay  in  operationalisation   of  the ALTM
system.
1155 ALTM mapping for Garland Due to default by  the  user,  the  project  is
(1549.4) command and Catchment suspended   pending   settlement   of   dues.
area for WRDO. WRDO could  not  finalise  the  yield,  which
[48 Months] was    an    important    parameter     for     the
design  of  the  entire  project.  Due  to  this,
area of the flying could not be decided.
1223 Aerial mapping for National The delay was due to  factors  beyond  our
(65.77) Thermal Power Corporation control,    such   as,   unfavourable  weather
(NTPC) over Loharinag conditions  and  time required   for  security
[25 Months] vetting  of  the  data  by  multiple  agencies
under the control of Ministry of Defence.
1222 Aerial mapping of The   delay   was   due    to    difficulties    in
(138.99) Chhattisgarh [20 Months] ground    control    survey    due    to   naxal
problem.  The  problem  was   circumvented
by carrying out rectification of photographs
using external controls.

39
1185 Aerial photography and The delay  was  caused  due  to  change  in
(121) Mapping over Kolkata user  specifications  and  addition  of  Ortho-
Municipal Corporation photo  as    deliverables.  Besides  this   the
[33 Months] starting  of   Aerial  Photography  itself  got
delayed  because  during  the  first  attempt
there was  a  lot  of  haze  which  affects  the
quality of acquired data.
1183 Aerial photography of 16 Out  of  16  towns,  13  were  completed  and
(110.06) places in Karnataka for data  supplied  to   user   within   time.   The
KRSAC, Bangalore work   for    remaining  towns   got   delayed
[48 Months] due  to  unfavourable   weather   conditions
and delay in security clearance.
1153 Aerial triangulation & The  project was  delayed  due  to  technical
(38) photogrammetric mapping snag in the aircraft.
of Chennai [8 months]
694 Aerial photography of 28 Aerial     photography    and    mapping   of
(843) towns in India Phase II 13  towns  in  Phase-II got  delayed  due  to
13 towns [8 months] season  dependent  factors.  Further,  these
towns are spread all over  the  country  and
the    work    of    control   survey   involved
considerable logistic challenges.
1070 Aerial photography of 28 Aerial    photography    and    mapping    of
(1439) towns in India Phase III 15   towns  in  Phase-III  got  delayed  due  to
15 towns [26 months] season   dependent  factors.  Further,  these
towns are  spread  all  over the  country  and
the   work   of    control    survey    involved
considerable logistic challenges.
1240 Preparation of Base Maps The delay was  due  to  difficult  terrain  and
(20) for additional Shimla inclement   weather   conditions   prevailing
planning area [13 months] in   Shimla   and   its   surroundings,   which
affected field data collection.
Satellite Projects
1061 Integrated land & water The  project  was  completed   in   June   2003
(63.32) Resources conservation and not in March 2005.
using RS&GIS in Mandsuar, In  an   internal   review,  it  was  decided  to
Ministry of Rural use   the    hydro-geomorphological    maps
Development [35 months] and   other  base  layers  under  preparation
for this study area covered in Rajiv Gandhi
National Drinking Water Mission
(RGNDWM) in order to optimize the efforts
and resources.
Hence there was a delay of 1 year 3 months.
 1       2                                3

40
1217 Inventory and change Main reasons for the delay  was  in  getting
(17.61) Detection study of surface necessary    inputs      from      the     project
water resources sponsoring   agencies   themselves,   which
[20 Months] were essential for completing the study.
1127 National Wasteland Mission Main reasons for the  delay  was  in  getting
(498) (2003) [12 Months] necessary inputs from the project
sponsoring  agencies themselves, which
were essential for completing the study.
1264 National Wasteland Mission Main reasons for the  delay was  in  getting
(346.25) (2005) [8 Months] necessary inputs from the project
sponsoring agencies themselves, which
were essential for completing the study.
1204 Ecological impact Main reasons for the delay  was  in  getting
(14.20) agreement of Khelgaon necessary     inputs     from     the      project
NTPC [20 Months] sponsoring agencies themselves, which were
essential for completing the study.
1063 Delineation of Season-wise Main reasons for the delay  was  in  getting
(46.08) cropped irrigated necessary     inputs     from     the      project
Area [9 Months] sponsoring agencies themselves, which were
essential for completing the study.
1118 Integrated resource The project was initiated in June 2002
(346.27) information system for and was expected to be  completed  by
desert area [11 Months] July 2004. The said project was completed
for the states of Karnataka, Haryana and
Rajasthan by July 2004. However, in case of
Gujarat there was a delay in completing the
soiltheme data base which was handled by
All India Soil & Land use Survey
Organisation,  Delhi. This was communicated
to the  sponsoring agency, i.e., Ministry of
Rural Development, Govt. of India, who in
turn approved the extension of project till
31st March, 2005 (Vide letter No. 5-19/2001-
The dated 21st February, 2005), thereby
resulted in a delay of 3 months only.
However, this communication got
inadvertently missed our attention while
responding to earlier audit queries.
1252 Prioritisation of watershed The    draft    report    of    the    project   was
(61.82) using remote sensing and submitted   to  MRD   in  May  2007  and  the
GIS techniques comments    were    clarified    in    the    final
[12 months] report submitted in November 2007.
 1       2                                3

41
1201 Mapping in geo-database HUDA  had   expressed   their   inability   to
(195.69) creation using high supply    the    input     required     for     the
resolution satellite data for remaining component  of  the  work.  Hence
Hyderabad Urban it  has  been   jointly  decided  (by   NRSA   &
Development Authority HUDA) to close the  project  and  return  the
HUDA [36 months] funds meant for this activity to HUDA.
68. In reply to a specific query, the DoS further explained the mechanism in place
to ensure timely and efficient execution of projects of national importance undertaken
by NRSC. The DoS submitted that in NRSC, for every operational user project, a
regular project progress review mechanism has been introduced through monthly
meetings of heads of divisions. Project management software has been implemented
that enables the project team to bring the project status to the notice of NRSC
management and also to seek guidance. Extensive discussions are held with concerned
project sponsoring agency for finalization of project proposal and various clauses of
MoU. In respect of all the user projects, MoUs are signed with the project sponsoring
agencies as well as with the partner institutes carrying out the assigned tasks wherein
the responsibilities of NRSC, Partner Institutes and Sponsoring Agencies are clearly
mentioned for timely completion of the projects. Product Realisation Plan (Technical
manual) is prepared for each project which describes the Product specification, Input
Satellite data, Ground truth, Base maps, ancillary data, etc., Pre-processing of data &
data preparation and image analysis and interpretation, Field verification process,
Post field data analysis and interpretation/correction, Final product generation (Map/
report/statistics) and Quality Assurance Mechanism and Accuracy Standards. A core
team is established for each project for better project management in the process of
continuous improvement in project handling, NRSC has formed an exclusive project
coordination cell for aerial projects from 2007 onwards. This cell coordinates regularly
with users for project inputs, realizing payments etc for smooth execution of projects
as per MoUs. A Project coordinator is identified for each project to deal with the
project monitoring for scheduled completion. The progress of projects is also reviewed
once in 2 months to address the issues if any during the project execution.
69. An amount of Rs. 4.99 crore was outstanding from users in the projects test-
checked by Audit. Asked to indicate the present status of these dues, DoS responded
that:—
"Out of the amount of Rs. 4.94 crores, stated by Audit, Rs. 3.41 crores have been
realised till date and Rs. 1.53 crores are still outstanding.
This amount of Rs. 1.53 crores due includes Rs. 83.43 lakhs due from M/s. ASCO
Ltd. against whom legal proceedings were taken up and the matter is also being
pursued with Government officials of West Bengal to render help in unearthing
the assets of the Company.
Another major amount of Rs. 26.26 lakhs (as against Rs. 27.99 lakhs pointed out
by audit) is due from Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike, Bangalore. Efforts
are being made to recover this amount. Efforts are also on to realize the balance
dues of Rs. 0.43 crores from various other users (29 cases)."
 1       2                                3

42
70. Audit further pointed out that NRSC could not obtain necessary inputs from
Water Resources Development Organisation (WRDO) of Karnataka for execution of a
project and the project was kept in abeyance from December 2005. The expenditure of
Rs. 4.64 crore, therefore, did not serve the intended purpose and Rs. 2.07 crore remained
to be recovered from WRDO. Asked categorically to state attempts made to revive the
project, DoS responded as under:—
"The project was kept in abeyance as the user has not paid the amount as per the
terms of the MoU/agreement. Subsequently, user has split the project into two
phases. The area surveyed by NRSC was treated as phase-I. The project was
continued upon receipt of payment from the user and data products were
delivered to user. NRSC has received from WRDO, in January, 2010, an amount
for the value of work executed i.e. Rs. 2.22 crores, which includes the dues of
Rs. 2.07 crores as pointed out by audit. User has intimated in principal withdrawal
of balance work from MoU. Therefore, reviving the project depends on the need
and initiative of the user."
71. It has been brought out by Audit that reivew of balances available under
Government projects implemented by NRSC disclosed unutilised aggregate sum of
Rs 75.14 crore in 46 projects. On being enquired about this unutilised aggregate sum,
DoS submitted:—
• "Break-up of 46 projects amounting to Rs. 75.14 crores mentioned in this para
is as under:
Nos. Amount (Rs. in Crores)
DoS Funded Project 28 8.67
DMSP Aircraft 01 64.99
User Projects 17 1.48
Total 46 75.14
• Out of 28 DoS projects 21 projects have been completed. Subsequent to
governmentalisation, the unspent balances of 20 completed projects
(amounting to Rs. 5.37 crores—excluding Rs. 0.10 crores paid to work cen-
tres) and 5 ongoing projects (Rs. 2.26 crores) was returned back to DoS in
January, 2009. The balance fund available in one completed project ( `0.58
crores) was returned to ISRO Hqrs in August, 2008.
The balance fund available in the remaining 2 on-going projects (Rs. 0.36
crores) was remitted to Government account and kept under "8443-Civil
Deposits for Work done" account. Presently, expenditure, if any, against the
ongoing projects, is being incurred against authorisation issued by ISRO
Hqrs only and hence there is no blockage of funds at present.
• 17 user projects are funded by non-DoS organisation such as DBT, DOD,
Min. of S&T, INCOIS, etc., and ANTRIX for various application projects.

43
Subsequent to governmentalisation, the unspent balances as on 31.08.2008
in these projects were remitted to government account and kept under
"8443—Civil Deposits for work done" account. On detailed review, it is found
that 16 projects have been completed and one project is in progress. Action
is being taken to transfer the balance amount of Rs. 1.37 crores to the
Government Revenue/refund to the respective Agencies.
• The other project under which Rs. 64.99 crores are available is towards
procurement of Aircraft for Disaster Management Support Programme
(DMSP)."
72. Under-costing of Rs. 2.52 crore was pointed out in 12 out of 60 user projects
test-checked by Audit. The Sub-committee desired to know whether Department of
Space have taken any action to recover or adjust the amounts undercharged. In
response, DoS stated:
"The under costing was due to undercharging of overheads (10 cases involving
Rs. 1.95 crore) and undercharging of rates for certain services (two cases
involving Rs. 0.57 crore).
In all the 10 cases, regarding variation in overhead charges, it is to state that a
conscious approach was adopted to charge reduced rate of overhead on case-
to-case basis depending on the projects's criticality, national importance, scale,
promotional requirements to exploit full potential in a particular sector etc.
In respect of other two cases regarding under-charging on account of abortive
charges, it may be noted that the abortive charges as a separate line item will be
seen only in projects where the actual quantum of work is known and the projects
cost is estimated accordingly. For sensor calibration projects for users like DRDL
and LRDE, the actual quantum of work is not known prior to flying activity and
the project cost is recovered by billing after the work is completed. In such
cases, the abortive flying is included in the actual number of flying hours for
which billing is done. Therefore in such cases separate line item of abortive
flying will not be seen in project bill/estimate.
In view of the above explanations, there is no case for recovery/adjustment of
the above said charges as they do not amount to under charging."
73. The Committee learnt that in two projects, NRSC completed the work without
signing MoU as required which in turn rendered the recovery of dues of  Rs. 1.11 crore
difficult. Asked to specify action taken with regard to these projects, DoS replied:—
“Rs. 83.43 lakhs due from M/s. ASCO Ltd. against whom legal proceedings were
taken up. Ministry of Law & Justice, Branch Secretariat, Kolkata have nominated
Sri S.S. Sarkar, Addl. Govt. Advocate, to handle the Execution Petition (EP)
before the Hon'ble High Court of Kolkata. The EP has been filed and is pending.
However, the Schedule of Assets of the Company is to be placed before the High
Court for attachment. The Company is not existing in any of its known addresses
in Kolkata, as confirmed through site inspections. The Department of Space has
also addressed letters to the Chief Secretary, West Bengal, and to the
Commissioner of Police, Kolkata, to render help in unearthing the assets of the
Company. The matter is being pursued.

44
Another major amount of Rs. 26.26 lakhs is due from Bruhat Bangalore
Mahanagara Palike, Bangalore. Efforts are being made to recover this amount."
VII.  TRAINING  IN  REMOTE  SENSING
74. Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS), Dehradun, a unit of NRSC, is the
focal point for long and short-term courses and refresher courses for training in remote
sensing. It conducts customised courses for professionals, for the period ranging
from four days to 24 months. The main function of Indian Institute of Remote Sensing,
Dehradun (IIRS) is capacity building through education at post-graduate level in the
application of remote sensing and geo-informatics for natural resource management.
75. With regard to the enrolment of students in various courses conducted by
IIRS, Audit observed that there was shortfall in long-term courses such as M.Sc.,
M.Tech and Post-Graduate Diploma.
76. Asked by the Sub-Committee to elaborate on their plans to increase enrolment
in long-term training courses, the DoS stated as under:—
(a) "Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, ISRO, Department of Space plan to
advertise more widely the details of the long term training courses to ensure
full capacity enrolment in Post Graduate Diploma, M.Sc. and M. Tech. courses.
(b) Parallel to that concerned user Departments and the University shall be
contacted through mail and the post to sponsor their middle level officers for
attending these long term training courses.
(c) For attracting users Departments to depute their officers for long term courses,
Govt. Officials will be provided flexibility in choosing option to complete their
project work module at parent department in same year or in two years after
initial training of first module of 4 months during first year.
(d) It is also proposed to organize 'Annual User Meet' based on interactions with
users Departments and including their feedback in our long term training
programmes.
(e) NNRMS Standing Committee on Training & Technology will also take
appropriate steps towards conducting long term training programmes."
77. In addition to the training at IIRS, NRSC at Hyderabad campus provides short
term training to the users of data products, as a part of its promotional activities.
NRSC, at its Hyderabad campus, conducted three to eight short term courses for 85 to
180 participants during the period under Audit review. However, percentage of private
persons trained against total number of trainees was only 14.53 percent.
78. To a specific concern of the Committee, the Department responded that ISRO
has advertised about the available long term courses in National Newspapers in different
zones to achieve suitable increase in private participants in their training programmes.

45
VIII.  FINANCIAL  MANAGEMENT
79. Audit review revealed significant deficiencies in financial management system
of NRSC which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
Excessive release of grants
80. The Committee have been informed that NRSC had an opening balance of
Rs. 90.04 crore at the beginning of the year 2003-04 which had increased to Rs. 373.93
crore at the end of 2007-08 due to accumulation of unspent balances. NRSC incurred
overall surplus of Rs. 11.90 crore during 2003-08 against which a general purpose grant
of Rs. 67.54 crore was received. Instead of refunding these unspent balances, NRSC
deposited these substantial balances available with them in bank accounts and earned
interest of Rs. 81.43 crore.
81. On being asked about current unspent balances with NRSC and reasons for
the same, the DoS explanation was:—
"Subsequent to governmentalisation as on 1.9.2008, all the unspent GIA and
unspent money in DoS funded Projects (except the fund received for DMSP
Aircraft) were refunded to DoS/remitted to Government account. Money received
for User Paid Consultancy Projects and deposits received for supply of satellite
data only are continued under depository works."
Budgeting and Budgetary control
82. It was brought out by Audit that revenue earned by NRSC varied between
(+) 17 per cent to (-) 29.84 per cent, NRSC centre expenditure varied between (+) 20 per
cent to (-) 30 per cent and variable expenditure incurred by NRSC varied between
(-) 42 per cent to (+) 58 per cent against its estimations, during 2003-09 indicating
deficiencies in planning of its resources.
83. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the major source of
revenue for NRSC and plans about expanding the same, the DoS replied as under:—
"In view of the governmentalisation of NRSC from 2008 onwards, the centre's
focus is more on public good services and projects of national importance. The
revenue expansion no longer exists. However, all efforts are made to expand the
user base on a continuous basis by providing varieties of services through
newer means like ftp based data delivery, quick turn-around-time from IMGEOS
and BHUVAN portal for data visualisation and services.
Presently, receipts against satellite data dissemination are the major source of
revenue for NRSC. Other sources of revenue are consultancy projects (including
aerial survey projects) in remote sensing and GIS for central ministries/
departments like Rajiv Gandhi national drinking water mission, Wasteland
monitoring, Irrigation potential assessment under AIBP funded projects, etc.
NRSC's focus is currently on executing projects for national imperatives such as
Disaster information support, natural resources census, national geospatial data
outreach, etc."

46
84. During the course of oral examination of the representatives of the DoS, the
Sub-Committee pointed out that in addition to remote sensing, which approximately
accounted for Rs. 60 to 80 crores of receipt of Department of Space, other major areas
of receipts of the Department are from lease of transponders  and launch vehicle
operations. Further, the Sub-Committee desired distinct reflection of large receipts
through appropriate accounting arrangements by opening of minor head which brings
in public domain separately receipts on account of lease of transponders, sale of data
products and other remote sensing operations and from launch operations.
85. Responding to the above, the Secretary DoS stated:—
"In fact, the launch operations or launch services provided to the other countries
or the commercial lease of transponders are handled through the Antrix
Corporation, that is another public sector undertaking which is a part of the
Department of Space and not as a part of the National Remote Sensing Centre.
When it comes to the remote sensing data part of it, for the national users, it is
handled by the National Remote Sensing Centre. But when it comes to the
international customers that is either they acquire the data from their own ground
stations or we sell the data, that is taken care of by the Antrix Corporation. So,
NRSA's role here is only for the national users or remote sensing data.
Till, September, 2008, it was functioning as an autonomous society on account
of the NRSC. So, the Department of Space use to take into account the revenue
they generate and only the balance amount was going to them as the grant from
the Government.
After September, 2008, we converted that into a centre of ISRO, a Government
entity. Now, the Government accounting principals on revenue generation and
putting it as a part of the revenue to the Consolidated Fund of India, that is being
practiced.
As far as the Antrix Corporation is concerned, the three points that were
mentioned, comes as the revenue of Antrix and it comes back to the Government
as the investor in that."
86. Asked to indicate the current trends of NRSC's budget against actual amounts
expended, DoS furnished the following information:—
(Rs. in crores)
RRE Expenditure %
2008-09 108.73 104.86 96.44
2009-10 147.21 147.19 99.98
2010-11 197.25 196.13 99.43

47
87. Responding to a specific query of the Committee regarding action taken for
utilising the resources optimally, DoS stated:—
"In order to ensure that the resources are utilized optimally, quarterly reviews of
the expenditure vis-a-vis the budget allocation are carried out by Additional
Secretary, DoS. Periodical reviews are carried out internally and a thorough
review of spendability of funds before the end of financial year is carried out and
funds deployed optimally so as to minimise the surrenders."
Work centre advances, dues from ACL and dues from the sale of satellite products
88. Audit scrutiny revealed outstanding work centre dues, dues from ACL and
dues from the sale of satellite data amounted to be Rs. 7.09 crore, Rs. 93 lakhs and
Rs. 3.93 crore respectively. On being enquired about the present status of the amounts
outstanding and steps taken by the Department of Space to recover or adjust the
same, the DoS in a written note explained as under:—
“(a) Against the work centre advances, outstanding dues of Rs. 7.09 crores,
Rs. 0.71 crores has been adjusted and Rs. 6.38 crores is awaiting adjustment
for which efforts are on the obtain Utilization certificates for adjustments.
Further, of the Rs. 6.38 crores, Rs. 1.29 crores is outstanding from
M/s. Engineering Projects Indian Limited (EPIL) alone for Water Resources
Development Organisation (WRDO) project which has been short closed
and the amount will be adjusted against work done by M/s. EPIL and Rs. 4.57
crores is pending adjustment from Government Departments.
(b) Dues from ACL: Rs. 93 lakhs has been received in full from
M/s. ACL—Action Closed.
(c) Dues from Sale of Satellite data products: Similarly, the dues from sale of
satellite data products amounting to Rs. 3.93 crores have been realized. —
Action Closed."
89. Further enquired about the mechanism employed by the DoS to ensure timely
recovery of dues, the DoS submitted:—
“(a) NRSC as a policy insists a 100% a dvance payment for supply of data
products. However, for some of the DoS Users including M/s. Antrix
Corporation Ltd. and for some other Government Agencies for emergency
applications like disasters, data products were supplied without insisting for
advance payment.
(b) However, a critical review of the same was taken up and presently all the data
products are being supplied against advance payments only and an MoU
with M/s. Antrix was also signed which takes care of advance deposits
payable to NRSC.
(c) Similarly, for all project related activities also the amounts receivable
are being monitored by way of MoUs with respective agencies which
incorporates terms and conditions of milestone payments, arbitration, etc.,
and work centre advances are also based on MoUs."

48
Internal control and internal audit system
90. Audit review revealed that internal control and internal audit were not
commensurate with the requirement of NRSC. Moreover, the scope of internal audit
was mainly restricted to establishment matters.
91. As regards, the frequency of internal audit carried out in NRSC, its scope and
effectiveness, the Department of Space stated as under:—
"The periodicity of Internal Audit conducted at NRSC by Internal Audit Wing
(IAW) of DoS is as follows:
Audit Period Conducted during
01.04.2005 to 31.03.2006 04.12.2006 to 12.12.2006
01.04.2006 to 31.03.2007 03.12.2007 to 11.12.2007
01.04.2007 to 31.03.2009 15.02.2010 to 05.03.2010’’
It was further submitted that restructing of Internal Audit Wing of DoS has been
taken up vide Office Order No. B. 11011/6/2011-Sec. 2 dated 27.07.11, to centralize the
Internal Audit Wing at Antariksh Bhavan at DoS, Bangalore under the overall control
of CCA which envisages conducting Internal Audit of each centre on an annual basis
and following changes in the existing system/processes/procedures have been
proposed:—
(a) To dissolve the existing decentralized Internal Audit Wing in the five major
Centres of ISRO and establish a centralised Internal Audit Wing at DoS,
Bangalore.
(b) Audit calendar: to draw up an audit calender for the entire department
covering all ISRO/DoS establishments. The audit period would be from May
to January and the period from February to April shall be used for follow up
and reconciliation.
(c) Entry and Exit meetings would be organized at each of the Centres which
would be chaired by Controllers/Directors of the Centres with participation
by CCA, DoS, Sr. Head (IA), alongwith the Audit team.
(d) To cater to training periodically to enhance the skills and knowledge in the
area of audit to the personnel of centralised IAW .
(e) To draw an Audit plan to cover all the activities which have bearing on the
reliability of accounts and records in all four areas of administrative system
and decentralized entities like CMD etc.
Commission charges to ACL
92. The Committee observe that the pricing Sub-Committee of NRSC had fixed
(January 2008) the revenue-sharing between NRSC and ACL in the ratio of 50:50 for the

49
sale of IRS data to foreign clients. The revenue share between NRSC and ACL was
fixed at 35 per cent, the remaining 15 per cent being re-seller's commission. For similar
services, DoS was paying to ACL an agency commission of 15 to 20 per cent. Thus,
NRSC was paying additional commission charges of 15 to 20 per cent to ACL and this
resulted in reduction of NRSC revenue in the range of Rs. 1.44 crore to Rs. 1.92 crore
during 2004-05 to 2007-08.
93. In this context, the Sub-Committee desired to know about the commission
charges payable by NRSC to ACL in the MoU between DoS and ACL for international
distribution of satellite data. The Committee were apprised that NRSC is not paying
any commission charges to ACL, which is sharing the revenue as charges towards
international data products to NRSC. These charges were described as favourable for
NRSC.
94.  The Sub-Committee also desired to know the measures taken by the DoS to
ensure that the interests of NRSC are taken care of. In response, the Department
submitted as under:—
"(a) Department of Space vide order No. B.31012/05/2009-Sec. 5 dated October 5,
2009 approved for payment of charges by ACL to NRSC based on the gross
revenue recognised by Antrix (after allowing towards re-seller commission)
on account of sale of data products in the ratio of 60:40 (NRSC:ACL).
(b) NRSC entered into MoU with Antrix concerning the International distribution
of IRS Satellite Data.
(c) ACL is also, similar to other users, making advance payment for supply of
data from NRSC. ACL is keeping the revolving deposit of Rs. 30.00 lakhs with
NRSC and recouping the same periodically. There is no outstanding receivable
from ACL to NRSC as on date."

PART II
OBSERVATIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
1. National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), a unit of the Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) under the Department of Space (DoS) is the nodal agency for
operational remote sensing activities and the sole authority to acquire, process and
disseminate the remotely sensed satellite data products withing India. It also
undertakes remote sensing application projects of national importance being part of
the National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS), a body of the Planning
Commission of India. The applications of remote sensing technology in particular,
have emerged as cost effective means for efficient management of national resources
in the fields of agriculture, water resources, urban development and disaster
management. The DoS incurred an investment of Rs. 2206 crore towards cost of
seven remote sensing satellites and other related programmes during 2003-08. The
Performance Audit of NRSC by CAG covering a period of six years between 2003-04
to 2008-09, through scrutiny of selected project files and analysed data products,
revealed glaring lapses such as underutilization of remote sensing satellites, poor
revenue generation through sale of data products; under performance of aerial remote
sensing aircraft; deficiencies in planning and implementation of remote sensing
application projects undertaken by NRSC thereby severely affecting timely realization
of expected benefits, shortfall in the enrolment in training courses in remote sensing
and poor financial management as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. The Committee are concerned to note that three (IRS-P3, IC and P4) out of
seven remote sensing satellites could utilize only 32, 45 and 50 per cent of their
maximum capacity, which in the absence of their designed capacity, were assessed by
Audit on the basis of comparison of actual number of scenes acquired by these
satellites. The Committee find that the satellites could not be put to use to their
maximum capacity due to technical problems in the spacecrafts and the impact of
lower capacity utilization on remote sensing application projects of national
importance was not assessed by NRSC. The Department of Space (DoS) justified that
all the three satellites in question have performed beyond their designed life
3-5 years and the overall performance of the satellite exceeded the designed capacity
of the mission. The DoS further claimed that there had not been any deficit in terms
of meeting data requirements and remote sensing application projects did not suffer
during the operational period of the satellites. The Committee find the reply deficient
as it gives a relative assessment of the performance of satellites based on designed
life time of the satellite and does not address the core issue of assessment of the
performance of the satellites based on its designed capacity and the actual number of
scenes captured. The Committee, therefore, recommend that important parameters
such as the design capacity of satellites should be carefully worked out and planned
so as to enable an accurate and scientific assessment of performance of satellites
50

51
based on their actual capacity to capture scenes. The Committee further desire that
emphasis of the Department of Space should be on the maximum and effective data
acquisition by the satellites rather than utilizing the satellites beyond their designed
life as the lower capacity utilization of these satellites adversely impacts remote
sensing application projects of national importance.
3. The Committee note that various mechanisms have been formulated by the
DoS for utilization of remote sensing satellites to their full potential. These include
setting up of the National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS) for
integration of satellite remote sensing data with conventional techniques towards
management of natural resources and development planning in the country, holding
of interaction meetings with various user Ministries/Departments on need basis,
institutionalization of remote sensing in many Ministries/Departments, upgradation
of the capacity of the Earth observation satellites and the mission management strategy
to ensure optimum use of available resource. The Committee desire that the synergy
of information obtained from remote sensing and complimentary geomatics
technologies such as Geographical Information System (GIS), Global Poisitioning
System (GPS), Cartography, Graphical Processing, Statistics, Photogrammetry, etc.
alongwith ground based socio-economy data should be utilized judiciously for
achievement of national development goals as set out in the NNRMS. The Committee
further recommend that DoS should ensure effective implementation of the
mechanisms put in place to optimize the performance of the remote sensing satellites
and also institute a robust monitoring system so that there are quantifiable positive
outcomes.
4. The Committee are dismayed to note that while the total capital investment on
the seven satellites in operation during the Audit review period was Rs. 1468.59
crore, operational returns were negative in the years 2003-08 and ranged from
Rs. 96.87 crore to Rs. 134.27 crore indicating that realization from sale of data
products was not sufficient enough to match its yearly operational expenditure. The
Department of Space claimed in self-justification that the spacecraft systems are
considered to be infrastructure for national development and public welfare and the
emphasis is on the outreach of the data products rather than cost recovery. It was
further asserted by DoS that the pricing policy of NRSC was in tune with the
increasing global trend of making data freely available for public services. The
Committee do not find the Department's justification convincing in so far as the
relevant provision in the Remote Sensing data Policy, 2011 provides only an assurance
from the Government for a continuous and improved observing/imaging capability
from its own Indian Remote sensing satellites programmes as a national commitment
and as a 'public good' and does not provide to give usable remote sensing satellite data
fee of cost. While acknowledging that remote sensing satellites are indeed public
good infrastructure with the mission towards sustainable national development, the
Committee, however feel that a balanced segregation can surely be worked out based
on various data types and needs of various users. The Committee also feel that
appropriate customized packaging of remote sensing data by way of adequate value
addition and making them fit for synergistic and simultaneous applications will
definitely enhance the marketability of such data and bring about increase in the net

52
returns. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department should enhance
their data marketing capability by way of appropriate packaging of data and value
addition. The Committee also recommend that the Pricing Committee in the DoS
should adopt a sustainable balanced approach to meet the twin objectives of making
certain category of data available as public good free of cost while also simultaneously
pricing another set of marketable category to bring about positive returns.
5. The Committee note with concern the huge discrepancy between the statistical
figures on the revenue from the data sales from IRS Missions and Access fee/Royalty
earned through International Ground Stations furnished by DoS to the Committee
and that obtained by Audit from the Principal Pay and Accounts Office of DoS. The
total revenue generated in three financial years from 2008-2011 amounted to
Rs. 20968 lakh as calculated from the table furnished by the DoS to the Committee
whereas the Audit vetting of the aforesaid data reveals an inflation in the figure by
48.31 per cent (Rs. 9770.50 lakh), with the corresponding figure furnished being
Rs. 11197.50 lakh. The DoS owes an explanation to Parliament on the discrepancy
within six months of the presentation of this Report.
6. As regards the downward trend in the earnings through Access fee/Royalty
from the International Ground Stations (IGS) by antrix, the Committee recommend
that the DoS explore the possibility of collaboration with global remote sensing ground
stations and research centres to establish closer linkages, more reliable and faster
data sharing and analysis, shared archives and near real time data access among
different countries and also establishing networks with higher bandwidth for
distribution of archival repositories and provision of real time access.
7. The Committee note that a realistic thematic data need assessment in various
remote sensing applications is required to enable the planning of the payloads of
operational remote sensing satellites prior to their launch so that the data acquisition
capacity of the satellites are in tune with the expected needs. In this context, the
Committee are dismayed at the Audit revelation that satellites were planned without
adequate thematic data need assessment and therefore, the extent of data gap against
the data need could not be assessed. The Committee observe that the Department's
reply, by their own admission, underlines the imperatives of data need assessment for
planning the payloads of satellites. The Committee appreciate the Department's efforts
to collect information on the intended use for data products disseminated by NRSC
and development of a CRM module under IMGEOS project, which is expected to be put
in operation in 2012, and hope that the module is made operational within the stipulated
time and monitored at the highest level to attain the objectives. The Committee also
desire that collection of information by Customer Relations Management (CRM)
module may be institutionalized and contain clear outcomes and DOS should ensure
that a realistic assessment of data needs is conducted exhaustively to enable a scientific
correlation in the planning and operationalisation of remote sensing satellites.
8. Huge idling of IRS data ranging between 53 to 95 per cent, as highlighted by
Aduit, has engaged the attention of the Committee. This is a pointer to the fact that
data need assessment was not based on any scientific study and lacked marketing
capability. The Committee note that the Department of Space have made some efforts

53
to initiate action to improve the utilization and sale of data by way of reduction in price
level of satellite data products, increasing awareness through Bhuvan web portal,
advertisements, publication of promotional materials, etc. The Committee, however,
cannot help observing that reduction in sale prices of data to encourage their utilization
might prove to be counterproductive as it is sure to bring down the net returns which
are already negligible. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the DoS should
set up a comprehensive mechanism to bring about optimum utilization of satellite
data while also increasing the net returns from sale of such data. The Committee
should like to be apprised of the machanism so involved and the tangible outcome
thereof.
9. Notably, the efficiency of data processing is measured in terms of turn-around
time, i.e., the processing time required to process the data into a finished product
from the time of receipt of request for data. The Committee deplore the decline in
efficiency of data processing as there has been increase in the turn-around time,
which has in turn adversely impacted timely delivery of data products to the users.
The Committee expect that the DOS make earnest efforts to operationalize the project
on Integrated Multi-Mission Ground Segment of Earth Observation Satellites
(IMGEOS) which has been purportedly conceived to enable faster and efficient data
products and services for users so as to bring about reduction in the turn-around
time for standard products to 24 hours and emergency products to 1 hour after
acquisition. The Committee are of the considered view that establishment of robust
operational remote sensing, geo-spatial information systems and supporting
infrastructure are critical to securing accurate and timely access to both archival
and real or near-real time reliable data. Keeping this in view, the Committee desire
the Department to enhance the present infrastructure for remote sensing
encompassing organizational, computational, educational and bandwidth components,
particularly as relates to time critical anticipation, disaster mitigation and emergency
responses to both natural and manmade catastrophes. To this end, the Committee
further impress upon the Department to strengthen and upgrade their software and
other related geo-matics technologies associated with the processing of data at par
with the best international standards so as to ensure a quantum jump in the efficiency
of data processing. The Committee also desire that ideal turn-around time be fixed for
different categories of data processed at NRSC and a stringent mechanism be installed
to monitor actually obtained turn-around time vis-a-vis prescribed.
10. The Standing Committee of Parliament on Department of Space had observed
in their 129th Report presented to both the Houses on 26th August, 2004 that in
order to increase accuracy of IRS data and also for more realistic interpretation of
acquired data, DOS needed to set up National Remote Sensing Coordination Committee
to facilitate holistic implementation of the following proposals: (i) integration of
Geographical Information System (GIS), Global Positioning System (GPS) and IRS
technology to enhance accuracy of derived data, (ii) production and distribution of
satellite data, (iii) processing of remote sensing data, (iv) using functional approach
towards difficulties faced by departments for accurate interpretation of the data
retrieved, (v) updating of technology at par with world standards, (vi) promotion of
remote sensing applications in coordination with universities and research centres,

54
and (vii) maintenance of national archive on remote sensing data with a view to
preserving data and also constantly updating it. The Committee deplore the reluctance
of the DoS to set up the National Remote Sensing Coordination Committee for a
variety of reasons but, apparently, the DoS have not been able to guide, implement and
monitor the works of multifarious programmes and agencies in an integrated and
efficient manner. Since the integration of satellite data with complimentary
geo-spatial/geo-matics technologies such as GIS, GPS, Catography, Photogrammetry,
Digital Elevation Model (DEM) has become inevitable for enabling immediate display
of intelligible, interpretable real-time data for various applications, which is in
consonance with the Standing Committee's recommendation of integration of various
technologies, the Committee, recommend that an integrated approch should be taken
and a unified overarching Coordination Committee be constituted to obviate scope for
delays and duplication of work performed by various agencies and for their effective
monitoring.
11. The Committee are in agreement with the views of the Standing Committee of
Parliament on DoS contained in their 42nd Report presented to both the Houses on
13.03.1997 that more and private entrepreneurs should be associated in the process
of remote sensing data utilisaiton programme as there is a huge scope of value
addition to the remote sensing data and using it in marketable form in several sectors.
The Committee are, however, dismayed to note that efforts of NRSC are not adequate
in customizing the data according to the needs of private users and also exploring the
possibility of widening the customer base resulting in very low levels of average sales
to the private sector. Audit examination revealed that the average sales to the private
sector were less than 20 per cent whereas the sales to the Government sector were
more than 80 per cent during the period 2003-2009. The Committee recommend that
a comprehensive mechanism for promotion of sale of data to private users incorporating
therein effectie sensitization programmes, training modules for efficient handling
of such data and also value addition, customization and appropriate packaging of data
to enhance their utility for multipurpose applications should be brought about and the
Committee apprised accordingly.
12. The Committee are surprised to find that the international market rate of
high resolution satellite data was about six times more than the price of comparable
IRS products. The Department's response in this regard, that IRS data available are
not comparable with foreign satellite data with respect to spectral and spatial resolution
and hence their prices are not comparable, indicates an urgent need for further
enhancement in the quality of IRS data in order to reach cutting edge compatibility in
the international market. Reposing immense faith in the intellectual and technological
capabilities, potential and future prospects of our space science and scientists, the
Committee exhort DoS to put in place suitable mechanisms in consultation and
collaboration with renowned scientists and technocrats leading to constant
technological upgradation, elimination of bottlenecks and enhancement of quality
and credibility of IRS data.

55
13. The Committee have been given to understand that DoS has undertaken an
exercise to gauge the total cost of remote sensing satellite systems and data products.
While earlier only the cost incurred for generating data products was taken into
consideration, now cost of the satellites and their launching will also be taken into
account. The Committee also appreciate that the costing and pricing are being finalized
by a high-power Committee set up by DoS and a differentiated pricing policy is being
considered for different users like Government users, DoS users, academic users,
private users, etc. The Committee, however, impress upon DoS to finalise and
implement this pricing policy with a sense of urgency after due legal and financial
vetting and the Committee be apprised within six months of its finalisation.
14. The Committee are deeply concerned to note the delay in completion of aerial
projects and under performance of aerial remote sensing aircraft due to non-availability
of pilots and technical snags. The Committee further note that 12 aerial projects
constituting 33 per cent of those scrutinized by Audit, costing   Rs.45.85 crore, were
delayed from 8 to 54 months. The Secretary, DoS, in evidence, attributed the non-
availability of pilots to greener pastures available in the aviation market. Needless to
say, this acute shortage of manpower to fly the aerial remote sensing aircraft is a
major handicap in the smooth functioning of aerial remote sensing projects. The
Committee are, however, informed that an institutional arrangement has been
established with the Indian Air Force (IAF) for obtaining pilots on deputation and
efforts are being made to increase the deputation period so as to have higher stability
in operations. The Committee feel that besides such institutional arrangements,
other avenues for induction and retention of pilots by devising attractive wage structure
and other incentive packages should be explored so as to obviate scope for delays in
projects and under performance of aircraft due to want of pilots. The Committee also
desire that DoS may also explore the possibility of having a tie-up with various
prestigious aviation academies and institutes in the country by obtaining their services
and finally absorb these skilled pilots.
15. The Committee are informed that a three year comprehensive contract has
been signed with a maintenance agency for reduction in delays in fixing technical
snags, better flow of spare parts and facilitation of better supervision  in carrying out
maintenance work. Retrofit of avionics system of two beach-craft owned by NRSC has
also been planned to be carried out in a phased manner. As regards the replacement
of ageing aircraft, the Committee were assured by DoS that the matter will be critically
examined at an appropriate time. The Committee are surprised to note that it is only
on being pointed outby Audit, the Department initiated steps to address the issue of
technical snags of the  aerial remote sensing aircraft. Needless to say, the DoS needs
to be proactive and take appropriate measures so that the work of remote sensing is
not hampered due to technical snags.
16. The Committee cannot absolve the delay in completion of aerial remote sensing
project on the ground that inter-agency consultations take time and that no time-
frame can be predicted for such consultations. Mindful of the imperative need for
expeditious release of the data collected by the remote sensing aircraft by the end
users, the Committee hardly need to emphasize the urgency for efficient coordination

56
between the agencies concerned. The Committee would like to be apprised of the new
mechanism put in place to facilitate timely release of the data collected by the NRSC.
17. The Committee note with concern lack of effective and periodic co-ordination
in the implementation of projects of national importance under the National Natural
Resources Management System. Projects such as planning of irrigation schemes;
mapping of wasteland to enable reclamation and rehabilitation thereof; and
identification of drinking water sources could not fructify well in time for want of
efficient and regular coordination. The Committee are particularly perturbed to note
that even in the face of extreme water stress all over the country, the DoS failed to
extend the much needed vital assistance in the implementation of the Rajiv Gandhi
National Drinking Water Mission, Further, notably, the various Standing Committees
under the NNRMS did not hold the regular meetings as mandated. The DoS needs to
review the mandate of these Committees as also the desirability of replacing by a
more efficient and reliable system and the Committee apprised.
18. The Committee are pained to note that the Village Resource Centre (VRC)
and Disaster Management Support Programme (DMSP) which are projects of national
importance directly implemented by NNRMS through DoS, could not achieve the
desired results. Audit review of performance of VRC coordinated by NRSC covering
the period from October, 2007 to August, 2008 revealed that targets for setting up
VRC nodes could not be met. DoS, on being questioned by the Committee submitted
that 473 VRC nodes have been set up in 22 States/UTs across the country. The
Committee expect the DoS to set up remaining VRC nodes at the earliest so that the
aim of making satellite based services directly accessible to rural population is fully
achieved. The Committee note that in DMSP, 92 per cent of the funds amounting to
Rs. 86.90 crore released to the NRSC as well as assets worth Rs. 7.80 crore remained
unutilized with the NRSC. The Committee seek explanation of the DoS for non-
utilisation of almost  the whole of the funds released for coping with floods, agricultural
drought, earthquake, landslides, forests fires, etc., The Committee also desire that
further release of funds for DMSP may be withheld until Utilisation Certificates for
the previous amounts released are submitted to the satisfaction of the DoS. Further,
taking note of the fact that the VRC and DMSP could not discharge their assigned
mandate due to non-availability of satellite communication bandwidth, the Committee
desire the Department to take appropriate steps to enhance their technological capacity
to meticulously tackle such problems so that such vital national projects are not
rendered dysfunctional.
19. The Committee are concerned to note that there were instances of relaxation
of terms of payment, short realization of revenue, etc., in the projects undertaken by
NRSC on behalf of ACL and other users. Audit review revealed that in four out of
seven such operational projects of Antrix Corporation Ltd. (ACL), chargeable
overheads were not levied resulting in undercosting of these projects by
Rs. 83.43 lakh and in two completed projects, NRSC did not raise demand for balance
dues of Rs. 1.85 crore from ACL. The Committee find, on further examination, that
no overheads were charged as no dues were apparently pending with ACL during the
implementation of the projects. Apparently, there is an urgent need for prior planning

57
and fixing of clear objectives of projects and also observing greater transparency in
the execution of projects according to canons of financial propriety. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that in future, the Department should not only avoid resorting
to such deviations in the costing policy but should also establish sound practices in
the management of their projects so as to obviate financial mismanagement.
20. The Committee further note that in operational projects for various users
other than ACL, there were shortcomings such as delays in completion of projects,
outstanding dues, wasteful expenditure, blocking of funds, undercosting of projects
and undertaking of projects without MoU rendering recovery of dues difficult. The
Committee find that the reasons attributed for delays in many of these projects includes
inter-alia non-receipt of scheduled payments from users, installation of new technology,
time taken for security vetting, unfavourable weather conditions, naxal problems
creating difficulties in ground survey, subsequent change in user specifications,
logistics challenges and also time taken for getting necessary imputs from the project
sponsoring agencies. The Committee were assured that various mechanisms are
being put in place in NRSC to expedite the process of completion of projects and
minimise delays in carrying out operational projects such as conduct of regular
monthly project progress review meetings, holding of extensive discussions and
signing of MoU with project sponsoring agencies to bring about standardization of
uniform costing methodology, review of costing policy, preparation of Product
Realisation Plan in the form of a Technical Manual, formation of a core team for
management of each project, etc. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
corrective action taken to fulfil the assurances given to them in each area of deficiency/
shortcoming.
21. The Committee note that the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS),
Dehradun, a unit of NRSC, is the focal point for long and short-term courses and
refresher courses for training in remote sensing and its main function is capacity
building through education at post-graduate level in the application of remote sensing
and geo-informatics for natural resource management. Taking cognizance of the
fact that capacity building is crucial in the endeavour towards optimum utilization of
remote sensing satellite applications, the Committee find the shortfall in the enrolment
in long term courses as well as lower percentage of private persons trained for
promoting sale of data products alarming. The DoS has enumerated various measures
such as issue of advertisements, deputations, interactive meetings, etc., to increase
enrolment in long-term courses. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
outcome of such measures to make good the shortfall in enrolment for various courses
and any further review taken to apply more innovative corrective measures.
22. The Committee are constrained to note that an amount to the tune of
Rs. 6.38 crore was awaiting adjustment as outstanding work centre dues. Though the
DoS reported subsequent adjustment of Rs. 0.71 crore, the Committee recommend
that the DoS scrupulously follow the financial instructions to adjust outstanding
advances paid to its work centres. The Committee, while acknowledging that certain

58
situations may demand instant supply of data for emergency applications without
payment of 100 per cent advance, desire that the Department's policy should also
recognise such exigencies and incorporate appropriate institutional mechanism for
a time bound recovery of outstanding dues.
23. The Committee take serious note of the fact that revenue earned by NRSC
varied between (+) 17 per cent to (-) 29.84 per cent against its estimation during
2003-09 indicating deficiencies in planning of its resources. The DoS has claimed
that all efforts are being made by them to expand the user base on a continuous basis
by providing varieties of services through newer means like ftp based data delivery,
quick turn-around-time from IMGEOS and BHUV AN portal for data visualisation and
services. Having regard to the dictum that increase in revenue is one of the most
significant markers of financial growth of any organization, the Committee wish to
impress upon the DoS not to undermine the importance of revenue generation but
initiate measures for self reliance in their financial operations. The Committee also
recommend that DoS/NRSC need to overhaul their management system to exercise
better monitoring and control over their financial activities.
24. The Committee are startled to note the absence of regular and effective
internal control and internal audit system in the NRSC. The Committee further find
that the DoS neither indicated the scope of internal audit nor were operational issues
covered in internal audit. The DoS has informed that restructuring of internal audit
wing (IAW) of DoS has been taken up and some changes in the existing procedures
have been envisaged such as dissolving of decentralised audit wing, establishing a
centralised internal audit wing at DoS, Bangalore, preparing an audit calendar for
the entire department covering all ISRO/DoS establishments, periodic training of
IAW personnel and Organization of entry and exit meetings at each of the centres
etc. The Committee desire that this restructuring of internal audit system of NRSC
be finalised and implemented expeditiously so that accounting, financial and
administrative matters in NRSC do not suffer from want of efficient and effective
internal control system and the Committee apprised.
25. To sum up, the Committee find that many significant deficiencies and
fundamental weaknesses have resulted in underutilization of remote sensing satellites
and their applications which have certainly stalled  timely achievements of important
national development goals with vital social objectives like food security, conversion
of wastelands into usable land, water security through drinking water missions,
environment security through disaster management support programmes, etc. The
Committee observe that these shortcomings would also definitely impinge upon the
nation's endeavour to be the frontrunner in remote sensing technologies, a promising
tool in the struggle for sustainable development. The Committee also recognize that
timely access to both archival and real time multispectral earth observation data
determines the level of emergency preparedness, disaster mitigation, early warning

59
vulnerability assessment, adaptive responses and humanitarian relief associated with
a wide array of disasters besides providing cost effective solutions to the natural
resources and protection problems.  The Committee, therefore, exhort the Department
of Space to take note of their considered suggestions/recommendations, as highlighted
in the preceding paragraphs to overcome the deficiencies that bedevil the effective
utilization of remote sensing technologies.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 August, 2012 Chairman,
6 Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-II OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 11TH JANUARY , 2012
The Sub-Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11th January, 2012 from 1130 hrs. to
1215 hrs. in Room No. '63', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. (Km.) Girija Vyas —       Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Jayant Sinha — Pr. Director (RC)
2. Ms. Geetali Tare — Pr. Director (SD)
Representatives of the Department of Space
1. Dr. K. Radhakrishnan — Secretary (DoS)
2. Dr. R.R. Navalgund — Director, SAC
3. Dr. V .K. Dadhwal — Director , NRSC
4. Shri A. Vijayanand — Joint Secretary
5. Shri V . Koteswara Rao — Scientific Secretary, ISRO
2. At the outset, the Convener welcomed the Member, and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The Audit Officers
then briefed the Convener on various issues concerning the subject 'Activities of
National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC)'.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Department of Space were called in.
Welcoming them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee, the Convener informed them that
the sitting had  been convened to take evidence of the representatives of the Department
of Space on various issues brought out in the C&AG Report on the activities of NRSC
60

61
which included underperformance of three (out of seven) remote sensing satellites,
negative operational returns, insufficient efforts of NRSC in customizing data products
and so on.
4. The Secretary and other Officers of the Department of Space first briefed the
Committee about the role and activities of NRSC and the various initiatives taken for
effective implementation of remote sensing. After that, the representatives of the
Department of Space responding to Audit Observations also responded to the queries
of the Members which included optimization of revenue through marketing of IRS
data, transparency in accounting and reasons for shortage of pilots. During the sitting,
an on-the-spot study visit to Hyderabad in first week of February, 2012 was proposed
for further examination of the subject.
5. The Convener thanked the representatives of the Department of Space for
deposing before the Sub-Committee and furnishing information in connection with the
examination of the subject. The Convener also thanked the Officers of the C&AG of
India for providing valuable assistance to the Sub-Committee in examination of the
subject.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee, then adjourned.

APPENDIX  II
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13) HELD ON 23RD AUGUST, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 23rd August, 2012 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Room No. '51', (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. Baliram
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Dr. Shashi Tharoor
9. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri Prakash Javadekar
12. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
13. Shri N.K. Singh
14. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
62

63
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
2. Ms. Geetali Tare — Pr. Director (Scientific
Departments)
2. *** *** ***
3. *** *** ***
4. The Committee then took-up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
(i)    Draft Report on 'Activities of National Remote Sensing Centre';
(ii)  *** *** ***
(iii)  *** *** ***
(iv)  *** *** ***
5. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the Draft, Reports and authorized
the Chairman to finalise the four  Reports adopted by them, in light of their suggestions
and the factual verifications received from the Audit and present the same to the
House on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports and Selection of additional subjects.
The Committee, then adjourned.
***Matters not related with this report.
GMGIPMRND—2720LS—1-11-2012.