67
(I) CONSTRUCTION OF NEW LINES ON
SOCIO-ECONOMIC CONSIDERATION
(II) EXCESSIVE DELAYS IN MAINTENANCE
OF LOCOMOTIVE
(III)FUNCTIONING OF RAIL VIKAS NIGAM
LIMITED
MINISTRY  OF  RAILWAYS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2012-2013
SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
(I)    Construction of New lines on Socio-Economic Consideration
(II)   Excessive Delays in Maintenance of locomotive
(III)  Functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
Prsented to Hon’ble Speaker on 16 January, 2013
Presented to Lok Sabha on ..............................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ..............................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
January, 2013/Pausa, 1934 (Saka)

PAC No. 1994
Price:  ` 45.00
© 2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13)............................................................ (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12)........................................................... (iv)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE – IV OF
THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12).......... (vii)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE – II OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13).................... (ix)
INTRODUCTION...................................................................... (xi)
REPORT
CHAPTER I CONSTRUCTION OF NEW LINES ON SOCIO-ECONOMIC
CONSIDERATION.
I. Introductory .............................................................. 1
II. Audit Review ............................................................ 1
III. Planning for Execution.............................................. 1
(i) Non-fixation of target dates for completion of  the
projects .............................................................. 1
(ii) Non-shelving of projects with nil progress or little
progress ............................................................. 3
IV . Financial management............................................... 4
(i) Non- availability of  Project Schedules ............... 4
(ii) Allotment of Funds and utilization .................... 5
(iii) Non-prioritization of Projects for Early Completion 5
V. Execution ................................................................... 6
(i) Delay in Execution of Projects ........................... 6
(ii) Contract Management ....................................... 6
(iii) Sharing of Cost by State Government................ 7
Observations/Recommendations ....................... 8
CHAPTER II EXCESSIVE DELAYS IN MAINTENANCE OF LOCOMOTIVE
I. Introductory .............................................................. 12
II. Audit Review ............................................................ 12
III. Delay in Maintenance ............................................... 12
IV . Bunching and overutilization of locos ...................... 14

V. Detention    of    locos   and  availability  of   spare   parts
        Observations/Recommendations ..................................... 14-16
CHAPTER III FUNCTIONING OF RAIL VIKAS NIGAM LIMITED
I. Introductory ..................................................................... 18
II. Planning process of RVNL ............................................... 18
III. Project Management ........................................................ 20
(i) Project execution of Golden Quadrilateral and port
connectivity .............................................................. 20
(ii) Execution of projects through SPVs ......................... 21
IV . Funding of projects .......................................................... 22
V. Handing   over  of   completed   projects    Observations/
Recommendations............................................................ 24-25
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the First Sitting of Sub-Committee – IV (Railways) of
the Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) held on 21st February,
2012. .......................................................................................................
II. Minutes of the First Sitting of Sub-Committee – II (Railways) of
the Public Accounts Committee (2012-13) held on 24th
September, 2012. ..............................................................................
III. Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2012-13) held on 28th December, 2012. ..........................................
  27
  29
  31
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
 7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
 14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
   16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
   17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
   18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
   19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
   20. Shri J.D. Seelam
   21. Shri N.K. Singh
   22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as
Minister on 28th October, 2012.
† Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(iii)

SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
3. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
(iv)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
  3. Dr. Baliram
  4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
  5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
  6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
  7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
  8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
  9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija Vyas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1.  Shri Devender Singh—Joint Secretary
2.  Shri H.R. Kamboj—Additional Director
3.  Shri A.K. Yadav—Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan
appointed Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
(v)

COMPOSITION OF  SUB-COMMITTEE-IV (RAILW AYS) OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12)
Shri Anant Kumar Hegde     —     Convenor
Lok Sabha
  2. Shri Jagdambika Pal
Rajya  Sabha
  3. Dr. Prasanta Chatterjee
  4. Shri J.D. Seelam
  5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
(vii)

COMPOSITION OF  SUB-COMMITTEE-II (RAILW AYS) OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)
Shri Anant Kumar Hegde     —     Convenor
Lok Sabha
     2.  Dr. Baliram
     3.  Shri Ashok Tanwar
    *4.  Vacant
Rajya  Sabha
     5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
* V acancy occurred vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister of State w.e.f. 28th
October, 2012.
(ix)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Sixty-seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘(i) Construction of New Lines on Socio-Economic Consideration;  (ii) Excessive Delays
in Maintenance of Locomotive; and (iii) Functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited' based
on Para Nos. 3.1, 4.1 and 7.2 of C&AG Report No. 34 of 2010-11 Union Government –
Railways relating to the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2010 was laid on the Table of the House on 5th August, 2011.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) took up the subjects for detailed
examination and report.  A Sub-Committee was constituted for the purpose.  The
Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) on the subjects at their sitting held on 21 February, 2012.  As the
subjects examination remained inconclusive, the Sub-Committee of Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) took further evidence of the Ministry on 24 September, 2012.
The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 28th
December, 2012. The Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.
4 . For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
5. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for taking oral evidence of the
Ministry and obtaining information on the subjects as well as finalizing and placing
the Draft Report before the main Committee.
6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for tendering evidence before the
Sub-Committee and furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection
with the examination of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR  JOSHI
28 December, 2012 Chairman,
7 Pausa, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(xi)

CHAPTER I
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW LINES ON SOCIO-ECONOMIC CONSIDERATION
I.  INTRODUCTORY
Railways take up projects for construction of new lines at regular intervals on
socio-economic grounds to provide rail connectivity to backward and remote areas of
the country.  These socially desirable projects though financially unviable and involving
a huge outlay of expenditure has been in a state of  incompleteness since many
decades.  While Railways undertook projects of expansion keeping in mind the financial
viability and their operational requirements, socio-economic development needs of
the backward regions also played a major role from time to time in the initiation of a
large number of new lines for providing rail connectivity, though these were non-
viable. In the Vision,    2020 document presented to Parliament, the Ministry of  Railways
(Railway Board) had stated that there was a huge shelf of 109 ongoing “New Line
Projects’ covering a route length of `11,985 kms. out of which only 12 were financially
viable, 8 were National Projects with assured funding, the remaining (97) being non-
viable but sanctioned on socio-economic grounds.
II.  AUDIT REVIEW
1.2 Audit reviewed those new lines that were sanctioned on considerations of
socio-economic development more than ten years ago (excluding national projects)
but were lying incomplete to evaluate their progress and constraints in implementation.
Audit examination of 50 on-going works of new lines sanctioned on socio-economic
development of backward regions revealed that five sanctioned more than 20 years
ago, nine sanctioned between 15 and 20 years; and 36 sanctioned between 10 and 15
years ago were still lying incomplete as on 31 March, 2010.  Railways have already
incurred   ` 8,549 crore on the 50 new lines projects and the balance funds required to
complete these projects were to the extent of  `16,800 crore.
1.3 The comments of the Audit are contained in the C&AG's Report No. 34 of
2010-11 (Paragraph 3.1) for the year ended March, 2010.
III.  PLANNING FOR EXECUTION
(i) Non-fixation of target dates for completion of the projects
1.4 Audit scrutiny of 50 new lines sanctioned on consideration of socio-economic
development taken up more than ten years ago, revealed that no target date for
completion was available in 36 projects out of 50.  There was huge delay in
commencement of preliminary works such as preparation of detailed estimates,
commencement of land acquisition process etc. Since all the projects reviewed were
justified for providing rail connectivity to the under developed/backward areas,
non-completing them for decades has not only derailed the objective of sanctioning
them but also resulted in blockage of huge funds that would have been utilized elsewhere.
1

2
1.5 The Sub-Committee desired to know whether sanctioning of projects on
consideration of socio-economic development of under developed/backward area and
not completing them for decades together serve any purpose.  The Ministry in their
reply stated that Railway network plays vital role for socio-economic development of
any area and to bring backward areas in development fold, projects are sanctioned on
socio-economic criteria besides financial criteria.  During 2010-11, Railway completed
709 km of new lines which is almost four times of annual average since independence
and almost double of all time yearly achievement.  During 2011-12, target of 1075 km
new lines have been fixed and Vision document of Railway envisages completion of
3000 km every year commencing 2012 to 2020.
1.6 Explaining the status of socio-economic projects and their execution, the
representative of the Ministry during evidence deposed as under:
"the total number of new line projects with Indian Railways is 129.  Out of this,
there are only 13 projects where the rate of return is more than 14 per cent which
is considered to be an economical and viable rate of return. Other 116 projects
have rate of return lower than 14 per cent and they are not financially fully viable.
The total length of the projects is 14,000 kilometres, out of which only about
1,600 kilometres are financially viable and 12,400 kilometres are projects which
have been taken up on socio-economic consideration and the throw forward of
the projects taken on socio-economic consideration is about ` 66,000 crore as
on 1.4.2011".
1.7 The witness further stated:
"The projects have not progressed as we would have liked them to because —
the projects are too many whereas the funds allotted are very limited; delay in
land acquisition; the law and order situation in the state and the forestry clearance
which takes maximum time because there are multi stage clearance".
1.8 The Sub-Committee enquired the reasons for non-fixation of the target dates
for completion of the projects and whether this imply that the Railways has no intention
of completing them within specific time-bound manner.  The Ministry in their reply
stated as under :
"Railways have huge throw forward of ongoing projects with limited availability
of resources, as a result resources are thinly spread.  Targets are therefore, fixed
annually depending upon availability of resources and progress made on different
projects.  To augment resources, Railway has requested State Govts., and other
beneficiaries to come forward and share cost of projects.  At present, 31 projects
covering a length of almost 5000 km have been taken up on cost sharing basis."
1.9 The Sub-Committee was informed during evidence that the Railways have
gained success because six States have come forward in 31 projects out of 129 projects
as mentioned earlier.
1.10 When enquired about allocation of huge outlay of  ` 8549 crore (till 31.3.2010)
on construction of new lines without fulfilling the objective of development of backward
area by providing rail connectivity, the Ministry in their reply, stated that Railways is

3
presently executing 129 new line projects covering a length of 14094 km at a cost of
`100407 crore.  Throw forward of ongoing new line projects as on 01.04.2011 is ` 72151
crore.  Unless, outlay for new line projects is enhanced, it may not be possible to
complete projects in reasonable time.
1.11 As large funds are being spent on various projects, the Sub-Committee was
keen to know whether any concrete plan for gainful utilization of the huge expenditure
already incurred on construction activities in these projects have been prepared and
the target date by which they would be completed. The Ministry replied as follows :
"To ensure gainful utilization of huge expenditure on projects, most of the projects
are further divided in various phases and as soon as one phase is completed, it
is opened for movement of traffic so as revenue generation can commence at the
earliest.  New line projects are funded by Planning Commission/M/o Finance in
the form of ‘Gross Budgetary Support’.  Railway is constantly following up for
substantial enhancement of gross budgetary support.  Unless adequate funds
for projects execution are not available, it may not be possible to fix up target
date of completion of all projects."
1.12 Audit observed that there was not only delay of two to fifteen years in
preparation of detailed estimates by the Zonal Railways but also delay of up to ten
years for formal sanction thereof at the Railway Board’s level. Immediate action to
initiate the process for land acquisition was not taken as result of which in twelve
projects either no land was acquired or the land acquired was less than 25 per cent of
the actual requirement.
1.13 When the Sub-Committee enquired about the reasons for unusual delay in
preparation and sanction of the detailed estimates, the Ministry in its reply stated  that
once the project is sanctioned, Final Location Survey is carried out wherein alignment
is marked in field and quantities of various items assessed and geological investigation
etc. carried out. Detailed estimates is then prepared in a reasonable time as per input
from Final Location Survey. In some of the projects estimate get held up due to resistance
on alignment and demand for change of alignment. Alignment has also got held up for
want of environmental clearance in number of projects.
(ii) Non-shelving of projects with nil progress or little progress
1.14 Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) in their 61st Report had
recommended reviewing all the ongoing projects that had been undertaken on socio-
economic considerations. The Committee had suggested that Railway should continue
only those projects which were substantially complete and shelve the rest.
1.15 Audit observed that no work had been carried out in five projects and the
progress of work in another four was less than ten per cent even after their sanction
more than a decade ago.  Railway had not agreed to shelve them for the time being to
avoid thin spreading of funds on the ground that shelving of projects taken up on the
demand and aspirations of the local people would have wider ramifications and invite
public criticism. The Public Accounts Committee in their Fourth Report
(15th Lok Sabha) had, however, observed that non-completion of the projects within a

4
fixed time-frame would invite greater criticism as the purpose of providing connectivity
to undeveloped area got defeated.  It was, therefore, stressed upon the Railways to
review all the projects and make a fair assessment of continuing or shelving the same.
1.16 On being asked to give the reasons for non-shelving of the projects where
either the work had not commenced or the progress of work was inordinately slow and
not likely to be completed in another 10 to 25 years,  the Ministry stated that  Shelving
of projects would mean that projects are no longer required for socio-economic
development of project areas. Railways consider that these projects are essential for
socio-economic development of areas and is progressing execution of projects as per
availability of resources.  Efforts are also being made to generate fund from other than
budgetary sources.
1.17 Responding to the suggestion of the Sub-Committee to involve private
parties in the projects of Railways, the representative of the Ministry during evidence
stated:
"Yes, we will do that and a policy is being framed which has been sent to cabinet.
One problem in Railway is that we built here but operation is also by the Railways.
Therefore, classical approach of BOT cannot work here.  Now the schemes are
being framed based on which private parties will be invited.  Unless the investment
is attractive, private parties will not come.  Two three new schemes we are
sending for approval of cabinet.  It is expected that private parties will take
interest."
1.18 The Sub-Committee asked whether the Ministry of Railways intend to
continue with all the projects, and whether action plan for early completion of all the
projects has been prepared.  In their reply, the Ministry stated as under:
"Yes, Railways intend to continue all the projects. Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance are being continuously followed up for enhancement of
gross budgetary support for execution of projects. In addition, resource are also
being generated by sharing a cost of projects with State Govt. and other
beneficiaries. Cost of 31 projects are being shared by State Govts., 4 projects
have been taken up on SPV and cost of 3 projects is being shared by Industry."
IV .  FINANCIAL   MANAGEMENT
(i) Non-availability of Project Schedules
1.19 In November 2007, Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) had submitted to
the Public Accounts Committee that the system of allotment of funds to the various
projects including new lines had been rationalized in March 2005 by prioritizing them
into four categories.  Audit noticed that while the projects in category - I were proposed
to be completed within next 2-3 years, no time schedule for completion of projects
placed in category III and IV projects was given.  Therefore, PAC had recommended
that the dates of completion in respect of projects placed in category III and IV shared
also be specified.
1.20 When asked to state the reasons of not indicating the time schedule for
completion of all the projects, the Ministry stated that due to paucity of funds, it is not

5
possible to fix time schedule for all projects. Targets are fixed every year depending
upon availability of resources and progress achieved on individual project.
1.21 When the Sub-Committee enquired whether the Railway Ministry prepare
list giving priority to some projects for grant of more funds,  the representative of the
Ministry during evidence stated as under :
"that they do prioritization every year and allot more money to only those projects
which are likely to be completed in that year.  Funds are allocated to other
projects depending on their progress".
1.22 Asked to state whether these projects were initiated without being serious
about providing connectivity to under developed/backward areas, the Ministry stated
that new line projects are taken up as enunciated by National Transport Policy 1980.
Projects are also taken up on socio-economic considerations. Out of 129 new line
projects, only 14 projects qualify stipulated 14% Rate of Return and other projects
have been taken up considering socio-economic benefits beside financial viability.
(ii)  Allotment of Funds and Utilization
1.23 Audit scrutiny revealed that allotment of funds to these projects was not
assessed on realistic basis. As a result, while some projects suffered for want of
sufficient funds, others had not utilized the allotted funds and there was huge surrender
at the end of year. It was also noticed that Railway Board continued to allot funds even
to those projects which had been transferred to Rail Vikas Nigam Limited resulting in
the funds remaining unutilized.
1.24 The Sub-Committee was keen to know about criterion adopted by the Railway
Board to provide funds at the beginning and through supplementary grants and how
funds which were allotted to a project and not likely to be utilized and surrendered
during the year.  The Ministry in their reply stated that funds are provided at the
beginning of year considering target fixed for the year and availability of resources.
Funds through Supplementary Grants are normally re-appropriation of funds from
projects where due to non-availability of clearances, land etc. allotted fund cannot be
utilized.   No surrender of fund is being done by Railways.
(iii)  Non-prioritisation of Projects for Early Completion
1.25 Railway had undertaken a large number of new lines and gauge conversion
projects without specifying the completion dates and ensuring availability of funds.
The PAC in their 61st Report (14th Lok Sabha) had observed that Ministry of Railways
should distinctly enunciate the core objectives of the projects, frame clear project
schedule at the initial stage to determine the completion dates, categorise all the
pending projects and complete the same within a definite time line.  Railway Board
while noting the observations of the Committee had stated that they had requested the
State Governments to share 50 per cent cost of such projects but the response was not
encouraging.  Audit scrutiny of the records relating to 41 new line projects (excluding
9 projects of East Central Railway) revealed that project specific investment schedules
had not been framed and the pattern of funds allotment was not indicative of any clear
target for completion of these projects.

6
1.26 The Sub-Committee desired to know whether there is any system of furnishing
project specific investment schedules at the time of preparation and sanctioning of
detailed estimates of the works.  The Ministry in their reply stated that no such execution
schedule is prepared at the time of sanctioning of detailed estimates.
1.27 About the action being taken by the Ministry to streamline the system of
allotment of funds so that the scare resources available are made best use of, the
Ministry stated that there is no proposal to formulate fund allotment which is done
considering targets fixed for the year, availability of resources and progress made on
individual project.
1.28 The Sub-Committee was also informed that the Ministry of Railway had not
made any independent assessment about the time required for completion of all those
projects which were incomplete for more than ten years.
V .  EXECUTION
(i)  Delay in Execution of Projects
1.29 Railway Board in 1980 had issued instructions that no work should be
awarded without ensuring that the clear site, approved plans and drawings were
available for handing over to the contractor.  These instructions were reiterated by
Railway Board in 2006.  Execution of works included in the detailed estimate of a
project should correspond to a logical project schedule as any imbalance in this regard
affects the progress of the project besides non-achievement of contemplated objectives.
In case the work is to be carried out through the agency of contracts, the tendering
process should commence immediately and tender should be finalized within a period
of three months from the date of opening.  Audit scrutiny revealed that tenders in
12 projects were called between one month and 10 years after the sanction of detailed
estimates.  Further, in 21 new line projects, 198 contracts were awarded without
availability of clear site.  The site were made over to the contractor after delay of
2 months to 60 months.  Similarly in 76 contracts of 20 projects, approved drawings
were made available to contractors after delay between 3 months to 8 years. 32 contracts
were terminated as the work could not be commenced or the progress was unsatisfactory.
These delays resulted in increase in the project cost on account of time overrun.  Also
non-completion of partly completed sections of project resulted in commissioning of
only 7 out of 50 partially completed sections.
(ii) Contract Management
1.30 Audit reviewed the position of 1,399 contracts awarded in respect of
38 projects.  Only 109 contracts were completed within the stipulated period of
completion.  In 891 contracts delay was between one and 84 months.  As a result of
long delays/slow progress, 60 contracts were foreclosed without any liability on either
side.
1.31 As per General condition of contract, if a contractor fails to complete the
work in time or to the satisfaction of the Railway, his contract may be terminated and
the Railway reserved the right to execute the balance work at the risk and cost of the
defaulting contractor.  Audit scrutiny of the contracts revealed that 60 contracts were
foreclosed by the Railways due to their not availability of site or drawings.  Out of

7
those 51 contracts were re-awarded.  On the other side 114 contracts were terminated
at the risk and cost of defaulting contractors.  However, risk and cost charges of
`116.45 crore were not recovered due to failure in timely notices or pursue the matter.
(iii) Sharing of Cost by State Government
1.32 In respect of the following new line projects, the respective State
Governments had initially agreed to provide non-forest Government land free of cost,
bear the cost of forestation of area equivalent of forest area to be given to Railway and
also to bear the cost of earthwork to some extent.
S.No. Name of the Project Commitment made Expenditure incurred by
Railway
1. Khurda Road – In 1993 – the CM of Railway incurred an
Bolangir Rail Orissa  had agreed to expenditure  of `12.50 crore
link Project provide non-forest on earth work, payment of
Government      land, cost of Government land
forestation   of    land and  expenditure on
equal to forest land forestation of land.
given to Railway and
provide  `15 crore for
earthwork.
2. Howrah-Amta As per MOU signed Railway took almost
including Bargachia— between Government 30 years to commence work
Champadanga of W est Bengal and the branch line Bargachia –
Railway, the land for Champadanga (32 kms) and
the project was to be due to incre ase in cost of
provided free. land, the State Government
expressed its inability of
provide land free of cost.
Railway had to incur an
expenditure of `67 crore.
3. Gadwal –Raichu In 1998, the then CM Railway did not pursue the
 new line of  Andhara  Pradesh case with the State
had  committed  to Government and deposited
provide the land falling the cost of land ( ` 5.43 crore).
in the State of AP free
to Railway.
However, Railway Administration’s failure to actively pursue the matter with the
State Governments as well as delay in commencement of works in some sections, the
State Governments had not fulfilled their commitments and ultimately Railways were
forced to bear all the cost.
1.33 When enquired about the reasons for not pursuing the matter with the State
Governments to fulfill the commitments made by them at the time of making proposals

8
for construction of new lines,  the Ministry in their written reply stated that State
Government are being continuously pursued for issues requiring their assistance in
project execution. These are basically early land acquisition, forestry and other
clearances and providing adequate security at work sites to have conducive environment
for project execution. State Government are also being requested to come forward and
share cost of projects so as to complete them in reasonable time.
1.34 On being asked to state as to why the Railways could not take up the issue
of provision of land free of cost immediately at the time of commitment made by the
respective State Government, the Ministry stated that :
"Railway had requested State Government to come forward and share cost of
projects. Different State Government have come forward with proposal of different
sharing pattern.  Recently, State Government have come forward to bear entire
cost of land besides sharing 50% cost of construction.  Railways have sanctioned
5 new line projects in 2011-12 on this commitment. It may not be possible to
insist State Government for ongoing projects to agree to provide land free of
cost".
1.35 When Sub-Committee asked about other cases, where the State Governments
had backed out of the commitments made by them and why the Railways could not
pursue the matter effectively, the Ministry stated as under:
"Kichha-Khatima (57 Km) new line was sanctioned in 2003-04 with commitment
of free land by State Government Despite repeated follow up, the State
Government could not provide land and Chief Minister, Uttarakhand has
requested Minister of Railways to bear entire cost of land which is now estimated
as `200 Cr.  Request of State Government has not been agreed and project is
presently on hold".
1.36 The Sub-Committee was further informed that the Railway is not continuing
with the project where State Government has backed out from their commitment and
project is still in planning stage.
Observations/Recommendations
1.37 The Committee note that many new line projects are taken up by Indian
Railways on the demand of the people’s representatives on socio-economic
considerations to provide rail connectivity to backward and remote areas of the country.
Although financially unviable, still in view of their tangible benefits to the society,
these projects are considered for construction.  In the Vision-2020 document
presented to Parliament, the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) stated that there
was huge shelf of 109 on-going ‘New Line Projects’ covering a route length of
11985 kms. out of which only 12 were financially viable, 8 were national projects with
assured funding and the remaining 97 projects being non-viable but sanctioned on
socio-economic grounds.   Audit examination of 50 on-going works of new lines
sanctioned on socio-economic considerations revealed that five projects sanctioned
more than 20 years ago, nine sanctioned between 15 and 20 years and 36 sanctioned
between 10 and 15 years ago were lying incomplete as on 31 March, 2010 despite
Railways having incurred expenditure of ` 8549cr.  Some of the major deficiencies
pointed out by Audit are delay in preparation of detailed estimates and land acquisition,

9
lack of coordination with State Governments/Ministry  Environment Forest for
environment clearance, law and order problems, militancy, insurgency etc. and
contractual failures.  Acknowledging that these projects have not progressed  well,
the representatives of the Ministry conceded that resource crunch, delay in land
acquisition, delay in environment clearances were some of the major constraints for
non-completion of these projects.
1.38 The Committee note with concern that preliminary works required for
successful execution of projects sanctioned on consideration of socio-economic
development of the backward regions were inordinately delayed.  In 36 projects, no
target date for completion was set and in 14 projects there was time overrun.  There
was delay of two to fifteen years in preparation of detailed estimates and formal
sanction thereof.  Further, there was considerable delay in acquisition of land.  In
34 projects, the process for land acquisition remained incomplete despite elapse of
more than ten years due to which construction could not commence.  The reasons for
non- acquisition of land were protests by land owners, non-clearances by the State
Governments for handing over forest lands etc. The Ministry have attributed the
delay in preparation and sanction of the detailed estimates due to change in the Final
Location Survey wherein alignment is marked in field and for want of environmental
clearance in a number of projects.  The Committee also observe that these projects
continue to remain in a state of uncertainty for want of sufficient funds.  The
Committee, therefore, recommend that adequate funds should be allocated for these
projects so that they do not remain incomplete for years together.  Since many projects
suffer due to non-availability of land, the Committee desire that before approval of a
new line project, the availability of land should be ensured.  The State Governments,
on their part, should accord top priority in acquiring land for such projects in view of
the long term socio-economic returns.  The Committee also desire the Railways to
prioritise the projects on 'Socio Economic Cost-benefit calculation' with proper
consultation with concerned State Governments.
1.39 The Committee find that work was not taken up in five projects which were
sanctioned in 1997-98 to 2000-01.  Further, in four projects the physical progress
was less than ten percent.  Still, Railways intend to continue all the projects with a
request to the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for enhancement of
gross budgetary support for execution of projects.  In their 61
st Report, the Public
Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) had recommended that Ministry of Railways,
Finance and Planning should not only lay down criteria for taking up various Railway
projects but also review all the on-going projects that were taken up on socio-economic
considerations.  The Ministry in their Action Taken Note stated that the new projects
were taken up based on the demands and aspirations of local people and therefore
shelving such projects would have wider ramifications and invite public criticism.
The Committee in its Fourth Report (15th Lok Sabha) had observed that while the
Railways were not prepared to shelve projects which were yet to take off, on the other
hand the State Governments were not prepared to share the cost.  Therefore, the
Committee had recommended that the projects taken up on socio-economic
considerations should be reviewed so that a fair assessment of continuing or shelving
such projects was made.  The Committee feel that unless the concerned State
Governments agree to share the cost and provide land free of cost, Railway may
revisit the proposed construction of such projects and also evolve a sound national
policy in this behalf.

10
1.40 The Committee note that the Railways are considering investment of
private parties (PPP mode) for construction of projects.  The Committee were further
informed that a policy is being framed for placing before the Cabinet and that two/
three projects would be taken up on pilot basis. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the policy initiatives taken by the Ministry to involve private parties in
the projects of Railways.
1.41 For successful implementation of the programme, the investment proposal
is accompanied by a detailed plan showing scheduling of the project and financial
outlay.  The Committee note that in all the new line projects which were reviewed by
Audit, scheduling was not done and funds were sparsely allotted without prioritization
which resulted in projects lingering on for years together.  Asked to show justification,
the Ministry submitted that they do prioritization every year and allot more funds to
only those projects which are likely to be completed in that year. The Committee also
observe that Railways have not made a proper assessment of funds requirement as a
result thereof while some projects suffered for want of sufficient funds in some cases
allotted funds remained unutilized.  Another problems area identified by the Committee
during examination of the subject was that Railways had undertaken large number of
new line and gauge conversion projects without specifying the completion dates and
ensuring availability of funds.  The Ministry informed the Committee that there is no
proposal to formulate fund allotment which is done considering targets fixed for the
year, availability of resources and progress made on individual project.  The Committee
in its successive reports have been emphasizing upon the Ministry to distinctly
enunciate the core objectives of the projects, prepare clear project schedules at the
initial stages, allocate sufficient funds, categorize all the pending projects and complete
the same within given timelines.  Sadly, the Railways have miserably belied that
expectations.  The Committee therefore reiterate that Railways should prepare
investment schedules of all on-going projects, provide sufficient funds consistent
with the completion dates and prioritize for early completion of the projects while
attaching due consideration and weightage to the projects linking remote and far
flung areas of the country.
1.42 The Committee deplore the delay in commencement of works and
finalization of tenders.  Tenders in 12 projects were called between one month and
10 years after sanction of detailed estimates.  Further, in 21 new lines projects,
198 contracts were awarded without availability of clear site which was handed over to
the contractor after a delay of two months to five years. Similarly, 76 contracts of
20 projects, the approved drawings were made available to the contractor after the
delay of three months to eight years.  Further, 32 contracts were terminated as the
work could not commence or the progress was unsatisfactory.  The delay resulted in
cost as well as time overrun.  For execution of any project, it is imperative that the
required formalities connected therewith viz. site availability, approval of plans/
drawings, allocation of funds and finalization of agency should be completed within
definite timelines.  Any slippages in this regard would invariably lead to time and cost
overrun.   The Committee desire that a proper monitoring mechanism should be put
in place to see that the timelines for completion of the project, within the prescribed
period, are strictly followed to avoid cost and time overrun.

11
1.43 The Committee note that in many projects, the respective State
Governments agreed to provide non-forest government land free of cost, bear the cost
of forestation of area equivalent of forest area to be given to Railway and bear the cost
of earth work to some extent.  However, subsequently, neither the State Governments
fulfilled their commitments nor Railways pursued these issues with them.  These
projects are Khurda road-Bolangir rail link; Hawrah-Amta including Bargachia-
Champadanga and Gadwal-Raichur new line.  The Ministry informed the Committee
that the State Governments are continuously pursued for issues requiring their
assistance in project execution and projects-costs sharing so as to complete them
within a reasonable time.  Since the Railways, as part of their social responsibility,
had agreed to provide rail connectivity, the Committee feel that the Railways should
make earnest endeavours to ensure fructification of these projects.  The Committee
also recommend that projects taken up at the instance of the State Governments
should be actively pursued by Railways with the respective State Governments for
provision of requisite resources.

CHAPTER  II
EXCESSIVE  DELAYS  IN  MAINTENANCE OF LOCOMOTIVE
I. INTRODUCTORY
2.1Locomotives were a valuable revenue-earning asset of the Railways, being
responsible for haulage of train services.  To ensure maximum availability and optimum
utilization of the loco fleet, scheduled preventive maintenance was carried out at
specified intervals. The maintenance of Diesel locos of North Western Railway was
carried out by Diesel shed located at Abu Road (ABR) and Bhagat Ki Kothi (BGKT).
Audit noticed that these sheds did not carry out the maintenance schedules in prescribed
time which resulted in excessive detention to locos. The comments of the audit are
contained in Paragraph 4.1 of the C&AG, Report No. 34 of 2010-11 for the year ended
March, 2010.
II.  AUDIT  REVIEW
2.2 According to audit, review of records of scheduled maintenance carried out
by these sheds during the period 2008-09 to 2009-10 revealed that Abu Road diesel
shed carried out 2260 maintenance schedules, out of which 2240 maintenance schedules
(99 per cent) were not carried out within the prescribed time.  Similarly Bhagat Ki Kothi
diesel shed carried out 3022 maintenance schedules, out of which 2676 maintenance
schedules (89 per cent) were not carried out within the prescribed time.
III.   DELAY  IN  MAINTENANCE
2.3 On being asked to state as to why this trend was allowed to continue over the
period of time with no corrective action taken from the controlling officer, the Ministry
in a written note submitted as under :—
"The Audit’s contention that the maintenance schedules were not carried out in
the Diesel Sheds in the prescribed time is based on the observation of the time
taken for each loco from shed in to shed out. In this connection, it is stated that
the prescribed timings as indicated in the Audit Report viz. trip schedule in
5 hrs., monthly schedule in 8 hrs., quarterly schedule in 16 hrs. half-yearly schedule
in four days and yearly schedule in 16 days and as taken from the Operating
Manual are basically an indication of the time taken for maintenance for the
above schedules and do not include the various other factors such as waiting
period of the loco after shed in and before start of maintenance activity.
* * *
The time taken by the locomotive from shed in to shed out is different than the time
taken by the locomotive in maintenance during various schedules.  In view of the
above, it is considered that it is not correct to conclude that the maintenance time
taken was more based on the time taken by the locomotive from shed in to shed out."
12

13
2.4 In the above context, the representative of the Ministry during evidence
stated as under:—
"….. this issue has come up in the audit report and very rightly so as to why time
taken for schedule increases and other things, the basic thing is that diesel
locomotives when they enter a shed, they do not come in a regular periodicity,
sometimes four or five will enter the shed literally at the same time, then there
may be a gap for a couple of hours….  We are concentrating on is that effectively
we have more locomotives on line and that is what we have achieved success-
fully and this particular study helped us to do that over the last four or five
years."
2.5 When Sub-Committee enquired about the reasons for not carrying out the
maintenance schedules required as per norms and the circumstances leading to abnormal
extra time taken in repairs to locos, the Ministry stated that any maintenance activity of
rolling stock or for that purpose any other asset will depend upon the extent of repairs
involved in addition  to various other factors of adequate trained staff availability,
availability of stores and other tools, availability of facilities in the shed etc.  Timings
indicated for carrying out various schedules are to be used for planning of other
requirements and creation of facilities.  Concluding that more time was taken in the
maintenance on the basis of shed in to shed out timings will not be a correct appreciation
of the case.
2.6 During evidence the Sub-Committee was informed that locos must broadly
come back well in time but we allow the overlap of this 10 to 15% deliberately so that
operations move smoothly and without any problem.
2.7 When the Sub-Committee pointed out that Audit has observed that 89%
maintenance schedules were not carried out within the prescribed time, the Chairman,
Railway Board during evidence stated as under:—
"If it is 89 per cent then the outage will never be as per the target."
2.8 About the steps taken to overcome this problem, the Ministry replied as
under : —
"It is a regular and constant activity at the level of management to keep on
making improvements in the maintenance of locomotives which also reduce the
total maintenance time of the locomotives. In this regard, the following major
steps have been taken at the level of Ministry of Railways which has improved
the availability of locomotives by way of extending the various schedules
periodicity such as POH from 72 to 96 months, IOH from 36 to 48 months,  yearly
from 18 to 24 months, half-yearly from 09 to 12 months etc.:—
• Microprocessor Based Control System (MBCS).
• Microprocessor Based Governor (MCBG).
• AC version Crank shaft Exhauster Motor, Fuel booster pump motor & Dirt
Exhaust blower Motor.

14
•  Upgraded Air Compressor.
• Improved TPU gear case seal.
• Vigilance Control Device.
• Sealed conduits for control cables."
IV.  BUNCHING  AND OVERUTILIZATION  OF  LOCOS
2.9 The Ministry of Railways admitted that there was scope for improvement in
detention of locos by avoiding bunching of locos, over utilisation of locos etc.  However,
Ministry contended that extra time was taken when locomotives required additional
repairs and major sub-assemblies were required to be arranged from Diesel Locomotives
Works (DLW) and Diesel Maintenance Works (DMW).
2.10  About the steps taken to avoid bunching of locos for overhauling, the
Ministry informed that bunching of locomotives for overhauling as well as for other
schedules is a phenomenon which cannot be totally avoided because of the varying
traffic requirements on day to day basis, the need and priority of traffic movements for
transportation of essential goods, military movements, VIP movements etc. Receipt of
two or more new locomotives in the same month will also lead to bunching of locos for
overhauling and other schedules. However, the following measures help in simultaneous
easing out of the bunching of the locos for their schedules:—
• Pre-poning of some of the schedules.
• Postponing of schedules in some locos.
• Transfer of locomotives from one to other Shed."
2.11 When asked to state the reasons for over-utilization of locos the Ministry
stated that over-utilization of locos beyond schedules depends upon the urgency or
requirements of locomotives for operations.  Since freight movement is erratic in nature
depending upon factors such as seasonal traffic, diversions etc., utilization of
locomotives is done by the Operating Department accordingly.  In the overall interest
of the Railways, completely banning over-utilization of diesel locomotives for the
purpose of carrying out schedule repairs will not be a practical approach.
V .  DETENTION  OF LOCOS  AND  AV AILABILITY  OF  SPARE PARTS
2.12 To avoid detention of high value locos, the Ministry stated that continuous
efforts are being made to minimize the ineffectiveness of the locomotives. These involve
the following :—
• Upgrading the infrastructure in the Diesel Sheds.
• Provision of adequate trained staff for maintenance of locos.
• Ensuring availability of all needed spares.
• Constantly improving the maintenance practices.
• Upgrading the spare parts for their reliability etc.
• Computerization in the Sheds.

15
2.13 The Sub-Committee desired to know whether the spares required for upkeep
of locomotives are arranged in time.  The Ministry stated that adequate planning is
done to ensure availability of all spare parts for the upkeep of locomotives.  However,
still some of the materials remain unavailable for short durations due to non-participation
of vendors in tendering; non-supply of the spares by the parties within delivery time
and fast changing technology.
2.14 When specifically asked regarding the problem of availability of quality
material/parts  for  maintenance  of  locomotives,  the  witness  during  evidence
deposed as under:—
"We definitely have our drawback, there is no doubt. This is one of the weak
areas which we keep on addressing because we have to import a lot of materials.
I agree with you.  But we are running a very big system and a fleet of 4000
locomotives and even with all these constraints, we are able to give an outage
which meets the requirements of the traffic.  Actually, the end result is finally
what we are able to give the requisite outage  and we take into account the
failures on the line and then we compute it."
2.15 He further added:—
"We will strive for improvement.  Here also, it is a constant process of improvement
like you rightly pointed out that we have experience at the back and new
challenges in front. So, we will look into how to improve our procurement system,
our spares system and method of reaching the spare parts to the loco sheds on
time so that the locomotives do not wait for more time."
2.16 It was also contended by the Ministry of Railways that the outage of
locomotives was a better indicator of the shed's performance as regards the maintenance
of locomotives has increased. Carrying out of less maintenance schedules than
prescribed not only increases the outage but also adversely affects the condition of
the locomotives.  Railways should follow the codal provisions under all circumstances.
Audit, however, noticed that no attention was paid to the provisions of the Manual
and the prescribed time was constantly flouted.
2.17 On being asked to state as to why codal provisions regarding prescribed
schedules for maintenance of locomotives were not followed and steps taken by the
Ministry to adhere to the maintenance schedules, the Ministry in their reply stated
that efforts are made to carry out the schedules at the prescribed periodicity.  However
as it becomes necessary at times to extend the periodicity of certain schedules in the
overall interest of Railway working.
2.18 The Ministry further informed that a regular monitoring both at the Railway
level and Ministry’s level is done to ensure that maintenance schedules are carried out
as per the prescribed norms to the extent feasible and also taking in to account the
overall interests of Railway working creating a balance between the desire for good
Railway operations as well as ensuring a healthy fleet of locomotives.

16
Observations/Recommendations
2.19 The Committee note that preventive maintenance of locomotives is carried
out at diesel sheds at specified intervals to ensure maximum availability and optimum
utilization of locomotives.  The maintenance of diesel locos of North Western Railway
is carried out by diesel shed at Abu Road (ABR) and Bhagat Ki Kothi (BGKT).  Audit
scrutiny revealed that failure of the Railways to carry out the maintenance schedules
of diesel locomotives within the prescribed time led to excess detention and
consequential loss of earning capacity to the tune of ` 92.89 crore.  Acknowledging
the drawbacks, the representatives of the Ministry informed the Committee that
various corrective measures have been taken to improve the shed outages which
inter-alia include improved infrastructure in the diesel sheds, repairing of running
bays and heavy repair bays, improved training in handling of locomotives both in the
shed as well as on line to staff and introduction of microprocessor based control
system.  Statedly, these self correction measures will help them in optimum utilization
of loco fleet.  While taking note of the remedial measures taken by the Railways, the
Committee would like to be apprised about the impact of these measures within three
months of the presentation of this report.
2.20 The Committee note that during 2008-09 to 2009-10, Abu Road diesel
shed carried out 2260 maintenance schedules, out of which 2240 (99 per cent) were
not carried out within the prescribed time. Similarly, Bhagat Ki Kothi diesel shed
carried out 3022 maintenance schedules, out of which 2676 (89 per cent) were not
carried out within the prescribed time.  The Ministry informed the Committee that
the prescribed timings as indicated in the Audit report are basically an indication of
the time taken for maintenance and do not include various other factors such as
waiting period of the loco after shed in and before start of maintenance activity.
Further, the Ministry submitted that it could not be correct to hold that the maintenance
time taken was more based on the time taken by the locomotive from shed in to shed
out.  The Committee were however assured that the management strives for
improvement in procurement system, availability of spares and induction of new
technology to improve the availability of locomotives, which are regularly monitored.
The Committee expect that the Ministry of Railways will be able to sustain the
momentum to improve the shed outages and the system of planned maintenance will
be synchronized to ensure that the locomotives come back for their scheduled
maintenance within the prescribed time to avoid loss of revenue to the Railways.
2.21 The Committee note that bunching of locomotives for overhauling is
unavoidable because of varying traffic requirements on day to day basis, priority of
traffic movements for transportation of essential goods and military movements etc.
When more than one locomotive enter the shed, it also lead to bunching of locos for
overhauling and other schedules.   Further, the Committee note that over utilization
of locos were allowed ignoring the maintenance of locos in working condition.  The
Committee were informed that since freight movement is erratic and depends upon
seasonal inputs, utilization of locos is done by the Department and therefore banning
over utilization of diesel locomotives for carrying out schedule repairs will not be a
practical approach.  The Committee desire that continuous sustained efforts need to

17
be made to minimize the ineffectiveness of the locomotives and feasibility of
computerization of sheds, upgrading the reliability of spare parts, upgrading the
infrastructure in the diesel sheds and improving the maintenance practice in
consonance with fast changing technology, may be examined by the Ministry and the
Committee apprised.
2.22 The Committee are concerned to that codal provisions regarding prescribed
schedules for maintenance of locomotives were not followed.  Taking cognizance of
the fact that the most comprehensive indicator of shed performance is the shed outage,
the Ministry submitted that efforts are made to carry out schedules at the prescribed
periodicity but it becomes necessary at times to extend the certain schedules in the
overall interest of working of Railways.  Further, the Committee were assured that
regular monitoring is done to ensure that maintenance schedules are carried out as
per the prescribed norms to the extent feasible.  Reiterating the need or strict
observance of codal provisions framed for better maintenance of locomotives and for
smooth conduct of Railway operation, the Committee recommend that the Railways
consider to suitably amend and update the codal provisions in tune with the need of
modernization in the Railways.
————

CHAPTER  III
FUNCTIONING OF RAIL VIKAS NIGAM LIMITED
I.  INTRODUCTORY
3.1Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL), a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) was
constituted in January, 2003 under the Companies Act, 1956.  Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) was entered into between the Ministry of Railways and RVNL
on 16 October, 2003, which laid down the roles and responsibilities of both RVNL and
Ministry of Railways.  RVNL was primarily constituted to develop and implement
various projects to quicken the augmentation of infrastructure on the Golden
Quadrilateral and its diagonals and other such projects covered under National Rail
Vikas Yojana (NRVY) and to leverage non-budgetary resources and market borrowings.
3.2 Audit Review of the functioning of RVNL revealed that even after seven
years of its inception, RVNL continued to be largely dependent on the resources of
Railways.  The performance of RVNL on project execution and management was
inefficient as they were plagued by delays and cost overrun as discussed in the
succeeding paragraphs. The comments of the Audit are contained in the paragraph 7.2
of the C&AG's Report No. 34 of 2010-11 for the year ended March, 2010.
II. PLANNING PROCESS OF RVNL
3.3 Only projects considered bankable and therefore amenable to market funding
were to be transferred to RVNL.  Initially, Ministry of Railways had entrusted 53 projects
pertaining to strengthening of the golden quadrilateral and its diagonals and port
connectivity works to RVNL.  A review of the planning process for transfer of projects
disclosed that of the initial 53 projects transferred to RVNL, 16 had already progressed
substantially. In respect of these 16 projects, the concerned Zonal Railways were to
continue to execute and complete them. These projects were funded through Railway’s
Budgetary Support through RVNL.
3.4 The Sub-Committee was keen to know the process of transferring works to
RVNL.  The Ministry in their written reply inter-alia stated as under : —
“As all the projects under NRVY could not be identified at one go at the time of
formation of RVNL, the projects have been transferred in parts to RVNL as and
when the need for strengthening of particular sections arose. Keeping this point
in view, the Cabinet Note had included the line that ‘The SPV may in future
undertake other bankable projects covered under NRVY’. In addition to
implementation of projects on the Golden Quadrilateral, the mandate of RVNL
includes implementation of port/hinterland rail connectivity and such
other bankable projects under NRVY and specifically assigned to it
18

19
by MoR. Subsequently, additional projects were transferred to RVNL on the
same consideration.  This process will necessarily continue as RVNL is a going
concern and was not created for any specific period. The Cabinet Note does not
define any life span for RVNL.
Thus, the transfer of projects to RVNL for execution of rail infrastructure projects
on fast track basis is done based on the above objectives of the Company."
3.5 When enquired whether any time frame was fixed for completion of the
projects transferred to RVNL, the Ministry stated that for any railway project, it takes
about 4-5 years from conception to commissioning involving preparation of DPR, final
location survey, preparation of design and drawing and their approval from Railways,
acquisition of land, awarding of tender, completion and commissioning of work. Upto
31st December, 2011, RVNL has fully completed 25 projects and 12 projects partially,
comprising of 3986 kms of project length.
3.6 On the premise that the project management practices of RVNL would be
better and funds from external sources could be leveraged, Ministry of Railways
consistently transferred additional works to RVNL.  It was also noticed that RVNL
suggested transfer of 13 projects back to the Indian Railways as these were considered
financially unviable on the basis of bankability studies.
3.7 When asked as to when RVNL suggested transfer of 13 projects back to
Railways and whether the Indian Railways had not worked out the financial viability of
these projects before transferring to RVNL, the Ministry in their reply stated that the
projects which were transferred to RVNL at the initial stage included both sanctioned
as well as unsanctioned projects. Since in some cases bankability had not been assessed
at the time of the formation of RVNL, the projects forming part of NRVY were transferred
to RVNL so that before execution the bankability for funding from extra budgetary
resources could be established by RVNL. Thus 13 projects were returned by RVNL to
Railways after the financial viability of these projects could not be established.
3.8 The Sub-Committee enquired as to why the Ministry keeps on changing the
basket of the project with RVNL rendering the planning process very ad hoc and
adversely affecting the pace of implementation.  The Ministry stated as follows:—
"The projects are transferred to RVNL for execution depending upon their
suitability for implementation by RVNL and the same is reflected in the planning
process.  There is no adhocism in the approach and process in the transfer of
projects to RVNL. In fact, it is only the regular flow of projects to RVNL that can
ensure a faster pace of implementation as a minimum number of projects should
be available at all stages of implementation i.e. Planning and Development,
Tendering, Award of Contracts and Execution etc.  The assignment of projects to
RVNL has contributed to the increase in pace of implementation of projects."
3.9 Audit observed that though RVNL was established with a clear mandate from
the Cabinet to undertake projects of NRVY, as many as 19 projects transferred did not
form part of the NRVY and were thus beyond the mandate of RVNL.  These projects
comprised 15 port connectivity and four golden quadrilateral projects.  Further, out of

20
15 port connectivity projects, three works pertained to Kolkata Metro Railway Projects
which were in no way related to port connectivity.
3.10 In reply to a query as to what prompted Ministry of Railways to go beyond
the mandate of RVNL and transfer 19 such projects to RVNL which even did not form
part of the NRVY , the Ministry inter alia submitted as under:—
"In the case of RVNL, the PSU was initially created for executing projects of
NRVY covering the Golden Quadrilateral and Diagonals, Port Connectivity Projects
and for major bridges.  However, the Memorandum of Articles of Association as
approved by Hon’ble Minister of Railways goes beyond this jurisdiction to
cover execution of projects related to creation and augmentation of capacity of
all manner of rail infrastructure as detailed above. Thus, the assignment of projects
to RVNL is as per the mandate of the Company as specified in the Cabinet Note
proposing the establishment of RVNL and the objectives of the Company as per
the Memorandum of Association."
III.  PROJECT  MANAGEMENT
(i)  Project execution of Golden Quadrilateral and port connectivity
3.11 Regarding execution of projects Audit observed that out of 59 Golden
Quadrilateral and Port /Hinterland Connectivity projects, 40 projects were transferred
to RVNL in May /June 2003 and of these, only 19 projects (47.5 per cent) were completed
as on date.  The remaining 21 projects were still in progress. Despite poor progress of
projects, Ministry of Railways transferred 19 more projects to RVNL between January
2006 and March 2010 leaving 40 projects yet to be completed.
3.12 As of March 2010, 24 projects were in the preliminary stage pending
finalisation of location survey, preparation of cost estimates, acquisition of land etc.
The physical progress in respect of seven out of balance 16 projects was less than 50
per cent.  Bulk of the projects suffered from inordinate internal delays in the tendering
process, finalisation of drawings for the bridges etc., which were avoidable. Audit has
observed that poor performance of the contractors had also adversely affected the
execution of the projects and the project management practices of RVNL were inefficient,
though RVNL was expected to bring in superior project management practices.
3.13 Considering the basic objective of RVNL, the Sub-Committee desired to
know, why the Railways did not take up the issue (with RVNL) of slow progress in
executing projects. The Ministry informed that for any railway project, it takes about
4-5 years from conception to commissioning involving preparation of DPR, final location
survey, preparation of design and drawing and their approval from railways, acquisition
of land,  awarding of tender, completion and commissioning of work.  It may also be
mentioned that the progress of works transferred to RVNL has also been affected due
to land acquisition problems; forest clearance; change in scope of work; local law and
order problems etc.

21
3.14  Elaborating the issue, the representative of the Ministry during evidence
submitted as under:
"They are delivering projects faster than the Railway Construction Unit because
they have been empowered more. Their BoD has all the powers. Their MD has
most of the powers, which even the Board Members do not have because we are
all bound by certain rules of the Government of India and they are a little more
free being a Corporation. So, their delivery is also faster. I am sure that in times to
come they will further give better performance."
3.15 In reply to a query of the Sub-Committee, the Ministry stated that various
monitoring mechanism exist to monitor the progress of works and prevent/minimize
the delays of projects being executed by RVNL.
3.16 On being asked to explain about the progress of projects duly indicating the
original cost, revised cost, actual expenditure incurred and progress (physical and
financial) in per cent terms, and reasons for delays against each project, the Ministry
in their reply submitted as under :—
"Out of the 40 projects and 2 material modifications to be completed as of March,
2010, RVNL has fully completed 6 projects upto 31st December, 2011.  From the
same it may be seen that 8 projects have been delayed on account of land
acquisition, forest clearance and law & order problems.  5 projects are being
funded through 2nd ADB loan which is yet to be signed.  The ADB loan has
been recently approved and tenders have been invited for these 5 projects.  The
delay in the execution of these projects is due to delay in the sanctioning in the
approval of the ADB loan." 
(ii) Execution of projects through SPVs
3.17 The MoU allowed RVNL to create project specific Special Purpose Vehicles
(SPVs) or any other financial structure considered suitable for a particular project.  The
SPV envisaged equity participation of RVNL and strategic partners.  The funds required
for the projects were to be raised through market borrowings.  Out of eight projects
planned to be implemented by creating SPVs, five SPVs relating to port connectivity
works had since been formed and could mobilise ` 701.30 crore through the strategic
partners of these SPVs, which constituted just 25 per cent of the funds required
 (` 2846 crore) to complete these projects.  Audit noticed inadequate planning and
poor monitoring which led to delays and cost overrun thereby defeating the basic
objective of assigning projects to RVNL for fast track implementation.
3.18 The Sub-Committee desired to know the reasons for poor response from the
investors for participating in project specific SPVs.  The Ministry in their reply stated
as under :—
"Investment in SPVs is to be funded through equity participation by the
stakeholders and debt to be raised by  SPV from  the  financial  institutions. In the
5 SPVs which have been formed by RVNL, the response from the stakeholders
has been satisfactory.  In all the 5 SPVs, the investment required is to the tune of
`.4,324 crore, out of which `1,330 crore is to be funded from equity and
` .2,994 crore to be funded through debt to be raised from the market.  The
stakeholders have already contributed an equity of ` 942 crore (approx.) out of
the equity requirement of ` 1,330 crore."

22
3.19 Regarding failure of RVNL in mobilizing resources, the representatives of
the Ministry during evidence stated as under : —
"That mandate of RVNL was also to mobilize resources from market and fund the
projects.   However, a limited work has been done on this.  Actually, when the
Board of Directors of RVNL was formed in 2005-06, at that time the financial
position of the Railways was very good and it was considered that when a lot of
money can be sourced by Railways then why to take loan from the market at
7-8 percent.  Therefore, Railways started funding RVNL.  But now, our position
is not good and it is considered that RVNL should raise funds from the outside.
Inspite of that RVNL has formed 5 SPVs where appropriately ` 4000 crore will be
required.  Based on the progress the funds are being collected from the partners."
3.20 As regards the extant status about the Projects on the SPVs, the  Ministry
stated that as on date of report, the Company has five joint venture SPVs.
IV .  FUNDING  OF  PROJECTS
3.21 The Ministry of Railways envisaged a budgetary support of only 25 per
cent or ` 3000 crore (including ` 1500 crore loan from ADB) in the initial funding plan
itself and the balance was planned to be raised by borrowings from the market and
through public private partnership. For this purpose, eight projects were planned to be
implemented by creating SPVs through equity participation with strategic investors.
Audit scrutiny disclosed that the funding of projects was initially met from the funds
released by the Ministry of Railways in the form of paid up capital (equity).
Subsequently, funds were released from the Capital Fund and also as a project advance
from the years 2006-07 and 2008-09 onwards respectively.
3.22 Analysis of funds released to RVNL vis-à-vis financial plan envisaged initially
revealed that the MOR released `5440.02 crore as budgetary support (which included
paid up capital ` 2085.02 crore and Project Advance `3355 crore) till March 2010 as
against the budgetary support of ` 3000 crore planned ab-initio in 2003. Budgetary
Support by Ministry of Railways thus formed 68 per cent of the total project cost of
RVNL against the 25 per cent planned initially.
3.23 Since MoU entered into between Indian Railways and RVNL does not
contain any provision for release of funds to RVNL as “Project Advance”, the Sub-
Committee enquired as to why the Ministry released an amount of `3355 crore to RVNL
as “Project Advance” without any interest liability on RVNL’s part.  The  Ministry
replied as follows: —
"At the time of framing of MoU with RVNL it was envisaged that the funds for
execution of projects would be raised by RVNL by leveraging the equity base
provided by Ministry of Railways.  However, later a conscious decision was
taken by Railway Board to fund the various projects from its own resources.
The extent of market borrowing was restricted to loans from IRFC for specific
projects.
RVNL has been assigned execution of railway projects for and on behalf of
Ministry of Railways. Thus, the funds for execution of the projects have been

23
provided to RVNL by the Ministry of Railways sanctioned through the Railway
Budget.  The money is paid as Project Advance to RVNL to incur expenditure
involved in execution of the project which is to be transferred to the Railways on
the completion of the projects.  The funds are released as Advance as the
ownership of the asset created by RVNL on completion lies with the Railways,
and RVNL does not have an independent revenue stream from operation of the
asset for repayment of any funds taken as ‘loan’."
3.24 In August 2004, Ministry of Railways permitted borrowings only through
IRFC and decided to bear full responsibility for the repayment of the principal and cost
of borrowing on the funds borrowed from IRFC.  RVNL had borrowed funds aggregating
to ` 1871 crore from IRFC as on March 2010.  The decision of the Ministry of Railways
allowing RVNL to borrow from IRFC narrowed the scope of raising market borrowings.
Review of records in Railway Board revealed that Indian Railways released funds to
RVNL to meet its repayment liability towards funds borrowed from IRFC.  The total
liability against a loan amount of ` 968 crore extended by IRFC (to RVNL) in 2005-06
and 2006-07 was assessed at ` 1245 crore which included the interest accrued.
3.25 One of the primary objectives in setting up RVNL was to generate additional
resources through market external borrowings for project financing to overcome the
Indian Railway’s bottleneck of budgetary constraints in meeting the demand of the
huge throw-forward of projects. The Sub-Committee enquired why Railways permitted
RVNL to borrow funds from IRFC.  The Ministry replied as follows : —
"When RVNL was set up, some debt funding requirements had been identified.
The option before the Ministry of Railway was to either permit RVNL to enter the
financial markets  directly and borrow or make use of its existing dedicated
market borrowing arm viz. IRFC.  Decision to assign responsibility of debt
financing of RVNL to IRFC was taken with the following objectives in view:—
• IRFC was  a well known name in the market with strong reputation and
raising the debt funding requirements from the market could be done by
them more conveniently and more professionally;
• Given the highest possible credit ratings of IRFC, the cost of borrowing
would be competitive.  Since the repayment obligation was to lie with
MOR only, this would be the cheaper option;
• In the event of RVNL entering the market directly, it would need some
support from MOR, either in the form of a guarantee or any other form.
MOR was not in favour of that.  Also, in such a scenario, there would be
two of entities owned by MOR viz. IRFC and RVNL entering the financial
markets based on the strength of backing of MOR.  While the pricing
obtained by RVNL would have been higher as compared to normal cost
incurred by IRFC, this would also have had some adverse impact on the
cost of borrowing of IRFC.  In the final analysis, MOR would have incurred
a higher cost for servicing its debt obligations towards both IRFC and
RVNL.

24
The system of IRFC providing debt financing support to RVNL has worked
satisfactorily in the overall interests of MOR and is being continue.”
3.26 When Sub-Committee asked whether any mechanism has been put in place
to ensure the maintenance of records and Accounts (by RVNL) to identify the goods
and services financed out of the ADB loan, the Ministry replied that ADB has part
financed specific projects as per the loan terms and conditions.  The expenditure made
by RVNL is reimbursed by ADB through Controller of Aid Audit and Accounts (Ministry
of Finance) as per the percentage specified in the loan agreement.  As such, there are
no specific goods and services of a project that can be identified as financed out of the
ADB loan.
V .  HANDING  OVER  OF  COMPLETED  PROJECTS
3.27 In April 2006, Ministry of Railways decided that after physical completion of
a project by RVNL, the assets should be straightaway transferred to the concerned
Zonal Railways at the value of the capital assets in their Block Account.  Thereafter,
the Zonal Railways concerned would own the assets and provide for their maintenance,
depreciation etc. as in the case of assets created by Railways themselves.  Audit,
however, revealed that though 19 projects had been completed and commissioned, the
formal transfer of projects to the concerned Zonal Railways has not taken place.
Pending finalisation of the methodology for accounting of the completed projects in
the Accounts of RVNL, the value of capital assets of projects commissioned and
physically transferred to Zonal Railways was yet to be included in the Block Account
of Railways.  Despite the existence of RVNL since 2003, Ministry of Railways was yet
to finalise the modalities for effecting transfer of completed projects from RVNL.
3.28 The Ministry of Railways was unable to finalize the modalities for effecting
transfer of completed projects from RVNL.  The Sub-Committee desired to know the
reasons thereof.  The Ministry stated that the projects which are completed/partially
commissioned are physically handed over to the Zonal Railways for operation and
maintenance from the date of commissioning itself.  However, the modalities of the
financial adjustments to be carried out are under finalization as the implications of
certain accounting issues are required to be examined in detail.
3.29 As the modalities has not been finalized, the Sub-Committee enquired as to
how these completed works are being reflected in the Balance Sheet of RVNL. The
Ministry in their reply stated that the advice of Statutory Auditor and CAG the value
of fully completed projects funded from other than IRFC loan, have been reduced by
RVNL from the work in progress and the amount is reflected in the Notes to Accounts.
With regard to IRFC projects, these projects are appearing as works in progress of
RVNL and will be accounted for as per the modalities to be finalized by Ministry of
Railways.
3.30 In respect of completed projects where ownership has not been transferred
to Railway, the Committee was informed that a project is considered physically handed
over to the Railways for operation and maintenance on the date of commissioning of
the project/part project.

25
Observations/Recommendations
3.31 The Committee note that Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL), a Special
Purpose Vehicle, was constituted in January, 2003 under the Companies Act, 1956
primarily to develop and implement four types of projects— (i) port connectivity;
(ii) strengthening of Golden Quadrilateral and its diagonals; (iii) rail connectivity to
hinterland; and (iv) mega bridge projects and other such bankable projects covered
under National Rail Vikas Y ojana (NRVY).  The Memorandum of Undertaking between
the Ministry of Railways and RVNL was entered into on 16 October, 2003 which laid
down the roles and responsibilities of both RVNL and the Ministry.  Audit examination
of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited revealed that even after more than nine years of its
inception, RVNL continued to be largely dependent on the resources of Railways; the
mobilization of resources was inadequate; its performance on project execution and
management was inefficient as they were plagued by delays and there were cost
overrun.
3.32 The Committee's examination revealed that the Ministry deviated from
the assigned role and responsibilities by transferring projects not covered under
National Rail Vikas Yojana (NRVY).  Further, the Ministry continued to transfer
additional projects to RVNL without adequate assessment of their financial viability.
13 projects initially entrusted to RVNL were transferred back to the Indian Railways
as these were considered financially unviable on the basis of bankability studies. The
Ministry of Railways acknowledged that in some cases bankability had not been
assessed at the time of formation of RVNL and thus the above 13 projects were
returned by RVNL to the Ministry after the financial viability of these projects could
not be established.  The Committee also observe that though RVNL was established to
undertake projects of NRVY, as many as 19 projects transferred did not form part of
the NRVY and were beyond the mandate of RVNL.  The Ministry justified transferring
of such projects to RVNL since NRVY was a programme and not a project specific
scheme. The Committee regret to point out that frequent change in transfer of projects
to RVNL rendered the planning process weak and displayed adhocism in decision
making which adversely affected the pace of implementation.  The Committee desire
that the Railways strengthen their planning process, prevent adhocism in decision
making so that programmes and projects once approved are executed within the given
time frame by the designated agencies and the Committee apprised.
3.33 The Committee are dismayed to note that bulk of the projects transferred
to RVNL suffered from inordinate delays.  Out of 59 Golden Quadrilateral and Port/
Hinterland connectivity projects, 40 projects were transferred to RVNL in May/
June, 2003 and of these only 19 projects (47.5 per cent) were timely completed and
the remaining projects were stated to be under progress.  Despite fully aware of the
slow progress of projects, the Ministry transferred 19 more projects to RVNL between
January, 2006 and March, 2010 leaving 40 projects to be completed.  The Ministry
attributed the delay due to land acquisition problems, forest clearance, change in
scope of work and other connected issues.  It was also submitted that regular meetings
were held at Railway Board with RVNL officials to monitor the progress of projects.
The Committee are, however, unhappy to note that many projects suffered delays for

26
lack of coordination between the Ministry and RVNL officials.  While emphasizing
the need for better coordination with RVNL for fast track implementation, the
Committee also recommend that an effective system be evolved for monitoring the
progress of projects and the Committee apprised.
3.34 The Committee observe that the MoU entered into between Indian Railways
and RVNL does not contain any provision for release of funds to RVNL as ‘Project
Advance’.  Till 31 March, 2010 an amount of Rs.3355 crore stands released to RVNL
as ‘Project Advance’ without any interest liability on RVNL’s part.  The Committee
were informed that the money is paid as `Project Advance’ to RVNL to incur expenditure
involved in execution of the project which is to be transferred to the Railways on
completion of projects.  The funds are released as advance as the ownership of the
asset created by RVNL on completion lies with the Railways and RVNL does not have
an independent revenue stream for operation of asset for repayment of any funds
taken as ‘loan’.  The Committee also note that subsequent to the formation of RVNL,
a number of changes in the financial structure and scope were made by the Ministry
which were against the original objectives of formation of RVNL.   In August, 2004
Ministry of Railways permitted borrowings only through Indian Railways Finance
Corporation (IRFC) and decided to bear full responsibility for the repayment of the
principal and cost of borrowings on the funds received from IRFC.  The Ministry
justified the borrowings from IRFC stating that the option was to either permit RVNL
to enter the financial markets directly and borrow or make use of its existing dedicated
market borrowing viz. IRFC.  Apparently, the RVNL was largely ineffective in
performing one of its core functions i.e. generating additional resources and resource
mobilization from external sources. To enable RVNL to discharge one of its core
functions, the Committee desire thaat the Ministry of Railways should impress upon
RVNL to make innovative efforts to generate additional resources in accordance with
mandate given to it.
3.35 The Committee are deeply concerned to note that though RVNL has been
in existence since 2003, yet Ministry of Railways is yet to finalize the modalities for
effecting transfer of completed projects from RVNL for including in the Block Account
of Railways.  The Ministry in April, 2006 decided that after physical completion of the
project by RVNL, the assets should be straightaway transferred to the concerned
Zonal Railways at the value of the capital assets in their Block Account.  The
examination of the subject revealed that 19 projects which had been completed and
commissioned, the formal transfer of these projects to the concerned Zonal Railways
has not taken place.   About the delay in handing over of completed projects, the
Ministry informed the Committee that the modalities of the financial adjustments to
be carried out are under finalization as the implications of certain accounting issues
are required to be examined in detail.   The reply of the Ministry is unacceptable since
modalities of financial adjustments, which are administrative issues, should have
been finalized on priority basis.  The Committee recommend that the modalities for
effecting transfer of completed projects from RVNL should be finalized within definite
timelines and the Committee apprised accordingly.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 December, 2012 Chairman,
7 Pausa, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE–IV OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 21ST FEBRUARY , 2012
The Sub-Committee sat on Tuesday, the 21st February, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to
1700 hrs. in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
    Shri Anant Kumar Hegde — Convenor
MEMBERS
Rajya Sabha
2. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
3. Shri J.D. Seelam
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri H.R. Kamboj— Addditional Director
Eesentatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General (Railways)
2. Ms. Divya Malhora — Principal Director (RBA)
Representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Railways
1. Shri A.P. Mishra — Member Engineering, Railway Board
2. Ms. Vijaya Kanth — Commissioner, Railways
Financial
3. Shri K.K. Srivast ava — Member Traffic, Railway Board
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-IV of the Public Accounts
Committee, welcomed the Members of the Committee, the Audit Officers and the
representatives of the Ministry of Railways to the sitting of the Sub-Committee
convened for briefing on the subjects 'Railways Finances' based on C&AG Report 33
of 2010-11 and 'Tatkal and Advance Reservation System in Indian Railways',
'Construction of New Lines on socio-economic considerations',   'Excessive Delays in
Maintenance of Locomotives' and 'Functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited'.  He also
drew the attention of the representatives to Direction 55(1) relating to confidentiality
of the matter till the report is presented to the House.
27

28
3. The representative of the Ministry of Railways then briefed the Sub-Committee
on various issues relating to the subject which  inter alia  include measures being
taken to increase traffic receipts, issues related to construction of new lines on socio-
economic considerations, functioning of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited and working of
Tatkal and Advance Reservation System.  They also responded to the various points
raised by the members of the Committee.
4.1 The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing
before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the information on the subject.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX  II
MINUTES  OF  THE FIRST  SITTING  OF  SUB-COMMITTEE–II  OF  THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  (2012-13)  HELD  ON  24TH  SEPTEMBER, 2012
The Sub-Committee sat on Monday, the 24th September, 2012 from 1100 hrs. to
1245 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
     Shri  Anant Kumar Hegde — Convenor
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General (Railways)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS (RAILWAY BOARD)
1. Shri Vinay Mittal — Chairman, Railway Board
2. Ms. Vijaya Kanth — Financial Commissioner, Railways
3. Shri A.P. Mishra — Member Engineering, Railway Board
4. Shri Keshav Chandra — Member Mechanical, Railway Board
5. Shri K.K. Srivast ava — Member Traffic, Railway Board
6. Shri Kul Bhushan — Member Electrical, Railway Board
2. At the outset, the Convenor , Sub-Committee-II of the Public Accounts
Committee, welcomed the Audit Officers and the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways to the sitting of the Sub-Committee convened to take evidence of the
representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) on the subjects 'Tatkal
and Advance Reservation System in Indian Railways', 'Excessive Delays in Maintenance
of Locomotives', 'Civil Engineering Workshops in Indian Railways', 'Delay in building
the new rail bridge over River Sone' and 'Signal and Telecommunication' based on
C&AG Reports No. 34 of 2010-11 and No. 32 of  2012-13 respectively.  He also drew the
attention of the representatives to Direction 55(1) relating to confidentiality of the
matter till the report on the subjects is presented to the House.  Thereafter, he raised
the points on the subjects of discussion.
3.*** *** ***
29

30
4. With regard to 'Excessive Delays in maintenance of Locomotives', the
representatives of the Ministry explained the measures taken to improve the
infrastructure in the diesel locomotives, training to staff, changes in the design and
engineering to improve the system.
5.*** *** ***
6.*** *** ***
7.*** *** ***
8. The Convener thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing
before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the available information on the subjects.
The witnesses then withdrew.
9. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.
*** Not related to this Report

APPENDIX III
MINUTES  OF  THE TWENTIETH  SITTING  OF  THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2012-13)  HELD ON  28TH  DECEMBER,  2012
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28th December, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs.
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri  Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
10. Shri J.D. Seelam
11.Shri N.K. Singh
12. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
REPRESENTA TIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri P. Sesh Kumar — Director General (C)
2. Shri Nand Keyolar S. — Director General
3. Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General
31

32
4. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General
5. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director (RC)
6. Ms. Geetali Tare — Principal Director
7. Shri Maneesh Kumar — Principal Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the  Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the sitting of the
Committee.  The Chairman, then, apprised that the meeting was convened to consider
and adopt the six Draft Reports circulated to them by the Secretariat.
3. The Committee then took-up the following Draft Reports one by one for
consideration:
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) Draft Report on “Construction of New Lines on Socio-Economic
Consideration”, “Excessive Delays in Maintenance of Locomotive” and “Functioning
of Rail Vikas Nigam Limited" based on the C&AG Report No. 34 of 2010-11:—
(v) *** *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** *** ***
4 . *** *** *** ***
5. During the further course of consideration, some Members suggested minor
modifications in the draft Original Reports.  After some discussions and deliberations,
the Committee adopted all the Draft Reports and authorized the Chairman to finalise
these Reports in light of the factual verifications received from the Audit, if any, and
present the same to the Hon'ble Speaker on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
Draft Reports and active participation in the consideration and adoption of the Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*** Not related to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—4679LS—04-03-2013.