53
ABNORMAL DELAY IN
EXECUTION OF ORDNANCE
FACTORY PROJECT
NALANDA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
ABNORMAL DELAY IN EXECUTION OF
ORDNANCE FACTORY PROJECT
NALANDA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.3.2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.3.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2012/ Chaitra, 1934 ( Saka)

PAC No. 1968
Price: ` 44.00
©2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12) ..................... ( iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11) ..................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) ................................................................................... ( vii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... (ix)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory .................................................................................... 1
II. Pendency of Audit Paras of the Ministry of Defence ................ 2
III. Abnormal  Delay  in  Execution  of  Ordnance  Factory Project
Nalanda ........................................................................................... 5
A. Delay in Procurement of Plant and  Machinery .................. 6
B. Lack of  Synchronisation of Civil Works with Procurement
of Plant and Machinery ........................................................ 19
C. Time and Cost Overrun......................................................... 21
D. Deficiencies  in  Planning  and  Delays  in  Revised Cost
Approvals ............................................................................... 22
E. Inadequate Monitoring of the Project .................................. 25
PART II
Observations and Recommendations ....................................... 26
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the Sixth sitting of  Sub-Committee-I of the Public
Accounts Committee (2010-11) held on 18th February, 2011 ...... 30
II. Minutes of the Nineteenth sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2011-12) held on 22nd March, 2012............................ 32

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
 3. Dr. Baliram
 4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
 5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
 6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
 8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
 9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija Vyas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri  Abhijit Kumar — Director
*Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide  the vacancy occurred vice  Smt. Jayanti Natarajan
appointed Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
 3. Dr. Baliram
 4. Shri Ramen Deka
 5. Shri Naveen Jindal
 6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
 7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
 8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
 9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
*16. Vacant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri  Abhijit Kumar — Director
*Vacancy occurred vice Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of S tate w.e.f.
19th January, 2011.
(v)

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11)
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab —  Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
 2. Shri Naveen Jindal —  Alternate Convenor
 3. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Kalraj Mishra
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Fifty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda’ based on
Paragraph No. 6.3, Chapter VI of C&AG Report No. CA 4 of 2008 and Chapter II
of C&AG Report No. 15 of 2010-2011 relating to the Ministry of Defence.
2. The above-mentioned Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India was laid on the Table of the House on 14th March, 2008 and 20th August
2010 respectively.
3. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time-frame, the Public Accounts
Committee (2010-11) took up the subject for detailed examination and report. A
Sub-Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation
with the Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of the Ministry
of Defence alongwith some other Ministries/Departments.
4. In the process of the scrutiny of the Audit Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports
pending with the Ministry of Defence, the Sub-Committee-I came across certain
pending Paragraphs/Chapters on very important issues and considered it prudent
to examine and report the same alongwith the Non-Compliance issue. Accordingly,
the Sub-Committee-I took up the above-mentioned Paragraph of the respective
Audit Report for in-depth examination.
5. The Sub-Committee-I took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence on 18th February, 2011. The Committee considered and adopted this
Report at their sitting held on 22nd March, 2012. Minutes of the sittings form
Appendices to the Report.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommenda-
tions of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
7. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for their efforts in examining the
subject in detail.
8. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Defence for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and
furnishing information that the Sub-Committee/Committee desired in connection
with the examination of the subject.
9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
28 March, 2012 Chairman,
8 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

REPORT
PART  I
I.  INTRODUCTORY
The Finance Accounts and the Appropriation Accounts of the Union Govern-
ment are audited yearly by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) in
accordance with the CAG's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.
As per Article 151 of the Constitution, the reports of the the C&AG stand referred to
the PAC for their scrutiny after being laid in the the Parliament. The table given
below shows the number of Audit Reports presented during each of the last three
years and the number of Audit Paras contained therein.
Sl. No. Y ear No. of Audit Reports Tabled No. of Paras
1. 2008 21 1701
2. 2009 17 1725
3. 2010 26 1265
Total 64 4691
2. As it becomes practically impossible for the Public Accounts Committee to
examine each and every Audit Report, the Committee adopt a selective approach
and take up relatively more important Reports/Chapters/Paragraphs for in depth
examination at the beginning of their term every year. The Report paragraphs not
selected for examination by the Committee are dealt with by means of a procedure
whereby the Ministries/Departments are required to furnish the remedial/corrective
Action Taken Notes to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure).
3. As there was inordinate delay on the part of the Ministries/Departments in
furnishing the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee in their 105th
Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that with effect from 31st March, 1996
the Action Taken Notes on all the Paragraphs of the Reports of the C&AG, which are
not formally taken up by the PAC for examination, should be furnished to the
Committee within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports.
4. During 2000-01, vide their 9th Report, the Committee decided that the remedial/
corrective Action Taken Notes furnished by the respective Ministries/Departments
should be categorized by the Audit under three broad heads namely, “accepted”,
“partially accepted”, and “not accepted”. In subsequent developments, the Committee

2
also decided that a brief on those Action Taken Notes which are categorized as 'not
accepted' should be furnished by the Office of C&AG, clearly indicating the reasons
for such categorization as well as the points of difference between the Audit and the
Ministry/Department concerned. The Remedial Action Taken Notes and briefs on
'non-accepted' paras are then circulated to the Members of the Public Accounts
Committee and after their consideration these Notes reach the stage of finality.
5. Even after putting this elaborate system in place, it came to the notice of the
Committee that various Ministries/Departments have not been able to stick to the
timeline of four months as recommended by the Committee and have erred in
furnishing the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes within the stipulated time-
frame. As per the information furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) who have set up a Monitoring Cell for assimilating and coordinating
the data from various Ministries, as on 25th June, 2010, a total no. of 4191 paragraphs
were pending with various Ministries/Departments.
6. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject of 'Non-Compliance
by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of ATNs to the Audit Paras of
C&AG of India' for detailed examination during the year 2010-11. A Sub-Committee
was constituted to examine the matter, prepare separate Reports on each erring
Ministry/Department concerned and place the same before the Main Committee for
their consideration. In the process, the Sub-Committee obtained Background Notes/
Preliminary materials and written replies from the Ministries/Departments concerned.
The Sub-Committee also took separate evidence of the representatives of the
respective Ministries/Departments.
II. PENDENCY OF AUDIT PARAS OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
7. This Report pertains to the remedial/corrective Action Taken on the Audit
Paragraphs pending with the Ministry of Defence. According to Audit, a total of
3462 audit paras were pending with the various Ministries as on 31.05.2010 on which
corrective/remedial Action Taken Notes were due. Out of these, a total 187 were
pending with the Ministry of Defence on which Action Taken Notes were not
furnished. According to the Department of Expenditure, as on 25.06.2010, a total of
4191 paras were pending with the various Ministries and out of these a total of 163
paragraphs were pending with Ministry of Defence on which the Ministry was
required to furnish Action Taken Notes.
8. When asked to indicate the exact number of Audit paragraphs received by
the Ministry of Defence during the last two years, the Ministry in a written note
intimated that a total of 131 C&AG Audit paras had been received during last two
years i.e. 2008-09 and 2009-10.
9. When the Committee desired to know about the reasons for pendency of the
Audit paras with the Ministry of Defence despite the prescription of a fixed time line
of four months from the date of laying of Audit reports on the Table of the House

3
and about the mechanism that has been devised or proposed by the Ministry of
Defence to ensure timely submission of Action Taken Notes within the stipulated
time of 4 months, the Ministry in a written note intimated that the submission of
Action Taken Notes was being reviewed by a Standing Audit Committee chaired by
the Secretary, Defence Finance and including the Vice-Chiefs of the Services and the
representatives of Ministry, CGDA and C&AG. In addition, efforts were also being
made to hold ATN adalats to facilitate settlement of outstanding Audit paras. The
Ministry further stated that the preparation of the ATNs required coordination
between a number of agencies i.e., the concerned unit/formation, the Service HQ
Ministry and DGADS. The Fact that the units/formations are spread across the
country also added to the time taken in coordinating a response.
10. Audit Report No. CA-4 of 2008 (Defence Services) was laid in Parliament on
14.03.2008. It contained Para No. 6.3, 'Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance
Factory Project Nalanda'. Subsequently, another Audit Report No. 15 of 2010-2011
was laid in Parliament on 20.08.2010 which contained Chapter II: Nalanda Factory.
The Committee while examining the subject considered both these Reports and have
come out with their finding int he succeeding paragraphs of this Report. The
sequence, inter-alia showing the date of presentation of both these Reports and
the current status of the remedial/corrective ATNs is as under:
(i) Report No. CA 4 of 2008
Para No. 6.3
Subject Abnormal Delay in execution of Ordnance
Factory Project Nalanda
(i) Date of presentation of Audit Report 14th March, 2008
to Parliament
(ii) Date of first response (ATN) by the Ministry's letter dated 28 August, 2008 received
Ministry by Audit on 11 September, 2008
(iii) Date of sending back the A TN (1st) 21st October, 2008
to Ministry
(iv) (a) Date of resubmission of A TN Ministry's letter dated 05 November, 2009
(2nd) to Audit by the Ministry received by Audit on 20 November, 2009
(b) Date of sending back the ATN 17th December, 2009
(2nd) to Ministry
(c) Date of resubmission of A TN Ministry's letter dated 10 May, 2010 received
(3rd) to audit by the Ministry by Audit on 01 June, 2010
(d) Date of sending back the ATN 17th June, 2010
(3rd) to Ministry
(v) Current status (whether finally Not vetted by Audit as Ministry of Defence
settled/final ATN sent to PAC or not) has not addressed the points raised in Audit
Reply dated 21st October 2008
(vi) If settled, what date N/A

4
(ii) Report No. 15 of 2010-11
Para No. 2.2
Subject Establishment of Nalanda Factory
(i) Date of presentation of Audit Report 20th August, 2010
to Parliament
(ii) Date of first response (ATN) by the Response received in two spells
Ministry (a) Ministry's letter dated 14th  March, 2011
received by Audit on 04.04.2011
(b) Ministry's letter dated 15th, April, 2011
received by Audit on 5th May, 2011
(iii) Date of sending back the A TN to Comments of Audit sent to DGADS, New Delhi
Ministry vide Audit Office Letter No. 693/Rep-7/2002-
09 dated 23rd June, 2011
(iv) Date of resubmission of ATN to Audit Not received by this office
by the Ministry, if any
(v) Current status (whether finally settled/) Not known
final ATN sent to PAC or not
(vi) If settled, what date N/A
11. When asked about the reasons for the delay in finalizing these remedial/correction
Action Taken Notes, the Secretary during evidence stated:—
"Firstly, let me assure you that it is not as if this was because of the neglect of
the issue per se. It was definitely that it was a detailed report and each aspect
was looked into by different associated officials. For example, you may notice
that there is an element of the personnel side, acquisition side and maintenance
side. Now we have to put all those elements together."
12. When asked whether they needed more time, to settle the paras, the witness
said:—
"I am not submitting that. I am only trying to explain one point."
13. When the Committee enquired about the non furnishing of corrective remedial
Action Taken Notes within the stipulated time of four months, the Ministry stated that
the information related to the Audit Para was required to be collected from the concerned
division of Ordinance Factory Board (OFB) which in turn had to collect the information
from the Factory. This process took some time in view of the complexity of the project.
Thereafter, the draft A TN was examined on file in the Ministry in consultation with the
Ministry of Defence (Fin). While the ATN for abnormal delay in execution of Project
Nalanda, leading to increase in estimated project cost was being examined, OFB, in
Feb., 2008, requested for revision of the estimated cost of project to 
` 2051.09 crore
based on L-1 offer of BMCS plant, NG and SAC/NAC plant.
14. The Committee wanted to know whether any responsibility was fixed for not
furnishing remedial Action Taken Notes on the pending audit paragraphs. Stating its
position the Ministry intimated that Committee through a written note as under:—

5
"All Cases of delay in A TN are taken very seriously in the Ministry and
monitored at various levels. All efforts are made to ensure that delays in
sending ATN are avoided."
15. Asked to state the specific date by the ATNs to these pending paragraphs
were likely to be submitted for further compliance, the Ministry in a written note
informed as under:—
"All efforts are being made to expedite the responses to the outstanding
audit paras. Regular reviews by the Standing Audit Committee are also
being undertaken to speed up the process. However, due to involvement of
a number of agencies, it is difficult to specify a time-frame for clearance of
all the outstanding cases."
III. ABNORMAL DELAY IN EXECUTION OF ORDNANCE FACTORY PROJECT
NALANDA
(PARAGRAPH No. 6.3 OF AUDIT REPORT No. CA 4 OF 2008)
16. As the remedial/corrective A TN by Ministry of Defence did not reach the
stage of finality, the Committee decided to enquire into the subject on "Abnormal
Delay in Execution of Ordinance Factory Project, Nalanda", the details of which are
contained in the succeeding paragraphs. As brought out earlier, the Paragraph No.
6.3 is contained in the Audit Report No. CA 4 of 2008 (Defence Services). The Audit
finding on this subject were further revisited in Chapter II : Nalanda Factory, Report
No. 15 of 2010-2011 which has suitably been incorporated in the Report.
17. Audit scrutiny revealed that with the induction of 155 mm gun system into the
Army, there arose the need to manufacture two lakh rounds of 155 mm ammunition
per annum in Ordnance Factories. Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) proposed setting
up a new factory to manufacture Bi-Modular Charge System (BMCS), a propellant,
required for the ammunition, stating that this task could not be entrusted to any of
the existing factories. The Ministry of Defence obtained approval of the competent
authority for setting up a new factory in Nalanda District, Bihar and issued "go
ahead" sanction in February, 1999. The Ministry simultaneously sanctioned
` 15 crore to be met from within the allocation of OFB, insisted OFB to prepare a
Detailed Project Report (DPR) urgently, for approval of the Government.
18. Audit scrutiny further revealed that the project suffered from serious delays
and has fallen considerably behind schedule, resulting in estimated cost overrun of
` 628.87 crore. Against the original target date of completing the project by November
2005, the actual progress achieved as of March, 2007 was only about 25 percent in
financial terms. While construction of crore technical buildings for the factory and
procurement of plants and machinery were to be commenced as of November, 2007,
ancillary items of work such as construction of residential accommodation, amenity
buildings, open air theatres, shopping centres, ordnance club, purchase of buses,
jeeps, cars, air-conditioners etc. have been completed, indicating poor planning and
deficient project management.

6
(A) Delay in Procurement of Plant and Machinery
19. The Indian Army after conducting trials of different types of propellants had
recommended in 1998-99 the procurement of Bi-Modular Charge System (BMCS)
Somchem, a division of Denel, South Africa. The company was the only known
manufacturer of BMCS at that time. The Ministry of Defence entered into a contract
with the company for procuring 4 lakhs BMCS modules in April 2002. The contract
envisaged transfer of technology (TOT) for indigenous production of the propellant
by OFD.
20. Audit pointed out that OFB signed a contract in March 2002 with M/s Denel, a
firm from South Africa, for Transfer of Technology (TOT) for manufacture of the
Bi-Modular Charge System and training buyer's personnel in the functions relating to
manufacture and testing and Licence fee for a total price of USD 13,990,000 equivalent
to 
` 68.44 crores.
21. Though OFB received the TOT documents and the supplier trained the buyer's
personnel, procurement of the plant and machinery was held up as the tendering
action revealed that the cost of the plant and machinery would be about 
` 847.94 crore
as against the sanctioned cost of  ` 531.42 crore. (As it was estimated at the 1999 rates).
OFB requested in February, 2005 for increasing the approved amount for plant and
machinery from 
` 531.42 crore to ` 874.94 (1) the cost of plant machinery envisaged in
the DPR was estimated at 1999 rates; (2) sanction accorded by the Ministry did not
provide for price variation; and (3) requirement of additional plant and machinery
emerged on analysis of TOT documents received by the OFD.
22. The OFB did not procure any plant and machinery, except non-process plants
including buses, cars, jeeps, air-conditioners, trucks, vans etc. at a total cost of
` 2.74 crore. The total expenditure incurred under this category was only ` 68.88 crore
(including ` 66.14 crore paid for TOT), amounting to a significantly low percentage of
13 per cent of the sanctioned sum of ` 531.42.
23. The contract agreement for Transfer of Technology was signed between OFB
and M/s. Denel (a company from South Africa) on 15th March, 2002 with effective date
of commencement of the contract from 15th March, 2003. However, Ministry of Defence
decided to cancel all contracts with Denel in June 2005 due to allegations of corruptions
in some other case. The contribution of Denel to the project was to supply the Transfer
of Technology (TOT) documents, which by that time had already been done and
payment made.
24. In the above context when the Committee desired to know the details of the
reasons for the cancellation of contract with M/s. Denel, the Ministry stated that in
April, 2005, News reports appeared in certain section of electronics and print media,
both in South Africa and in India, about the alleged payment of agency commission by
M/s. Denel to secure contracts of Anti-Material Rifles (AMR) supplied to the Indian
Army. Subsequently, based on information furnished by the Ministry of Public
Enterprises, Government of South Africa, to the Indian High Commissioner, South
Africa, it was found that M/s. Denel had appointed Varas Associates as Technical
Adviser in respect of India for the period from January 2001 to December 2004. It was
during this period that two contracts of Anti Material Rifle (AMR) were signed on

7
20.03.2002 and 27.03.2002. These contracts contained specific clauses related to penalty
for use of undue influence and non-engagement of Agents/Agency Commission for
award of the contract to the seller. In view of the prima facie breach of the clauses on
Agents/Agency Commission as contained in contracts on Anti Material Rifles (AMR)
signed on 20.03.2002 and 27.03.2002, the Ministry, after consulting with the Ministry of
External Affairs, directed (i) to cancel all contracts with Denel South Africa (ii) recovery
of advance along with interest (iii) non opening of LC where LC had been received (iv)
obtaining of legal opinion in cases where LC had been opened, apart from considering
the question of recovery of any loss, imposition of penal damages or any other action
as deemed fit under the relevant contracts.
25. When the Committee desired to know the specific reason for the cancellation of
the contract of Transfer of Technology (TOT) with Denel, the Secretary during the oral
evidence further stated as under:—
"Sir, there was some material suggesting malpractices in the contract for
supply of Anti Material rifle. It is the rifle which is used for busting the
bunkers. It fires ammunition which goes through the concrete.”
26. When enquired about the exact date from where the warranty clause of Transfer
of Technologies started, the Ministry in their post evidence reply intimated that the
exact date of commencement of Warranty/Guarantee clause related to Transfer of
Technology contract is 15.03.2003, which is the effective date of contract. The firm
submitted Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG) which was valid upto 15.03.2010.
27. The Committee wanted to know about the criteria for selecting the site of Nalanda
and the inherent advantages it had in setting up this project. The Ministry in their post
evidence reply stated as under:—
“As per directives of the Ministry in June 1998, DGOF & Chairman/OFB had
constituted a Site Selection Committee for the new Propellant factory. The
Committee was directed to recommend suitable site based on the following
criteria:—
(a) Availability of adequate land with scope for future expansion;
(b) Availability of source of water in adequate quantity in the near vicinity;
(c) Availability of adequate electric power;
(d) Geographical features and terrain conditions;
(e) Safety and security aspects;
(f) Soil conditions, suitability for construction of explosives process/storage
and buildings;
(g) Availability of skilled manpower;
(h) Adequate rail and road links;
(i) Climatic conditions;
(j) Logistics in the transport of raw materials and propellants including
proximity to proof establishments;
(k) Government policy regarding development of backward regions; and
(l) Any other relevant factors.

8
The Committee evaluated following sites and concluded that the site in Rajgir,
District Nalanda had advantage in terms of adequate land, availability of water in
adequate quantity and availability of power in close proximity etc. over the
following other sites:—
Markacho (Bihar)
Gwalior site,
Sagar (MP)
Warangal,
Thereafter, a group of officers was constituted on 07th Sep. 1998 with the approval
of Hon'ble RM to finalize/confirm the selection of Greenfield site for the proposed
new propellant factory. The group of officers carried out analysis of merits and
demerits of various sites and recommended Rajgir site in Nalanda District of
Bihar as the most suitable site for setting up of a new propellant factory. The
important points/merits/demerits of various sites, analysed by this group are
summarised below:—
(a) Markacho Site: About 39% of land in forest land; denotifying the forest land
may not be possible. The land is also uneven having deep burrow pits.
(b) Gwalior Site: Land is rocky; continuous rock strata propagate shock waves,
hence not desirable for a propellant factory. Raw material not available nearby
Temperature falls upto 0.4
O
 C which may pose problem for storage of nitroglycerine.
(c) Sagar Site: 25% of land is forest land which may not get denotified.
(d) Warangal Site: 1185 families i.e. roughly a population of 6274 will have to be
displaced. Land acquisition could be a problem. Nearest water source is 20 km
away. National highway is 135 kms away.
(e) Rajgir Nalanda Site: Meets all criteria for the site. A backward area; locating
a factory will help development of the region.
The report of the Committee on site selection was duly approved by the Hon'ble
RM for setting up New Propellant Factory as adequate land was available for the
project with scope of future expansion, industrial water requirement could be
met from Panchane River and Ghora Katora Dam, nearest Railway Station is at
Rajgir, and power was available in the close proximity to the site from Bihar State
Electricity Board. The nearest National Highway is 25 km from the site and the
distance would decrease to 7 km on construction of bridge over Panchane River
for which a scheme has already been sanctioned of the State Government.
Thus, it would be seen that the proposed site at Rajgir Nalanda had inherent
advantages, as mentioned above, over the others as per the criteria for selection
of the site.”
28. When the Committee desired to know the receipt of this Audit Para for the first
time in the Ministry and the latest position of the same, the Ministry in their written
reply intimated that the revised Draft Para was issued by the Principal Director of Audit
(PDA) to MoD on 04.01.2008. The comments were received from OFB on 23.05.08.

9
The ATN duly concurred by MoD (Fin) was sent to PDA for vetting on 28th Aug. 2008.
The observations raised by PDA on the ATN were subsequently replied by the Ministry
on 5th Nov. 2009 and 10th May 2010.
29. Asked to explain the reasons for cost estimation of procurement of Plant and
Machinery at the rates of 1999, the Ministry stated that M/s M.N. Dastur and
Co.,Kolkata was selected for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR ) for OF
Nalanda project based on the open tender enquiry (L-1 offer). The firm submitted DPR
in Sept 1999 wherein it had estimated the project cost for Ordnance Factory Nalanda
Project as 
` 926.94 crore without Customs Duty and at ` 1031.79 crore with Customs
Duty. The estimates for Plant & Machinery were based on the budgetary quotations
received from leading international and indigenous suppliers at the then prevailing
rates and the inputs available with their consulting engineers.
30. Audit pointed out that the Nalanda project was also kept in abeyance from
June, 2005 to July, 2006. By the time the project was stalled, tenders were received for
all the three plants, namely the  feeder Nitro-cellulose and Nitroglycerine Plants and
the main BMCS plant. The decision to keep the project in abeyance as also subsequent
delay in finalizing contracts led to considerable cost and time overrun as would be
evident from the fact that the estimated cost had gone up from 
`  941 crore as originally
sanctioned to ` 2161 crore as per the revised sanction. As a result of the expriy of the
warranty period for the transfer of technology, the delay also resulted in a situation in
which the manufacturing processes and outputs would be without any cover of
warranty by the provider of the technology.
31. In the above context, the Committee wanted to know the specific reasons for
keeping the project in abeyance from June, 2005 to July, 2006. Explaining the view
point, the Ministry intimated in a written reply as under:—
“After the contract was signed in April, 2002 with M/s Somchem, South
Africa, the Army undertook 'into service commissioning' trials of the
propellant, which were completed in March,  2003. Most of the technical
specifications of the plant were also received by that   time. The vetting of the
specifications for the main BMCS plant was completed by December, 2003
and OFB initiated action for tendering the main plant in March, 2004. Since,
the cost of the project based on the lowest bids for the plant and machinery,
which were received in response to global tender enquiry, was substantially
higher than the sanctioned cost of the project, OFB approached the Ministry
of Defence in February, 2005 for revision of the project cost.
In view of the time and cost over-run, MoD decided in June, 2005 with the
approval of RM to consititute an Expert Committee to review the BMCS
project; it was also decided to keep the project in abeyance till further orders.
The mandate of the Expert Committee was to study the feasibility of
manufacture of BMCS in the existing propellant making factories, utilizing the
technology already acquired from M/s Somchem, The Committee was also
asked to assess the cost and timeframe for production of BMCS in the existing
factories.

10
The report of the Expert committee was received in January 2006. The Committee
had recommended that the explosives and propellant required for manufacture
of BMCS could be made in the existing propellant manufacturing ordnance
factories, that combustible cartridge cases could be manufactured in the
private sector and that the end product can be assembled and made in one of
the ordnance factories. These recommendations of the Committee were not
acceptable for the reasons indicated below:—
(a) The existing facilities were quite old; therefore it was not possible to
manufacture new generation propellants  with these old plants. Also it was
not possible to modify them to suit the chemical processes required for
manufacture of BMCS as specified in the ToT documents by Somchem, South
Africa.
(b) It was not thought prudent from the point of view of both security and
economy to manufacture different types of explosives at different propellant
manufacturing factories.
(c) Combustible cartridge case being critical element of BMCS, facilities for in
house manufacturing was considered indispensable.
It was therefore decided by the Ministry in June, 2006 not to accept the
recommendations of the Committee and to resume the project.”
32. Audit scrutiny revealed that Tender Enquiry for BMCS plant was issued for the
first time on 29 March 2004.  Israeli Military Industries (IMI) Israel emerged as the L-1
firm at a cost of  
` 571.71 crore. The matter did not progress since the project was kept
in abeyance by the Ministry in June, 2005. IMI insisted on a price increase from
original 2004 price of 
` 571.71 crore to ` 654.79 crore. OFB refused to accept the
increased price and decided to issue global tender enquiry to generate more competition.
33. Fresh Tender Enquiry was issued on 26th February, 2007 in which IMI, again
emerged as L-I. During the earlier negotiations, the escalation demanded by the IMI
was 15 per cent over a period of two years from July, 2004 to August, 2006. Against the
fresh tender, the escalation was 67 per cent over a period of one year.
34. Audit pointed out that the internal assessment of OFB indicated that compared
to the quotation of IMI Israel in 2004, the rates quoted by IMI in January, 2008 was on
a high side. By adding escalation factors to the estimates quoted in October, 2004, the
base price came to 
` 800.34 crore as against ` 1050.01 crore quoted by IMI in the fresh
tender. Another estimate carried out by the University Institute of Chemical Technology,
Mumbai arrived at a cost of  
` 832.22 crore. For the single base propellant plant,
Ordnance Factory Bhandara calculated the basic cost at ` 269.1 crore as against the
cost of  ` 747.23 crore demanded by IMI.
35. The Ministry of Defence constituted  a Cost Negotiation Committee (CNC) on
27 March, 2008 with former DGOF as Chairman. Four meetings of the CNC were held on
10 April, 2008, 30 April, & 1 May 2008, 21 May 2008 and 22 July 2008. The CNC  could
obtain a reduction of Euro 3.00 Millions only. The Cabinet was also intimated about the
completion of negotiation for BMCS Plant and the final negotiated cost of the plant
amounting to 
` 1174.98 crore was indicated.

11
36. In the above context the Committee desired to know the reasons for the Cost
Negotiation Committee not having taken a decision on introduction of the price variation
formula and final price for the BMCS Plant as the contracts were entered into on the
basis of many presumptions and assumptions. In reply the Ministry stated that the
tenders for the BMCS plant were floated for 'firm and fixed' prices. Though during the
negotiations IMI had sought a price variation formula for the civil works, the CNC had
decided not to include price variation formula since it was not part of RFP condition.
Therefore no price variation formula was considered at that stage. Subsequently, CCS
was approached for revision of project cost based on the firm and fixed negotiated
price of the BMCS plant.
37. In response to a related query on the matter, the Secretary in evidence stated as
under:—
“Our procedures are very rigid primarily because our Government  procedures
stem from a fundamental lack of trust in our systems. Therefore, we make our
procedures very rigid. When you make your procedures very rigid, this is
what happens. The current procedures say that if you have a multi-vendor
open tender as it was in this case, it has a fixed price contract. Somebody
quotes a particular amount, then against that tender you cannot give a higher
amount. Logically this seems to be correct.”
38. Audit pointed out that IMI sought incorporation of a price variation formula to
protect themselves from the losses arising out of steep hike in the prices of steel,
cement etc. The price variation formula was to be based on prices as on 01 July, 2008
and would be applicable on the Rupee content of the contract. However, the Request
for Proposal for the BMCS plant was based on firm and fixed prices and it was decided
by the CNC not to include price variation formula at that stage.
39. Asked to state whether the Cost Negotiation Committee could take a decision
on introducing a price variation formally, the Secretary in evidence replied as under:—
“The Cost Negotiation Committee cannot go beyond the terms of RFP which
you have tendered out. Therefore, if you have not built this into the RFP, you
cannot add it later.”
40. One being asked whether introduction of price variation was contained in the
RFP the Secretary further stated:—
“This was not there. There is no price variation clause on account of delay.”
41. When the Committee desired to know the reasons for the Ministry going in for
rebidding despite being aware of the fact that there were not many suppliers of such
equipment, the Ministry in their written reply stated that after resumption of the acitivites
of the Project in July, 2006, M/s. IMI was called for negotiations for reduction in prices.
M/s. IMI vide their letter dated 07.09.2006 intimated an increase of price from  
`  571.71
crores to `  654.79  crores and also extended the validity of their offer till 31.12.06. Since
the prevailing guidelines of procurement of Plant & Machinery of OFB did not have
any provision to accept such increase of price against firm and fixed price tender, TPC
OFB decided to issue fresh Global Tender Enquiry. The Ministry further stated that the

12
retendering action led to generation of more competition wherein two more firms i.e.
M/s. Simmel Difesa, Italy and M/s. Omnipol participated in tendering process, in addition
to M/s. IMI, Israel and M/s. DMP Italy, who had already participated in the earlier
tender.
42. The attention of the Secretary was drawn to the fact that due to re-bidding of the
contract, the cost escalation was 67% instead of 15% which was asked by IMI as cost
negotiation. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for not considering the earlier
request of escalation of 15% clarifying the positions, the Secretary stated:—
“If the rules were different, this would not have happened. If the rules had
allowed flexibility on this score, this would not have happened. We can think
of a rule which will say that in case of a delay we will give a price variation. It
is possisble. In every case we have to examine whether this gives any scope
for misuse later. Our preference always has been because of this inherent or
innate distrust which we have in our own system that every time when in
doubt, go in for an open tender even though the number of bidders may be
limited.”
43. Audit pointed out that the OFB concluded the contract for the BMCS plant with
IMI Israel in March 2009 at a total cost of  
` 1175 crore. It also paid an advance of
` 174 crore to IMI in March, 2009. For the NG Plant, Biazzi of Switzerland emerged as
the lowest tenderer when the price bids were opened in January, 2004. After the project
was restored in July, 2006 Biazzi did not accept the earlier quoted price. The OFB
decided on 30 August, 2006 to re-tender the case and OFB Tender Purchase Committee
finalized the case in November, 2007. The order was placed on Biazzi at a total cost of
` 40.10 crore in June, 2008. As regards the NC Plant, Josef of Germany emerged as the
lowest tenderer at a cost of  ` 106.06 crore against the tender enquiry issued in
November 2004. On restarting the project in July, 2006, Josef increased the price to
` 136.27 crore. On refusal by the firm, global tender enquiry was issued in two phases.
The lowest offer of Josef, Germany was at  ` 134.26 crore, However, the firm backed out
citing that they had applied for export licence without which they could not provide
the integrity pact and EMD. Against the fresh tender enquiry issued in January 2008,
the Ministry accorded sanction in October, 2008 for  
`  186.46 crore for procurement of
NC Plant. The contract was concluded by OFB with Bowas in January, 2009. A payment
of  
` 49.15 crore had been made to the firm till March, 2010.
44. In the above context the  Committee wanted to know the reasons for the Ministry/
OFB not proceeding to procure the BMCS Plant, NG Plant and NC Plant in a coordinated
manner. Explaining the position, the Ministry in a written note informed as under:—
“The procurement process of BMCS plant, NG Plant and NC Plant,  was
initiated in a uncoordinated manner. Separate tenders were simultaneously
issued for the different plants for manufacuturing the ingredients of BMCS
as these plants are made by different OEMs. Similarly, there had to be a
separate tender for the main BMCS plant (comprising of five plants i.e.
Combustible cartridge case plant, Single base propellant plant, Triple base
propellant plant, Nitrocellulose/Nitroglycerine paste plant and propellant

13
charge assembly plant) as the OEM supplying the plant would have to ensure
integrated functioning of all the plants on a trunkey basis in  compliance with
the specifications laid down in the ToT documents of Denel.
It may be noted for seamless integration of ToT (obtained from Somchem, a
unit Denel, South Africa) and BMCS plan (supplied by IMI), the technical
specifications for the plants have been vetted by the technology provider.
OFB has also obtained consent from the technology provider (Somchem) for
disclosing documents of raw materials and bought out items. In addition, the
plant supplier was not only responsible for designing, supplying and
commissioning of the BMCS plant but also responsible for the dynamic proof
of the product.
The contracts for other plants were concluded to save time and to ensure that
these plants would be ready when BMCS plant was due for commissioning.”
45. The Committee specifically wanted to know the reasons for award of orders for
two feeder plants but not for the main BMCS Plant which would use output of the
feeder plants. Explaining the point, the Ministry through a written note informed as
under:—
“It has been endeavour of the Ministry to minimise delay in completion of
Ordinance factory Nalanda Project. Therefore, while examining the case for
procurement of Nitroglycerint plant, Ministry authorised OFB to incur
expenditure, under respective heads, upto the amounts approved by the
Cabinet  Committee on Security, in November, 2001. The contracts for other
plants were concluded to save time and to ensure that these plants would be
ready when the BMCS plants was due for commissioning. The contract for
BMCS plant could be concluded only after the approval of the revised cost of
the project which was based on the negotiated cost of main plant and machinery
by the CCS (Cabinet Committee on Security).”
46. Asked to further explain the justification for the retendering process as the same
did not generate any significant competition, the Ministry stated that as per the
procurement procedures of Plant and Machinery of OFB, no revision of price could be
accepted after opening of the price bid. The L-I firm M/s. IMI Israel intimated an
increase of price during finalisation of the contract. Since as per the terms and conditions
of the Tender Enquiry (RFP), the offer quoted by the firm was firm and fixed, OFB had
no choice but to go for retendering action. After re-tendering on 18.10.06, four offers
were received (M/s. IMI, M/s. Samuel Difessa, M/s. DMP and M/s. Omnipol) as against
two offers (M/s. IMI & M/s. DMP) in the first tender, thereby generating more
competition.
47. When asked about the exact difference of price offered by the L1 and L2 during
the bidding stage, a representative of the Ministry deposed in evidence:—
"In the first round IMI was the L1 and the bid amount was 
` 601 crore, which

14
was brought down after negotiations to ` 597 crore. L2 was DMP which bid
for  ` 717.66 crore.In the second round of tendering, IMI again emerged as
the L1 at  ` 1090.82 crore and the bidder who emerged as L2 quoted
` 1780.72 crore. The price difference was about ` 700 crore."
48. When the Committee desired to know whether other bidders were also encouraged
for bidding at that stage, the Secretary stated as under:—
“In the first round as well as in the second round there were other bidders as
well.”
49. When enquired about the present status of the Project and the plan of the
Ministry/OFB for early procurement of BMCS, the Ministry in their written reply
intimated that:
1. Land Acquisition: 98.5% completed (Out of total 2967.59 acres of Land, OFN
has taken over 2928.59 acres of Land (Pvt. Land 1749.82, Govt. Land: 366.77,
Forest Land 812.99).
2. Rehabilitation: Construction of dwelling units and all other infrastructural
facilities for Land Displaced Persons has been created and completed.
3. Civil works by DRDO: All the civil works related to estate, non process building
and Administration. Building of factory premises have been completed along
with other infrastructures.
4a. Plant & Machinery: The chemical process plants
/circlesolidNitro-glycerine Plant of capacity 500 Kg./hr.
/circlesolidNitrocellulose Plant of capacity 800 MT/annum
/circlesolidSAC (25T/Day)/NAC Plants (10 T/day)
are in advanced stages of installation. It is expected that all these plants will
be commissioned by July, 2011.
4b. BMCS Plant (capacity 8 Lakh modules per year): The contract agreement
with M/s. IMI was signed on 16.03.09. However, in view of the
recommendation of the CBI to blacklist the IMI, Israel, no work was in progress
at the moment.
5. Manpower: The existing manpower strength is 188 No. (GO: 17, NGO: 64,
NIEs: 38, IEs: 11, DSC: 53 and LAO: 5). The above manpower is available to
maintain the infrastructures already created and to monitor the activities of
Civil Works as well as erection and commissioning of P&M (NC, NG, SAC/
NAC Plants).

15
6. Financial Status:
Head Sanctioned Cumulative Expenditure Expenditure T otal
cost expenditure for the During 2010- Cumulative
upto month 01/11 11 as on expenditure
31.3.10 31.01.11 as on
31.01.11
P&M 1434.30 289.87 6.56 81.39 371.23
Non process 64.70 4.74 0.40 0.90 5.64
P&M
ToT 66.14 66.14 — — 66.14
Land & 93.46 79.95 0.01 0.96 83.78
Rehabilitation
CW by 415.57 309.60 1.81 10.68 320.28
DRDO
Enabling 14.15 — — — —
work
Contingency 47.92 — — — —
Defer revenue 21.82 35.72 2.76 10.26 45.98
DGQA 2.45 — — — —
Total 2160.51 786.02 11.54 104.19 893.05
50. When the Committee desired to know whether there were any litigations relating
to the BMCS, the Secretary during the evidence submitted as under:—
“No, this will be depending upon the findings after the company gives its
show cause and after the findings, again the decision of the Government
regarding punishment.”
51. When the Committee desired to know whether any timeframe had been given for
getting the reply, the Secretary added as under:—
“Yes, we had given them a time. They had asked for some papers and reply to
that has gone. They were told to submit their reply in the next two weeks.
Now these two weeks' time is over on 25th of February (2011).”
52. When asked categorically whether the Government would be in a position to
take a decision on the BMCS Plant before the end of March, 2011, the Secretary added
as under:—
“Before we take a decision, we will need to consult the Central Vigilance
Commission and the Law Ministry. So, I think it will be the end of March or
15th of April by which time we will be able to come to finding a decision.”
The witness further stated as under:—
“It will  take six weeks' time. Each of the options for punishment has
implications. Therefore, it may be that a final decision on this will need to be

16
taken by the Cabinet Committee on Security. So, it depends on what the reply
is, what the findings are and what punishment is meted out. Then we will
have our direction clear on how to go from there.”
53. Audit pointed out that the Ministry of Finance wanted the Ministry of Defence
to confirm in the CCS note that the cost and time projected were firm and there would
be no further escalation. The Ministry confirmed that the revised project estimates
were based on the negotiated price cost for main Plants and Machinery. Therefore, no
further cost and time overrun was foreseen. However, the Committee also learnt from
Audit that the assertion by the Ministry was untrue as it was fully aware that in the last
meeting of the CNC, IMI had insisted on the price variation clause on the Indian
content of the contract. Two junior officers—one from the Ministry and another from
OFB—had also reached agreements with IMI that price variation formula would be
applicable from 1 August, 2008.
54. In the above context, when the Committee asked categorically whether the
Ministry of Defence confirmed in the Cabinet Committee on Security that the revised
project estimates were based on the negotiated price cost of Plant and Machinery and
therefore no time and cost over-run was foreseen, the Secretary during evidence
stated as under:—
“There are certain things which one just cannot cater for or provide for. This
is one such case. When this assurance was given or this assertion was made
by the Ministry, at that point of time the Ministry did not think at all that IMI
will get involved in a bribery case and therefore the whole will come to a stop.
This assertion was made on the presumption that all things being normal or
equal, this is what will happen. This was something which was really not
envisaged that it will happen.”
55. When asked about the reasons for the officials from the Ministry and OFB
reaching an agreement with Israeli Military Industries IMI with regard to price variation
formula despite being fully aware of the fact that there was no such provision in the
guidelines to accept increase in price against the fixed price, the Ministry in their
written reply intimated that there was no such agreement  about the Price V ariation
formula. During the CNC meeting on 22nd July, 2008, IMI had been requested to extend
the validity of the offer upto 31st Oct. 2008. IMI extended the validity of the offer up to
31st October, 2008. In the same letter IMI had sought for inclusion of price variation
formula for the civil works which was not accepted by Cost Negotiation Committee
(CNC) since price variation formula was not part of  Request for Proposal (RFP)
conditions. Therefore no price variation formula was considered at that stage.
56. When asked specifically whether the OFD and the Ministry of Defence reached
an agreement with IMI for application of price variation formula from 1.8.08, the Secretary
during the oral evidence stated:—
“Sir, I would disagree. There was no such agreement about price variation
formula. It could not have been there because the RFP did not provide for
price variation”.

17
He further stated:—
“The company asked for price variation. I think, the Committee said that it
will look at it or examine it, but it was never agreed to. It was not a part of
the contract”.
57. Taking serious note of the delays in completion of the contract and evident
constant time escalations due to re-tendering for which the price of the project was
increased by 67 per cent, the Committee wanted to know whether the supplier was
trying to take advantage of the situation due to existence to monopolistic market for
this kind of defence requirement. Agreeing with the observations of the Committee,
the Secretary stated as under:—
“My sentiments in general are in accord with your sentiments. As far as
this case is concerned, we must keep in mind that this was the second
retender. In both the retenders, and in the second tender as well, there was
a huge gap between L1 and L2. So, a further retender had an imminent
danger—any assessment would say that—of price going up further.
Now, I am quite in accord with your sentiment. My first reaction was also
that this is something like a company trying to take advantage of our
situation. There is no doubt about it. Unfortunately where you have such
limited number of vendors available and where the cost of other vendors is
much higher than this vendor, the available options are very limited. One
can go to an extreme and say that if BMC plant does not come to India, I
will keep importing and it does not matter, but I will not give it to you. That
is one attitude. If it was a personal matter, perhaps one could take that
attitude. Then, you tend to become more practical. I think that is where the
matter is.
Now as far as negotiations are concerned, the papers I have gone through
indicate that negotiations were made as hard as possible, but unfortunately
the IMI understood very well that they were in a position, strength because
of the huge gap between L1 and L2. As soon as the bids were opened, they
understood that there was a gap of 
` 700 crore between L1 and L2 and
therefore, the message was that any retender would fetch only a higher
price. Therefore, despite the hard negotiations, they stuck to it. Still I do
believe that basically the IMI took advantage of that position.”
58. Audit further pointed out that the Ministry of Defence in December, 2008 put
up a note to Cabinet seeking approval for revision of the estimated cost of project
from 
` 941.13 crore to ` 2160.51 crore. "The approval para" of the note to the Cabinet
did not refer to the BMCS plant at all and sought only the approval of the revised
costs of the project. In the note, the facts of the increased cost of the BMCS plant
and IMI's offer of reduction of only US $ 3 million were mentioned as contributing
reasons to the escalation of the costs. The lack of resolution on the issue in the
CNC was not mentioned. Similarly, the issue of introduction of the price variation
formula was not brought to the notice of the Cabinet.

18
59. In the above context the Committee asked whether the Ministry made any
efforts to bring  the notice of the Cabinet the issue of introduction of price variation
formula. In reply the Ministry stated that the tenders for the BMCS plant were floated
for 'firm and fixed' prices. Though during the negotiations, IMI had sought a price
variation formula for the civil works, CNC had decided not to include the price varia-
tion formula since it was not part of the RFP condition. Therefore no price variation
formula was considered at that stage. Subsequently, CCS was approached for revision
of project cost based on the firm and fixed negotiated price of BMCS plant.
60. Elucidating further on this point, the Secretary clarified:—
"Sir, we did not introduce a price variation formula. He asked for it, but it was
not agreed to. The contract did not have a price variation formula.''
The Secretary further stated:—
''It was not agreed to at all levels. By the PNC also, it was not agreed to
because we could not agree to a post-contract condition or a post-tender
condition. That would have vitiated the entire tender. The audit will, no doubt,
tell you that after an RFP is floated, any substantive variation of the condi-
tions is not permissible. If any substantive variation of the conditions needs
to be done, then the earlier RFP has to be retracted and a fresh RFP has to be
floated, embodying the revised conditions. Otherwise the entire tender
process gets vitiated. The conditions of computation cannot be changed.''
61. When the Committee enquired whether the Ministry of Defence/Ordnance
Factory Board clarified as to what was the negotiated and approved cost of project
and with what results, the Ministry in a written note intimated that it had been men-
tioned in the CCS note that CNC, constituted by MoD under the Chairmanship of
DGoF, had extensive negotiations with M/s Israel for BMCS plant. The Cabinet was
also intimated about the completion of negotiation for the BMCS plant in explicit terms
and the revised cost of project was based on the negotiated cost of main plant and
machinery. The Ministry further stated that even MoF, while examining the CCS note
had taken note of the fact regarding completion of price negotiations for BMCS plant.
62. In December, 2008, the Ministry of Defence had put up a note to the Cabinet
seeking approval for revision of the estimated cost of the project from 
` 941.13 crore to
` 2160.51 crore. The approval of the Cabinet had to be sought for any cost escalation.
However, the approval para of the note to the Cabinet did not refer to the BMCS plant
at all and sought only the approval of the revised cost of the project. When asked to
clarify the reasons for non-mention of the BMCS Plant in the Cabinet Note, the Secre-
tary during the evidence stated:—
''In the CCS Note, the cost and the cost revision in the BMCS plant was
explicitly mentioned. It was mentioned that this is the price which has been
negotiated.''
He also added:—
''Sir, this was mentioned. The cost negotiation Committee tried very hard to
get the price down. IMI offered about Euro 3 millions discount and that is it.

19
After that, it refused to offer any further discount. Then, they decided to
place the matter before the Government. In the Government, this was exam-
ined and decided that we may go ahead with this because fresh retender  may
lead to even higher prices. So, this was placed before the CCS. This was
placed before the CCS with the proposal that we go ahead with it.''
63. Replying to a query as to whether any efforts were made to negotiate the price
escalation, the Secretary during the oral evidence stated as under:—
''Sir, as I have said, I am entirely in accord with your sentiments. This is a
situation, which we come across in our Ministry very often. Each of these
systems is unique. In each of these cases the companies try to take advan-
tage of his position and in each of these cases we have to employ all the
means at our command to bring him down to reason and we do it. We speak
to our counter-parts; we use diplomatic channels; and we try to pressurise
him as best as we can. I am quite sure that in this case also it must have been
done. I am not aware about it because I was not there at that time, but IMI
here had an advantage because of this huge gap between L-1 and L-2, and at
any point of time it could point out and say that this is the price internation-
ally and I am still cheaper by far. So, I feel exactly as you feel, and there is no
doubt about it.''
64. On a specific query as to whether there was deficiency in planning, the
Secretary replied:—
''No, Sir. As I said, it just could not have been envisaged that IMI will stand
accused of bribery. This was something, which just could not be catered for
or planned for.''
(B) Lack of Synchronisation of Civil Works with Procurement of Plant and
Machinery
65. Audit scrutiny revealed that the OFB got civil works executed for 
` 299.45 crore
through the Chief Construction Engineer (Research and Development). Of the 815
residential accommodations constructed, 693 quarters were lying vacant as of July,
2007. Thus, while a substantial amount of  86 per cent of the sanctioned amount for
civil works had been spent, technical buildings for the factory were yet to be
constructed.
66. In the above context, the Committee desired to know the reasons for non-
construction of technical buildings for the factory and the construction of huge num-
bers of residential accommodation. In reply, the Ministry stated that the production of
BMCS at Nalanda Project mainly depended on four chemical process plants i.e. NG,
NC, SAC/NAC and BMCS Plants. The construction of the technical buildings required
for the above Plant primarily depended on the detailed drawings submitted by the
Plant Supplier after finalisation of the contract and subsequent approval from CFEES,
New Delhi. As there was delay due to retendering in the finalisation of the chemical
plant, it resulted in delay in the construction of technical buildings. The Ministry
further stated that Land acquisition for the project commenced in July, 2000 and culmi-
nated in March,  2003. The Civil Works related to the project was entrusted to DRDO

20
in January, 2002. Since the residential complex and non-technical buildings were of
standard design and in view of the scale of accommodation available, DRDO
commenced construction of residential quarters in May, 2002 and construction of non-
process building in May, 2004.
67. Audit further pointed out that against the sanctioned cost of 
` 347.48 crore, the
cost estimated for civil works in the revised sanction sought was ` 526.75 crore, an
increase of ` 215.27 crore (62 per cent).
68. When the Committee desired to know the reasons for the underestimation of the
cost and the justification for the escalation his cost which contributed to delay in
project completion, the Ministry in their written note stated as under:—
''The DPR, submitted by M/s MN Dastur on 23rd Sep., 2009, was based on
budgetary quotation of leading international and indigenous suppliers on
the then prevailing prices and the input available with their consulting
engineers. Similarly, estimated cost for other infrastructures and civil works
was considered based on prevailing market rate at that time. The above project
was sanctioned at total cost of  ` 941.13 crores in 29th Nov., 2001.
After the procurement and TOT contract was signed in March, 2002, further
steps could be taken only after trials were completed by the Army in March,
2003. V etting of the technical specifications of the plants was completed by
M/s  Somchem in December, 2003 and action for tendering for the main plant
was initiated by OFB in March, 2004. A final decision on the bids received in
response to the global tenders issued in July, 2004 could not be taken as the
cost of the project has gone up substantially, and OFB therefore had to
approach MoD for approval of the revised cost. In view of the time and cost
over-run, MoD decided in June, 2005 with the approval of RM to constitute
an Expert Committee to review the BMCS project; it was also decided to keep
the project in abeyance till further orders. A decision to go ahead with the
project was taken in June, 2006.
Though the State Govt. had agreed to execute the rehabilitation package for
the displaced persons, it was delayed considerably. Ultimately in December,
2003 MoD had decided to entrust this responsibility to DRDO, which has
since completed construction of 1190 houses for accommodating the
displaced persons.
The soil conditions at the project site were not conducive for construction of
industrial buildings, mainly due to inundation by rainy water. This resulted in
a considerably higher cost for foundation and road construction. Higher
expenditure had also to be incurred for supply of electricity and water. There
was also some additional  expenditure for fencing, due to certain require-
ments stipulated by the Archaeological Survey of India for protection of
certain nearby monuments.
The increase in the prices of steel and cement is one of the major reasons for
increase in the cost of the project as a whole. Monthly wholesale price index
for iron and steel was 136.7 in November, 2001 when the proposal was
originally approved by the CCS; the index has risen to 359 by April, 2008

21
which represents an increase of 163%. As regards cement, the index figures
are 146.7 and 221.4 for November, 2001 and April, 2008 respectively,  which
represents an increase of 51%.
In addition there was also an increase in the USD conversion rate, imposition
of service tax @ 
` 10.25% w.e.f. 10.09.04, introduction of 4% Works Contract
Tax that lead to further increase of project cost.''
(C) Time and Cost Overrun
69. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Ministry had obtained the approval of the
competent authority and issued sanction in November, 2001 to execute the project by
November 2005, at a cost of  
` 941.13 crore (at 1999 price levels). The sanction catered
to the following broad category of items: Plant and machinery, including TOT (` 531.42
crore), Civil Works (` 347.48 crore), Contingency (` 31.59 crore), Deferred Revenue
(` 21.82 crore) and Directorate General of Quality Assurance (` 8.82 crore). However,
except for the township, residential accommodation, non-technical buildings and
allied services, no progress has been made in procurement of plant and machinery and
construction of factory buildings. Meanwhile, the estimated cost of the project shot
up from 
` 941.13 crore to ` 1570 crore (September, 2006). Sanction was yet (July, 2007)
to be accorded for the revision sought.
70. In the above context, the Committee enquired whether the Ministry was not
aware of the shortcomings of the site of the Project at the time of granting approval for
the same. The Ministry in their written reply stated that the site Selection Committee
constituted for the purpose evaluated the sites and concluded that the site in Rajgir,
District Nalanda had distinct advantage over the others. Thereafter, a group of officers
was constituted on 07th Sep., 1998 with the approval of Hon'ble RM to finalize/confirm
the selection of Greenfield site for the proposed new propellant factory. The group of
officers carried out analysis of the merits and demerits of various sites and recom-
mended  Rajgir site in Nalanda District in Bihar as the most suitable site for setting up
of a new propellant factory.
71. The report of the Committee on site selection was duly approved by the Hon'ble
RM. for setting up New Propellant Factory as adequate land was available for the
project with scope of future expansion. Industrial water requirement could be met from
Panchane River and Ghora Katora Dam,  the nearest Railway Station was at Rajgir, and
power was available in the close proximity to the site from Bihar State Electricity Board.
The nearest National Highway is 25 km. from the site and would decrease to 7 km. on
construction of bridge over Panchane River for which a scheme has already been
sanctioned by the State Government.
72. When enquired about the action taken/proposed by the MoD to complete the
project without any further delay and cost escalation, the Ministry in their written
reply stated that they were keen to complete Ordnance Factory Nalanda Project
without any further delay. The CBI had filed a chargesheet in June, 2010 wherein it had
recommended blacklisting of the Isreal Military Industries, Israel along with five other
forms of Indian and foreign origin for being involved in illegal gratification. The firm
had been issued show cause notice by the OFB. A decision regarding the penal action
would be taken after examining the reply of IMI and in consultation with the Ministry

22
of Law and Justice and Central Vigilance Commission (CVC). As each of the options for
penal action had implications, the final decision would need to be taken by the Cabinet
Committee of Security. Thereafter, a clear course of action would emerge on the way
ahead for completion of Nalanda Project.
(D)  Deficiencies  in Planning and delays in revised cost approvals
73. Audit scrutiny revealed that Project Management Board (PMB) in its meeting
held in October, 2004 decided to incorporate all the revisions required and to submit
the request for obtaining approval to the revision of cost. The OFB requested
(February,  2005) the Ministry for issue of sanction for the increased estimate
(
` 1480.43 crore) of the project.
74. The Committee  desired to know the reasons for the delay on the part of the OFB
to submit the revised cost estimate for approval of Competent Financial Authority
(CFA). In this regard, the Ministry in a written note intimated as under:—
''The original sanction for the Nalanda project was accorded by CCS in 2001
based on a detailed project report prepared by M/s MN Dastur, Kolkata for
OFB. Subsequently in April, 2002, a contract for transfer of technology was
entered into with M/s Somchem, a division of Denel, South Africa. Thereafter
the trials of the ammunition were undertaken by the Army which was com-
pleted in March, 2003. The vetting of the specifications for the main BMCS
plant was completed by December, 2003 and tendering action was initiated by
OFB in March, 2004. The offers received in response to the global tender
enquiry were much higher than the estimated cost. In February, 2005, OFB
therefore, approached the Ministry for revision of the project cost from ` 941
crores to 
` 1480 crores.
In view of the time and cost overrun the Ministry decided in June, 2005 to
constitute an Expert Committee to review the project; it was also decided to
keep the project in abeyance till further orders. The report of the Expert
Committee was received in January, 2006. As explained above, the Ministry
decided in June, 2006 not to accept the recommendations of the Committee
and to resume the project.
On restarting the project in July, 2006, the firm was called for negotiations for
reduction in prices. The firm vide its letter dated 7 Sept., 2006 increased the
price from 
` 571.71 crore to ` 654.79 crore while extending the validity upto
31st Dec., 2006. Since as per prevailing guidelines there was no provision to
accept such increase against fixed price tender, OFB decided to retender the
case.
In April, 2007, MoD directed OFB to re-examine the project cost based on
L-1 offer of valid firms enabling Ministry to approach CCS for the firm & fixed
revised cost of the project. Accordingly OFB forwarded the revised cost of
Nalanda Project duly approved by Board in its meeting held on 30.01.2008
based on the L-1 offer of NG, SAC/NAC and BMCS Plant."
75. Audit scrutiny further revealed that noting the steep increase in the estimated
cost of the project and inordinate delays in commissioning the project, the Ministry

23
appointed an Expert Committee to make a reappraisal of the need to set up the factory
and examine whether the bi-modular charge system could be manufactured in existing
factories, contrary to the initial statement that the existing factories could not take up
the load. Consequently, in June, 2005 the Ministry directed OFB to keep all the activi-
ties related to the project in abeyance. By then, the Ministry had also imposed restric-
tions on the foreign firm from whom TOT was purchased. The Expert Committee noted
(June,  2005) that according to OFB it was possible to undertake the manufacture in the
existing factories by augmenting the facilities and in that case the facilities already
created at Nalanda could be used by Bihar Police Academy, Central Paramilitary Forces
Training Centre/Academy or Director General Ordnance Factories (R&D) centre. How-
ever, the Expert Committee also opined that absence of the suppliers of TOT would in
no way affect execution of the work as the experience gained by OFB and Defence
R&D would be adequate enough for its execution. After considering the Expert
Committee's recommendations, the Ministry decided in July, 2006 to resume the activi-
ties of the Nalanda Project.
76. When the Committee desired the Ministry to share the report of the Expert
Committee constituted in June, 2005 to review the Nalanda Project, the Secretary
during the evidence replied as under:—
"The Report in substance says insofar as the Nitro glycerin and Nitrocellulose
are concerned, insofar as the component parts of this ammunition are concerned,
they can be made at the existing factories of the Ordnance Factories Board at
different locations. Then, apart from these component parts, there was another
component part specially the combustible cartridge case. It was also required
to be manufactured. They said that this can be formed out to a private sector
company. Insofar as the integration is concerned, they said that probably
some plant was nominated for integration. They said that there should be a
plant."
The Secretary further added:—
"Therefore, there was no need to go in for new plant for BMCs altogether. So,
this was considered in the Government. It was noted that the existing plant
for manufacture of different components were very old and probably, did not
have the requisite standards required for this type of ammunition.
Secondly, the Government also noted that transferring all these components
from different locations to one location would have been a major logistical
problem as also a security problem. They also noted that this combustible
cartridge case was very important ingredient and therefore, it had to be
manufactured in-house. Another factor which they noted was that even if the
existing capacities of the component plants are expanded to meet these
requirements, the total cost comes to very near the estimated cost of this new
plant. Therefore, they said that it would be more advisable to go in for new
plant."

24
77. When the Committee enquired whether the recommendation made was by the
same Expert Committee, the Secretary during the evidence replied as under:—
"This was by the Government. The Committee recommendation was: "Do not
go in for this new plant."
78. When the Committee further enquired whether there was a wastage of 13 to
14 months as the Expert Committee was constituted in June 2005 but subsequently the
Government in July,  2006 issued directives for resumption of work, the Secretary
replied in the affirmative.
79. When asked about the competencies/requirements for being the Members of
Expert Committee and whether the Members meet the required level of competency,
the Ministry in their written reply intimated that Committee was headed by renowned
scientists in the field of High Explosives and Propellant and had members from DRDO,
OFB, DGQA, Users, Ministry & MoD (Fin). The Committee was broad based and had
senior scientists from DRDO and other senior officers having rich experience in the
area of production, quality assurance and usage of explosives and propellants.
80. Audit pointed out that the contract for Transfer of Technology between OFB
and Denel was to remain valid for a period of five years from the effective date  i.e.
15 March, 2003. Two important conditions were to be valid for seven years. The first
was the seller's warranty that if the product at semi stage had been duly accepted in
accordance with the relevant quality assurance and inspection and acceptance criteria
as set out in the ToT document and that these semi stage products had been properly
assembled and tested in accordance with the provisions in the same document by a
competent, experienced and skilled manufacturer of products. Then the final product
will conform to the performance specifications set out in the Contract. The second one
was the performance bank guarantee which was 10 per cent of the contract value of US
$ 13.99 million. Both the warranty and guarantee had lapsed in March, 2010.
81. When the Committee categorically asked whether the Ministry of Defence has
fixed any responsibility for the lapse in the warranty and guarantee, the Ministry
intimated in a written note as under:—
"No lapse was committed by the Expert Committee."
82. The Committee then asked whether the Ministry of Defence had any plan to
sign further contract with the ToT provider and what would be the estimated cost of
the proposed new contract. Responding to the query, the Ministry in a written reply
intimated that the Ordnance Factory Board had received all the technological
documents related to indigenous production of BMCS and their personnel have been
trained at the technology provider premises for assimilation of technology.
Specification for procurement of BMCS plant had been vetted by the Technology
Provider. In addition, the plant supplier for the main plant for BMCS was not only
responsible for designing, supplying erecting and commissioning of the plants but
also is responsible for dynamic proof of the end product 'BMCS'. In view of the above,
the necessity for signing further contract with the ToT provider would not arise.

25
83. In the same context, the Secretary, Ministry of Defence stated in evidence:—
"The ToT provider is Denel and Somchem is a subsidiary of Denel. As of now,
Denel remains black-listed. So, there is no question of any further dealing
with them."
84. When the Committee desired to know the duration of the contract, the  Secretary
replied as under:—
"I will get it checked, but I think that the duration of the contract is expiring in
September, 2011. The contract was signed in March, 2009."
(E)  Inadequate Monitoring of  the Project
85. Audit pointed out that the Steering Committee headed by the Chairman OFB and
a PMB, under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Department of Defence Production
set up to monitor the projects was required to meet every six months to review/monitor
the progress of the project. But the Committee met only once in May, 1999 while the
PMB met twice, i.e. in December, 2002 and October, 2004. Apparently, the urgency
shown in sanction of the project was not exhibited by the Committee/PMB in
monitoring its progress.
86. When the Committee desired to know about the mechanism put in place in the
Ministry of Defence to monitor the progress of project and synchronization of activities
within sanctioned cost and the reasons for inaction between November, 1999 i.e. the
date of sanction of the Project, and June, 2005 i.e. the date by which the project was to
be completed, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
"Two tier monitoring mechanism was put in place for ensuring timely
implementation of this project. Steering Committee under the Chairmanship
of DGOF & Chairman OFB and Project Management Board (PMB) under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (DP) have already been constituted in March,
1999 and Deccember, 2001 respectively. The representative of the User has
been taken on board in both these structural monitoring mechanisms. In this
connection it is pertinent to highlight that Steering Committee meetings were
regularly convened by OFB for monitoring the activities of the project. In fact
it met on seventeen occasions up to June, 2005. PMB also met twice to review
the project during this period."

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Pursuant to the recommendation contained in the 105th Report (Tenth
Lok Sabha), with effect from 31st March, 1996, all the Ministries/Departments are
required to furnish remedial/corrective ATNs on all the Audit paragraphs not taken
up by the Committee for detailed examination. The ATNs duly vetted by the Audit are
submitted through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a
period of 4 months from the date of laying of Audit Reports on the Table of the House.
Notwithstanding the fact that this system was devised as early as 1995 and subsequently
modified in 1996, a close examination of the subject  by the Committee revealed that
as on 25.06.2010, remedial/corrective ATNs in respect of 4191 Audit paras were
pending with various Ministries/Departments during the period from 1997-98 to
2007-08. Due to time constraints the Committee took up the examination of only
those important paragraphs for which remedial/corrective ATN had not been furnished
by the Ministries. One such case relates to the Ministry of Defence. The Committee
note that the figures supplied by the Ministry of Defence regarding the number of
pending audit paragraphs with them did not tally with the figures supplied by the
Monitoring Cell (Department of Expenditure) and Audit. The Monitoring Cell had
indicated the number of pending paras as 163. The Ministry stated in a written note
that a total of 131 Audit paras were received during the last two years i.e. 2008-09 and
2009-10. However, the figure shown by Audit regarding the total number of pending
paras as on 31.05.2010 was 187. The Committee deplore the discrepancy in the
number of pending Audit paragraphs and recommend that the pendency figures be
reconciled and correct and consolidated position as on 31.5.2011 be furnished to the
Committee and the remedial/corrective action taken thereon within 4 months of
presentation of this Report.
2. The Committee note that CAG Report No. CA 4 of 2008 and 15 of 2010-11 were
presented to the Parliament on 14th March, 2008 and 20th August, 2010 respectively
and ATNs were forwarded for vetting on 11th September, 2008 and 4th April, 2011
respectively for the first time. As per the system devised ATNs on all the paragraphs
of the Reports of CA&G of India are required to be furnished to the Committee
through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) within a period of
4 months from the date of laying of Audit Reports in Parliament. The first Report in
question contained the Audit Para No. 6.3 on 'Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance
Factory Project Nalanda' and the second Report a full chapter on the subject under
examination. The Committee find that the first Para No. 6.3 of Audit Report CA-4 of
2008 is not yet settled even after a lapse of more than three years. Likewise the
second Audit observation which was revisited by Audit through Chapter II 'Nalanda
Factory' in Para No. 2.2 of Audit Report No. 15 of 2010-11 has yet to been settled even
after a lapse one year against the prescribed timeline of 4 months. The Committee
deplore the cavalier manner in which the serious differences and lapses noticed in
Audit are being treated by the Ministry of Defence.
26

27
3. The Committee note that the Ministry of Defence through Ordnance Factory
Board planned to set up an Ordnance Factory at Nalanda for meeting out the needs of
the Defence Forces. The work for the Factory started in the year 1999 with envisaged
capital outlay of  ` 531.42 crore. However, to the utter dismay of the Committee, it was
found that even after a lapse of 11 years, the Factory had not been set up. The Committee
are astounded to note that against the original target date of completing the project by
November, 2005, the actual progress achieved as of March, 2007 was only 27 per cent
in final terms. Worse, while construction of core technical buildings for the factory
and production of plants and machinery were yet to be commenced as of November,
2007, ancillary items of work such as construction of residential accommodation,
amenity buildings, open air theatres, shopping centres, ordnance club, purchase of
buses, jeeps, cars, air conditioners etc. were completed. Strangely enough, no one
found anything amiss in the project planning and execution. Such a  brazen project
mismanagement, bordering on callousness, calls for fixing individual responsibility
to ascertain dereliction of duty and complicity on the part of  the individuals involved.
4. The Committee also find that due to the absence of price variation formula the
Ministry could not protect and pursue the deal with new supplier, i.e. the Israeli
Military Industries (IMI). The Committee also observe that the IMI sought
incorporation of price variation formula to protect themselves from the losses arising
out of steep hike in the prices of steel, cement etc. The price variation formula was to
be based on prices as on  July, 01, 2008 and would be applicable to the rupee content
of the contract. However, as the Request for Proposal for the Bi-Modular Charge
System (BMCS) plant was based on firm and fixed prices, it was decided by the CNC
not to include the price variation formula at that stage. The Committee deplore that
due to want of  foresight and prudence on the part of the Ministry, the price variation
formula was not built into the Request For Proposal RFP. Apparently, the failure to
incorporate the price variation formula in the RFP caused substantial time and cost
overrun and delayed the project.
5. The Committee note that the retendering of the contract of BMCS plant increased
the price of the project by 67 per cent leading to the delay in completion of the project.
In both the retenders there was a huge gap between L1, i.e. IMI company from Israel
and L2, i.e. DMP from Italy of `  700 crore. A further retender had an eminent danger
of escalating the price further. The Committee observe that due to limited number of
vendors available and the cost of other vendors being much higher than IMI, the
available options were limited. As IMI knew that there was a gap of ` 700 crore
between L1 and L2 they stuck to the increased price. The Committee regret to note
that the supplier was trying to take advantage of the monopolistic market for this
kind of defence requirement which unfortunately it seems escaped the attention of
the Ministry. The Committee therefore, deplore that the Ministry failed to consider
the price escalation aspect before retendering the BMCS contract.
6. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Finance wanted the Ministry of
Defence to confirm in the CCS that the cost and time projected for the plant and
machinery were firm and there would be no further escalation.

28
The Ministry of Defence confirmed it saying that the revised project estimates
were based on the negotiated price cost for plant and machinery and therefore there
could be no further cost and time over-run in the future. This assertion was made on
the presumption that all parameters for the BMCS plant with IMI were normal and
equal. The Ministry of Defence entered into a contract in March, 2009 and the Ministry
of Defence paid an advance of  ` 174 crore to IMI and only three months later in June,
2009, the Ministry put on hold this transaction because the CBI registered a case
against IMI for being involved in a bribery case. The Committee regret to note that the
Ministry had no inkling about the ensuing probe by the CBI against IMI at the time of
paying the advance. The Committee wish to caution the Ministry to be attentive and
alert so that such lapses do not recur.
7. The Committee observe that in December 2008, the Ministry of Defence put up
a note to the CCS seeking approval of the revision of the estimated cost of the project
from `  941.13 crore to ` 2160.51 crore. However, the approval para of the note did
not refer to the BMCS plant at all and sought approval of the revised cost of the
project. The Cost negotiation Committee could  negotiate the price down by about
Euro 3 million only. The Committee also observe that the Ministry did not make
substantial efforts to negotiate the cost and even failed to utilize our diplomatic
channels. The Committee cannot condone such serious omissions on the part of the
Ministry of Defence particulary when defence purchases and defence projects involving
million of rupees are handled by them. Obviously, there is something awry with the
functioning of the Ministry calling for complete overhaul of its procurement systems
and procedures.
8. The Committee observe that Ordnance Factory Board (OFB) approached the
Ministry of Defence in February 2005 for revision of the project cost. The Committee
also note that the Ministry of Defence cancelled all contracts with Denel, a company
of South Africa for breach of another contract related to procurement of Anti Material
Rifle in June, 2005. The Nalanda project was kept in abeyance from June, 2005 to
July, 2006. In view of the time and cost over-run the Ministry of Defence decided in
June, 2005 with the approval of RM, to constitute an Expert Committee to review the
BMCS project which came out with the report that the Nitroglycerin and Nitro
Cellulose and the component parts of the ammunition could be made at the existing
factories of Ordnance Factories Board at different locations, indicating that there
was no need for a separate and exclusive plant for BMCS. But the Government noted
that the existing plants were very old and outdated and did not have the requisite
knowhow required for this particular type of ammunition. Secondly, transferring all
these components from different locations to one location would be a major logistical
as well as security problem. The Combustible Cartridge case was a very important
ingredient and had to be manufactured in house. Further it was argued that the cost
of augmenting the existing Plants, would be as high as building a new plant. The
Committee regret to note that it took about 13 months for the Expert Committee to
come out with a report which the Ministry junked. The committee are dismayed that
the findings of the Expert Committee, appointed by the Ministry, consisting of eminent
scientists and experts were brushed aside by the same Ministry being  impracticable

29
and  imprudent. The Committee would like to be explained the reasons for brushing
aside the report of the Expert Committee and the level at which such decision was
taken.
9. The Committee observe the contract for transfer of technology between Ordnance
Factory Board and Denel, a company of South Africa, was to remain valid for a period
of five years from the effective date, i.e. 15th March, 2003. Two important conditions
were to be valid for seven years. The first was the seller's warranty that if the product
at semi stage have been duly accepted in accordance withd the relevant quality
assurance and inspection and acceptance criteria as set out in the Transfer of
Technology (ToT) document and that these semi stage products have been properly
assembled and tested in accordance with the provisions in the same document by a
competent, experienced and skilled manufacturer of products, then the final product
will conform to the performance specifications set out in the Contract. The second
one was the performance bank guarantee which was 10 per cent of the contract value
of US $ 13.99 million. Both the warranty and guarantee had lapsed in March, 2010.
The Committee regret to note that no responsibility was fixed for this lapse in warranty.
The Ministry, however, stated that Ordnance Factory Board had received all the
technlogical documents related to indigenous production of BMCS and their personnel
trained were at the technology provider premises for assimilation of technology. The
Committee note that the plant supplier for the main plant for BMCS is not only
responsible for designing, supplying, erecting and commissioning of the plant but
also is responsible for dynamic proof of the end product BMCS. Moreover, the contract
for the BMCS plant with IMI signed in March,  2009 was due to expire in September,
2011. The Committee regret to note that the expiry of the warranty period has resulted
in a situation in which the manufacturing process and output would be without any
coverage by the technological provider. The Committee therefore, recommend that
the Ministry should find ways and means to ensure that the warranty and guarantee
of the Transfer of Technology by Denel and the BMCS by IMI is extended so that
output would be covered by the technological provider.
10. The Committee's examination of the subject and close scrutiny of facts has
revealed multiple acts of omission and commission by the Ministry of Defence causing
a loss of  ` 628.87 crore to the public exchequer. Moreover, the Committee observe
that CBI filed charge sheet in June, 2010 recommending blacklisting of the Israel
Military Industries (IMI) along with five other firms of Indian and foreign origin for
being involved in illegal gratification. The firm has been issued show cause notice by
OFB. The Committee would like to be apprised of the final outcome of the penal action
initiated against the defaulter firm and the remedial measures instituted to prevent
such recurrences within three months of presentation of this Report.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
28 March, 2012 Chairman,
8 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I ON "NON-COMPLIANCE
BY THE MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION
TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED PARAGRAPHS OF THE C&AG OF INDIA"
OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD ON 18TH FEBRUARY , 2011
The Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the
18th February, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to 1735 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
Shri Naveen Jindal
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence
Services)
2. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director of Audit (Air Force and
Navy)
3. Ms. Suparna Deb — Principal Director of Audit (Ordnance
Factories)
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Shri R.K. Singh — Secretary (Defence Production)
2. Smt. Nita Kapoor — Secretary (Defence Finance)
3. Shri R.K. Mathur — Spl. Secretary (M)
4. Shri Vivek Rae — DG(Acq.)
5. Shri V . Somasundaran — Additional Secretary (Defence Production)
6. Shri Subhash Chandra — Joint Secretary JS (Air)
7. Shri R.K. Ghose — JS&AM (Air)
30

31
8. Smt. Rashmi Verma — Jo int Secretary (LS)
9. Air Mshl NAK Browne — VCAS
10. Air Mshl J. Neri — AOM
11. Air Mshl Anil Chopra — AOP
12. Air Mshl R.K. Sharma — DCAS
13. A VM PNR Govind — ACAS(Trg.)
14. Shri D.M. Gupta — DGOF/Chairman, OFB
15. Shri Mahesh Chandra — GM, OF
16. Shri Narendra Kumar — DDG/OF Cell
2. At the outset, the Convener, Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts  Committee,
welcomed the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the
Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the Secretariat briefed the Sub-
Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on "Non-compliance by the
Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the
non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India".
3. The Convener then informed that the sitting has been convened for taking oral
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence on the subject relating to
"Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the Non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India", Chapter II "Training of
Pilots in IAF" of Audit Report No. PA 5 of 2008 and para 6.3 "Abnormal Delay in
Execution of Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda" of Audit Report No. CA 4 of 2008
alongwith the updated position as contained in Audit Report No. 15 of 2010-2011.
4. * * * * * *
5. After a brief break, the Sub-Committee sat again to proceed with the discussion
on para 6.3 titled "Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance Factory Project Nalanda".
The Representatives briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by the
Ministry in submission of replies to the para of C&AG. The representatives also
responded to the queries of the Sub-Committee.
6. The Convener then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Defence for
appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing information in connection
with the examination of the subjects. The Convener also thanked the officers of the
C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance to the Sub-Committee in the
examination of the subjects.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.
*The matter does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 22ND MARCH, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 22nd March, 2012 from
1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room 'D'. Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Shri Jagdambika Pal
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Tariq Anwar
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Prakash Javadekar
10. Shri J.D. Seelam
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
 1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit
2. Shri R.S. Mathrani — Director General of Audit
(Report Central)
3. Ms. Ila Singh — Principal Director of Audit
32

33
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. Apprising that the
meeting had been convened to consider and adopt three Original Draft Reports on
'Training of Pilots in the Indian Air Force', 'Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance
Factory Nalanda', and 'Member of Parliament Local area Development Scheme
(MPLADS)' and one Action Taken Report on 'Assistance to States for Developing
Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities (ASIDE) Scheme', the Chairman thanked the
Convenor and the Members of the Sub-Committee who took evidence of the represen-
tatives of various Ministries/Departments in connection with the examination of the
above original subjects, especially 'MPLADS' and finalized the Draft Reports for being
placed before the main Committee for their consideration.
* * * * * *
3. * * * * * *
4. * * * * * *
5. * * * * * *
6. * * * * * *
7. * * * * * *
8. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the following other Draft
Reports and adopted the same:—
(i) * * * * * *
(ii) 'Abnormal Delay in Execution of Ordnance Factory Project NALANDA' based
on the C&AG Report Nos. 4 of 2008 (Para No. 6.3) and 15 of 2010-11 (Chapter II).
(iii) * * * * * *
9. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the adopted Draft
Reports in light of the views expressed by the Members and factual verifications made
by Audit and present them to Parliament on a date convenient to him.
10. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
discussions and valuable suggestions on the Draft Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*The matter does not pertain to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—31LS(S3)—15-5-2012.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006.
(A.P)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co. Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28 Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2621,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P)
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
PRRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.