50
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND LAND
MANAGEMENT IN INDIAN RAILWAYS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Sixteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FIFTIETH REPORT

FIFTIETH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
DISASTER MANAGEMENT AND LAND
MANAGEMENT IN INDIAN RAILWAYS
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixteenth Report
(15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28 December, 2011
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28 December, 2011
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2011/Pausa, 1933 (Saka)

,,
PAC No. 1959
Price:  `  120.00
© 2012  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-2012)  . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
CHAPTER I Report  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been
accepted by the  Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee
do  not desire to pursue in view of  the replies received
from the Government  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
replies of  the Government  have not been accepted  by
the Committee and which require reiteration  . . . . . . . . . 101
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies  . . . . . . . . . . 108
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the Twelfth Sitting  of Public Accounts Committee
(2011-12) held on 21st December, 2011  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their   Sixteenth   Report  (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
(i)

(iii)
* Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.
COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised by
the Committee, do present this Fiftieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Disaster Management
and Land Management in Indian Railways'.
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
29th April, 2010. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 24th February, 2011. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted this  Report at their sitting held on 21st December,
2011. Minutes of  the sittings are given at Appendix I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
23 December, 2011 Chairman,
02 Pausa, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Disaster Management and Land
Management in Indian Railways" based on Chapters I & II of the C&AG Report No. 8
of  2008.
2. The Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 29th April, 2010. It contained Twenty four Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of
Railways in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly
categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Paragraph Nos. 3-11, 14-20 & 22-24
Total: 19
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government.
Recommendation Paragraph Nos. —Nil—
Total: Nil
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which required reiteration:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 2, 12, 13 & 21
Total: 5
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
Recommendation Paragraph Nos. —Nil—
Total: Nil
Chapter V

2
3. The Sixteenth Report on "Disaster Management and Land Management in
Indian Railways" was based on Chapters I and II of the C&AG Report No. 8 of 2008.
The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed various
shortcomings/lapses like delay in the submission of remedial/corrective A TNs on the
Audit Paragraphs; failure in ensuring timely dispatch of the essential rescue and relief
equipment for the accident victims; inadequate security and surveillance mechanism
in Railway Stations; lack of proper training and expertise in running/driving trains and
handling sophisticated equipment causing accidents; slow pace of manning the
unmanned level crossings; non-formation of Land Management Cells in many Zones
and Divisions of the Indian Railways; delay in acquisition and mutation of land;
improper maintenance of land records in various Zones and Divisions; non-erection of
boundary walls around the vacant Railway land to prevent encroachment and failure
to harness the vast land resources through prudent and result oriented development.
The Committee had accordingly given their Observations/Recommendations in the
Sixteenth Report.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways to each of the
Observation/Recommendation of the Committee contained in their Sixteenth Report
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit comments.
I. DELAY IN SUBMISSION OF REMEDIAL ATNs
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1 and 2)
5. Taking note of 481 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on various Audit
paragraphs pending with the Ministry of Railways as on February,  2010, the Committee
in their Sixteenth Report had opined that the existing mechanism/system put in place
for preparation/submission of the ATNs needed to be streamlined/overhauled so as to
accord due importance to the Audit Paras and facilitate submission of the ATNs within
the prescribed time limit of four months. The Committee had further recommended that
the Ministry should link up the Railway Board Headquarters with all the Zones,
Divisions and Production Units through various means of modern communication
devices for facilitating effective and efficient inter-Railways data transfer, processing
etc. for timely submission of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes.
6. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:—
"At present, a total of 405 paras pertaining to 1995-96 to 2007-08 are pending
with the Ministry. All out efforts are being made to finalise these paras at the
earliest. Out of these, 11 paras are under final stages and will be sent to Monitoring
Cell shortly after Hindi translation.
Ministry of Railways is fully aware of the seriousness of the matter and strives
hard for expeditious disposal of the Audit Paras. The increase in the number of
paras from 362 in September, 2009 to 481 in February, 2010 is due to inclusion of
172 new paras pertaining to C&AG's Report of 2008-09 which was presented to
Parliament on 24.8.2009. This figure of 481 has now come down to 406 paras as
on 30.6.2010. Finalisation of 75 paras in just 4 months indicates the weightage

3
being given to Audit Para in this Ministry. Further 11 paras will be sent shortly to
Monitoring Cell after Hindi translation. Disposal of pending ATNs has been
included as one of the Agenda items in monthly Board Meetings and will be
reviewed at the Chairman, Railway Board level. It is assured that the position will
improve with close monitoring".
The Ministry have further stated as follows:—
"Since as many as 406 paras were still pending with the Ministry as on 30th June,
2010. The Committee are not impressed with the Ministry's statement that
finalization of 75 paras in just four months indicates the weightage being given
to the Audit Paras. Moreover, the Ministry, in their own interest, ought to give
weightage to the Audit Paras so that the shortcomings pointed out by the Audit
are removed and the overall performance of the Ministry is improved. Every year
new Audit paras are bound to pour in and if appropriate and effective measures
are not taken in time to finalise and dispose them of the pendency would be too
huge to handle."
7. The Committee are dissatisfied to note the tardy rate of settlement of Audit
observation since out of 406 paras only 75 Audit paras could be settled over the period
of four months. This is a telling commentary on the financial administration of the
Railways and it belies the claim that they attach weightage to the early settlement of
Audit Observations. Let the Ministry note that it would be in their own interest and
their financial administration would inspire confidence if they attach due importance
to the Audit Observations and take prompt remedial action leading to further improved
functioning of the Railways. On the contrary, delay in taking remedial action will
have a spiralling effect and lead to accumulation of more Audit Observations in the
succeeding years. Further, considering the huge operations of the Railways over a
vast geographical spread, it is all the more imperative that the Railways modernize
their data maintenance and information management system, besides streamlining/
overhauling the existing mechanism for preparation and submission of Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes on Audit Paras within the prescribed time limit of
four months. The Committee should like to be apprised of the definite time line for the
remedial/corrective action to be taken on the remainder 406 Audit paras and a more
efficient and effective monitoring mechanism devised to resolve them. The Committee
desire that the progress in the disposal of pending Audit paras be intimated to them
from time to time.
II. FAILURE IN TIMELY DISPATCH OF RESCUE/RELIEF EQUIPMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
8. In their earlier Report, the Committee had noted that rescue and relief measures
during the first hour of train accidents, termed as the 'Golden Hour' was crucial in
increasing the survival chances of the victims. But observing the utter failure of the
Indian Railways in ensuring timely dispatch of the essential rescue and relief equipment
within the 'Golden Hour' in most of the major train accidents, the Committee had
impressed upon the Railways to identify the strategic locations and train junctions on
all the vulnerable routes and gather all the necessary relief items and equipment at

4
those locations/junctions in such a way that those were made available to the accident
site within the 'Golden Hour' by any convenient means of transport.
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as follows:—
"With the enactment of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 which envisages
participation by all stake holders based on their expertise, the golden hour i.e.
first hour after the accident is generally managed by the few on board railway
staff, railway staff working at the nearby areas, unaffected train passengers,
local police and fire brigade, local hospitals and doctors, other relief rescue
workers in the nearby areas. Depending on the location of the accident, Railways
ARMVs are seldom able to reach the site of accident within the golden hour
considering the facts that the same are rail mounted and located at stations
where railways have suitable trained staff and their movement to the site of
accident is also dependent on their distance from site as also on several other
factors. Keeping the above in view, zonal railways are coordinating with the
non-railway, Government/non-Government resources available with various
agencies so that the same can be requisitioned immediately to help the affected
persons. This information has been made part of the Disaster Management
plans of the zonal Railways."
10. The Committee note that the Ministry has conceded that depending on
the location of the accident, Railway ARMVs are seldom able to reach the accident
site within the 'Golden Hour' for a variety of reasons. It is precisely for such
unconscionable delays that the Committee, in their earlier Report, had
recommended that strategic locations and train junctions should be identified on
all the vulnerable routes and requisite rescue and relief materials/ equipment
stationed in these locations to facilitate instant provision of requisite relief to the
accident victims within the 'Golden Hour'. The Committee, however, note that the
Ministry's reply is conspicuously silent how the Zonal Railways are coordinating
with the non-railway, Government/Non-Government organizations for pooling
the resources available with various agencies to press urgent rescue and relief to
the affected persons. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) strengthen and intensify its monitoring mechanism and ask for
periodical reports from the Zonal Railways to ensure that they coordinate
effectively with various Government/Non-Government Organizations for providing
the much needed help and succour to the accident victims within the 'Golden
Hour'. The 11th July, 2006 serial blasts in seven local trains in Mumbai, where
the Accident Relief Medical Vans (ARMVs) were sent by the Railways, after all
the victims had already been shifted to the hospitals, should act as a wake up call for
the Railways. The Committee hardly need to emphasise that the incident should
spur the Railways to be in a state of preparedness to meet such accidents in
accordance with the provisions contained in the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the mechanism put in place to rush
the much needed relief to the victims of accidents within the 'Golden Hour' and
the steps taken to test the efficacy of such mechanism.

5
III. SLOW PACE OF THE UPGRADATION OF THE EXISTING UNMANNED
LEVEL CROSSINGS
Recommendation (Para No.12)
11. The Committee in their Sixteenth Report had observed that train accidents at
unmanned level crossing remained very high, being the second highest after derailments,
because as many as 16,976 level crossings, constituting about 50 per cent of the total
number of 34,220 level crossings in the country were still unmanned. Observing the slow
pace of manning the unmanned level crossings reportedly due to fund constraints, the
Committee had impressed upon the Railways to quicken the pace by undertaking a
proper survey/assessment and the identification of the most accident-prone sites and
also by exploring the avenues for private sector participation or other revenue generating
modalities to help finance the upgradation. The Committee had further urged upon the
Railways to forge arrangements for harnessing active cooperation and participation of
the stakeholders especially the State Governments and the District Authorities in their
efforts to appropriately man the unmanned level crossings.
12. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:—
"Ministry of Railways have a comprehensive Policy on reducing vulnerability at
level crossings. On this basis Zonal Railways have  been advised to follow up
expeditious completion of ROB/RUB, Limited Height Subways, Normal Height
Subways works, in their Railways. 3000 Level Crossings have been sanctioned
for manning during the budget 2010-11 and more will be taken in the next budget.
With the decision taken to man all unmanned level crossings, it is imperative
now to do away with LCs with very level of TVUs. There has been emphasis on
closure of LC Gates by diverting the traffic and merging/combining of unmanned
level crossings to adjoining level crossings. The work related to provision of
lifting barriers in replacement to gate leafs on manned level crossings is being
done on priority basis besides providing basic infrastructure at unmanned Level
Crossings. Meanwhile education of road users has been undertaken to guide
them in exercising caution before crossing the unmanned level crossings. Help
of village panchayats etc. has been initiated through publicity campaigns and
other publicity campaigns including sending SMS on  moblie phones especially
in rural areas have been started at vulnerable locations."
13. The high rate of train accidents at the unmanned level crossings continues to
be a matter of serious concern since as many as 16,976 level crossings out of the total
34,220 level crossings in the country remained unmanned at the time of the presentation
of the Committee's Original Report on the subject. In this context, the Committee find
that 3000 level crossings have been sanctioned for manning during the year 2010-11
and more would be taken up during 2011-12. Taking note of the tardy pace of work, the
Committee feel that it would take the Railways around six years to complete the process
of manning all the unmanned level crossings and that too if the achievement is optimum
each year. The Commitee would also like to know the targets fixed for the current year,
the achievement made so far including that of the previous year and the time line by
when all the level crossings will be manned. The Committee further recommend that

6
the work of manning the level crossings be accelerated to reduce the mishaps at the
unmanned level crossings. The measures taken by the Railways viz. education of the
road users to exercise caution, publicity campaigns through the help of village panchayats
at vulnerable locations etc. are steps in right direction but these endeavour must continue
unabated and intensified further with a view to averting accidents at the unmanned level
crossings across the country.
IV . INADEQUATE MODERN SIGNALLING AND RADIO COMMUNICATION
SYSTEM
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
14. In their Sixteenth Report, the Committee had observed that although a ten
year Corporate Safety Plan (2003—13) was formulated by the Ministry of Railways in
2003 to realize the vision of an accident and casualty free Indian Railways through the
use of modern and better technology etc., the provision of modernization was
progressing behind schedule and the Railway zones had not been able to provide
standard performance parameters of signalling and telecommunication equipment in
use. The Committee had also noted with concern that the expenditure on signalling
and telecommunication had steadily declined from 6.2 percent of the total expenditure
in 2005-06 to 2.6 percent in 2009-10. Opining that provision of adequate signalling and
telecom equipment was imperative for the prevention of many of the train accidents as
corroborated by lesser number of such accidents in the developed countries where
better communication based signalling system, Automatic Train Protection and Control
System and GSM based Mobile Train Radio Communication System were being utilized,
the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should make special efforts for
speedier installation of modern signalling and telecommunication system for better
operational and safer movement of trains. The Committee had also recommended that
adequate funds should be earmarked for the purpose and feasibility of additional
revenue generation be explored through lending of Railways land/assets to the telecom
operators for installing mobile towers etc.
15. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:—
"Funds for Signal & Telecommunication works under plan Head-33 are provided
based on the availability of resources. There is a steady increase in % utilization
of funds which are utilized judiciously to ensure productive deployment for
increased level of safety. Signal incidences have steadily come down even though
there is an increase in Signal Assets. The accidents attributed to S&T are
negligible. During 2010-11 (upto July 2010) accidents attributed to S&T are nil
against total accidents of 26 on IR. Mobile Train Radio Communication has been
commissioned on 1700 RKMs out of 2415 RKMs and all the 84 nos. voice recorders
in control offices have been commissioned. Further a lot of inputs have gone
into to modernize the Signalling and Telecom infrastructure on Indian Railways.
Large scale Track circuiting works have been undertaken during the last 10
years, along with provision of Electronic Interlocking, Panel Interlocking, Route
Relay Interlocking, Block Proving by Axle Counter, Data loggers, etc."

7
16. The Committee do not accept the reply of the Ministry that there is a steady
increase in the percentage of utilization of funds towards Signal and
Telecommunication (S&T) works. On the converse, the fact of the matter is, the
expenditure on S&T  works had declined from 6.2 percent of the total expenditure in
2005-06 to 2.6 percent in 2009-10, as pointed out by the Committee in their Sixteenth
Report. The Committee, would, therefore like to have the actual expenditure trend for
S&T work vis-a-vis the total expenditure for the last five years to study the trend of
expenditure and the veracity of the claim that there has been steady increase in the
percentage of expenditure on S&T.
17. The Committee note that Mobile Train Radio Communication has been
commissioned on 1700 RKMs out of the 2415 RKMs identified for the purpose. In
view of the importance of the Modern Signalling and Telecommunication System for
better operational  and safer movement  of trains, the Committee desire that expeditious
measures be taken to Commission Mobile Train Radio and other effective
communication system in the remaining 715 RKMs, identified for the purpose within
a definite timeline and the Committee apprised. They also recommend that additional
routes on the Indian Railways be progressively indentified for provision of better
communication based signalling system within a given time period.
V . ENCROACHMENT OF RAILWAY LAND
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
18. In their sixteenth Report, the Committee had observed that the encroachment
of Railway land had acquired menacing proportion as was evident from the fact that as
many as two lakh encroachment cases (approximately) involving about, 1,594 hectares
of land were there at the end of the year 2006-07. The situation had been so grave that
even the Railway Safety Zone were encroached upon. Finding that lack of proper
survey/verification of Railway land, non-availability of proper land records, improper
maintenance of Registers, inaction on the part of Section Engineers, RPF personnel
and other Railway authorities in carrying out timely inspection, identification and
prevention of the encroachment activities were the root causes of the large scale
encroachment of Railway land, the Committee had urged upon the Ministry to formulate
a comprehensive action plan, in coordination with the State Government, District
Authorities, local police and judiciary, for removal and prevention of encroachments.
19. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:—
"Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Detailed comprehensive
instructions have been issued vide Railway Board's letter No. 2007/LML/06/10
dt. 01-04-2010 covering whole gamut on Land Management. Zonal railways
have been asked to identify vulnerable locations prone to encroachments and to
construct boundary walls at such locations on a programmed basis in order to
prevent encroachments. As an additional safeguard for preventing encroachment,
railway land is also licensed  to railway employee for cultivation purposes.
Railways have been directed to formulate the action plan for prevention of
encroachments and to remain vigilant for preventing encroachment at the
vulnerable locations.

8
It may be appreciated that encroachment removal process has a social aspect
also. Railways are dependent on the assistance of the State Govt. for police and
magistrate, etc. who are normally reluctant to provide adequate support and
assistance. Efforts of removal of encroachment are halted by court cases also.
Despite above constraints Railways have been able to successfully reduce the
area under encroachments by 1080 hectares in the past 5 years as is evident from
the position given below:—
Details as Area (Hectare) under
on encroachments
31.03.05 2075
31.03.10 995
Due care is being taken to ensure that the projects do not get affected due to
encroachments. As a result, only 6 projects have been affected due to
encroachments. Railways are taking necessary action for removal of
encroachments at these project sites."
20. The Committee are aware that encroachment removal process has a social
aspect and efforts for removal  of encroachment are halted due to litigations. But the
issues of social aspect and litigations come into picture only after the Railway land is
encroached upon. Prudent foresight, therefore, requires that the Railways resort to
all possible and effective precautionary and preventive measures not to let its land
encroached upon in the first place. Let the Railways mark it well that how protracted
and prohibitive, it is in terms of time and cost, to evict the encroachers compared to
prevention of encroachment. Further, the Ministry's submission that 1080 hectares
of land has been made free of encroachments during the last five years is no consolation
in view of the fact that 995 hectares of land was still under encroachment as on
31st May, 2010. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Railway Board take
up the matter with various State Governments with a view to ascertaining the causes
of their reported reluctance in providing necessary assistance for removal of
encrochments so that an amicable solution is arrived at for speedy reclamation of the
Railways land. The Committee also desire that inaction or negligence in preventing
or removing the encroachment of Railway land be viewed sternly and stringent action
taken against the officials concerned for collusion or dereliction of duty.
VI. INADEQUATE LEGAL POWERS TO THE ESTATE OFFICERS
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
21.  Finding that in as many as 21,654 encroachment cases, orders of the Estate
Officers to evict the encroachers from the Railway  land were not implemented on
various grounds and also observing that as many as 45,551 cases of encroachment
were pending decisions, the Committee in their Sixteenth Report had recommended
that there was a need to carry out necessary amendments in the Public Premises
(Eviction) Act, 1971 to give more teeth and legal powers to the Estate Officers for
effective eviction of the encroachers from the Railway land as well as expeditious
settlement of the pending cases.

9
22. The Ministry of Railways in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as
follows:—
"The observation of the Committee regarding need for amendment of the Public
Premises (Eviction Act, 1971) to provide more power to the Estate Officers is
welcome. However, it is mentioned that the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 is a Central Act pertaining to Ministry of
Urban Development (MoUD). Ministry of Railways had suggested MoUD for
empowerment of Estate Officers. However, MoUD in consultation with Ministry
of Law and Justice have not agreed to the suggestions.
Despite the above constraints, Railways have been able to successfully reduce
the area under encroachments by 1080 hectares in the past 5 years."
23. Taking note of inordinate delays in executing the eviction orders passed by
the Estate Officers in as many as 21654 cases and 45,551 encroachment cases
pending for decision, the Committee impress upon the Ministry of Railways to again
take up the matter with the Ministry of Urban Development to get the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 amended so that the Estate Officers
are provided with adequate powers for speedy eviction of encroachers from the Railway
land as well as for expeditious disposal of the pending cases. The Railway could also
consider in consultation with the Law Ministry to have a special law for removal of
encroachment on their land considering the dimension of the problem, the litigious
nature of the encroachers and the public interest involved.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee further observe that both the apex cell in the Railway Board
and the Accounts Departments in the Zonal Railways do not seem to be well
conversant with the prescribed procedures for preparing and furnishing Remedial/
Corrective Action Taken Notes as Audit had to point out various shortcomings in
a large number of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes (about 150) submitted
by them, which in the process, caused undue delays in the final submission. It
needs to be re-emphasized here that Audit paras basically provide crucial inputs
and suggestions for avoiding infructuous expenditure, lapses, deficiencies as well
as for plugging various systemic loopholes, shortcomings etc. prevailing in the
Ministry with a view to improving the overall performance and achievements of
the Ministry. Accordingly, taking prompt remedial action thereon ought to be
accorded priority and any delay on this count needs to be treated as a serious
lapse. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Railways to change their work
ethics so as to take prompt remedial/corrective action on the Audit observations/
findings and the requisite Action Taken Notes prepared and furnished within the
stipulated time. The whole mechanism should be strengthened by introducing a
system of fixing responsibility for the lapses and inordinate delays in the submission
of Action Taken Notes on the Audit Paras. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry should clear all the pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes
within a fixed time-frame.
[Sl. No. 3, Part II, Para 3 of the 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Instructions have been sent to Railways and also to Members concerned for
early finalization of all pending paras pertaining to 1995-96 to 2007-08. Disposal of
pending A TNs has been included as one of the Agenda items in monthly Board
Meetings and will be reviewed at the Chairman, Railway Board level. Further, as
decided in the meeting of Committee of Secretaries convened by Cabinet Secretary,
ATN adalats will be organized quarterly for resolving differences between Audit and
Executive. It is expected that all these measures will lead to expeditious disposal of
pending A TNs.
10

11
Audit vide their U.O. No. 26035-Rly./Co-ord./RR2-5/2010 dated 09.8.2010 have
vetted the Action Taken with the following remarks:—
"No comments."
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board.
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16 dated, 27.1.2011, 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that the Ministry of Railways have issued their Disaster
Management Plans at the Ministry, Corporate, Zonal and Divisional Railways’ levels
by November, 2009. All the provisions of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 and the
guidelines of the National Disaster Management Authority issued in 2007, 2008 and
2009 have been reportedly either complied with or included in these Plans. However,
the State Governments, which play a key role in mitigation of a disaster, rescue, relief
etc. have not yet prepared their Disaster Management Plans and thus no tangible
purpose can be served by promulgation of these Disaster Management Plans.
Consequently, the intended objective of sharing resources in all the disasters including
railway accidents still remains a distant hope. While stressing the need for putting in
place an integrated, comprehensive and uniform Disaster Management Plans to
effectively deal with the challenges which emerge in the event of train accidents or
other disasters, the Committee urge upon the Ministry to take up the matter at an
appropriate level for persuading the State Governments to formulate and promulgate
expeditiously their Disaster Management Plans. In this context, the Committee would
like the Ministry to have a coordinating arrangement with the State Governments, the
District Authorities, civil/private hospitals, military and para-military forces and other
concerned agencies so as to effectively leverage their infrastructure and resources for
putting up synchronized efforts while responding to train or any other related disasters.
[Sl. No. 4, Part II, Para 4 of the 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
On the Railways there is a uniformity and a coordinated approach in tackling
Disasters with the Civil Authorities etc. This is because Indian Railways have made
out a disaster Management plan in November 2009 which emphasizes this aspect.
Consequently details of concerned Civil Authorities (including District Collectors,
Police Officers), Medical and Armed Forces have been incorporated in all the Divisional
and Zonal Disaster Management Plans. Further local contact numbers of
Civil Authorities, Medical Staff are also available at stations.
With the promulgation of a Disaster Management Act 2005, it has become
mandatory on the part of State Govt./District Authorities and other ministries to provide
their resource for management of Disasters (including major Railway accident). NDMA
has issued Guidelines on Management of Earthquakes, Floods, Chemical disasters,

12
Cyclones, medical preparedness, Biological Disasters, Chemical (Terrorism) Disasters,
Management of Landslides and Snow Avalanches etc. These Guidelines are bringing
on all Central Government Ministries and Departments as also on the State
Governments. Indian Railways' DM Plan has now been prepared in November, 2009
taking these guidelines into consideration. The State Governments have also prepared
their DM plans separately. As mandated by these Guidelines, the State DM Plan,
District DM Plan have also to be in line with Guidelines given by NDMA. This has
brought about a cohesive and coordinated approach amongst various wings of Central
and State Governments.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 311-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 05.10.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board.
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 27.1.2011, 24.2.11]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 5)
Recognizing the need for stronger and appropriate infrastructure as a part of the
strategy for setting up an effective disaster management system in the Indian Railways,
the High Level Committee constituted by the Railways had recommended for the
provision of important rescue and relief equipments like Self Propelled Accident Relief
Trains (SPARTs), Accident Relief Trains (ARTs), Accident Relief Medical Vans
(ARMVs) in addition to breakdown cranes, rescue ambulances etc. The Committee,
however, in their examination find grave inadequacies in the provision and persisting
deficiencies in the maintenance of the aforesaid essential relief and rescue equipment.
Subsequently, the Ministry of Railways claimed that the requisite number or the required
scale of ARTs and MRVs are being equipped but SPARTs would be inducted after the
successful completion of trial of three such equipment manufactured by Integral Coach
Factory. The Committee observe that this is high time that the Indian Railways should
have such a scale and degree of preparedness to meet large-scale emergent crisis,
which may arise in the event of train accidents/disasters. To prevent any compromise
on this count, the Committee recommend that requisite number of SPART and other
similar or associated emergency relief equipment should be inducted urgently in a time
bound manner. This is imperative for the Indian Railways to gear up the scale of
preparedness to the desirable level. Further, many a times such essential equipments
inducted at a high cost are thrown out of operation due to machinery breakdowns,
poor maintenance, unscheduled repairs etc. The Committee, therefore, desire that
every possible safeguards and arrangements should be made for ensuring timely and
proper periodic maintenance/overhauling of these essential equipments so that these
are kept operationally fit all the time.
[Sl. No. 5, Part II, Para 5 of the 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

13
Action Taken by the Government
Indian Railways is actively pursuing induction of the state of the art SPARTs.
Production of these SPARTs has already started, a few have been put in use on
Zonal Railways. Rest are under manufacture on yearly basis. Adequate maintenance
schedules of all Relief/Rescue equipment including in ARTs/cranes is well laid down to
ensure they are kept operationally fit all the time.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 397-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 08.12.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16 dated 27.1.2011, 24.2.11]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee note that rescue and relief during the first hour of train accidents
termed, as the 'Golden Hour' is crucial to increase the survival chances of the  victims.
In Indian Railways, this type of rescue and relief work is primarily carried out by a few
on board staff, nearby railway staff and local police and hospitals. The Committee are,
however, pained to note that the Indian Railways have utterly failed in ensuring  timely
dispatch and arrival of the essential rescue and relief equipment within the
'Golden Hour'  in most of the major train accidents including 11 July 2006 serial blasts
in seven local trains in Mumbai and 27 June 2009, truck-train collision at Ujjain Station.
Shockingly, in the Mumbai incident, the ARMVs sent to the  blast site proved to be
useless because all the victims had already been shifted  to nearby hospitals by the
volunteers from amongst the  passengers. In the opinion of the Committee, the Ministry
need to draw suitable lessons from these incidents so that the same mistakes are not
repeated in future. In view of this  appalling scenario, the Committee desire that strategic
locations and train  junctions should be identified on all vulnerable routes and all the
necessary items and equipments should be stationed at these locations in such a way
that these are made available to the accident site  within the 'Golden Hour' by any
convenient means of transport. The Committee would like to have details of precise
action taken in this regard.
[Sl. No. 6, Part II, Para 6 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
With the enactment of the Disaster Management Act 2005 which envisages
participation by all stake holders based on their expertise, the golden hour i.e. first
hour after the accident is to be generally managed by the few on board railway staff,
railway  staff working at the nearby area, unaffected train passengers, local police and
fire brigade, local hospitals and doctors, other relief rescue workers in the nearby
areas. Depending on the location of the accident, Railways ARMVs are seldom able to
reach the site of accident within the golden hour considering the fact that the same are
rail mounted and located at stations where railways have suitably  trained staff and

14
their movement to the site of accident is also dependent on their distance from site as
also on several other factors. Keeping the above in view, zonal railways are coordinating
with the non-railway, govt./non-govt. resources available with various agencies so
that the same can be requisitioned immediately to help the affected persons. The
information has been made part of the Disaster Management Plans of the Zonal Railways.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 397-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 08.12.2010 have  vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010/BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 27.1.2011, 24.2.11]
Comments of the Committee
Please See Para No. 10 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 7)
Another major constraint being faced by the Railways in providing timely rescue
operations in a train disaster is the lack of proper training of the frontline/onboard staff
resulting in inability to provide organized and coordinated operation. Precious time is
also lost in summoning qualified personnel on the sites. Even though, the Railways
have initiated certain measures in this regard the actual position still remains far from
satisfactory. It was found in the Committee's examination that in most of the Divisions
less than 25 per cent of the frontline staff was trained, whereas in the Zones the
specialized training courses organized by Indian Railways were poorly attended. The
Committee view imparting of training to on board and frontline staff as an imperative to
deal effectively with train disasters and feel that this needs to be pursued vigorously
with the available manpower in the Indian Railways. The Committee would, therefore,
like the Ministry to explore every possible avenue to provide appropriate training to
their staff to improve their post disaster management skills so that the Railways'
response time to a particular train accident/disaster is further minimized to provide
effective succour to the accident victims. As a part of this strategy, possibility of
imparting passenger education by the TTEs in coping with emergencies and accidents,
on the lines of similar exercise being done on  Passenger Airlines may also be explored.
The Committee further observe that apart from on board staff and passengers,  people
living in nearby areas are the first ones to arrive at  a disaster site. The Committee,
therefore, impress upon the Ministry to take advantage of this situation and enter into
arrangements with NGOs, V oluntary Organizations, civil society groups, clubs etc.
operating at various places/locations along the  vulnerable rail lines for enlisting  their
services in rescue and relief operations. These Organizations should  also be provided
necessary  training to enlist their services in such emergency situations.
[Sl. No. 7, Part II, Para 7 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

15
Action Taken by the Government
Ever since adoption of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, comprehensive
instructions  on Training for the first time on Disaster Management has been issued
vide Railway Board Letter No.E(MPP)2009/3/1, dt. 20.01.09. Ministry of Railways have
issued instructions regarding training on Disaster  Management of Railway Officials
including top level Railway officers, other staff and includes frontline staff also. A
copy of the instructions on training the DM are at Annexure I . Since Disaster
Management figures as a course content in the stage-wise-training module, required
staff are regularly being trained for DM in various training institutes e.g. IRITM/LKO,
ZRTIs Customer Care Centers etc. on Disaster Management. The TTEs and other
ticket checking staff on board the  train  are imparted DM Training in the Customer
Care Institutes.
Details of Organizations like NGOs, V oluntary Organizations, Civil Society groups,
clubs etc. were available especially to provide Medical relief which can be helpful
during Disaster Management have been provided in DM plans of Railway or recorded
in the Divisional Office Control Room, Railway Hospitals and at stations.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 397-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 08.12.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010/BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 27.1.2011, 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that achieving rapid access to the accident sites still remains
a major hurdle, as rescue operation during the 'Golden Hour' cannot be achieved
merely with the conventional provisions of ART, ARMV and SPART etc. For this, the
Indian Railways require a paradigm shift like provision of air support and integration of
railway disaster management infrastructure with those of civil authorities, armed forces
etc. The Committee feel that this requirement further reinforces the need for proper and
speedy implementation of the Disaster Management Act, 2005, which makes it mandatory
for the Ministry of Railways to ensure proper coordination with the various
Departments of the Union Government and the State Governments for dovetailing the
Disaster Management Plans of all the stake holders so that the available infrastructure
and resources are shared. The Committee further desire that the current arrangement
of coordination for rescue and relief operations with the State Governments, District
Authorities, local police, Medical and Armed Forces, and other agencies need to be
further strengthened for facilitating effective and synchronized relief/rescue operations.
This would greatly enhance the Railways’ quick response to any sort of train accidents.
The Committee desire that in undertaking such an exercise, arrangements may be kept

16
in hand for providing air support and deploying water/amphibious vehicles like boats,
hovercrafts etc. if the situation so warrants.
[Sl. No. 8, Part II, Para 8 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
For proper and speedy implementation of provision of the DM Act 2005 the DM
Plan has been prepared for Indian Railways which provide a blue print to the Zonal
Railways and even to field units to tackle a disaster. To ensure proper coordination
with departments of Union and State Govt. & District authorities, Local Police, Medical,
Para-Military Forces (NDRF) coordination has been strengthened with all of them.
A schedule for Mock Drills with NDMA/NDRF as also meetings with NDRF Units
have been laid down/directions have been given recently in a sabotage case on 28th
May, 2010. A train accident involving passengers of Train No. 2102 Jnaneshwari Express
near Kharagpur, help of helicopters was taken from air base Kalaikunda and special
NDRF force was called from Kolkata for facilitating effective and synchronized relief/
rescue operations to enhance the Railways' quick response. The specialized services
of modern cold cutting equipment available with NDRF was taken to extricate bodies
of the dead, as also injured passengers from the capsized coaches. NDMA & MHA
controls are also apprised for assistance in relief in case of major train accidents.
Even in the incident of collision of Uttar Banga Express (3148 Dn.) with V ananchal
Express (3404 Dn.) at Sainthia station of Eastern Railway on 19.07.10, a team of NDRF
was requisitioned and reached site of the accident to help in the Railway's efforts of
relief & rescue.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 311-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 05.10.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16 dated 27.1.2011, 24.2.11]
Observation/Recommendation (Para Nos. 9 and 10)
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee are concerned that while there emerge newer and graver threats
day by day, posing serious challenges to railway safety and security, matching attention
and response is not visible in the railway security establishments. This was especially
found at the Railway stations where infrastructure was inadequate and surveillance
was not very effective as revealed in a joint inspection by Audit of the security
mechanism at 138 stations across the Indian Railways. This inspection revealed that
while CCTVs were not available in 87 out of the 128 stations, a number of CCTVs were
found dysfunctional in 10 out of the 24 'A' category stations such as Chennai Central,
Kalyan, Secunderabad, Guwahati and Patna Junction. Worse still, in most of the

17
 test-checked stations there was either acute shortage or prevalence of dysfunctional
security gadgets such as scanning machines, metal detectors, bomb detection and
disposal squads etc. The smaller stations were worst off in this regard, as none of them
were equipped with any surveillance mechanism. These threats are further compounded
by the existence of unmanned multi-entry/exit points. These glaring lapses in the
Railways existing security set-up give the impression that while moderate level of
security precaution is being provided at the bigger stations, the smaller stations are
left to providence in sofaras preventing threats to safety and security issues are
concerned. This is a serious lapse for which Railways have to make earnest efforts at
a fast pace to meet the growing security challenges. In this regard, the Committee have
been informed that an electronic surveillance based Integrated Security System is
being installed at 195 sensitive stations across the country. Besides, the Railway
Protection Force has been strengthened by infusing more funds; raising 12 commando
companies; providing specialized training; launching better information network with
passengers/public and augmenting Dog Squad. The Committee still find that these
measures are not commensurate with the quantum of the threat perception faced in a
vast network which operates about 900 trains, reaching 800 stations and handling
approximately 1.4 crore passengers per day. Moreover, the Integrated Security System
neither addresses much about the risks associated with the goods trains nor covers
the safety and security issues concerning tracks and bridges even though these are
very vulnerable to sabotages. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry
of Railways should get a proper security evaluation done for analyzing different threat
perceptions relating to train stations, tracks, bridges etc. so that a comprehensive
security plan is formulated and adequate preventive and anti-sabotage security system
is put in place. The Committee further recommend that the RPF be reformed, modernized
and expanded to provide the required level of manpower and security.
[Sl. No. 9, Part II, Para 9 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee note that with the increasing number of train passengers and
users, most of the railway stations across the country have been increasingly facing
the problem of over crowding. With the existence of unmanned or inadequately manned
multi-entry and exit points in many of the stations, the problem of overcrowding and
unauthorized entry into the railway premises is growing day by day posing a challenge
to the railway safety. As a matter of concern, the number of tresspassers, unauthorized
hawkers/vendors prosecuted by the Railway Protection Force under various sections
of the Railways Act, 1989 reached 14 lakh in the year 2008 alone. To eliminate this
problem, the Committee observe that the Railways need to take precise and time bound
multi-pronged measures like construction of boundary walls and fencings around the
stations, plugging of unmanned entry and exit points, allowing the entry of the
non-passengers to a certain point as is the case in the airports, revising the norms of
platform ticket system etc. The Committee further desire that all these measures should
be incorporated in the Railways' Integrated Security System as efforts to homogenise
all the railway safety measures for better results.
[Sl. No. 10, Part II, Para 10 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

18
Action Taken on Recommendation Nos. 9 & 10 by the Government
A High Powered Committee consisting of officers from NSG,  Delhi Police, RPF,
CISF & Railways has formulated Composite Security Plan for Railway Security. Based
on the recommendations of above Committee,  202 vulnerable railway stations have
been identified. An Integrated Security System, consisting of following four broad
areas, is being installed to strengthen surveillance mechanism over above stations at
an estimated budget of Rs. 353 crore under Works Programme 2009-2010.
(a) IP based CCTV surveillance system.
(b) Access control.
(c) Personal and baggage screening system.
(d) Bomb Detection and Disposal system.
Regarding provision of boundary wall at vulnerable stations nominated for
Integrated Security System, General Manager have been advised to have them built/
provided in consultation with RPF and concurrence of Zonal Finance, wherever
provision of boundary walls/fencing etc. is considered essential and inescapable.
Review of Railway Security
Meetings with Ministry of Home Affairs are being held at regular interval of time
to review railway security. State-wise nodal officers have been nominated from RPF for
coordination, liaison with concerned State authorities. Sensitive routes have been
identified in consultation with the concerned security agencies. Necessary action is
being taken for its security in a coordinated manner. Ministry of Railways in consultation
with Ministry of Home Affairs has decided to hand over the security of Kolkata Metro
Railway to a single agency i.e. RPF. Creation of additional posts is under process.
Close coordination with State Police, GRP and Civil Administration has been maintained
to improve the security in Railways.
Modernization/Strengthening of RPF
— Rs. 67.09 crore have been allocated for procurement of modern security related
equipment for RPF and procurement process is underway.
— RPF personnel are being equipped with modern fire  arms like AK 47 rifles.
— Proposal for legal empowerment of RPF to deal with passenger related offences
is under examination of the Board.
— 973 non-gazetted posts in RPF were sanctioned in the year 2008 and recruitment
process has already been completed. To further augment the strength of RPF,
5134 posts have been created  with the approval of Ministry of Finance, for
which recruitment process has been initiated.
— To strengthen railway security in vulnerable sections, creation of infrastructure

19
for three new RPSF Bns. has been sanctioned under Works Programme
2010-2011. HQ's of above Battallion will be at:—
(i) Manwal (NR)
(ii) Cooch Behar (NFR)
(iii) Asansol (Mahila Bn) (ER)
— A Commando training Centre to impart Commando Training to RPF/RPSF
personnel has been approved to be set up at Canning/ER.
— An All India RPF Help line, sanctioned at an estimated cost of Rs. 5 crore is
being set up.
— Networking of Security control Rooms and posts of RPF at Divisions, Zones
and Railway Board has also been approved to improve response to passenger
and ensure better crime control.
— 12 Commando companies are being raised by giving commando training to
RPSF personnel in institutes of repute.
— A National Dog Training centre has been approved at Podanur, SR with a
capacity of training of 50 dogs at a time.
 Railways have been advised to take action for identification and construction
of boundary walls at vulnerable locations on a programmed basis in order to prevent
trespassing and preventing outsiders against developing any right of entry on
Railway land besides prevention of encroachments. Locations around stations
within towns are one of these vulnerable locations where boundary walls are
provided on programmed basis depending on availability of funds. Instructions to
ensure manning of entry and exit points to prevent entry of unauthorized
persons/non-passengers in ticketed area of railway stations and to form combined
teams of ticket checking staff and personnel of Railway Protector Force and
Government Railway Police for surveillance at the stations where the problem of
checking unauthorized entrants is severe, already exist. These instructions had
been reiterated for strict compliance and railways have also been instructed to
conduct special drives periodically in association with RPF/GRP staff at  station
premises to evict unauthorized persons. Entry of non-passengers to ticketing area
of platform on the authority of platform tickets is restricted during peak rush
periods especially during festival seasons and vacation periods when platforms
and railway stations become congested.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 311-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 05.10.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 27.01.2011, 24.02.11]

20
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee in their examination find that about 83 to 86 per cent of the train
accidents during the preceding five years were caused by human errors especially the
failure of the Railway staff. This indicates lack of proper training or expertise in running/
driving trains and handling sophisticated equipment. On a closer scrutiny, rampant
cases of human errors are also indicative of occupational hazards such as working in
extreme climates and overstretched working hours etc. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should study the causes of the human errors leading to
train accidents and take necessary remedial measures for imparting appropriate skills,
training and for alleviating unreasonable hardships, if any, faced by the railway
personnel to prevent or minimize the errors to the barest minimum.
[Sl. No. 11, Part II, Para 11 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
A major chunk of Accident due to human error are not in control of Railways.
This is due to the fact that bulk of the total accidents are at unmanned level crossing
caused by road users. Another smaller chunk is on account of sabotage or of bomb
blast and/or miscreant activities. The extent of the rest i.e., of accidents on account of
failure of Railway staff is reducing year after year in numbers. Even in these cases,
there is big percentage of them which are consequent to a failure of equipment, the
Railway staff is personally required to excercise greater care and supervise passing of
trains. The Railways have adopted a policy of placing such accidents, not in the
category of failure of equipment, but on failure of Railway staff.
With rail traffic increasing fast, there is considerable pressure on the Railway
staff in such situation especially incongested sections. This is partly being overcome
by improved Technology adopted gradually on the Railways as also by modernization
of equipment and revamping the Training Modules of staff.
The improvements in Training methodology and review of training Modules,
periodicity etc. have been taken up in a big way. Practical aspects of Training is being
emphasized in the Revised Training Modules. This has shown encouraging results as
the no. of  cases of accidents on account of failure of Railway staff have gradually
reduced year after year.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 311-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 05.10.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 27.01.2011, 24.02.2011]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 14)
The Committee note that the Indian Railways have chalked out various measures
to reduce different types of accidents like derailments, collisions, level crossing
accidents, fire accidents. While these measures need to be pursued vigorously, many
challenges lie ahead in this regard like fund constraints, lack of trained manpower, lack
of co-operation from the States, sabotages by anti-social elements etc. Moreover,
these being costly projects, would exact huge investment. The Committee, therefore,

21
desire that the Ministry should explore new vistas and partnerships with the State
Governments/PSUs and even the Private Sector perhaps in the PPP mode for enhancing
revenue generation so that a substantial portion of the projects can be self financed or
self sustainable.
[Sl.No. 14, Part II, Para 14 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Ministry of Railways agrees with this recommendation and to implement this
policy has created an Infrastructure directorate in the Railway Board to oversee PPP
projects so as to bring in greater investment on the Railways. This Ministry is already
implementing a number of railway projects/schemes in partnership with State
Governments and with private sector holders to improve the viability and prospect of
timely execution of projects. Ministry of Railways has also entered in cost-sharing
arrangements with the following State Governments for funding of Railway projects:
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand,
West Bengal, Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 311-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 05.10.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16 dated 27.1.2011, 24.2.11]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No.15)
The Committee find that many of the railway assets and properties including
train stations, tracks, bridges, wagons, rolling stock, immovable infrastructure are
exposed to various forms of vandalism like sabotage by extremists, mob violence,
arson, looting, destruction, hooliganism and even thievery. With the increasing
incidences of mob violence, general strikes, public agitations, bandhs etc., the railway
assets especially in the far-flung and remote areas are at the greater risk of destruction.
It has been informed by the Ministry that in some cases of vandalism, where culprits
are known, FIRs are filed but could not be pursued vigorously because of multiple of
constraints like lack of manpower, lack of co-operation from the local police, lengthy or
protracted court cases. Thus, acts of vandalism on the Railways' property are not
being pursued effectively. The Committee recommend a vigorous and purposive follow
up of prosecution of persons responsible for destruction of railway property and also
an assessment of the need to amend certain laws to effectively enforce the protection
of railway property. A Committee of experts, including legal experts may be set up to
study the best possible solution for covering the gaps in the law and its enforcement
as far as prosecuting the culprits is concerned. The Committee believe that with the
increasing use of electronic surveillance systems, the prevention and pursuance of
these cases should be easier, faster and more decisive. For this, the Railways may enter
into a formal coordinating arrangement with State Governments, District and Local

22
Authorities/police, law courts etc. to undertake proper investigation to identify and
arrest the culprits for further appropriate action. Further, an effective mechanism should
be put in place for monitoring the outcome of the cases registered. Also, considering
the difficulties and hurdles in pursuing such cases,the Committee would like the
Ministry to focus on taking preventing actions by sensitizing all the law enforcement
agencies like RPF, GRP and local police on these issues.
[Sl.No.15, Part II, Para 15 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
An unrelenting fight against criminals in protecting railway property is the main
function of Railway Protection Force. The RPF enquiry officers have been invested
with the powers of prosecution under the RP(UP) Act and certain sections of the
Railway Act, 1989 Nodal officer (of the rank of Chief Security Commissioner) has been
nominated for coordination with each State Zonal Railways have been advised to
coordinate with the State Governments at appropriate levels. The Divisional Security
Commissioners/Assistant Security Commissioners usually conduct coordination
meetings with their counterparts at District level. The matters regarding investigation
and prosecution of the persons responsible for destruction of railway property are
also chased up. The cases registered by police are also monitored at appropriate
levels.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 311-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 05.10.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 27.1.2011, 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No.16)
The Railway Board took a decision in December 2000 to set up separate Land
Management Organization at Divisional and Zonal levels for preventing encroachments
upon Railway Land. Subsequently, the idea was dropped without the approval of  the
Board and Audit found in their review that land management cells were not formed in
8 out of 16 Zones and 44 out of 67 Divisions. Although the Ministry of Railways
claimed that Land Management Cells have now been set up as previously envisaged
and made functional with well trained and competent officials in the Zonal Headquarters
and Divisions of all the sixteen Zonal Railways, the Committee find in their examination
that such cells are still not in place in various Zonal and Divisional Headquarters. This
reveals either errors in the information submitted by the Zonal Railways or lack of
involvement as well as slack monitoring by the apex body in the Railway Board. The
Committee observe that establishing a separate Land Management Cell at each of the
Zonal and the Divisional Headquarters level would vastly help the Railway authorities
in interacting, coordinating liaisoning with the State Revenue Authorities on various
land related issues, like land title disputes and eviction of encroachments into railway

23
land. Furthermore, since land disputes are complicated and often turn into protracted
court cases, the system demands that those manning land management cells should
be fully conversant with various Rules and Acts governing landed property like the
Railway Act, 1989, and the Public Premises Eviction Act, 1971. The Committee,
therefore, while urging the Railways to set up separate land management cells in
remaining Zone/Divisions, would also like the Ministry to make necessary
efforts/arrangements to staff their Land Management Cells with those who possess
adequate knowledge and skills to deal effectively with land related matters/cases in
Courts of Law and if required, suitable training may be provided to them to improve
the performance of these Cells.
[Sl.No.16, Part II, Para 16 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Consequent to the decision taken in December, 2000, Land Management cells
have been set up and are functional in all the zonal headquarters and divisions on
railways. Comprehensive instructions have been issued vide Railway Board's letter
No. 2007/LML/06/10, dt. 01.04.2010 covering whole gamut on Land Management
including imparting regular training from railway's training institute as well as other
reputed private training institutes to the officials and staff of Land Management Cells.
Regular training of officers and staff is carried out at the divisional training school and
Indian Railway Institute of Civil Engineering (IRICEN), Pune in order to deal effectively
with land related matters. Separate workshops are also organized for interaction with
revenue officials.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 28-RA-II/12-2/2007/(MIP) dated 02.2.2011 have vetted
the Action Taken Note with the following comments:—
"Seen, thanks. However, copy of the detailed instructions issued, regarding
leasing/licensing of railway land to PSUs along with a copy of contract agreement
containing the clause for retrieval of land in case the same is required by Railway
before the expiry of the term of the lease, may be furnished for kind appreciation
of PAC."
Ministry's Comments
Requisite instructions are at Annexures A, B, C, D and E.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance,
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 24.2.2011]

24
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee are constrained to note the delays in acquisition of land in
71 out of the 129 cases reviewed by Audit. Further, even though land was acquired,
mutation of land was not done with the respective State revenue authorities in
60 cases. Surprisingly, the acquired land was not handed over to the respective
construction departments/open lines in 44 cases. It was also found that several cases
of land acquisition, processed as far back as five to seven years, were still not finalized.
The main reasons for these problems were court cases, delay on the part of the State
Governments, encroachments, pricing disputes with the State Governments,
non-disbursement of amount etc. The Committee in their examination notice that the
entire land acquisition procedure of the Indian Railways had been carried out under
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The Committee have now been informed in this regard
that with the enactment of the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2008, acquisition of land is
expected to be faster. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should further
streamline their procedures of land acquisition and mutation preferably under a properly
modified Act so that no scope is available for court cases and disputes with the State
Governments in acquiring land for their purposes. This would arrest the delays in
acquisition of Railways Land and consequently, will accelerate the momentum and
progress of the capacity enhancement projects like Dedicated Freight Corridors, which
are still at the nascent stage of finalizing land acquisition even after a lapse of three
years from its initiation.
[Sl. No. 17, Part II, Para 17 of 16th Report of PAC  (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Land is a State subject. Land acquisition for railway projects is undertaken by
State Government under the "The Land (Acquisition) Act, 1894". For the new projects
and old projects where process of acquisition is in initial stages, the land acquisition is
now being undertaken through the Railways (Amendment) Act, 2008. As the State
Government is custodian of all land records, mutation which inter-alia involves
alteration to the land records owned by the State Government is done by State
Government only. Notwithstanding above, it is always the endeavour of Railways to
streamline and expedite the land acquisition and mutation process by constant
interaction with the State Revenue Authorities and other agencies at all levels. In this
regard, periodic meetings are held with State Government officials including Secretary
level meetings.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 28-RA-II/12-2/2007/(MIP) dated 02.2.2011 have vetted
the Action Taken Note with the following comments:—
"Seen, thanks. However, copy of the detailed instructions issued, regarding
leasing/licensing of railway land to PSUs alongwith a copy of contract agreement
containing the clause for retrieval of land in case the same is required by Railway
before the expiry of the term of the lease, may be furnished for kind appreciation
of PAC."

25
Ministry's Comments
Requisite instructions are at Annexures A, B, C, D and E.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 24.2.2011]

26
Observation/Recommendation  (Para No. 18)
As per provisions of the Indian Railways Code for Engineering Department, the
Indian Railways Works Manual and the Joint Procedure Order issued by Chief General
Engineer/Zones, three basic land records registers namely Land Records Register,
Land Boundary Verification Register and Encroachment Inspection Register are required
to be maintained at Zonal, Divisional and field levels. The Committee's examination
has, however, revealed that the Land Boundary Verification and Encroachment
Inspection Registers were not being maintained by 97 out of 212 Senior Sectional
Engineer's Offices checked by Audit. Besides, inconsistencies prevailed in reporting
the facts on the land holding, recent land encroachments, land plans, verification  of
records, construction of boundary walls etc. at various levels in the zones besides
instances of title disputes and forged sale of land by private parties. In  the absence of
proper land records, the Railways could not submit accurate information  even to the
Courts thus prolonging many land dispute cases. Thus, the failure of the Railways to
maintain the requisite land records registers has snowballed into a big problem for not
only the Railways but also for other stake holders for the simple reason that many of
the  disputes and the court cases stemmed from this lapse. The Committee have now
been informed that in order to address the deficiencies in record maintenance, all the
data relating to land holdings has been computerized. In addition, more than
 81 per cent of the total 52,367 land plans have been digitally scanned by August 2009.
The Committee observes that it is also necessary to correct the inaccuracies in the
existing land records. This would produce accurate, dispute-free land records and
data, which would in turn help in settling many of the court  cases and preventing any
more disputes in future.
[Sl. No. 18, Part II, Para 18 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. All land record registers as per
codal provisions are maintained by zonal railways and divisions. Deficiencies are
made good by Railways as and when noticed. Railways have been further directed to
review the land records and correct the inaccuracies wherever noticed. Comprehensive
detailed instructions have been issued vide Railway Board's letter No. 2007/LML/06/10
dt 01-04-2010 to Zonal Railways in this regard.
Audit vide their U.O. No.28-RA/II/12-2/2007/(MIP) dated 02.2.2011 have vetted
the Action Taken Note with the following comments:—
"Seen, thanks. However, copy of the detailed instructions issued, regarding
leasing/licensing of railway land to PSUs along with a copy of contract agreement
containing the clause for retrieval of land in case the same is required by Railway
before the expiry of the term of the lease, may be furnished for kind appreciation
of PAC."

27
Ministry's Comments
Requisite instructions are at Annexures A, B, C, D and E.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case  No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 24.2.2011]

28
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 19)
As an offshoot of improper maintenance of land records in various Zones and
Divisions, instances of title disputes, non-reclamation of land and even forged sale of
land are still prevalent in the Indian Railways. In a unique case   of the
Western Railway, the railway administration failed to take back timely possession of a
piece of land measuring 159.91 hectares from the State Government even after 32 years
of the closure of the narrow gauge line on Ujjain-Agar Section as it could not prove its
ownership. The Ministry attributed the cause of these problems to the fact that the
Indian  Railways inherited the land records from the erst while British India, various
State Railways and Princely States, which lacked uniformity in maintenance of land
records. The Committee do not find this contention convincing neither for the Railways
inability to recover the land from the State Governments, nor for instances of forged
sale of land by the private parties because these problems would not have emerged at
the first instance had the Railways undertaken verification/proper survey of the
inherited land for correct record maintenance and resolving ownership issues
immediately when they took over possession of the land. The fact that this was not
given any attention before indicates the apathetic attitude of the Ministry in taking
timely action for having interactions/coordination with the concerned States with a
view to facilitating transfer of ownership and other allied matters. Recently, the Ministry
have taken on priority such long awaited measures as — verification of land  plans
with revenue authorities; computerization of land plans including scanning and
microfilming; and holding meeting with State Government revenue officials. The
Committee feel that the Indian Railways need to evolve a staggered time-frame for
implementation of these measures so that no scope for title disputes and forged selling
of land is left. The Committee further recommend the Ministry to keep all railway land
under their possession/ownership in umambiguous terms to avoid any unwanted
controversy in future.
[Sl. No. 19, Part II, Para 19 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Comprehensive detailed
instructions have been issued vide Railway Board's letter No. 2007/LML/06/10
dt. 01-04-2010 covering whole gamut on Land Management. General Managers of the
Zonal Railways have been directed to take up issues regarding land management in
the coordination meeting with the  State Governments. As already observed by the
Committee, railway has taken up the task of verification of land plans on priority basis.
In this regard, 45240 no. of land plans have been verified and digital scanning of
43270 land plans have been completed out of total 54060 plans upto Oct-2010. Railways
have been directed to complete the balance work in order to keep all railway land under
their possession/ownership in unambiguous terms. It is a committed policy and effort
of railway to keep railway land under their possession/ownership in unambiguous
terms.
As regards Ujjain-Agar narrow gauge section, Railway is the bonafide owner of
the land. Railway is in constant interaction with State Government of Madhya Pradesh
regarding transfer of this railway land to the State Government.

29
Audit vide their U.O. No. 28-RA-II/12-2/2007/(MIP) dated 02.2.2011 have vetted
the Action Taken Note with the following comments:—
"Seen, thanks. However, copy of the detailed instructions issued, regarding
leasing/licensing of railway land to PSUs along with a copy of contract agreement
containing the clause for retrieval of land in case the same is required by Railway
before the expiry of the term of the lease, may be furnished for kind appreciation
of PAC."
Ministry's Comments
Requisite instructions are at Annexures A, B, C, D and E.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance,
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 24.2.2011]

30
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 20)
In a disturbing scenario, the Committee find that the Indian Railways have been
facing many cases of encroachment of their land across the country. The issue was
raised in Parliament in 1999 but no effective eviction drive seems to have been taken as
2,20,152 encroachment cases were noticed as on 1st  April, 2004. Further, 16,109 new
cases of encroachment crept in during  the period 2004-05 to 2006-07 thus leaving
1,88,996 cases involving land area of about 1,594 hectares at the end of the year 2006-07.
The encroachment problem has grown deeper and acquired multidimensions as many
of such cases were not shown or shown inaccurately in the railway records by the
concerned Senior Section Engineers and Section Engineers. In the opinion of the
Committee, the situation is so grave that even the Railway Safety Zones have not been
spared from the menace of encroachment despite the Railway Board's instructions
issued in August 2002. In fact, 26,108 encroachment cases were found in the Safety
Zones located in 15 zones at the end of 2006-07. The collateral damage caused by the
encroachment into the Railway land is highly visible as completion of many projects
have been delayed resulting in cost overrun and loss of earning capacity to the Railways.
The main cause of increase in these cases of encroachment was non-erection of
boundary walls around the vacant railway land. There had been heavy and widespread
shortfall in construction of boundary wall around railway land across 14 Railway
Zones on account of shortage of funds, non-finalization of estimates, non-finalization
of tenders, failures of contractors, non-availability of material etc. As regards, eviction
of the encroachers, the Railways, being dependent upon the State Governments for
law enforcing agencies like Police and Magistrates etc. have been facing difficulties in
getting enough support from these quarters. Moreover, Courts also halt the eviction
process in many cases. All these factors have put  the  Railways in a very precarious
condition. In the Committee's analysis, the root cause of these cases of encroachment
can be traced to lack of proper survey/verification of railway land, non-availability of
proper land records, improper maintenance of land record registers and indifference to
the malaise; fuelled by inactivity on the part of Section Engineers, RPF personnel and
other Railway authorities in carrying out timely inspection, identification and prevention
of the encroachment activities. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry of
Railways to formulate a comprehensive action plan both for early removal of all these
encroachments and prevention of fresh encroachments into any of the Railway land
especially including those in the Safety Zones. A coordinated approach is required to
be taken to elicit active participation and co-operation for other stakeholders like the
State Governments, District Authorities, local police, judiciary etc. Simultaneously,
Divisional Railway Manager should be made responsible for any fresh encroachment
on Railway land in his Division.
[Sl. No. 20, Part II, Para 20 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. Detailed comprehensive
instructions have been issued vide Railway Board's letter No. 2007/LML/06/10

31
dt. 01.04.2010 covering whole gamut on Land Management. Zonal Railways have been
asked to identify vulnerable locations prone to encroachments and to construct
boundary walls at such locations on a programmed basis in order to prevent
encroachments. As an additional safeguard for preventing encroachment, railway land
is also licensed to railway employee for cultivation purposes. Railways have been
directed to formulate the action plan for prevention of encroachments and to remain
vigilant for preventing encroachment at the vulnerable locations.
It may be appreciated that encroachment removal process has a social aspect
also. Railways are dependent on the assistance of the State Govts. for police and
magistrate, etc. who are normally reluctant to provide  adequate support and assistance.
Efforts of removal of encroachment are halted by court cases also. Despite above
constraints Railways have been able to successfully reduce the area under
encroachments by 1080 hectares in the past 5 years as is evident from the position
given below:—
Details as on Area (Hectare) under
encroachments
31.03.05 2075
31.03.10 995
Due care is being taken to ensure that the projects do not get affected due to
encroachments. As a result, only 6 projects  have been affected due to encroachment.
Railways are taking necessary action for removal of encroachments at these project
sites.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 28-RA-II/12-2/2007/(MIP) dated 02.2.2011 have vetted
the Action Taken Note with the following comments:—
"Seen, thanks. However, copy of the detailed instructions issued, regarding
leasing/licensing of railway land to PSUs along with a copy of contract agreement
containing the clause for retrieval of land in case the same is required by Railway
before the expiry of the term of the lease, may be furnished for kind appreciation
of PAC."
Ministry’s Comments
Requisite instructions are at Annexures A,B,C, D and E.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance,
Railway Board.
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 24.2.2011]
Comments of the Committee
 Please see paragraph No. 20  of Chapter I.

32
 Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee observe that about 1.13 lakh acres of Railway land, which is
approximately 10 per cent of the total 10.68 lakh acres of  land possessed by the Indian
Railways is lying vacant. This vacant land has been kept for future expansion of
Railway infrastructure in order to meet the demands of traffic growth in the country.
Till that happens, the Railways lease out the vacant land for several purposes such
as—Grow More Food Scheme, Pisciculture, Welfare Activities for Indian Railways
Employees etc. These vacant lands are also licensed out for commercial use to—Oil
companies, Steel Yards, PSUs like Container Corporation of India, Indian Railway
Catering and Tourism Corporation, Central Warehousing Corporation etc. In this
connection, the Committee note that the Railways have not been able to derive maximum
benefit due to certain problems and gray areas such as poor maintenance of records,
failure to repossess the land after the expiry of the licensing period, under recovery of
licence fee etc. Due to these constraints, the Indian Railways have failed to harness
their vast land resources through quick and result oriented development. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Railways need to be proactive in this regard to
earn more revenue from their vacant land by being more vigilant and strengthening
their licensing system and the maintenance of proper records regarding area under
licensing by keeping track of date of licensing, due date for taking back, quantum of
land released by the licencee after the expiry of the licenses and the current status of
the utilization of these lands etc. The Commitee would like to be apprised of the details
of the latest status in this regard.
[Sl. No. 22, Part II, Para 22 of 16th Report of PAC  (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Indian Railways have taken a proactive approach regarding management of land
and in this regard, all vacant railway land has been declared as its land bank thereby
keeping proper accountal of utilization of each plot of land. Comprehensive detailed
instructions have been issued vide Railway Board's letter No. 2007/LML/06/10,
dt. 01.04.2010 to Zonal Railways covering whole gamut of Land Management including
proper upkeep of land records and the land given on license basis. Railways have been
asked to ensure that no railway land is handed over on lease/license without execution
of proper legally valid agreement. As an additional safeguard, railways have also been
directed to ensure that draft agreement duly signed by the party is available with
railways before processing the case of licensing/leasing.
As a result, there has been steady improvement in revenues generated through
land thereof as is evident from the details given in table below:—
Sl. No. Y ear Revenue earned
(In crore of Rupees)
1. 2005-06 201.45
2. 2006-07 356.00
3. 2007-08 476.51
4. 2008-09 541.95
5. 2009-10 685.08

33
Audit vide their U.O.No.-28-RA-II/12-2/2007/(MIP) dated 02.2.2011 have vetted
the Action Taken Note with the following comments:—
"Seen, thanks. However, copy of the detailed instructions issued, regarding
leasing/licensing of railway land to PSUs along with a copy of contract agreement
containing the clause for retrieval of land in case the same is required by Railway
before the expiry of the term of the lease, may be furnished for kind appreciation
of PAC."
Ministry's Comments
Requisite instructions are at Annexures A,B,C,D and E.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance,
Railway Board.
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 24.2.2011]

34
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 23)
The Committee in their examination find persistent delays in renewal/execution
of the agreement regarding commercial licensing of land by the Indian Railways.
To give details, licensing agreement was yet to be executed in the Indian Railways in
respect of 14,905 cases out of 33,504 cases under licensing; there were delays in
renewal/execution of license agreements ranging from 3 to 5 years in 90 cases and 5 to
10 years in 2,427 cases; there were delays beyond 10 years in 16,588 cases etc. Besides,
in 42 cases, the license fee fixed was much lower than the current market value resulting
in heavy loss of revenue. The  Committee find that the Ministry have not so far
initiated any concrete action for addressing these problems except for reiterating the
Policy Circular for Commercial Licensing (issued vide Letter No. 2005/LML/1818, dated
12.02.2005 and 04.12.2009) which only emphasized that in future no leasing/licensing
of land would be processed unless the draft lease/license agreements submitted by
the parties duly signed. The Committee observe that due to continuance of delay in
renewal and execution of license agreements, the Railways have been losing huge
sums of revenue. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Indian Railways to set a
time line for executing/renewal in respect of the land commercially licensed and also to
ensure that the license fee in respect of land licensed to the PSUs is pegged to the
market value of land and recovery of the amount due is effected accordingly. For this,
the Committee would like the Ministry to review the system of entering into license
agreements with CONCOR, CWC, IRCTC so that any provision denying the Railways
of the deserving revenue are identified and rectified at the earliest. The issues of under
recovery and non-recovery of license fees, non-revision of license fees and the failure
to execute agreements should be monitored regularly at the Board level. Further, the
Committee desire that the Railways should ensure uniformity in the levy of other
charges wherever applicable besides recovering outstanding charges from the
defaulters.
[Sl. No. 23, Part II, Para 23 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Detailed instructions have been issued to Railways that draft agreement duly
signed by the party should be available with the Railways before processing the case
of licensing/leasing and Railways should ensure that no railway land is handed over
on lease/license without execution of proper legally valid agreement. In addition, the
issue of signing of pending agreements has been taken up with Railways and they
have been directed to ensure signing of all pending agreements in a planned manner.
Observations of Audit to review the system of entering into license agreements
with CONCOR, CWC, IRCTC are noted. Though the policy of licensing of railway land
is in place, the working of these PSU's are integral with the railway working and help
railways in augmenting the revenues. Land given to CONCOR is predominantly used
for container traffic which contributes in freight traffic moved by Railways. As far as
leasing of railway land for development of rail side warehousing by CWC is concerned,
lesser lease rental is compensated by the existing system of revenue sharing besides

35
increase in freight earnings from incremental rail borne traffic handled at these terminals
because of value added services like storage, handling and door to door service
provided by CWC. It is in view of this that the concept of commercial licensing has not
been made applicable to these PSUs as Indian Railways interests are served in a larger
perspective geared towards provision of services to its customers.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 28-RA-II/12-2/2007(MIP) dated 02.2.2011 have vetted
the Action Taken Note with the following comments:—
"Seen, thanks. However, copy of the detailed instructions issued, regarding
leasing/licensing of railway land to PSUs along with a copy of contract agreement
containing the clause for retrieval of land in case the same is required by Railway
before the expiry of the term of the lease, may be furnished for kind appreciation
of PAC."
Ministry's Comments
Requisite instructions are at Annexures A,B,C,D and E.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance,
Railway Board.
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 24.2.2011]
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 24)
With 1.13 lakh acres of vacant land, the Indian Railways planned to utilize its
vacant land, wherever feasible, for setting up of various infrastructure projects which
include Rail coach and component factories, multi model logistic parks, auto hubs,
cold storage & perishable cargo centres etc. These ventures are being taken up in
order to generate additional revenue for the Railways. Further, the vacant land, which
is not required for the Railways' operational needs in the near future, has been entrusted
to the recently formed Rail Land Development Authority to undertake commercial
developments. The Committee welcome these ventures and hope that these would
help to finance some of the vital and capital intensive railway projects like Project
Unigauge, track renewal, upgradation of  signalling & telecommunication equipment
and other sorts of infrastructure modernization and renovation activities aimed at
enhancing railway safety and revenue generation which would require huge investment.
While encouraging the Railways to explore all available options in this regard to
optimize their revenue generation and operational needs, the Committee expect the
Railways to be prudent enough to protect their long-term interests so as to pre-empt
any of the licensees from taking undue advantage of possible loopholes in the lease
deeds even to the extent of taking over of the ownership rights etc. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry put in place certain safeguards provisions for early
and efficient retrieval of the leased out/trespassed/encroached upon land.
[Sl.No. 24, Part II, Para 24 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

36
Action Taken by the Government
Suggestion of the Committee has been noted. In order to safeguard Railway's
long term interest on ownership title of railway land and to provide for resumption of
land by Railway in future for its own operational usage, necessary provisions have
been made in the contract agreements regarding resumption of land by Railways on
expiry of lease terms or on payment of due compensation to the developer, if land is
required by Railway before expiry of lease term.
Audit vide their U.O. No.28-RA-II/12-2/2007(MIP) dated 02.2.2011 have vetted
the Action Taken Note with the following comments:—
"Seen, thanks. However, copy of the detailed instructions issued, regarding
leasing/licensing of railway land to PSUs along with a copy of contract agreement
containing the clause for retrieval of land in case the same is required by Railway
before the expiry of the term of the lease, may be furnished for kind appreciation
of PAC."
Ministry's Comments
Requisite instructions are at Annexures A,B,C,D and E.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No.2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 24.2.2011]

ANNEXURES
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. E(MPP)2009/3/1 New Delhi, dt. 20.01.09
General Managers,
All Indian Railways.
Director General,
Railway Staff College, Vadodara.
Director,
Indian Railways Institute of Transport and Management,
Manak Nagar, Lucknow.
Jagjivan Ram RPF Academy,
Lucknow.
Sub: Disaster Management Training.
Subsequent to enactment of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 and the creation
of National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), the subject of disaster
management has gained high priority in the country. As per provisions of this Act, all
Central Ministries/Departments have to take necessary measures to address disaster
management related issues and also to strengthen and upgrade its set-up in their
respective spheres of working. Indian Railways have already taken several initiatives
in this direction. However there has been a felt need for greater integration of disaster
management preparedness into developmental planning, leveraging the strengths of
other non-railway agencies and to harness the availability and strengths of railway
on-board staff who are the first railway responders during any eventuality.
With this in view, Board have decided to revamp the training on disaster
management being imparted to various tiers of railway officials through railway training
institutes as indicated below:—
S.No. Categories of New Training methodology and schedule
Officials
12 3
1. Top Level 3-day Disaster Management Modules are to be delivered
Management (GMs, at RSC/Vadodara and IRITM/LKO @ one every
PHODs, DRMs and 3 months as per annexure 1.
other SAG Officers).
37

38
Frequency of Training:
Once every five years for SAG Officers and above.
2. Middle Level Some of the latest and relevant topics are to be included
Management (SG & in the AMP and MDP programmes being delivered at
JAG officers). RSC/BRC as per annexure 2.
IRITM, LKO will also deliver special module being
developed by them @ one every month.
Frequency of Training:
Every SG/JAG officer need to undergo the module once
every five years either at RSC as regular MDP/AMP
course or special DM module at IRITM.
3. Lower Level Disaster management training to be imparted at IRITM/
Management (SS & LKO on the topics @ one course every month as per
JS officers including annexure 3.
serving Group B Frequency of Training:
officers). Once every five years.
4. Probationers and Topics as per annexure 4 are to be covered during the
Group B officers regular training programme at RSC/Vadodara.
attending induction
courses. Frequency of Training:
As part of the course.
5. Supervisors of all Topics as per annexure 5 are to be covered during the
frontline departments one-week special course at ZRTIs @ one every month.
(Mechanical, Electrical,Passing this course is compulsory for promotion to the
Engg., S &T, Traffic level equivalent to Section Engineer and above.
Comml. & Optg.).
Frequency of Training:
Once every five years.
6. Railway Staff on Disaster Management being a multidisciplinary effort
board passenger during field operations, training in groups of such
carrying train (TS, on-board staff is more desirable and efficient than
Dy. TS, TTEs & training them category-wise. Role of on-board railway
catering staff of staff has been a matter of great criticism in most of the
Commercial serious train accidents. On-board staff is the first railway
Department, Coach representatives to respond to any untoward incident
attendants and AC and their empowerment will improve Railways response
Mechanics from in a big way. Such staff is to be trained in appropriate
Electrical multidisciplinary groups at such locations in the
12 3

39
Departments, some divisions where there is concentration of such staff, to
of the selected coach obviate the need for their hostel accommodation, non-
cleaners of availability for longer periods, etc. Such training can be
Mechanical imparted at the selected country-wide locations to cover
Departments, some maximum number of staff in short period of time. This
of the RPF escorting training can also be imparted in the Customer Care
staff and catering Institutes. Only selected staff of Mechanical, Electrical
staff of contractor (AC), RPF is to be imparted this train ing who are deputed
wherever out- to escort trains. This training  will be made mandatory in
sourced). a phased manner for any staff to go on- board a passenger
train. The staff of catering contractor is also to be
imparted this training in Phase 2 to leverage their
physical presence. Topics to be covered under this
training are at annexure 6.
Frequency of Training:
Once every three years.
7. Nominat ed ARMV Composite training of Mechanical and Medical Staff for
and ART staff of relief and rescue operations is planned to be given at
Mechanical and upcoming Disaster Management Railway Institute at
Medical departments. Bangalore. Such staff is to be trained at STC/Bangalore
under SWR, who are also setting up disaster
management training module, to augment and facilitate
their training till such time regular DM institute comes
into existence. Facilities at STC/Kharagpur may also be
utilized for such training.
Doctors and paramedics nominated for ARMVs and
other rescue operations should be exclusively trained
on trauma care management either at some specialised
institutions or in-house.
Frequency of Training:
Once every three years.
8. Disaster As per recommendation no. 46 of HLC on disaster
management team of management there should be a disaster management
RPF staff & other team of RPF on each division comprising about 16 men
RPF personnel in different ranks. Such teams should be trained in
associated with relief, providing necessary support on relief rescue operations.
rescue operations. The existing 5 day training module should be
appropriately revised to make it suitable to achieve the
above objective. Each of the above teams should be
trained on this module at RPF Academy at Lucknow.
12 3

40
In addition, training module may be appropriately
developed separately for RPF Officers and staff and
should be imparted at RPF Academy at Lucknow.
The respective training modules should include role of
RPF at the accident site, security at the railway premises
like railway stations, trains etc.
Frequency of Training:
Once every three years for disaster management team
of RPF.
Once every five years for other RPF officers and staff.
Zonal Railways & Training institutions are requested to take immediate action
on the above and confirm its implementation for the information of the Board.
Encl.: As stated Sd./-
Rajiv Kishore
Director (Man Power Planning)
     Railway Board
12 3

Top Management (GMs, PHODs, DRMs and other SAG officers)
Module to be delivered at RSC/BRC and IRITM/LKO@ one every 3 months
Objective: After the training, the officer should be able to:—
(i) Distinguish between the national level crisis, serious railway accident where
help from other agencies are also needed and normal railway accident where
railway resources are adequate.
(ii) Assess the extent of resource mobilization needed under each of these events
and should be acquainted with the best practices/resources in this matter.
(iii) Review the level of preparedness with respect to these events in their own set
up.
(iv) Clearly identify his personal role and responsibility in managing the event.
(v) Assess the strengths and weaknesses of his working domain with respect to
their role in a disastrous situation within and outside railway.
(vi) Make/help make action plan to manage vulnerabilities in his working domain.
(vii) Id entify events that may lead to disaster if associated systems and procedures
are not set up right while there is time.
(viii) Command the field operations involving different department of the railway
and outside resources.
Contents of training module:
(a) Aspects of  Disaster Management —Prevention, Mitigation, Relief and Rescue
more emphasis on prevention & mitigation.
(b) Developments on Disaster Management on national front—Disaster
Management  Act, 2005—Provisions concerning Railways, NDMA, NDRF,
IDRN, NIDM, Emergency Operating Centres, National Disaster Management
Policy, Other developments, Disaster Management  Plans, Relief and Rescue
Teams etc.
(c) Role of Railways in Railway and Non-Railway Disasters.
(d) Role of Civil Administration in Railway Disasters.
(e) Possible disasters on the railway system and their prevention and mitigation.
(f) Integration of Disaster Management  into developmental planning.
(g) Information Dissemination, Crisis Communication, Interactive Sessions, Media
Handling.
41

42
Middle Management (SG and JAG officers)
Module to be delivered during AMP & MDP at RSC and at IRITM, Lucknow.
Objective: After the training, the  Officer should be able to:—
(i) Distinguish between the national level crisis, serious railway accident where
help from other agencies are also needed and normal railway accident where
railway resources are adequate.
(ii) Assess the extent of resource mobilization needed under each of these events
and should be acquainted with the best practices/resources in this matter.
(iii) Review the level of preparedness with respect to these events in their own set
up.
(iv) Clearly identify his personal role and responsibility in managing the event.
(v) Assess the strengths and weaknesses of his working domain with respect to
their role in a disastrous situation within and outside railway.
(vi) Make/help make action plan to manage vulnerabilities in his working domain.
(vii) Id entify events that may lead to disaster if associated systems and procedures
are not set up right while there is time.
(viii) Understand the role of individual departments in relief and rescue operations
during serious accidents/disasters and unified  command of response from all
departments of railways and outside.
(ix) Conversant with the equipment with the railways for field operations.
Contents of training module:
(a) Aspects to Disaster Management — Prevention, Mitigation, Relief and Rescue.
(b) Developments on Disaster Management on national front—Disaster
Management  Act, 2005 — Provisions concerning railways, NDMA, NDRF,
IDRN, NIDM, Emergency Operating Centres, National Disaster Management
Policy, Other developments, Disaster Management  Plans, Relief and Rescue
Teams etc.
(c) Role of Railways in Railway and Non-Railway Disasters.
(d) Role of Civil Administration in Railway Disasters.
(e) Possible disasters on the railway system and their prevention and mitigation.
(f) Integration of Disaster Management  into developmental planning.
(g) Information Dissemination, Crisis Communication, Interactive Sessions, Media
Handling.
(h) Commission of Railway Safety.
(i) Judicial Commission.
(j) Discussions on Corporate documents (corporate safety Plan etc.)
(k) Divisional & Headquarter Disaster Management Plans of Railways.
(l) Safety Management Plan.
(m) Discussions on disaster management efforts in some of the latest railway related
disasters.

43
(n) Table top/class room simulation exercise.
(o) Disaster Management films.
Lower Level Management (SS, JS Officers’ including serving Gp. B)
Special Module to be delivered at IRITM/LKO
Objective: After the training, the officer should be able to:—
(i) Distinguish between the national level crisis, serious railway accident where
help from other agencies are also needed and normal railway accident where
railway resources are adequate.
(ii) Assess the extent of resource mobilization needed under each of these events
and should be acquainted with the best practices/resources in this matter.
(iii) Review the level of preparedness with respect to these events in their own set
up.
(iv) Clearly identify his personal role and responsibility in managing the event.
(v) Assess the strengths and weaknesses of his working domain with respect to
their role in a disastrous situation within and outside railway.
(vi) Make/help make action plan to manage vulnerabilities in his working domain.
(vii) Id entify events that may lead to disaster if associated systems and procedures
are not set up right while there is time.
(viii) Understand the role of individual departments in relief and rescue operations
during the serious accidents/disasters and unified command of response from
all Departments of Railways and outside.
(ix) Work as a team under the team leader.
(x) Conversant with the equipment with the Railways for field operations.
Contents of training module:—
(a) Aspects of Disaster Management — Prevention, Mitigation, Relief and Rescue.
(b) Brief on Developments on Disaster Management on national front — Disaster
Management Act, 2005 — Provisions concerning Railways, NDMA, NDRF,
IDRN, NIDM, Emergency Operating Centers, National Disaster Management
Policy, Other developments, Disaster Management  Plans, Relief and Rescue
Teams etc.
(c) Role of Railways in Railway and Non-Railway Disasters (In brief).
(d) Role of Civil Administration in Railway Disasters (In brief).
(e) Possible disasters on the railway system and their prevention and mitigation.
(f) Integration of Disaster Management  into developmental planning.
(g) Commission of Railway Safety (In brief).

44
(h) Judicial Commission (In brief).
(i)  Discussion on Corporate documents (Corporate Safety Plan etc.).
(j) Safety Management Plan of the division.
(k) Discussions on Disaster Management efforts in some of the latest railway
related disasters.
(l) Divisional and  Headquarter Disaster Management Plans of Railways.
(m) Table top/class room simulation exercise.
(n) Disaster Management films.
Probationers of All Services
Module to be delivered during Induction Course and Group B course at RSC
Objective: After the training, the  Officer should be able to:—
(i) Distinguish between the national level crisis, serious railway accident where
help from other agencies are also needed and normal railway accident where
railway resources are adequate.
(ii) Assess the extent of resource mobilization needed under each of these events
and should be acquainted with the best practices/resources in this matter.
(iii) Review the level of preparedness with respect to these events in their own set
up.
(iv) Clearly identify his personal role and responsibility in managing the event.
(v) Assess the strengths and weaknesses of his working domain with respect to
their role in a disastrous situation within and outside railway.
(vi) Make/help make action plan to manage vulnerabilities in his working domain.
(vii) Id entify events that may lead to disaster if associated systems and procedures
are not set up right while there is time.
(viii) Understand the role of individual departments in relief and rescue operations
during serious accidents/disasters and unified  command of response from all
departments of Railways and outside.
(ix) Conversant with the equipment with the railways for field operations.
Contents of training module:—
(a) Aspects of Disaster Management — Prevention, Mitigation, Relief and Rescue.
Brief discussion Emphasis on relief and rescue.
(b) Disasters (accident & non-accident) affecting railway working.
(c) Relief, Rescue and  Restoration systems on the Railways—ARTs, ARMEs,
140 Tonne Crane.
(d) Accident Manual, Disaster Management Plans of Division & HQ.
(e) Inquiries of railway accidents — Judicial, CRS & Departmental.

45
(f) Role of Railways in Railway and Non-Railway Disasters.
(g) Role of Civil Administration in Railway Disasters.
(h) Brief on Developments on Disaster Management on national front — Disaster
Management Act, 2005 — Provisions concerning Railways, NDMA, NDRF,
IDRN, NIDM, Emergency Operating Centers, National Disaster Management
Policy, Other Developments, Disaster Management Plans, Relief and Rescue
Teams etc.
(i) Disaster Management films.
Supervisors of All Frontline Departments
(Mechanical, Electrical, Engg., S&T, Traffic Comml. & Optg.)
Module to be delivered at ZRTIs @ one every month
Objective: After the training, the trainee should be able to:—
(i) Distinguish between the national level crisis, serious railway accident where
help from other agencies are also needed and normal railway accident where
railway resources are adequate.
(ii) Assess the extent of resource mobilization needed under each of these events
and should be acquainted with the best practices/resources in this matter.
(iii) Review the level of preparedness with respect to these events in their own set
up.
(iv) Clearly identify his personal role and responsibility in managing the event.
(v) Assess the strengths and weaknesses of his working domain with respect to
their role in a disastrous situation within and outside railway.
(vi) Make/help make action plan to manage vulnerabilities in his working domain.
(vii) Id entify events that may lead to disaster if associated systems and procedures
are not set up right while there is time.
(viii) Understand the role of individual departments in relief and rescue operations
during serious accidents/disasters and unified command of response from all
Departments of Railways and outside.
(ix) Learn to work as a team at the site of disaster/accident.
(x) Conversant with the equipment with the Railways for field operations.
(xi) Learn to render medical first-aid and use fire extinguisher by himself.
Contents of training module:
(a) Introduction to disaster management—- Main Ingredients of DM, Last 5 Major
accidents on IR with emphasis on relief, rescue and restoration, discussion
with participants.
(b) Features of disaster management plans at various levels.

46
(c) Developments on Disaster Management at National front—Brief discussion.
(d) Location of Emergency Provisions in Coaches— C&W — Emergency windows
and hatches, Electrical — Isolation through emergency switches.
(e) Duties at accident site.
(f) Duties of Control Officials.
(g) Codal provisions of accident manual, IRCM etc.
(h) Communication skills and PR/Media handling, Good conduct.
(i) Rescue techniques: Medical — First Aid, Shifting, Handling and transportation
of injured, Evaluation of seriousness of injury, Artificial respiration,
Haemorrhage, Bandage and Electrocution, Consoling the injured patients,
Demonstration, Practical examination.
(j) Rescue techniques — Fire fighting (each trainee has to exhaust one fire
extinguisher), Causes and kind of fire, Types of fire extinguishing equipments,
Types of fire extinguishers, Fire Brigades, Isolation of burning vehicle,
Demonstration, Practical examination.
(k) Table top/class room simulation exercise.
(l) Disaster Management films.
(m) Discussion and Question/Answer Session.
On-board Railway Staff (Multi-disciplinary)
Module to be delivered at selected countrywide locations through out-sourcing
Objective: After the training, the trainee should be able to:—
(i)  Assimilate accident management related information before start of the journey.
(ii) Understand to work as a team and clearly identify his personal role and
responsibility in managing the accident in the team of railways’ first responders.
(iii) Know the physical operation of all emergency provisions in the coaches/train.
(iv) Know the physical operation of fire extinguishers.
(v) Assess the extent of resources (railway and non-railway) mobilization needed
during railway accidents.
Contents of training module:
(a) Introduction to Disaster Management— Main ingredients of Disaster
Management, Experiences at accident sites, last five major accidents on IR
with emphasis on rescuer, relief and restoration, Discussions with participants.
(b) Rescue technique — Medical— First aid, Shifting, Handling and transporting
the injured, Evaluating the seriousness of injury, Artificial respiration,
Haemorrhage, Bandage and electrocution, Consoling the injured patients,
Demonstration and examination.

47
(c) Rescue techniques — Fire fighting (each trainee has to exhaust one fire
extinguisher), Cause and kinds of fire, Types of fire extinguishing equipments,
Types of fire extinguishers, Fire Brigades, Isolation of burning vehicle,
Demonstration and examination.
(d) Duties of on board Staff: At the starting station like team reporting, details of
doctors, emergency systems, etc. and at the accident site.
(e) Codal provisions of accident manual, IRCM etc., Good conduct, Communication
skills.
(f) Location of Emergency Provisions in Coaches — C&W — Emergency windows
and hatches, Electrical — Isolation through emergency switches etc.
(g) Table top/class room simulation exercise.
(h) Disaster Management films.
(i) Discussion and Question/Answer Session.

ANNEXURE A
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA ¼Hkkjr ljdkj½
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS ¼jsy ea=ky;½
RAILWAY BOARD ¼jsyos cksMZ½
No. 2002/TG-III/600/ 6 New Delhi, dt.  19.03.2004
The General Managers,
All Indian Railways.
The Managing Director,
Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd.,
New Delhi.
Sub.: Memorandum of Understanding between Ministry of Railways and Indian
Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd.
Ref.: Ministry of Railways letter No. 2000/TG .III/600/5 dt. 16.4.2001.
The Ministry of Railways had signed a Memorandum of Understanding for the
year 2001-02 with the Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation on
12th April, 2001 which was circulated vide Board's letter dated. 16.4.2001 quoted above.
A further MoU signed on 19.3.2004 is enclosed which may be widely circulated
on your Railways.
This Issues with the concurrence of the Finance Dte. of Railway Board.
Receipt of this letter may kindly be acknowledged.
Sd/-
Director (Tourism & Catering)
Railway Board
Encl.: As above.
Copy to:
1. Director, PSU, Railway Board.
2.  All Addl. Members, DG/RPF, DG/RHS, Railway Board.
3. CRB, FC, MM, MT, ME, ML, MS and Secretary, Railway Board.
48

MEMORANDUM
OF
UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
AND
INDIAN RAILWAY CATERING
49

AND TOURISM CORPORATION LTD.
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING BETWEEN INDIAN RAILWAYS
AND
INDIAN RAILWAY CATERING AND TOURISM CORPORATION LTD.  (IRCTC)
This Memorandum of Understanding is made on 19th day of March Two
Thousand Four (2004) between
A. The President of India acting through the Secretary, Railway Board, Ministry
of Railways, hereinafter referred to as the "Railways" (which expression shall unless
excluded by or repugnant to the context be deemed to include its successors-in-
interest and assigns)
and
B. Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Limited, company
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956, having its registered office at New Delhi
hereinafter referred to as the "IRCTC" (which expression shall unless excluded by or
repugnant to the context be deemed to include its successors-in-interest and assigns).
1.1 Whereas the IRCTC Ltd. has been formed as an extended arm of the Indian
Railways (IR) to upgrade, professionalise and manage the catering and hospitality
services at stations, on trains and other locations; and to promote domestic and
international tourism through development of hotels, information and commercial
publicity and global reservation systems
and
Whereas Ministry of Railways feels that the IRCTC Ltd. would be a Special
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to explore and exploit under utilised assets of IR by forming
joint ventures/alliances/networks/associated and subsidiary companies and stimulate
private entrepreneurship and investment in the hospitality business
and
Therefore the Ministry of Railways and IRCTC Ltd. have in principle agreed that
IRCTC Ltd. would primarily serve the rail users and passengers through value added
services and strengthen IR's linkage with travel and tourism industry on the terms and
conditions herein set out below:—
1.2 In order to fulfil the above objectives, the following Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) has been entered into between Indian Railways and the
Corporation (IRCTC Ltd.)
2.1 Transfer of land and buildings
The land and buildings owned by the Indian Railways and so identified mutually
will be leased/licensed to the IRCTC Ltd. on nominal license fee/lease charges with
permission to sub-lease/sub-license the rights to third parties in regard to activities
related to passenger amenities and essential services like food & beverages outlets,
50

51
pantry cars, passenger information services, retiring rooms/budget hotels, pre-departure
& post-arrival services, development of passenger terminals, etc. in consideration of
sharing of revenues in the pattern mentioned in clause 2.3.1.
IRCTC Ltd. will not only continue to provide these essential services but will
also induce investment in their upgradation and professionalisation. IRCTC Ltd. will
with the participation of private entrepreneur manage these activities and Indian
Railways' liabilities will reduce to the extent.
To enable the Corporation in providing upgraded facilities and improving
customers' satisfaction, IR will license/lease land/buildings/rolling stock to the IRCTC
Ltd. at mutually agreed license fee for specified periods.
2.2 Use of Rolling stock by IRCTC Ltd.
(i) Considering that rolling stock and transport capacity on hill railways, branch
lines and other isolated sections remains under utilised, IRCTC Ltd. will make all
efforts to exploit the full potential of such assets and earn incremental revenues. In due
course IRCTC Ltd. may take over the management, operation and marketing of these
lines on concessions or other mutually agreed terms.
(ii) On main line and trunk routes, the IRCTC Ltd. may handle demands from
chartered groups, party coaches, special trains, etc. For this purpose, Indian Railways
will quote a flat rate per train/coach per day subject to a minimum 500 kilometers usage
per day or as may be decided by railway from time to time based on fully distributed
haulage costs or adult fare for full coach + 15%, whichever is higher. Such rates will be
inclusive of all charges such as detention charges, haulage charges, empty haulage
charges, service charges, maintenance charges, etc. IRCTC Ltd. will be free to charge
whatever the market can bear over and above the flat rate.
(iii) Maintenance of equipments in pantry cars/mini pantries
While IR will continue to maintain the rolling stock, IRCTC Ltd. may provide and
maintain the equipment, which are required for provision of catering/vending on
mutually agreed terms.
2.3 Sharing of costs/risks/revenues
The expenditure for construction, development and maintenance for new facilities
(related with passenger amenities and essential services) will be the responsibility of
the IRCTC Ltd. or its associates under suitable back to back contract between the
IRCTC Ltd. and its associates. The commercial risk in the ventures will also be borne
by IRCTC Ltd./associates. The license fee/royalties earned by IRCTC Ltd. shall be
shared between IRCTC Ltd. and IR as under:—
2.3.1 Broadly the activities to be handled by IRCTC can be grouped under
following four categories:—
Category 1— Passenger amenities like management of stalls, refreshment rooms
at railway stations, pantry car services, Rail Neer etc. where services are restricted to
paid passengers and items for sale and tariff are determined and controlled by Railways.
For this activity there is very limited scope of profit to the service provider.

52
Category 2 —  Other passenger amenities related projects like retiring rooms,
Yatri Niwas, etc. where tariff is partly controlled by Government, there is some business
opportunity due to dual pricing of products.
Category 3 — Commercial projects like Food Plazas, open air restaurants,
commercial publicity, special festivals/events budget hotels etc. where there may not
be  any Government control on tariff, there is a potential for business and the profits
may be higher.
Category 4 — Tourism related projects like comprehensive package tours,
special trains, etc. where the role of IR will only be as a carrier and the promotional
activities would be undertaken by IRCTC.
In view of this following model for revenue sharing is suggested for different
activities to be undertaken as pilot projects for a period upto 31.3.2004 after which the
sharing ratio could be reviewed mutually between IR and IRCTC.
Categories Remarks Proposed Percentage sharing
of licence fee/ royalties earned
in different projects
IRCTC  IR
Category 1 Essentially a passenger amenity area: 85% 15%
IR will save overhead costs to the tune
of 60% to 80% of turnover in case of
departmental units. In the case of licensee
operated units IR will save cost of
documentation, supervision etc.
Category 2 Passenger amenity related area: IR will 75% 25%
save investments and existing losses.
Projects will ensure utilization of sleeping
assets like unutilized land. Revenue of
IRCTC will be earmarked for future
development/investment on behalf of IR.
Category 3 Commercial projects: Greater share of 60% 40%
IRCTC in view of heavy initial
investment on these projects and the
need for resources  generation  for  future
development/investment on behalf of IR.
Category 4 T ourism related projects: IR will act as aIRCTC will be IR will be
carrier only. All arrangements  including free to market guaranteed
boarding, lodging, sightseeing, transfer the product payment of full
facility and marketing expenses to be and retain the tariff + a
borne by IRCTC. These projects will margin after specified
improve IR image and result in  growth guaranteed minimum
in passenger traffic. payment to service charge.
the IR.

53
2.3.2 Where services/products are directly provided by IRCTC to IR.
Pricing of such services/products provided by IRCTC Ltd. to IR, e.g.
retail ticketing shall be as mutually negotiated between the railway administration
and IRCTC Ltd.
3. Payment Mechanism
As for each project, separate agreement/MoU will be made between IR and
IRCTC and specific railway will be nominated for the purpose of receiving payment.
For all projects falling under category 1, 2, & 3 final payment will be made after
adjustment on quarterly basis within 20 days after closing of the quarter and some
adhoc monthly payment will be made by IRCTC for each category.
For category 4, IRCTC will intimate railway at least 30 days in advance for
booking special train/coach and all payment will be made at least 48 hours before the
departure of train/coach.
4. Catering Services
IRCTC will follow all the relevant guidelines and instructions issued by the
Ministry of  Railways from time to time including catering Policy 2000 circulated by
Railway Board’s letter No. 97/TGIII/600/12 dated 20.10.2000, as modified/amended
from time to time unless any specific exemptions/changes for IRCTC in respect of the
relevant items/clauses is agreed to by Ministry of Railways. IRCTC, however, will take
all necessary measures to improve quality of service and enhance revenue.
5. Rail Neer
(a) "Rail Neer" shall be the exclusive brand of packaged drinking water to be
procured and sold by the department and non-departmental private catering
licensees on the premises of Indian Railways including trains subject to
availability and supply of Rail Neer from IRCTC.
(b) In instances of "Rail Neer" not conforming to BIS specifications IRCTC shall
be responsible for all complaints and litigation arising out of it and shall
indemnify Indian Railways. IRCTC shall also replace such quantities of supply
at its own cost.
(c) In case IRCTC fails to fulfil  its commitment in supply of Rail Neer then the
zonal railways and the private licensees would be free to procure supply from
available BIS approved brands of packaged drinking water as notified by BIS.
Any extra expenditure incurred by Railways on this account would be reimbursed
by the IRCTC.
(d) In case IRCTC fails to fulfil the requirement of Packaged Drinking Water on
Railways  premises in departmental/private licensees and Railway  is faced
with any legal or financial burden, the IRCTC will indemnify the Railways for
the losses suffered by it.
(e) Railways will continue to conduct inspections and checks through commercial
and medical departments including joint inspections under Quality Control
and PFA who will ensure that the norms are followed at processing and
distribution points to IRCTC, departmental and private licensees as per

54
guidelines contained in Para 9 and 10 of Commercial Circular No. 20 of 2001
issued vice letter No. 98/TG-III/631/11 dated 22.3.2001. Samples should be sent
to registered laboratories having adequate infrastructure to carry out the tests
as per extent rules.
(f) Railway should also continue to advise BIS regarding any major irregularity
detected in supply of packaged drinking water of any manufacturer for
appropriate action. Railways should continue to be in touch with the Bureau of
Indian Standards (BIS) to obtain a list of certified manufacturers who have
been given licence to manufacture the packaged drinking water.
6. Performance Evaluation
While the performance would be reviewd by the Company regularly, the Ministry
of Railways may review the performance quarterly. The evaluation of performance
would, however, be done at the close of the financial year jointly by the Company and
the  Ministry before submitting final evaluation to the DPE based on composite score
of five point scale.
6.1 Railway Administrations will have the right to inspect the catering facilities
maintained and food items sold under the licensees/sub-licensee.
6.2 IRCTC should respond to inspections conducted by the concerned railway
officers and take appropriate remedial/redressal measures to address the complainant
under advise to the railway office. In case of any deficiency in performance and non-
adherence of policies/guidelines issued from the Ministry of Railways, CCMs of Zonal
Railways can take such action as suspension/cancellation of contracts of licensees/
sub-licensees through  IRCTC.
7. Provision of essential services like Electricity, Water, Drainage, etc.
IR will provide electricity, water, drainage and other facilities for the outlets
managed by the Corporation. Corporation/associate will however pay the actual cost
of these services.
8. Provision for access to approach
IR will also provide access to the staff of the Corporation or that of licensee/sub-
licensee to the railway premises without any entry fee.
9. Telecom Facility
Railway communications network will be utilised by IRCTC Ltd. for its operation
and information requirement on mutually agreed terms.
10. Railway personnel on Deputation
It may become necessary for IRCTC Ltd. to draw some of the essential personnel
resources of IR for its operational and marketing requirements in its corporate office
and regional headquarters. IR will provide assistance to IRCTC Ltd., in accordance
with the extant rules for providing the services of senior officers/staff.

55
11. It is mutually agreed that the parties would enter into appropriate agreements
for catering services and  setting up of budget hotels at the appropriate time on case to
case basis within the broad framework set out in this MoU. For this purpose Ministry
of Railways will develop guidelines and model agreements for different activities.
12. Both parties can modify/amplify terms of the MoU, whenever considered
necessary on mutually agreed terms.
13. This MoU will take effect the day it is signed by the parties but shall be
applicable for the period after expiry of the earlier MoU for 2001-02.
14. This MoU will be subject to provision of Railway Act, 1989, and the rules
framed therein and any directions issued in case of emergency will be binding on the
IRCTC Ltd.
"In witness whereof Shri V .N. Mathur, Secretary, Railway Board, Ministry of
Railways on behalf of President of India  and Shri M.N. Chopra, Managing Director,
Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd. duly authorised by the IRCTC
Ltd. have signed these presents on the day and year first above written.
(V .N. Mathur) (M.N. CHOPRA)
Secretary, Railway Board Managing Director
Ministry of Railways, Indian Railway Catering &
New Delhi. To urism Corporation Ltd.,
New Delhi.
WITNESS
Sd/-
(Kamal Kant)
Executive Director (Tourism & Catering)
Railway Board.
For and on behalf of President of India
WITNESS
Sd/-
Director/Catering Services,
IRCTC Ltd.
For and on behalf of the Indian Railway
Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd.
Sd/- Sd/-

ANNEXURE  B
Unique No. 05/LML/60
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 2001/LML/13/55 New Delhi, dated 1.12.2005
General Manager (Engg.)
All Zonal Railways
Sub.: Licensing of railway land to the Container Corporation of India Ltd. for setting
up of ICDs etc.
Re.: Board's letters No. 2001/LML/13/55 dated 24.09.03 and 24.08.05.
In continuation of Board's letter of even no. dated 24.09.03 and in partial
modification on Board's letter of  even number dated 24.08.05 on the subject, Board
have reviewed the licence fee of railway land licensed to the Container Corporation of
India Ltd. (CONCOR) for existing depots and decided that lease charges for land
already leased to CONCOR would be levied @ Rs. 250/- (Rupees two hundred and fifty
only) per TEU per annum for the period from 01.04.2004 to 31.3.2007. The next revision
would be due from 01.04.2007.
2. Any additional land allotted at existing depots during the period from 01.04.2004
to 31.3.2007 will also be charged on TEU basis i.e., @ Rs. 250 per TEU. However,
requirement of additional land shall be based on proper justification regarding need for
operational requirements i.e., business related for containers only (not for residential
purposes) with a certificate from CONCOR to this effect subject to the recommendations
of the SAG standing committee duly approved by AGM/GM.
3. CONCOR shall be given the option to take the Railway land  on long term lease
basis, both in respect of existing and new depots, in terms of Board's letter No. 2001/
LML/13/53 dated 04.10.2001, for a period of 35 years on upfront payment of lease
charges equivalent to 99% of the market value of the land alongwith a nominal licence
fee of Rs. 1000/- per annum, instead of making annual payments on TEU basis.
4. This issues with the concurrence of the Finance Directorate of the Ministry of
Railways.
Please acknowledge receipt.
Sd/-
(Rajesh Kumar)
Deputy Director (Land Management)
Railway Board
No. 2001/LML/13/55 New Delhi, dated 1.12.05
56

57
Copy to:
(i) Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Railways), 224, Rail Bhawan,
New Delhi (with 80 spares).
(ii) FA & CAOs, All Zonal Railways.
Sd/-
For Financial Commissioner/Railways
Copy to:
(i) The General  Secretary, All Indian Railwaymen's Federation, Room No. 253,
Rail Bhavan, New Delhi (35 copies).
(ii) The General Secretary, National Federation of Indian Railwaymen, Room
No. 256-E, Rail Bhavan, New Delhi (35 copies).
(iii) The Secretary-General, Federation of Railway Officers Association, Room
No. 256-A, Rail Bhavan, New Delhi (5 spares).
(iv) The Secretary-General, Indian Railway Promotee Officers Association, Room
No. 268, Rail Bhavan, New Delhi (5 spares).
(v) The General Secretary, All India RPF Association, Room No. 256-D, Rail Bhavan,
New Delhi-110001.
Sd/-
For Secretary, Railway Board
Copy to:
(i) Sr. PPSs/PPSs/PSs to CRB, FC, MS, MM, MT, ML, ME, Secretary
(ii) Sr. PPSs/PPSs to All Additional Members, Advisers, DG/RHS and DG/RPF
(iii) PSs to all EDs, JSs and IG/RPF
Copy to: F(X)-I, TT and TC (FM) Branches, Railway Board

Unique No. RB/L&A/056/2005
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 2001/LML/13/55 New Delhi, dated 24.8.05
The General Managers (Engg.)
All Zonal Railways
Sub.: Licensing of railway land to the Container Corporation of India Ltd. for setting
up of ICDs etc.
Re.:  Board's letter No. 2001/LML/13/55 dated 24.09.2003.
The question of revision of rates of license fee for railway land licensed to
CONCOR for setting up of new ICDs had been under consideration of Board for
sometime past. It has now been decided that in future, the railway land shall be licenced
to the Container Corporation of India Ltd. (CONCOR) for setting up of new ICDs etc.
at 6% of the market value of the land or at the rate of Rs. 200/- per TEU of 2000-2001
updated, whichever is higher.
2. For the existing depots, wherever extra land has been given, the same shall be
dealt with as per the following rates:
(i) Rs. 200/- per TEU w.e.f. 01-04-2001—31.03.2002.
(ii) Rs. 225/- per TEU w.e.f. 01.04.2002—31.03.2003.
(iii) Rs. 250/- per TEU w.e.f. 01.04.2003—31.03.2004.
3. For the period 1.4.04 onwards, rates to be charged for existing depots are
under consideration of Board. Till these are finalized and communicated, charges may
be provisionally realised at Rs. 200/- per TEU, as communicated vide the letter under
reference (however, in depots where additional land is taken by CONCOR, the
provisional charges will be Rs. 250/- per TEU). This would be subject to suitable
adjustments for the revised license fee, as may be decided by Board subsequently.
4. Other conditions regarding lease agreement, period of lease etc. remain
unaltered.
5. This issues with the concurrence of the Finance Directorate of the Ministry of
Railways.
Please acknowledge receipt.
Sd/-
(Desh Ratan Gupta)
Director (Land & Amenities)
Railway Board
58

Unique No. RB/L&A/14/03
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 2001/LML/13/55 New Delhi, dated 24.9.03
The General Managers (Engg.)
All Zonal Railways
Sub.: Licensing of railway land to the Container Corporation of India Ltd. for setting
up of ICDs etc.
Re.: Board's letter No. 88/LML/13/55 dated 26.12.1994.
In partial modification of the extant instructions on the subject as contained in
the Board's letter cited above, Board have reviewed the licence fee of railway land
licensed to the Container Corporation of India Ltd. CONCOR for setting up of ICDs
etc. and decided that lease charges for land already leased to CONCOR would be
linked with the volume of  traffic handled by the CONCOR. Board have further decided
that lease charges would be levied Rs. 200/- (Rupees two hundred) per ICD for three
years from 01.04.2001 to 31.3.2004. The next revision would be due from 01.04.2004.
2. Other conditions regarding lease agreement period of lease etc. remain
unaltered.
3. Guidelines for charging of licensing fee for fresh cases shall be separately
issued.
This issues with the concurrence of the Finance Directorate of the Ministry of
Railways.
Sd/-
(Rajesh Kumar)
Desk Officer (Land and Amenities),
Railway Board.
59

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 88/LM(L)/13/63 New Delhi, dated 26.12.1994
The General Managers (Engg.)
All Zonal Railways
Sub.: Leasing of railway land to the Container Corporation of India Ltd. (CONCOR)
Re.: Board's letters of even No. dated 13.3.90 & 25.9.91.
In partial supercession of the extant instructions on the subject as contained in
the Board's letters cited above, Board have decided that lease charges for Railway land
leased to CONCOR should be linked with the turn over of the CONCOR from various
depots, instead of linking it with the price of the land. Board have further decided that
the scale of land lease charges should be such as to give incentive to CONCOR for
achieving higher turn over. The following charges have been decided to be levied on
CONCOR for the Railway land leased to them:—
(a) Rs. 130/- per container calculated on the basis of actual number of containers
dealt with by CONCOR in each depot during 1994-95;
(b) Rs. 80/- per container for the additional number of containers handled during
1995-96 and onwards, upto the designed capacity of the depot;
(c) Rs. 50/- per container handled beyond the designed capacity of the depot in
the subsequent years;
(d) The arrears prior to 1994-95 would be calculated at an average rate of Rs. 130/-
per container, which could be paid by CONCOR to Railways on instalment
basis spread over a period of 10 years;
(e) The charges indicated above should be reviewed once in every 5 years.
2. Other conditions regarding lease agreement, period of lease, etc. remain
unaltered.
This issues with the concurrence of the Finance Dte. of the Ministry of Railways.
Sd/-
(P.K. Wahi)
Executive Director, Land Management,
Railway Board.
60

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA/BHARAT SARKAR
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS/RAIL MANTRALAYA
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 88/LM(L)/13/63 New Delhi, dated 25.9.1991
The General Managers (Engg.)
All Zonal Railways
Sub.: Leasing of railway land to Container Corporation of India  Ltd. (CONCOR)
Re.: Board's letter of even number dated 13.3.90.
In modification of Board's letter referred to above, Board has decided that 3% of
the market value of land per annum may be charged for railway land leased to CONCOR
for setting up ICD, CFS, etc.
This issues with the concurrence of the Finance Directorate of this Ministry.
Sd/-
(S.K. Jagdhari)
Executive Director, Land Management,
Railway Board.
No. 88/LM(L)/13/63 New Delhi, dated 25.09.1991.
Copy forwarded for information to:—
(i) The FA&CAOs, All Indian Railways.
(ii) The Directors of Audit, All Indian Railways.
Sd/-
(Saroj Rajware)
for Financial Commissioner (Railways)
Copy to F(X) II (with 5 spares) and TC (M&S) (with 5 spares)
Copy to MD/CONCOR, Rail Bhavan, New Delhi.
61

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA/BHARAT SARKAR
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS/RAIL MANTRALAYA
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 88/LM(L)/13/63 New Delhi, dated the 13.3.1990
The General Managers (Engg.)
All Zonal Railways
Sub.: Leasing of railway land to the Container Corporation of India Ltd.  (CONCOR)
The question of making railway land available to Container Corporation of India
for setting up Inland Container Depots has been considered by the Board. It has been
decided  to lease railway land, wherever spareable to CONCOR for setting up Inland
Container Depots, Container Freight Stations and Container Parks, on the following
terms and conditions:—
(i) Container Corporation of India will pay the licence fee at 6% of the book value
of the land, per annum. As licence fee will be linked to book value, no periodical
revision thereof is envisaged.
(ii) The period of lease will be initially for 30 years, subject to renewal thereafter,
with the Railways retaining the right to terminate the licence even during the
term of licence, on due notice, if the land is required for their own operational/
developmental needs.
(iii) Any additional land required by CONCOR may be acquired by the Railways at
the cost of CONCOR. Ownership of such land will be vested with the Railways.
However, such land will be made available to CONCOR for their use without
charging any licence fee.
A suitable lease agreement for each case of lease of land should be entered into
with CONCOR in accordance with the above and extant instructions.
This issues with the concurrence of the Finance Directorate of the Ministry of
Railways.
Sd/-
(J.M. Sharma)
Executive Director, Land Management,
Railway Board.
62

Annexure C
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA/BHARAT SARKAR
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS/RAIL MANTRALAYA
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 2005/Tele/RCIL/1 New Delhi, dated 2.11.2006
The General Managers, General Manager,
All Indian Railways. CORE/Allahabad.
General Manager, Director General,
MTP/Kolkata. R.D.S.O.,
Lucknow.
Director General, Director,
Railway Staff College, IRISET,
Vadodara. Secunderabad.
Sub.: First Revised Agreement between Railways and RailTel.
First Revised Agreement between Ministry of Railways and RailTel Corporation
of India Limited has been signed on 21.09.2006 and a copy thereof is attached.
All matters with RailTel may now be dealt as per the provisions of this revised
agreement.
This issues with the concurrence of Finance Directorate of Ministry of Railways.
Sd/-
(Sanjay Dungrakoti)
Director/Telecom
No. 2005/Tele/RCIL/1 New Delhi, dated 2.11.2006
Copy forwarded for information to:
FA&CAOs, All Indian Railways.
For Financial Commissioner/Railways.
Copy along with enclosure to:
(i) Chief Signal & Telecom Engineers, All Indian Railways.
(ii) Chief Signal & Telecom Engineers, CORE/Allahabad, MTP/Kolkata.
(iii) Sr. ED(Signal), ED(Tele), RDSO/Lucknow.
(iv) Sr. Professor (S&T), Railway Staff College, Vadodara.
(v) MD/RailTel, New Delhi.
Copy to F(X)II Branch, Railway Board.
63

FIRST
REVISED AGREEMENT
DATED
21.9.2006
BETWEEN
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
AND
RAILTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED
64

CONTENTS
  1. DEFINITIONS & INTERPRETATION 66
  2. MUTUAL  AGREEMENT 69
  3. GRANT OF RIGHTS AND TRANSFER OF ASSETS 69
  4. W ARRANTIES AND REPRESENTATIONS 72
  5. INDEMNITIES 73
  6. OBLIGATIONS OF RAILW AYS 74
  7. OBLIGATIONS OF RAILTEL 75
  8. FURTHER RIGHTS 76
  9. FURTHER  AGREEMENTS 77
10. REVISION OF GRANT FEE AND TENURE 77
11. TELECOM SERVICES FOR RAILW AYS 78
12. TITLE TO OPTICAL FIBER NETWORK 80
13. ENTITLEMENT TO REVENUES 81
14. TAX LIABILITY 81
15. SERVICE ASSURANCE 81
16. V ALIDITY OF AGREEMENT 81
17. ASSIGNMENT 81
18. DEFAULT, SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE AND TERMINA TION 82
19. CONFIDENTIALITY 82
20. W AIVER, FORBEARANCE AND V ARIATION 83
21. SEVERANCE 83
22. NOTICES 83
23. ENTIRE AGREEMENT 84
24. NO PARTNERSHIP 84
25. GOVERNING LAW 84
26. ARBITRATION 84
27. FORCE MAJEURE 85
             SCHEDULE AND ANNEXURES 87
65

66
THIS FIRST REVISED AGREEMENT is made in pursuance of Clause 3.3 of the
Agreement between the Ministry of Railways and RailTel Corporation of India Ltd.
This 21st day of September, 2006 at New Delhi between—
The President of India, acting through Additional Member (Planning), Railway
Board, Ministry of Railways, hereinafter referred to as the "RAILW AYS" (which
expression shall unless excluded by or repugnant to the subject or the context be
deemed to include its successors-in-office, and assigns) of the One part;
AND
RailTel Corporation of India Limited, a company incorporated under the Companies
Act, 1956, having its registered office at 10th floor, Bank of Baroda Building, 16 Sansad
Marg, New Delhi-110001 hereinafter referred to as "RailTel" (which expression shall,
unless excluded by or repugnant to the subject or the context, be deemed to include its
successors, executors, administrators and legal representatives) through its Managing
Director, of the Other part;
RECITAL
A. RAILW AYS are desirous of expeditiously modernizing their existing
telecommunication system for their train control, operation and safety and of
generating additional revenues by creating nationwide broadband and multimedia
network by laying Optical Fiber Cable (OFC) along the Railway track utilizing its
right of way;
B. RAILW AYS have formed RailTel as a Government company under the Companies
Act, 1956; and the aforesaid tasks are proposed to be entrusted to the said
Company;
C. RAILW AYS agree to authorize RailTel to use its right of way for the limited
purpose of establishing an Optical Fiber Network by laying cables, pipes etc. as
detailed hereinafter;
D. RAILW AYS agree to transfer the Optical Fiber Cable assets and authorize
RailTel to make use of land/buildings as detailed hereinafter.
NOW IT IS HEREBY AGREED AND DECLARED as follows:—
1.  DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
Definitions
1.1  In this Agreement, unless the context or subject otherwise requires, the following
expressions shall have the following meanings:—
"Cable" means underground cable and shall include copper,
fiber or any other type of cable.
"Copper Cable" means the quad copper cable to be laid in the same
trench in which Optical Fiber Cable is laid.
"Drawings" shall mean maps, drawings, plans and tracings or
prints required for and maintenance of optical fiber

67
cable system and shall include any modification
and further drawings as may be issued from time to
time, irrespective of whether the same is in physical,
digital, electronic or any other form.
"E1" means one 2 Mega Bit Per Second (MBPS) stream
which can carry upto 30 channels.
"End Users" means users of telecom services provided by
RailTel.
"Gross revenues" means the total revenue earned from sale of telecom
capacity by RailTel, excluding income from Railways
after deducting mandatory license fees.
"License" means any telecommunication license required for
the provision of telecommunication services to End
Users of the Optical Fiber Network pursuant to the
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, as amended.
"Long Haul Communication" means communication channels provided to
connect large distant points like 2 cities.
"Optical Fiber Cable Assets" means and shall include optical fiber cable,
equipments used for long haul communication &
equipments used for short haul for connecting the
way side stations from control office.
"Optical Fiber Network" means the network providing telecom services
utilizing Railways' OFC assets and includes other
assets used for telecommunication.
"Primary Multiplexers" means the device used for deriving channels of
64 Kilo Bit Per Second (KBPS) from E1.
"Railways" means "Railway" as defined in sub-section
31 section 2 of the Indian Railways Act,  1989 (Act
No. 24 of 1989).
"Railway Equipment" means telecommunication equipment, and other
ancillary equipment connected to the Railways
Network.
"Railway Land" means all land within the fences or boundary marks
indicating the limits of the land appurtenant to
Railways.
"Railways Network" means the circuits used for Railways'
telecommunication needs and includes circuits to
be established on optical fiber network and
specifically allocated for Railways' communication.

68
"Short Haul Communication" means communication channels provided to
connect short distant points like 2 adjacent stations.
"Site" shall means the land, stations and other places
along, under or through which the works are to be
carried out and any other land or places provided
by the RAILW AYS for the purpose of this
Agreement.
"Statutory Requirements" means all relevant statues, bye-laws and
regulations having force of law in India.
"Term" means the period commencing from the 30th day of
July 2003 and, expiring after thirty (30) years or any
other mutually agreed period or till RailTel remains
a PSU of the Ministry of Railways, whichever is
earlier.
"Telecommunications Facilities" means transmission facilities, telecommunication
equipment, drop/insert locations and all other
ancillary telecommunication facilities of the Optical
Fiber Network.
"Telecom Services" means and shall include the services offered by
RailTel under the terms of licenses granted to it by
Ministry of Communication, Government of India
including Infrastructure Providers-I & II and
Internet Service Provider and/or any other services
as may be offered in future under the license granted
to it by Department of Telecommunication.
"Works" shall mean all works of every kind required for the
execution, commissioning, operation and
maintenance of the Optical Fiber Network.
Interpretation
1.2 In this Agreement unless the context otherwise requires:—
1.2.1 All references to Clauses, Sub-clauses, Paragraphs, or Schedules are
to Clauses, Sub-clauses and Paragraphs of, and Schedules to, this
Agreement which shall form an integral part of this Agreement;
1.2.2 The headings in this Agreement are for the purpose of convenience
only and shall not affect the interpretation or construction of this
Agreement;
1.2.3 References to statutory provisions shall be construed as references to
those provisions as they are respectively amended or re-enacted or
modified by other provisions from time to time.

69
2.  MUTUAL  AGREEMENT
Consideration
2.1 In consideration of the mutual agreement and undertakings herein set out,
the parties to this Agreement have granted the rights and accepted the obligations
herein after appearing.
3. GRANT OF RIGHTS AND TRANSFER OF ASSETS
3.1 RAILW AYS hereby agree to:—
3.1.1  Grant for the Term to RailTel an irrevocable and exclusive right to install,
construct, own, operate, maintain and keep the Optical Fiber Network
on, under or over (as appropriate) the Railway Land, together with, all
required authority to use RAILW AYS' rights of way for laying cable,
pipe,  etc. alongside, under, over or across the track, access, easements,
quasi-easements and all other rights relating or incidental to the Optical
Fiber Network free from all encumbrances subject to exceptions as
provided in this Agreement and the right of RAILW AYS to establish its
own telecommunications network pursuant to the Railways Act, 1989.
However, Railways shall continue to have the right for granting permission
for track crossing to other licensees;
3.1.2 T ransfer to RailTel the RAILW AYS existing optical fiber cable assets as
detailed in Annexures A, B & C and broadly consisting of Optical Fiber
Cable with 20 fibers after retaining 4 fibers (2 pairs) for Railway use
wherever 24 fiber OFC is existing and Optical Fiber Cable with 6 or
8 fibers after retaining 2 fibers (1 pair) wherever 8 or 10 fiber OFC is
existing; and take back for its own use the ownership of 4 fibers and 2
fibers from the 24 fiber OFC and 8 or 10 fiber OFC respectively already
transferred to RailTel as on date;
3.1.3 T ake ownership of 4 fibers (2 pairs) from the 24 fiber (or more) OFC asset
of RailTel in which RailTel has incurred capital expenditure;
3.1.4 T ake back ownership of short haul STM-1 and primary multiplexing
equipment already transferred to RailTel as on date;
3.1.5 T ake ownership of short haul STM-1 and primary multiplexing equipments
in which RailTel has made investment till date for creating short haul
communication network;
3.1.6 Grant RailTel the right to use by itself or by any third party permitted by
it the  surplus space in microwave and other buildings to install
equipments, space in towers to mount antennae (subject to the design
capacity) and to market surplus capacity in digital microwave links;
3.1.7 License the buildings/land required for installing  OFC and power supply
equipments for Network Operation Centre (NOC), data centres, access
nodes, transport nodes, backbone nodes and long   haul equipments
and toweres, to RailTel on payment of license fee charges at the prevalent

70
standard rates. However, at stations, wherever RailTel will be providing
equipments, including STM-4 long haul which are used for Railways
critical applications such as PRS/UTS/FOIS/Control circuits/Railnet, etc.,
building/land required for installing OFC and power supply equipments
shall be given to RailTel without any charges. The requirement of the
land is given in Annexure D. Guidelines for Granting Right of Way and
sparing land/building space and Construction of Towers by RailTel issued
vide Railway Board's letter nos. 02/LML/13/12 dated 28/11/2005 & 5/5/
2006 respectively would continue to be applicable, except provisions for
revenue share on revenues earned  by utilizing/permitting surplus space
in microwave buildings, space in towers and capacity in digital microwave
links, which would now be governed by provisions in clause 3.2.1
hereinafter  provided, tell superceded by  subsequent directives from
Railway Board;
3.1.8 Pay RailTel for investment done by them on 4 fibers of OFC cable at
proportional cost (including financing cost, but with no mark up to RailTel),
as a consideration for Clause 3.1.3 of this Agreement. Details of such
sections are placed at Annexure C;
3.1.9 Pay RailTel proportional maintenance charges for maintenance of 4 fibers
or 2 fibers (as the case may be) retained/taken back/taken by railways as
per Clauses 3.1.2  and 3.1.3 of this Agreement;
3.1.10 Pay RailTel the cost incurred by them in STM-1 and primary multiplexing
equipments as discussed in Clause 3.1.5 of this Agreement. Details of
such equipments are at Annexure C;
3.1.11 Pay RailTel lease charges as arrived at mutually (on incremental cost
basis) for recovery of principal and interest and charges for repairs and
maintenance only incurred by  RailTel towards creating, as per Railways
requirement, a  STM-4 network (as per Clause 3.2.6  of this Agreement)
and with ring protection wherever  rings are available, for use of
Railway's long haul communication. Any surplus capacity on this
network can be commercially exploited by RailTel for which revenues
share is payable as per clause 3.2.1;
3.1.12 Pay RailTel for  Internet connectivity and other premium services, Rates
will be decided centrally by Railway Board once in a year based on cost
plus basis or lowest rates charged/offered by RailTel to other bulk/
preferred customers whichever is lower.
3.1.13 Not charge  RailTel Grant fee of Rs. 11.34 Crore per annum for use of their
Right of Way by RailTel on reconsideration of Clause 3.2.1 of the
Agreement dated 30.07.2003. At the same time, the share of RailTel's
Gross Revenue shall be enhanced as per Clause 3.2.1 hereinafter  provide;
3.1.14 Pay RailTel proportionate  maintenance charges as per Clause 3.1.9 and
lease charges for the Railways long haul STM-4 network as per

71
Clause 3.1.11 centrally by Railway Board to be distributed to the Zonal
Railway on a pro-rata basis.
3.2 RailTel agrees—
3.2.1 To share with Railways 5% (five per cent) of the Gross Revenue from
30.07.2003 till such time that STM-4 network is set up in terms of
clauses 3.2.6   and 3.2.7 hereinafter provided and 7% (seven per cent)
of Gross revenue thereafter. Gross Revenue includes revenue from use
of MW towers, space in S&T and  other buildings, MW bandwidth
surplus capacity on Railways' short haul and long haul systems etc.;
3.2.2 Subject to Clause 11.3, to allot 25 crores equity shares of Rs. 10 each
aggregating to Rs. 250 crores to RAILW AYS for transfer of Optical Fiber
Cable Assets as per details in Annexure-A;
3.2.3 That RailTel shall bear the cost of augmentation/modification, if any, in
the microwave buildings, towers and links and share revenue earned
therefrom with Railways as per clause 3.2.1;
3.2.4 T ransfer, in terms of Clauses 3.1.2 and 3.1.3 of this Agreement, 4 fibers
(2 pairs) to Railways where 24 fiber OFC is existing and  2 fibers (1 pair)
where  8/10 fibers are existing. Wherever the 8/10 fiber cable is replaced
by a 24 fibers cable, RailTel shall  transfer 2 (two) additional fibers to
Railways on proportionate cost basis. Wherever equity is already issued
by RailTel for 24 fiber or 8/10 fiber OFC (as the case may be) against such
assets taken over from the Railways, proportionate equity will be adjusted
towards future transfer of OFC assets. Details of such sections are
indicated at Annexures A, B and  C;
3.2.5 Transfer short haul system to Railways with use of capacity as indicated
in para 11.4 RailTel has issued equity to Railways for transfer of such
assets from Railways  to RailTel, equity will be adjusted towards future
transfer of OFC. Details of such assets are indicated in Annexure-A;
3.2.6 In sections having 24 fiber OFC, build wherever required a STM-4 long
haul system with ring protection wherever available and with NMS, on
Railways' 2 (two) pairs of fiber, for Railways' use on payment of lease
charges as per Clause 3.1.11;
3.2.7 In sections having 8/10 fiber OFC, provide STM-4 long haul system with
ring protection wherever available with NMS for Railways use on
Railways pair of fiber on payment of  lease charges as per  Clause 3.1.11;
3.2.8 To meet Railways communication requirements from 30.07.2003 till such
time that STM-4 network is set up in terms of Clause 3.2.6 of this agreement
and that no charges shall be payable by Railways to  RailTel (as envisaged
in the first schedule to the agreement dated 30.07.2003) on account of
RailTel meeting such requirement as part of the overall objective of setting

72
up of RailTel to commercially exploit the surplus capacity of the network
while Railways continue to make captive use of the same;
3.2.9 To declare to the shareholders  from out of its profits from time to time as
decided by its Board of Directors;
3.3 The financial arrangements in Clause 3.2.1 shall be reviewed after every
3 years. The review can be undertaken earlier than 3 years with mutual
consent, however, not earlier than one year from the last review;
3.4 RailTel shall make payment of Railway dues at end of every year on
account of revenue share and maintenance charges, etc., if any, for optical
fiber cable and equipments  maintained by Railways. However, the
payment of revenue share to Railways shall be deferred for 5 years i.e. till
30.07.2008 and shall be payable on a yearly basis thereafter. The deferred
payment of revenue share for the  5 year period will however, become
payable from the 6th year onwards and the schedule of payment shall be
decided with mutual consent.
4.  W ARRANTIES  AND  REPRESENTATIONS
4.1Warranty and Representation by the Parties
Each of the parties warrant and represent to the other that each party has
full legal capacity, right, power and authority to execute and perform
their respective obligations under this Agreement during the term of this
Agreement.
4.2 RailTel's Warranties and Representations
 RailTel's warrant and represents:—
4.2.1 That the nationwide broadband Optical Fiber Network will be created by
utilizing  Railways' OFC assets and /or microwave network and its own
OFC and telecom assets;
4.2.2 That the Optical Fiber Network will be designed in accordance with well
established, approved, tested and proven engineering principles and
practices;
4.2.3 That the Optical Fiber Network will comprise of Telecommunications
facilities and materials of sound quality. The materials shall conform to
International Telecom Union (ITU)/Indian Railway Standard (IRS)
specification;
4.2.4 That the Optical Fiber Network will be designed and constructed in
accordance   with the requirements of this Agreement in a safe, economical
and efficient manner;
4.2.5 That its compliance of the terms, conditions and stipulations of this
Agreement does not require the consent of any third party except any
statutory authority and will not cause RAILW AYS to lose any interest in

73
on benefit of any title, status, asset, right, license, relief or privilege
which it would otherwise be entitled  to own or enjoy;
4.2.6 That prior information, adequately in advance will be given to Railways
regarding broad architectural design of the Optical Fiber Network.
4.3 RAILW AYS' Warranties and Representations
       RAILW AYS warrants and represents:—
4.3.1 That  it is subject to civil and commercial law with respect to its obligations
under this Agreement and the execution of this Agreement authorizes
RailTel to create Optical Fiber Network;
4.3.2 That it has disclosed and will disclose to RailTel all material information
which would affect the performance of  RAILW AYS obligations under
this Agreement;
4.3.3 That it is the legal and beneficial owner of the Railway Land and has the
right, power and capacity to grant the rights over the Railway Land to
RailTel for construction of Optical Fiber Network;
4.3.4 That the land marked for laying down the Optical Fiber Network, is free
from all liens, charges, encumbrances, litigation, third party rights or
interests.
5.  INDEMNITIES
5.1 Indemnity by RailTel
RailTel shall indemnify RAILW AYS in respect of any loss, costs, expenses,
compensation or damages incurred in connection with:—
5.1.1 Injuries or damage to persons or property resulting from any act, omission
or neglect or breach of statutory duty by RailTel, its assignee, agents,
servants or employees or for or in respect of any claims, demands,
proceedings, damages, cost charges, expenses in respect thereof or in
relation thereto;
5.1.2 All claims which may be made in respect of the stores/material/services
for infringement of any right protected by patent, registration of designs
or trade mark, intellectual property rights, provided that in the event of
any claim in respect of any alleged breach of patent, registered designs
or trade mark, intellectual property rights being made against the
RAILWAYS, it shall notify RailTel of the same and RailTel shall at its own
cost, either settle any such dispute or conduct any litigation that may
arise from there;
5.2 RailTel shall assume full responsibility for and shall hold RAILW AYS
harmless against all losses, liabilities, claims, demands, damages, charges,
costs and expenses arising directly or indirectly out of or in connection
with or as a result of death or personal injury to any person in the

74
employment of RailTel while carrying out RailTel's normal activities in
the project sites.
5.3 Indemnity by RAILW AYS
RAILW AYS shall indemnify RailTel in respect of any loss, costs, expenses,
compensation or damanges incurred in connection with:—
5.3.1 The rights granted as per  Clause 3 of this Agreement;
5.3.2 Injuries or damange to persons or property resulting from any act,
omission or neglect or breach of statutory duty by RAILWAYS, its agents,
servants or employees or for or in respect of any claims, demands,
proceedings, damages, costs charges, expenses in respect thereof or in
relation thereto;
5.4 RAILW AYS shall assume full responsibility for and shall hold RailTel
and all sub-contractors harmless against all losses, liabilities, claims,
demands, damages, charges, costs and expenses arising directly or
indirectly out of or in connection with or as a result of death or personal
injury to any person in the  employment of RAILW AYS while carrying
out RAILW AYS' normal activities on the sites.
6. OBLIGATIONS OF RAILWAYS
6.1 Covenants and Agreements
RAILW AYS convenants and agrees that it shall:—
6.1.1 Release all approvals, which are within the competency of the RAILW AYS,
to RailTel within reasonable time of submission of proposals including
drawings etc. by RailTel to the RAILW AYS;
6.1.2 Use its best endeavours to assist RailTel in securing all approvals relating
to the Optical Fiber Network;
6.1.3 Furnish RailTel with available information towards details of the topology
and maps of the Railway Land, the roll diagrams showing the ground
conditions on both sides of the track along the Railway Land, locations
of existing cables, pipelines, power lines, sewers, proposed additional
Railway lines, if any, including without limitation all other relevant
information available to RAILW AYS and provide free and liberal assistance
in making available such information to RailTel in order to avoid any
disruption or damage to above service media, whenever in the opinion of
the Railways furnishing such information is considered necessary;
6.1.4 Permit  free  access  to  RailTel,  its  permitted  assignee  and  the
sub-contractors and other authorised persons along with their transports,
equipments and other materials as needed, involved in construction and
maintenance of optical fiber assets at all times day and night to the land
being made available for this project and the equipment rooms;

75
6.1.5 Install, operate and maintain the Railways Equipment including local
leads;
6.1.6 Wherever feasible, provide communication facilities from Railways'
telecom network, water and electricity for execution of the works and
later for operation and maintenance of the network save that RailTel shall
bear the cost of electricity and other utilities in connection with the
execution of their works and later for operation and maintenance of the
network. However, at stations, wherever RailTel shall be providing
equipments for Railways' use, Railways shall provide electricity with
'AT' supply as far as feasible to RailTel without any charges;
6.1.7 Maintain RailTel's optical fiber cable assets as detailed in Clause 11 of
this Agreement, if specifically requested by RailTel;
6.1.8 Continue to provide Primary Multiplexers to derive voice channels from
STM-1 short haul equipment which will be provided by RailTel at each
station for Railways' communication circuits;
6.1.9 Authorise RailTel to use, with prior approval, frequencies allotted to
Railways provided use of same does not interfere in Railways' working;
6.1.10 Subject to availability and quality of service meeting Railway's
requirement, Railway will source all its bandwidth requirements from
RailTel unless RailTel is not in a position to provide the same.
7.  OBLIGATION OF Rail Tel
7.1 Covenants and Agreements
RailTel convenants and agrees that it shall:—
7.1.1 Establish, operate and maintain the Railways' Network in a professional
manner to ensure required reliability and availability;
7.1.2 Effectively monitor and coordinate the activities of the Railways'
Network;
7.1.3 Be responsible for acts of commission/omission of all personnel
employed or engaged by RailTel, in the Railways' Network;
7.1.4 Ensure no interference to RAILW AYS' normal working system except
with permission/and where it is unavoidable for execution, operation
and maintenance of its Optical Fiber Network or Railways Network;
7.1.5 Execute the works in an orderly manner making as little disturbance as is
practicably possible to the RAILW AYS' operation system;
7.1.6 Ensure that it follows and honours all regulations of the RAILW AYS
including requisite approvals and statutory regulations of the State
Governments, Central Government, and local bodies during execution
and subsequent operation and maintenance of the Project;

76
7.1.7  Not have access to the buildings of RAILW AYS except for such areas
as allowed pursuant to this Agreement and where Optical Fiber Network
is installed.
7.1.8 Commercially exploit the spare capacity only after all the requisite
permission/license, if any, has been received from the appropriate
authorities. The responsibility for default in this respect shall be entirely
that of RailTel.
7.1.9 Provide STM-1 short haul equipment including associated equipment at
each station for meeting the requirement of Railways' control and other
communication, wherever RailTel shall lay optical fiber cable along the
railway track. The cost of providing this STM-1 short haul equipment
including associated equipment will be borne by Railways.
7.1.10 Provide additional bandwidth for all future requirements of Railways as
mentioned in this Agreement, wherever feasible.
7.1.11 Meet the requirement of bandwidth for Railways' communication as
detailed in Clause 1 for the entire Term.
8.  FURTHER RIGHTS
RAILW AYS also agree that RailTel shall have the right:—
8.1 Subject to Clause 7.1.4 & 7.1.5 to construct, own, operate, maintain and
install any further additions or extensions to the Optical Fiber Network,
on, over or under (as appropriate), the Railway Land together with all
rights of way, access, easements, quasi-easements and all other rights
required relating or incidental to the further additions or extensions of
the Optical Fiber Network free from all encumbrances as RailTel deems fit
during the Term of this Agreement; and
8.2 To cause its officers, servants, agents or contractors with or without
materials, appliances and things from time to time and at all times hereafter
to enter and be, upon the Railway land to install, operate, maintain,
adjust, repair, alter, replace or remove the whole or part of the Optical
Fiber Network and/or exercise the rights granted under this Agreement
and for any other purpose, connected or relating to the Optical Fiber
Network without affecting train operations and ensuring availability of
RAILWAYS' communication requirements.
8.3 To increase/decrease the requirement of space, at the station given in
the Annexure D  or may request for additional space on stations not
mentioned in Annexure D for its business activities. However, such right
will be subject to availability and feasibility of such space at the desired
stations and on payment of license fee charges at prevalent standard
rate.
8.4 To get its assets, located on Railways' lands, identified and earmarked as
RailTel's assets.

77
8.5 To have an option for issuance of identified assets.
8.6 To use Railways' right of way for laying cable, pipes, etc., as defined in
Clause 3.1.1. for new lines being constructed or to be constructed in
future.
9.  FURTHER  AGREEMENT
9.1 Subject to other provisions of the Agreement, RAILWAYS shall ordinarily
not use the land, wherein Right of Way is given to RailTel, in a manner,
which may hamper the efficiency of the Optical Fiber Network.
RAILW AYS shall not carry out any activity in the vicinity (say, within
1/2 mt. of either side) of the cable route to prevent any likely damage to
the cable system (e.g. tree plantation, digging of trenches, construction
if temporary/permanent structures, etc.) in cases where it becomes
necessary to carry on some work in the vicinity of the cable route which
work may affect the efficiency of the Optical Fiber Network, the RAILW AYS
shall give adequate and reasonable written notice to RailTel before
starting the work, to enable RailTel to take necessary steps for prevention
of damage of efficiency of the system. RailTel will take immediate steps
and unable Railways to carry out the activity as felt necessary by
Railways. The direct cost of shifting of OFC alignment by RailTel
necessitated due to the Railways' requirement shall be compensated by
Railways to  RailTel. RailTel shall ensure that the alignment of optical
fiber cable, wherever feasible, shall be at the edge of the railway boundary
to avoid interference with the maintenance activities and expansion of
Railway network.
9.2 For this purpose, RailTel shall supply 5 copies of the cable route plans
and associated drawings and documents, etc. to the RAILW AYS for
distribution amongst its various executive agencies.
9.3 In addition to grant of right to use the buildings/lands as contemplated
under Clause 3.1.6. Railways agree to consider participation of RailTel in
setting up of Cyber Cafe/Internet kiosks at stations or in trains as per
extant instructions of Railways on the subject.
10.  REVISION OF TENURE
10.1  Railways shall have the option to renew the rights hereby granted upon
the expiry of the Term, for a further term of thirty (30) years upon mutually
agreed terms and conditions by giving at least six (6) months written
notice prior to the expiry of the Term.
10.2  Irrevocability and Term:—
10.2.1  The grant of the rights, by RAILW AYS  to RailTel, over the Railway land
cannot be withdrawn during the tenure of this Agreement except where
National security is involved or under the relevant provisions of this
Agreement. In the event of the way leave facility (use of right of way)

78
being discontinued with, RAILW AYS will neither be liable to pay any
compensation or reimburse any amount to RailTel nor to provide any
alternative arrangement for access, etc. in such a case, any installation
put up by the RailTel are liable to be removed/shifted at RailTel's own cost.
10.2.2 The above rights do not confer upon RailTel, in any way, any right of
possession or occupation of the land and does not affect the Railway's
title, possession, control and use of the land.
10.2.3 For the purpose defined in Clause 3.1, RAILWAYS agree to assist
RailTel to undertake all acts and execute all documents as are necessary
or required in pursuance to any statutory requirement or authority or
otherwise as required by RailTel, so as to secure the grant as also assist
RailTel in registration of such rights over the Railway land and transfer
of assets under this Agreement required in connection with setting up of
the Optical Fiber Network.
10.2.4 RailTel shall ensure the way leave facility does not in any way impinge
on the safety and security of railway operations and railway property
specially while crossing of the track, level crossing gates, bridges, etc.
10.3 The tenure of the right to use of the microwave infrastructure as
contemplated under Clause 3.1.6 shall be co-terminus for use of right of
way (way leave facilities) as granted to RailTel under these presents or
till the assets are abandoned or dismantled, whichever is earlier. In case
Railways decide to abandon or dismantle the same, Railways agree to
offer transfer of the infrastructure at microwave stations to RailTel, if
required by RailTel, at mutually agreed value.
10.4 The duration for the license to use the buildings/railway lands shall be
co-terminus with the use of right of way (way leave facilities) or till the
buildings are abandoned or dismantled, whichever is earlier.
11. TELECOM SERVICES FOR RAILWAYS
11.1 Upon transfer of Railways' optical fiber cable assets to RailTel as indicated
in clause 3.1.2, RailTel would provided telecom services to the
RAILWAYS, which were hitherto being provided through existing Optical
Fiber Cable Assets of RAILW AYS viz. Control communication, block
communication, block circuits, administrative trunk circuits, backbone
for mobile train communication, subscriber loop for telephone exchanges,
etc. For this purpose, RailTel shall transfer back short haul  STM-1
equipment at every station to Railways with telecom hut (where Railway
accommodation is not available). Railways' responsibility shall be limited
to providing primary Multiplexers and extend circuits of the Railways'
Network from OFC equipment locations by providing local leads. And
RAILW AYS will continue to maintain its own.
(i) Short haul optical equipment;
(ii) Primary Multiplexers;
(iii) Local leads; and
(iv) Station equipments for control functioning.

79
11.2 Further, RailTel agrees to provide STM-1 equipment and associated
equipment except Primary Multiplexers at every station, with its costs to
be paid by Railways at all sections where RailTel shall be laying optical
fiber cable. RAILW AYS agree to provide Primary Multiplexers and local
leads for extending the circuits for Railway network from the locations
(where the OFC is terminated and Add Drop Multiplexers are provided),
to the stations and for provision of station equipments for control
functioning.
11.3 Additional optical fiber cable assets which have been commissionned or
in the proces of commissioning, may also be transferred by RAILW AYS
to RailTel in due course after retaining 4 fibers. RailTel will continue to
provide the services to the Railways which these OFC assets would
have provided but for their transfer to RailTel. Valuation of such assets
shall take place upon commissioning on similar basis as followed for
existing optical fiber cable assets for the assets commissioned upto
March 31, 2002. The valuation of assets completed beyond March 31,
2002 shall be made on actuals. Railways may decided to transfer the
optical fiber cable assets soon after their completion on the basis of
approximate valuation based on a historical cost data pertaining to the
preceding year of such OFC assets. However, this will be subject to
adjustment subsequently based on the actual cost. It is agreed that
these optical fiber cable assets shall be transferred to RailTel in lieu of
issue of equity by RailTel to the RAILW AYS at par against the valuation
of such assets till Railways' equity in RailTel reaches 51% of authorized
capital. Subsequently, such transfer shall take place and on outright
purchase basis.
11.4 Railways will use capacity of STM-1 system for short haul and other
applications. The spare capacity will be offered to RailTel for commercial
exploitation subject to a maximum of 1/3rd capacity. Further, on long haul
STM-4 system also, the spare capacity available will be offered for
commercial exploitation by RailTel.
11.5 RailTel will provide STM-4 system on one pair of fiber retained/transferred
to Railways, in case of 24 fiber cable and on RailTel's fiber in case of 8/10
fiber cable in ring protection with NMS  to meet Railways' requirement of
long haul bandwidth. This system will be maintained by RailTel and
Railways will pay annual lease charges as mutually decided based on
incremental cost basis as per clause 3.1.11.
11.6 Railways may assist RailTel in carrying out optical fiber works on certain
sections.
11.7 Railways may transfer OFC and other telecom work sanctioned in works
program for implementation by RailTel as deposit works.

80
11.8 Operation and maintenance of the Optical Fiber Network
RailTel shall maintain the optical fiber cable and long haul system.
However, with mutual consent specific sections can be maintained by
Railways. The short haul optical fiber system will be maintained by
Railways.
11.9 Railways or RailTel may desire to review the arrangement spelt out in
11.1 to 11.7 above in which case the review shall be undertaken along
with the review of financial arrangement as per Clause 3.3.
11.10 To ensure reliability of Optical Fiber Network, a separate Memorandum
of Understanding/Agreement, bringing out the details of responsibilities
and other terms of operation and maintenance of optical fiber cable
network, shall be entered into between RAILW AYS  and RailTel.
11.11 Future Telecommunication requirements of Railways
On demand from RAILW AYS, RailTel shall provide telecom services in
extended sections, which do not from part of RailTel's plan for OFC
coverage, RailTel shall,  initially bear the cost for constructing the network
to provide telecom services as demanded by RAILW AYS. RailTel shall,
however, recover the cost of such investments from the Railways over a
period of 5 years. The title and ownership of such assets shall vest with
the Railways. RailTel shall be permitted to utilise by itself or by any third
party permitted by it the surplus bandwidth in the OFC system on such
sections on same terms as have been decided  for surplus capacity in
microwave links in clause 3.1.6 and 3.2.3.
11.12 RailTel will verify and, if required, RailTel will take suitable steps with the
approval of Railways to strengthen the tower, before using the tower
space for antennae.
11.13 The RAILW AYS reserve the right to set up their own separate telecom
system including optical fiber cable system for meeting the needs of rail
operations.
12.  TITLE  TO  OPTICAL  FIBER  NETWORK
The property and title to the Optical Fiber Network  [other than the  Copper
Cable, P-Mux, Railway Land & Sites. 4/2 fibers (2/1 pair) retained for Railway use
and short haul STM-1 equipment transferred to Railways] shall vest in RailTel
during the Term of the Agreement except where provided to the contrary in this
Agreement. After expiry or termination of the Agreement unless the terms are
further extended, the title to the Optical Fiber Network shall pass to the RAILW AYS
on terms and conditions to be decided mutually. The property and title to the
Microwave Assets, Copper Cable, Railway Land and Site shall at all times vest in
RAILW AYS.

81
13.  ENTITLEMENT  TO  REVENUE
RailTel shall be entitled solely and exclusively to all revenue income arising from
the Optical Fiber Network in respect of the provision of telecommunication
services to End Users on a commercial basis. Sharing of revenue with other
parties will be governed by relevant clauses forming part of this Agreement or
any other Agreement that  RailTel enters into.
14.  TAX  LIABILITY
RailTel's Liability to Tax
14.1 RailTel shall be responsible for all taxes, levies, charges and license fees
which RailTel is statutorily required to pay in respect of construction
operation and maintenance of Optical Fiber Network while, RAILW AYS
will have no financial liability for payment of any taxes, levies, charges
and license fees of any kind related to this Agreement, Railways would
provide assistance to RailTel in securing possible tax exemptions/rebates
from the particular tax authorities, if so desired by RailTel.
15.  SERVICE  ASSURANCE
For the purpose of maintenance and replacement of the assets, a charter of
Quality of Service (QOS) will be separately finalised and signed between
RAILWAYS  and RailTel to ensure that RAILWAYS and RailTel's communication
needs are taken care of. RailTel shall use all reasonable efforts to ensure that the
availability of the Optical Fiber Network shall be as per the requirements laid
down in service level Memorandum of Understanding/Agreement, which shall
not be less than 99.5%. The quality of service of the circuits shall be as per ITU
standards.
16.  VALIDITY  OF  AGREEMENT
The Agreement shall remain valid till RAILW AYS have majority stake in the
equity share capital of the RailTel i.e. RAILW AYS' equity holding in RailTel is
equal to or more than 51 per cent of the paid up equity of RailTel.
17.   ASSIGNMENT
Transfer of Rights and Obligations
17.1 RailTel shall not assign novate of transfer any rights or obligation under
this Agreement to any third party except to a subsidiary without prior
approval from the Railways. However, whenever such assignment is
made, RailTel shall ensure that the contract of the assignment provides
that the duties and obligations under this Agreement shall be fully binding
on the assignee.
17.2 RailTel can employ servants and agents or sub-contract for execution of
a particular work of limited scope within  the provision of this Agreement.

82
18.  DEFAULT, SPECIFIC PERFORMANCE AND TERMINATION
18.1 RAILW AYS shall be entitled to terminate this Agreement upon one hundred
and twenty (120) days notice in writing to RailTel in the event that:—
18.1.1 RailTel enters into any arrangement or composition with or for
the benefit of its creditors;
18.1.2 An order is made or a resolution is passed for the winding up of
RailTel;
18.1.3 RailTel enters into liquidation either voluntarily or compulsorily
(except for the  purposes of amalgamation or  reconstruction); or
18.1.4 RailTel has a receiver appointed over the whole or any part of its
assets or undertaking.
18.2 T ermination of this Agreement howsoever arising shall be without
prejudice to any antecedent rights and remedies of either party and the
provisions of the Agreement shall continue to bind each party in so far
and for as long as may be necessary to give effect to their respective
rights and obligations.
18.3 Upon termination of this Agreement, Railways shall have the first right
or claim for the assets transferred under these presents to RailTel.
Without prejudice to the right of revocation or the pre-emptive right of
Railways on optical fiber  cable and other related equipments, RailTel
shall  have the right to offer its optical fiber cable assets and equipments
including the assets acquired under this Agreement both present and
future as securities.
18.4 Non Stoppage or lending of the use of Railways Network
Since the asset of the Railways Network will be used for reasons of
public interest, RailTel and its creditors will, under no circumstances, be
allowed to stop/lend the use of the asset of Railways Network in terms of
Clause 11 of this Agreement.
19.  CONFIDENTIALITY
Confidential Information
19.1 The parties undertake to each other that they will not at any time hereafter
use or divulge or communicate to any person other than to their
employees, auditors, bankers or financial and legal advisers whose
province it is to know the same, any information concerning the Optical
Fiber Network, the contents of the maps and topographical details
provided by the RAILW AYS accounts, know how, trade secrets, of the
parties which have been disclosed or may come to their knowledge in
relation to or as a result of this Agreement ("the Confidential Information").

83
Time Limitation
19.2 This restriction shall continue to apply after the termination of this
Agreement for any reason whatsoever without limit in point of time but
shall not apply to the Confidential Information which becomes a matter
of public domain through no fault of a party.
20.  WAIVER,  FORBEAR ANCE  AND V ARIATION
Waiver and Forbearance
20.1 No exercise or failure to exercise and no delay in exercising any right,
power, remedy or privilege, on the part of any of the parties hereto shall
constitute a waiver thereof nor shall any single or partial exercise of any
right, power, remedy or privilege preclude any further or other exercise
thereof or the exercise of any other right, power remedy or privilege.
Cumulative Rights
20.2 The rights and remedies available in this Agreement are cumulative and
not exclusive of any rights or remedies otherwise provided by law.
Variation
20. 3 This Agreement shall not be varied or modified unless such variation or
modification shall be reduced to writing and signed by duly authorised
representatives of the parties.
21.  SEVERANCE
Effect of Severance
21.1 If any provision of this Agreement or part thereof is rendered void, illegal
or unenforceable by any legislation to which it is subject, it shall be
rendered void, illegal or unenforceable to that extent and no further,
provided that if the commercial basis of this Agreement is hereby
substantially affected or altered the parties shall negotiate in good faith
to amend and modify the provisions and terms of this Agreement as may
be necessary or desirable in the circumstances.
22. NOTICES
Communications
22.1  All communications between the parties with respect to this Agreement
shall be in writing and forwarded to the address set forth below or to
such other address as a party may from time to time designate by facsimile
and courier.
Rail Tel
[Address] The Managing Director,
Rail Tel Corporation of India Limited,
10th Floor, Bank of Baroda Building,
16, Sansad Marg,

84
Rail Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 001.
Tel. +91 11 51501452
Attention: The Man aging Director
RAILW AYS
The Secretary (Tele.)
Railway Board,
Ministry of Railways,
Rail Bhawan, New Delhi-110 001.
Tel. +91 11 23383138
Attention: The Executive Director (Telecom)
23.  ENTIRE  AGREEMENT
Scope of Agreement
23.1 This Agreement sets forth the entire agreement and understanding
between the parties in connection with the subject matter of this
Agreement and supersedes and cancels in all respects all previous
correspondence, agreements, undertaking and Memorandum of
Understandings between the parties whether written or oral.
24. NO PARTNERSHIP
Relationship
24.1 The relationship between the parties to this Agreement shall not
constitute a partnership. None of the parties has the power or the right to
bind in any way whatsoever or to commit or  pledge the credit of any
other party.
25. GOVERNING  LAW
 Construction and Interpretation
25.1 This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with
the laws of India.
26.  ARBITRATION
26.1 In the event of any dispute or difference between the parties hereto,
such dispute or difference shall be resolved amicably by mutual
consultation or through the good offices of empowered agencies of the
Government. If such resolution is not possible, then the unresolved dispute
or difference shall be referred to arbitration of an  arbitrator to be nominated
by Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs ("Law Secretary") in terms of
the Office Memorandum No.55/3/1/75-CF dated the 19th December,
1975 issued by the Cabinet Secretariat (Department of Cabinet Affairs)
as modified from time to time. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act,

85
1996, (26 of 96) shall not be applicable to the arbitration under this
clause. The award of the Arbitrator  shall be binding upon the parties to
the dispute. Provided however, any party aggrieved by such award
may make a further reference for setting aside or revision of the award
to Law Secretary whose decision shall bind the parties finally and
conclusively.
27.  FORCE MAJEURE
Rights and Obligations of Parties
27.1 A force majeure event shall be deemed to have occurred if at any time,
during the Term of the Agreement the performance in whole or in part by
either party of its obligation under the contract is prevented or delayed
by reason of any  war or hostility, acts of the public enemy, civil
commotion, sabotage, strikes and  lockouts not limited to the
establishment of the party claiming Force Majeure event, epidemics,
quarantine restrictions, acts of Government, act of God or such
eventualities which are beyond the control of the party, hereinafter
referred to as events, and provided notice of happening and cessation of
any  such eventuality is given  by either party to the other within 21 days
from the date of occurrence  thereof.
27.2  No failure or omission to carry out or observe any of the provisions of
this Agreement shall entitle any party to terminate this Agreement or
give rise to any claim for damages by any of the parties against any other
party in respect of such non-performance or result in a breach of this
Agreement if such failure or omission arises as a result of a Force Majeure
event.
27.3 In the event of a Force Majeure event continuing for more than one
hundred and eighty days (180), the parties shall negotiate in good faith
within sixty (60) days to amend or modify the terms and conditions of
this Agreement as may be necessary or desirable in the circumstances to
substantially give effect to the commercial basis and objectives of this
Agreement as agreed by the parties taking into account the change in
circumstances.
27.4 An event of   Force Majeure shall to the extent possible be remedied with
all reasonable despatch and performance of affected duties and
obligations shall be resumed as early as possible.
27.5 Following the notice referred in sub clause 27.1 and for so long thereafter
as the Force Majeure continues, the duties and obligations which cannot
be performed or carried out because of Force Majeure event shall be
suspended.
Provided however that no obligation which requires payment of moneys
shall be suspended because of the Force Majeure event.

86
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have set their respective hands the day and
year first before written.
Signed by Signed by
Sd/- Sd/-
Shri S.K. Suri, Addl. Member
(Planning) Shri K.K. Bajpeyee
Railway Board Managing Director
For and on behalf of For and on behalf of
THE PRESIDENT OF INDIA RAIL TEL CORPORATION OF
INDIA  LTD.
Witnesses:
Name: Mahabir Prasad , Addl. Member (Tele)
Address: Railway Board, Rail Bhawan,
New Delhi-110001.
Name: Rajiv Sinha, Executive Director (POM)
Address: RailTel, 10th Floor, BoB Building Parliament Street,
New Delhi-110001.

ANNEXURE D
FREIGHT MARKETING CIRCULAR  NO.7  OF  2005
Hkkjr ljdkj  GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
 jsy ea=ky;  MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
 ¼jsyos cksMZ   RAILW AY BOARD)
jsy Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110001
No. 2004/TC(FM)/23/2 Pt. Rail Bhawan, New Delhi-110001, dated 07.04.2005
The General Manager,
  1. Central Railway, Mumbai
  2. Eastern Railway, Kolkata
  3. East Central Railway, Hajipur
  4. East Coast Railway,  Bhubaneswar
  5. Northern Railway, New Delhi
  6. North Central Railway, Allahabad
  7. North Eastern Railway, Gorakhpur
  8. Northeast Frontier Railway,  Maligaon
  9. North Western Railway, Jaipur
10. Southern Railway, Chennai
11. South Central Railway, Secunderabad
12. South Eastern Railway, Kolkata
13. South East Central Railway, Bilaspur
14. South Western Railway, Hubli
15. Western Railway, Mumbai
16. West Central Railway, Jabalpur
Sub.:  Guidelines for setting up of rail-side warehousing facilities with public-
       private-partnership
Reference is invited to Railway Board's letter No. 98/TC(FM)/15/18 dated 27.7.2001
dealing with policy guidelines read with letter No. 2004/TC(FM)/23/2pt. dated 21.2.2005
regarding setting up of rail-side warehousing facilities in partnership with CWC as per
the Memorandum of Understanding entered into with them.
Pursuant to the announcement by Hon'ble Minister for Railways in the Budget
Speech 2005-2006 regarding setting up of rail-side warehousing facility with public-
private partnership for participants other than CWC, consolidated guidelines
incorporating all amendments is enclosed.
This issues with the concurrence of Land Management and Finance Directorate
of Ministry of Railways.
Sd/-
(Ms. S.R. Sett)
Joint Director,  Freight Mktg.
No. 2004/TC(FM)/23/2 pt. New Delhi, dated 07.04.2005
87

88
Copy to:
(i) Chief Commercial Managers (FM), All Indian Railways
(ii) Dy. Chief Commercial Managers (FM), All Indian Railways
(iii) ED[LM, EDTC(R)]EDF(C)  Railway Board for information
Sd/-
(Ms. S.R. Sett)
Joint Director, Freight Mktg.
No. 2004/TC(FM)/23/2pt. New Delhi, dated 07.04.2005
FA&CAOs All Indian Railways
Sd/-
(Dhruv Singh)
For Financial Commissioner for Railways
New Delhi, dated 07.04.2005

GUIDELINES
Objective: The objective of the project is to provide warehousing to promote
inter-modality by providing seamless door-to-door service at competitive price, reducing
the cost of secondary transport through provision of warehousing at close proximity
to rail facility and other value added services to customers.
1. The warehouse will be in addition to and not in substitution of the existing
Goods shed.
2. Who can Apply: Any individual firm or corporate entity having Rs. 10 crores
turnover per annum with requisite expertise and experience in execution of
warehousing project can apply. For Foreign Agencies, an Indian Joint Venture
partner will be necessary.
3. Whom to Apply: The application will be submitted to the Chief Commercial
Manager of the Zonal Railway(s) concerned.
4. Site for Warehouses: The proposals for warehousing may be considered
only at those locations where setting up of such value added facility will
result in attracting sufficient additional traffic and sites so identified are agreed
to by the Railways. Necessary traffic survey in this regard may be carried out
by the prospective warehousing agency. Location will be jointly decided by
the service provider and Railways. Final decision in this regard will rest with
Railways.
5. Provision of Land: As the idea of providing warehousing has been conceived
to give value added single window system service to the customers at the
Railway terminal itself, the land for the warehouse will be provided by Railways.
While earmarking such land for warehouse, Railways' own long term future
requirement should also be kept in view. The size of the plot shall have a
direct relevance with the minimum level of traffic guaranteed. The land to be
finally given on lease would be recommended by a Committee of officers of
the zonal railway at SAG level from Commercial, Engineering and Finance
Departments. Recommendations would be put up to AGM/GM for acceptance.
Railway Board will be kept informed in the matter.
6. Earnest Money and Security Deposit: The bidders will be required to deposit
an amount of Rs. 5,00,000/- (Rupees five lac) as earnest money along with the
bid. The successful party will have to make a Security Deposit of
Rs. 25,00,000 (Rupees twenty five lac) in the form of a Bank Guarantee in the
format as prescribed by Ministry of Finance (Copy enclosed).
6.1 Mode of Selection: The selection of the warehousing agency will be made
after Inviting competitive bids which will be in two parts i.e. Technical bid
and Financial bid (format enclosed).
6.1.1  Technical bids will have particulars like firm's name, address, existing
areas of activity and experience, list of customers served, area of
warehousing and other facilities proposed to be built including
indication of land requirement, expected gestation period for project
89

90
implementation, source of funding, financial results (audited accounts)
for the last three years.
6.1.2 The financial bid will include the expected annual turnover in the
 first year and subsequent years, pinpointing guaranteed rail-born traffic
separately, expected revenue performance in the first year and
subsequent years and percentage of total revenue* subject to a minimum
of 5% proposed to be shared with Indian Railways.
7. Tender Selection Committee : The Tender Selection Committee (TSC)
comprising of 3 SAG Officers one each from Commercial, Accounts and
Engineering Departments will finalise the tenders and take approval of
General Manager.
8. Period of Lease Agreement: The lease agreement will be for 30 years which
may be extended further subject to satisfactory performance for a period and
on such terms and conditions as may be mutually decided between the
Railways and the promoter. In case the lease is not extended, the premises
alongwith the structures will be handed over to the Railways.
9. License Fee: As the idea behind the scheme is to increase rail borne traffic
and to share the revenues, Railways will charge a nominal land license fee of
Re.1/- per Square Metre per annum. Lease rent will be paid by the promoter
for the warehousing area including any open areas around the built-up
warehousing structure used for business/movement purpose as agreed
mutually with Railway.
9.1 Revenue Sharing : From the third year onwards or from the date of
operationalisation of the warehousing, whichever is earlier, in addition to the
nominal lease rental, the promoter will share with Railways the accepted
percentage, subject to minimum of 5%, of the gross revenues from all activities
arising out of the business at the location leased to the promoter. This
percentage will be reviewed every three years after the date of
operationalisation of the warehousing complex or from the sixth year after the
execution of the agreement, which ever is earlier.
10. Loading/Unloading Facilities: Loading/Unloading facilities at the terminal
will be developed by the promoter for smooth operations.
11. Free Time: Free time for loading/unloading will be as per Railways rule and
beyond this, the rakes detained will include demurrage charges. No wharfage,
however will be levied under the system.
12. Development and Maintenance of Common Area: The common facility areas
like circulating area, approach roads, lighting, office complex for rail users,
basic amenities for rail users, road parking etc. will be developed by the
service provider and used commonly with the Railways. The repair and
maintenance cost of this area shall be borne by the promoter. It is, however
*Total revenue will include revenues accruing out of all the activities arising out of the business at
the location leased to the promoter.

91
clarified that no lease rent is payable in respect of such area. No commercial
activity is allowed on this land.
13.  Rail linkage: Railways will provide efficient rail connectivity required to
handle traffic. Efficient loading/unloading facilities at the existing rail terminal
in proximity to the warehouse will be developed by the promoter for smooth
running of the warehouse.
14. Preference to Rail borne traffic : The promoter will be required to give
preference to the rail borne traffic. This will be a condition of the lease agreement
enjoining the promoter to earmark at least 70% of the warehousing space for
rail borne traffic. A Committee of officers from Commercial, Accounts and
Engineering Departments will conduct a review of rail borne traffic every
year.
15. Staff cost: Cost of Commercial Staff which will be posted at the Goods sheds
to issue RR and supervise loading/unloading will be borne by the service
provider. However, Railways will keep the number of such staff to the minimum.
16. Gestation period: The warehouse promoter would be allowed a maximum
period of two years from the date of signing the agreement as gestation
period which will cover construction and operationalisation of the warehouse.
17. Termination of lease contract: Railways reserve the right to terminate the
lease contract under the following circumstances:—
(i) On termination of lease period if further extension is not sought.
(ii) If no warehouse construction work starts within one year of granting
letter of intent, the agreement will stand terminated automatically.
(iii) Any violation of the terms and conditions of the lease agreement.
(iv) Rail borne traffic going down the minimum level of guaranteed traffic
continuously for two years.
(v) In the event of promoter not paying the minimum lease charges in any
year and portion of the revenue as fixed in the agreement.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 2005/LML/18/8 New Delhi, dated 8.06.2005
The General Managers,
All Indian Railways and Productions Units.
Sub.: Policy on licensing of railway land for commercial plots etc.
              (Master Circular).
Ref.:      Board's letter of even number dated 10.02.05.
In partial modification of  Board's letter referred to above, Para 3 may be read as
under:—
3. Rates of licence fee
Licence fee of plots will continue to be fixed as a percentage of the land value,
determined as per the procedure detailed in Para 5 below. For period prior to 1.4.1995,
the licence fee will be governed in terms of Board's letter No. 83/W2/LM/18/87
dated 17.9.1985. For subsequent periods, the percentage would be as under:—
Item      T ypes of Plots Annual Licence Fee Annual Licence Fee
No. as a Percentage of as a Percentage
Land Value (from 1.4.95 of Land Value
to 31.3.04 in (from 1.4.04 onwards
terms of Boards  in  terms of Board's
letter dated letter dated 24.3.04)
29.8.95)
(a) Railway related activities     6%     6%
such as City Booking
offices, Out Agencies etc.
(b) Ordinary Commercial     6%     6%
Plots—without
Structures
(c) Ordinary Commercial Plots—
with temporary structures for
stocking/storing
(i) Covered area      7 
1/2%  for     (i)   7 1/2%
(ii) Open area     the whole area     (ii)  6%
(d) Steel Yards/Coal Dumps,     10%     7 1/2%
Bulk Oil Installations etc.
(e) Land used to lay     6%     6%
private sidings
(f) Shops/Retails Depots etc.      20%     10%
92

93
Other terms and conditions remain unchanged.
This issues with the concurrence of finance directorate of Ministry of Railways.
                                              Sd/-
(Desh Ratan Gupta)
Director (Land and Amenities)
Railway Board
No. 2005/LML/18/8                                                        New Delhi, Dated 8.06.05
Copy forwarded for information to:
  (i) FA&CAO, all Indian Railways and Production Units.
  (ii) Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Railways) (with 46 spares).
                                                                                    Sd/-
For Financial Commissioner/Railways
Copy to:
EDTC
®,   EDF(C),  F(C)  and  F(X)I  Branches, Railway Board.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 2005/LML/18/8 New Delhi, dated  10.01.2005
The General Managers,
All Indian Railways and Productions Units.
Sub.: Policy on licensing of railway land for commercial plots etc.
              (Master Circular).
Ref.:— Board's letter No. 83/WI1/LM/18/87 dt. 29.8.1995
Policy guidelines for commercial licensing of Railway land last issued vide Board's
letter No. 83/W2/LM/18/87 dt. 29.8.1995 in super-session of the earlier policy/directives,
have been amended from time to time. With a view to bring all such policy instructions
under one umbrella, it has been decided to issue a Master Circular combining all the
instructions issued so far on the subject. Hence forth, Railways should quote only the
present letter for any further reference.
2.0 General
2.1 Leasing of land is not permitted except in cases where it is specifically
approved by the Railway Board. Lands for the purpose of commercial use should be
given on licensing basis only. In this connection, Board's letter No. 82/W2/LM/18/116
dt. 22.11.1982 may please be referred to.
2.2 Temporary licensing of railway land to private individuals for the purpose of
setting up shops, commercial offices, vending stalls, clinics etc. not connected with
the Railway working was stopped in terms of Board's letter No. 80/W2/18/0/A
dt. 7.6.1984. This ban will continue. In exceptional cases, where such licensing may
have to be done with the prior approval of the Board, licence fee must be fixed by
resorting to public auction/open tenders for getting the maximum revenue.
2.3 Licensing of ordinary commercial plots connected with Railway working, as
indicated in para 3 below will be done with the personal approval of General Manager
in consultation with FA&CAO. The periodical review may, however, be approved by
DRM on the recommendation of Committee of Divisional Heads of Engineering,
Commercial and Finance Departments.
2.4 Licenses of existing licencees, not connected with the Railway working as
mentioned in Para 3 (f) below may, however, be renewed from time to time so long as the
land is not required by Railway for its own purpose but on new terms and conditions
indicated in this letter.
94
Unique No. 2005/LML

95
2.5 In each case of licensing, proper agreement must be executed between the
Railway Administration and the licencees before the licencee is given possession of
the land/plot. This must be strictly followed and for any violation of these instructions.
The official handing over land before the execution of agreement, shall be held personally
responsible by the Railway Administration.
3. Rates of licence fee
3.1 Licence fee of plots will continue to be fixed as a percentage of the land value,
determined as per the procedure detailed in para-5 below. The percentage applicable
w.e.f. 1.4.04 to various types of plots will be as under:
Item T ypes of Plots Annual Licence Fee as
No. a Percentage of Land
V alue
(a) Railway related activities such as City
Booking offices, Out Agencies etc. 6%
(b) Ordinary Commercial Plots—without structures 6%
(c) Ordinary Commercial Plots—with temporary
structures for stocking/storing
(i) Covered area (i) 7 1/2%
(ii) Open area (ii)  6%
(d) Steel Yards/Coal Dumps, Bulk Oil Installations etc. 7 1/2%
(e) Land used to lay private sidings 6%
(f) Shops/Retail Depots etc. 10%
4.0 Formation of a Standing Committee
4.1 A Standing Committee of three HoDs will be set up at the Headquarters of
each Zonal Railway and other Railway Units. The Standing Committee consisting of
CE, CCM and FA&CAO shall examine fresh cases connected with railway working as
indicated in Para 3 (a) to (e) and submit its recommendations to G.M. for approval.
4.2 The periodical review will, however, be done by DRM on the recommendations
of Divisional Heads of Engineering, Commercial and Finance Departments. The
Committee will review annually whether the traffic commitments by the licensees of the
commercial plots have actually materialised or not and in case of any deviation, initiate
suitable corrective action including delicensing and vacation as necessary.
5.0 Fixing of  land value
5.1 A market value would however, be required to be taken to serve as a base
value for working out rental fee payable. This shall be fixed on the basis of the land
value of the surrounding area as on 1.1.1985, as determined from the Revenue Authorities
and/or from the following:—
(a) Evaluation of Town Planning Department;

96
(b) Actuals as per PWD and CPWD transactions;
(c) Actual Transactions, as per documents filed in the Office of the
 Sub-Registrar;
(d) V alue of land as assessed by professional evaluators of the State and
Central Governments.
5.2 The land value as worked out shall be increased every year on the 1st of
April, starting from 1.4.1986 at the rate of 10% over the previous year's land value to
arrive at the land value for the following year based on which the annual licence fee
shall be fixed. From 1.4.2004 onwards, the land value shall be increased at the rate of
7% every year over the previous year's value.
5.3 However, for fresh cases of licensing of plots, for any purpose(s) defined in
Para 3.1 (a) to (e) above, the licence fee shall be fixed after obtaining the current value
of land. In very rare cases where it is not possible to obtain the current cost (reasons
for which should be brought on record), the updated cost based on 1.1.1985 land price
should be adopted.
However, for the Metropolitan towns of Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi and Chennai if
the HoDs' Committee feel that the land rates are widely varying within the city, two or
more rates can be utilised for that city. Using this method, arrears of collection of
licence fee on this account should not be allowed to accumulate.
6.0 Minimum licence fee
6.1 The minimum licence fee in respect of plots covered under this letter should
be Rs. 1000/- per annum. For the purpose of determining the minimum licence fee, the
maximum size of a  plot shall be taken as 100 sq. metres. For instance, in case licensing
of a plot measuring 250 sq. metres is involved, the minimum licence fee chargeable
shall be relevant to three plots of 100 sq. metres each and will work out to Rs. 3000 per
annum.
7.0 Revision of licence fee
7.1 As the notional land value will increase by 7% over the previous year's land
value as mentioned in Para 5.2 above, the licence fee will automatically go up by 7%
over the previous year's fee from the first of April every year. Suitable provisions, with
the Schedule of payment due, may be incorporated in the Agreement.
7.2 The termination/renewal date of the Agreement should always be at the end
of the Financial year so that there is no confusion and a better watch is kept on
renewals.
8.0 Powers of  licensing and renewal
8.1 Fresh cases of licensing of plots connected with Railway working and
mentioned at (a) to (e) of Para 3 above will be approved by GM, on recommendation of
the HoD's Committee. As regards plots mentioned at (f) of Para 3, viz shops, retail oil
depots etc., as already stated, the existing ban on fresh licensing for purposes
unconnected with Railway working will continue Renewal of licences of railway land
not connected with Railway working given under para 3 (f) can be done at GM's level
with Finance concurrence.

97
9.0 Security deposit and liquidated damages
9.1 Instructions contained in para 1025, 1026 and 1027 of the Indian Railways
Code for the Engineering Department (1999 Edition) should continue to be strictly
followed and any violation of these instructions should be viewed seriously.
10.0 Settlement of pending cases
10.1 The revised instructions would become effective with effect from 1.4.2004.
It has also been decided to withdraw the retrospective effect of orders dated 29-8-1995.
Thus, the orders of August 1995 would be made applicable for the period 1995-96
onwards and not for the earlier period i.e. from 1-4-1986 to 31-3-1995. Any recovery
already effected for the period between 1-4-1986 to 31-3-1995 need not be refunded in
cash but should be adjusted against future payments due from the concerned party.
Arrears of land licence fee may be recovered in easy instalments.
10.2 In cases pending in Courts of Law, the Law Officer of the Railway should be
consulted before arriving at a settlement.
11.0 Having included their provisions in the master circular, the earlier circulars
on the subject Nos.
i .   83/W2/LM/18/87 dt. 24.3.04
     ii.   83/W2/LM/18/87 dt. 29.8.95
     iii.  83/W2/LM/18/87 (V ol. II) dt.  14.3.01
     iv.   83/LML/18/87 (V ol.II) dt. 5.11.01
      v.    83/W2/LM/18/87 (V ol. II) dt. 28.4.04
      vi.  01/LML/18/58 dated 23.9.02 stand withdrawn.
This issues with the  concurrence of the Finance Directorate of the Ministry of
Railways.
Please acknowledge receipt.
Sd/-
(DESH RATAN GUPTA)
Director (Land & Amenities)
Railway Board.
No. 2005/LML/18/8 New Delhi, Dated 10.02.05
Copy forwarded for information to (i) FA&CAO, all Indian Railways and
Production Units.
(ii)  Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Railways) (with 46 spares)
Sd/-
For FINANCIAL Commissioner/Railways
Copy to:
 EDTCR, EDFC, FC, and F(X) I Branches, Railway Board.

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
(RAILW AY BOARD)
No. 2008/LML/18/15 New Delhi, dated 17.03.2008
The General Manager,
All Indian Railways.
Sub.:—  Licensing of railway land for establishing a rail terminal and/or for
providing connectivity to existing rail heads.
Ref.:— Board's letter No. 2005/LML/18/8 dated 10.2.05.
Suggestions had been received by the Ministry of Railways for making some
relaxation in the policy of licensing of railway land for establishing a rail terminal (ICD)
and/or for providing connectivity to existing rail heads. In continuation of Board's
letter No. 2005/LML/18/8 dated 10.2.05 it has been decided that railway land, if available
and not required for railway's own use in the near future, may be allotted to private
parties for setting up of rail terminals for handling of rail borne traffic and providing
connectivity to the nearest rail head as indicated below:—
(a) For providing rail terminal (ICD), the licence fee should be based on the
circle rate fixed by the Revenue Authority or the industrial rate, whichever is
higher; and
(b) For providing connectivity to the existing rail heads on Indian Railways, the
licence fee may be charged on the basis of industrial rates.
2. There will be no change in other terms and conditions stipulated in Board's
letter dated 10.2.05 referred to above as amended from time to time.
3. It may please be noted that the licensee shall not use the land for any
purpose other than the one for which railway land has been licensed, without prior
approval of Railway. In cases of use of land for a purpose other than the one for
which railway land had been licensed, railway will have the right to refix the licence
fee based on proposed use. Besides, Railway will have the right to adopt market/
commercial rates or terminate the agreement when it is found that the usage of the
licensed land is not connected with railway working. For this purpose, Railway will
conduct checks periodically (say at six months’  intervals) to see if the railway land
is being put to additional/alternative use.
98
RB/L&A/084/2008

99
4. This issues with the concurrence of Finance Directorate of the Ministry of
Railways.
Please acknowledge receipt.
Sd/-
(Rajesh Kumar)
Deputy Director/Land Management
Railway Board
No. 2008/LML/18/15 New Delhi, dated...  03.2008
Copy forwarded for information to—
(i) FA&CAO, All Indian Railways and Production Units
(ii) Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Railways),
224,  Rail Bhawan, New Delhi (with 46 spares)
Sd/-
For Financial Commissioner/Railways
Copy to:
EDTT(F), EDFM, EDCE(G) and EDF(X)II

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
100

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT  HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 1)
In terms of the procedure evolved by the Public Accounts Committee in their
105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha), the Ministry of Railways, like other Ministries/
Departments, are required to furnish to the Committee, Remedial/Corrective Action
Taken Notes on the Audit paragraphs/Chapters relating to the Railways as contained
in the reports of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India, which stand referred to the
Public Accounts Committee under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. These
Notes are to be furnished within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports in
Parliament through the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), which has
been designated as the nodal agency for the purpose. But the Ministry have not been
able to adhere to this prescribed schedule in most cases leading to accumulation of
huge number of pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes. As of February
2010, a total of 481 pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes, pertaining to the
period 1995-96 to 2007-08, relate to the Ministry of Railways, Giving reasons for this
huge backlog, the Ministry of Railways submitted that many of the issues raised in the
Audit Paragraphs required collection of information/data from the vast Railway system
of the Indian Railways consisting of 16 Zonal Railways, 6 production units and
68 Divisions, which took much time. According to the Ministry, this becomes even
more complicated and time consuming if the Audit paragraphs pertain to more than
one Zonal Railway, and the delay gets multiplied when there is any disagreement with
Audit on certain issues or where the Zonal Railways miss some crucial facts, figures
and issues and the Audit have to point these out for correction.
[Sl.No. 1, Part II, Para 1 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
At present, a total of 406 paras pertaining to 1995-96 to 2007-08 are pending with
the Ministry. All out efforts are being made to finalise these paras at the earliest. Out of
these, 11 paras are under final stages and will be sent to Monitoring Cell shortly after
Hindi translation.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 26035-Rly/Co-ord/RR2-5/2010 dated 09.8.2010 have
vetted the Action Taken with the following remarks:—
"The number of pending Action Taken Notes (excluding the figure of 2008-09) is
407 as on 31.7.2010 as per this office record."
101

102
Ministry's Comments
As per DG(Rlys)'s D.O. No. 185-Rly/Co-ord/RR2-5/2010 KW dated 18.01.2011,
now 339 ATNs up to the year 2007-08 are pending with this Ministry.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 27-1-2011, 24-2-2011]
Comments of the Committee
Please see para No. 7 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee do not find convincing, the reasons advanced by the Ministry of
Railways for huge accumulation of pending Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes
since these were not unforeseeable and could have been avoided much before by evolving
internal arrangements in the Ministry to comply with the procedure. It appears to the
Committee that the Railways need to give serious attention to the matter and fully apply
the available technical capabilities to achieve functional and administrative efficiency.
Moreover, despite the matter being taken up at the highest level in the  Ministry with the
Chairman, Railway Board directing  the General Managers of Zonal Railways to expedite
submission of the requisite information, there has not been much improvement in the last
four months. Instead, the number of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes pending
with the Ministry has gone up to 481 in February 2010 from 362 in September 2009. This
is  not acceptable to the Committee. All these facts clearly indicate that greater efficiency
is required in data collection, maintenance and information management systems
throughout the entire network of the Indian Railways besides taking audit replies more
seriously. While expressing their displeasure over this failure, the Committee desire that
the Ministry of Railways should urgently complete total modernization of their data
maintenance and information management systems. Simultaneously, the existing
mechanisms or systems put in place for preparation and submission of Remedial/Corrective
Action Taken Notes on Audit paras need to be streamlined/overhauled so that these
Notes are furnished within the prescribed time limit of four months. This calls for effective
monitoring at various stages of preparation and submission of the Action Taken Notes
by none other than the Railway Headquarters. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry link up  the Railway Board Heaqdquarters with all the Zones, Divisions
and Production Units through various means of modern communication devices for
facilitating effective and efficient inter-Railways data transfer, processing etc. for timely
submission of Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes.
[Sl.No. 2, Part II, Para 2 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]

103
Action Taken by the Government
Ministry of Railways is fully aware of the seriousness of the matter and strives
hard for expeditious disposal of the Audit Paras. The increase in the number of paras
from 362 in September 2009 to 481 in February 2010 is due to inclusion of 172 new paras
pertaining to C&AG's Report of 2008-09 which was presented to Parliament on 24.8.2009.
This figure of 481 has now come down to 406 paras as on 30.6.2010. Finalisation of
75 paras in just 4 months indicates the weightage being given to Audit para in this
Ministry. Further 11 paras will be sent shortly to Monitoring Cell after Hindi translation.
Disposal of pending ATNs has been included as one of the Agenda items in monthly
Board Meetings and will be reviewed at the Chairman, Railway Board level. It is assured
that the position will improve with close monitoring.
Audit vide their U.O.No.26035-Rly/Co-ord/RR2-5/2010 dated 09.8.2010 have vetted
the Action Taken with the following remarks:—
“The number of pending Action Taken Notes (excluding the figure of 2008-09) is
407 as on 31.7.2010 as per this office record."
Ministry's Comments
As per DG(Rlys)'s D.O.No.185-Rly/Co-ord/RR2-5/2010 KW dated 18.01.2011,
now 339 ATNs up to the year 2007-08 are pending with this Ministry.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways' case  No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16 dated 27-1-2011, 24-2-11]
Comments of the Committee
Please see para No.7 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation (Para  No. 12)
The Committee note that train accidents at unmanned level crossing remains
very high, being the second highest after derailments. As informed by the Ministry,
the numbers of such train accidents were 65 each (out of 239 total train accidents) in
both 2004-05 and 2005-06, 72 (out of 195) in 2006-07, 65 (out of 194) in 2007-08,  and 62
(out of 177) in 2008-09. The committee's examination of the causes of these accidents
has revealed that as many as 16,976 level crossings, constituting about
50 per cent of the total number of 34,220 level crossings, in the country are still unmanned.
This implies that the unmanned level crossings will continue to be accident-prone.
The Committee have been informed in this regard that cost of manning these level
crossing is around Rs. 3,300 crore with a recurring expenditure of Rs. 1,700 crore per
annum and because of fund constraints, upgradation of the existing unmanned level
crossings to manned level crossings in being done progressively. The Committee
observe that the current pace of manning unmanned level crossing is very slow
compared to the rapidly growing rail traffic and the exploding road traffic posing

104
further risk of increasing accidents at unmanned level crossings. In view of the loss of
precious lives and high cost of accidents in the form of huge compensation and post
disaster rescue and relief works, the Committee feel that the logic behind the slow pace
of upgradation is not justified. The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Railways
to quicken the pace of manning unmanned level crossings. For this, the Railways should
undertake a proper survey/assessment to identify the most accident-prone sites and
categorise them into three or four priority groups for phase-wise and time bound
upgradation. To help finance this venture, avenues for private sector participation or
other revenue generating modalities may be explored. Further, train services infrastructure
and accidents involve all the stake holders i.e. State Governments, the Local Self
Governments, NGOs, V oluntary Organisations, Civil Society, Clubs and most importantly,
general public. The Committee would, therefore, urge upon the Railways to forge
arrangements for harnessing active cooperation and participation of these stakeholders
especially the State Governments and the District Authorities in their efforts to man the
unmanned level crossings. The Committee further urge the Ministry to streamline the
existing policy and management of level crossings so as to reduce inconveniences being
faced by the public owing to long duration of closing traffic gates before and after the
arrival of trains at a particular level crossing.
[Sl. No. 12, Part  II, Para 12 of 16th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Ministry of Railways have a comprehensive Policy on reducing vulnerability at
level crossings. On this basis Zonal Railways have been advised to follow up
expeditious completion of ROB/RUB, Limited Height Subways, Normal Height Subways
works in their Railways. 3000 Level Crossings have been sanctioned for manning
during the budget 2010-11 and more will be taken in the next budget. With the decision
taken to man all unmanned level crossings, it is imperative now to do away with LCs
with very level of TVUs. There has been emphasis on closure of LC Gates by diverting
the traffic and merging/combining of unmanned level crossings to adjoining level
crossings. The work related to provision of lifting barriers in replacement to gate leafs
on manned level crossings is being done on priority basis besides providing basic
infrastructure at unmanned Level Crossings. Meanwhile education of road users to
guide them in exercising caution before crossing the unmanned level crossings. Help
of village Panchayats etc. has been initiated through publicity campaigns and other
publicity campaigns inlcuding sending SMS on mobile phones especially in rural
areas have been started at vulnerable locations.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 311-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management
dated 05.10.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways, case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 27-1-2011,  24-2-11]
Comments of the Committee
 Please see para No. 13 of Chapter I.

105
Observation/Recommendation (Para  No. 13)
The Ministry of Railways formulated in 2003 a Corporate Safety Plan (2003-13) to
realize the vision of an accident free and casualty free Indian Railways through the use
of newer and better technology, removal and replacement of overaged assets, tracks,
rolling stock, bridges, maintenance inspection and modernization of signalling and
telecommunication wing, human resource development etc. The Ministry claimed that
under this Plan, they have provided modern, efficient and reliable signalling and
telecommunication system apart from taking new initiatives for additional Safety features
which include Modern Train Radio Communication System, cab signalling, Anti Collision
Device etc. The Committee's examination has revealed that while continuing train
accidents belie the realization of the vision of an accident free and casualty free rail
system, the extent of modernization has not covered other areas and limited to some
improvements in signalling and telecommunication facilities only. Further, the
Committee's examination of a related Audit Report has revealed that provision of
modern signalling system is progressing behind schedule and geographical disparity
has emerged with some areas lagging behind others. Moreover, the Railway Zones
have not been able to provide standard performance parameters of signalling and
telecommunication equipment in use. In a more worrisome scenario, the Committee
notice that the expenditure on signalling and telecommnication steadily declined from
6.2 per cent of the total expenditure in 2005-06 to 2.6 per cent in the year 2009-10. In the
opinion of the Committee, the signalling & telecommunication equipments are something
which are very critical for prevention of many of the train accidents as shown by the
incidence of lesser number of train accidents in developed countries, where better
communication based signalling system, Automatic Train Protection and Control System
and GSM based Mobile Train Radio Communication System etc. are being utilised.
The Committee would like the Ministry to make special efforts for speedier installation
of modern signalling and telecommunication system for better operational and safer
movement of trains. Since these initiatives would involve substantial cost, which will
be augmented by maintenance and replacement cost, the Committee urge the Ministry
to enhance funds for signalling and telecommunication works and ensure productive
and judicious utilization of these funds, so that targets set under the Corporate Safety
Plan are achieved within the stipulated time. In this regard, the Committee would like
the Ministry to explore the feasibility of entering into tie ups with telecom operators to
ascertain whether the Railways can earn certain amount of revenue by lending some
portion of their land or assets for mobile towers, receivers etc.
[Sl. No. 13, Part II, Para 13 of 16th Report of  PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
Funds for Signal & Telecommunication works under plan Head-33 are provided
based on the availability of resources. There is a steady increase in % utilization of funds
which are utilized judiciously to ensure productive deployment for increased level of
safety. Signal incidences have steadily come down even though there is an increase in
Signal Assets. The accidents attributed to S&T are negligible. During 2010-11 (upto July
2010) accidents attributed to S&T are nil against total accidents of 26 on IR. Mobile Train
Radio Communication has been commissioned on 1700 RKMs out of 2415 RKMs and all
the 84 nos. voice recorders in control offices have been commissioned. Further a lot of

106
inputs have gone into to modernize the signaling and Telecom infrastructure  on Indian
Railways. Large scale Track circuiting works have been undertaken during the last
10 years, along with provision of Electronic Interlocking, Panel Intelocking, Route Relay
Interlocking, Block Proving by Axle Counter, Data loggers, etc.
Audit vide their U.O. No. 397-RA-II/12-3/2010/PAC/Disaster Management dated
08.12.2010 have vetted the Action Taken Note.
Sd/-
(Ravi Prabhat)
Executive Director (Accounts)
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated  27-01-2011, 24-2-2011]
Comments of the Committee
 Please see para Nos.16 & 17 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 21)
In carrying out eviction and removal of encroachments from the Railway lands,
the Estate Officers play a key role. Their authority and powers need to be strengthened
through amendment in the law where necessary. The Committee find that in 21,654
cases decided by the Estate Officers, orders to evict encroachers from the land were
not implemented on various grounds. To ensure faster removal of encroachments
from the Railway Land, more teeth need to be provided to the eviction orders issued
by the Estate Officers. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry for providing
adequate legal powers to the Estate Officers even to the extent of placing them at par
with the Magistrates by making necessary amendments to the Public Premises
(Eviction) Act, 1971. In this context, the Committee further observe that the Act has
not yielded the desired results as can be gauged from the prevalence of as many as
45,551 pending encroachment cases across the Railway Zones during the year 2006-
07 which further strengthen the need for amendment of the Act to provide more
powers to the Estate Officers.
[Sl. No. 21, Part II, Para 21 of 16th Report of  PAC (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Government
The observation of the Committee regarding need for amendment of the Public
Premises (Eviction) Act, 1971 to provide more powers to the Estate Officers is welcome.
However it is mentioned that the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants)
Act, 1971 is a Central Act pertaining to Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD). Ministry
of Railways had suggested MoUD for empowerment of Estate Officers. However, MoUD
in consultation with Ministry of Law and Justice have not agreed to the suggestions.
Despite the above constraints, Railways have been able to successfully reduce
the area under encroachments by 1080  hectares in the past 5 years.

107
Audit vide their U.O.No. 28-RA-II/12-2/2007(MIP) dated 02.2.2011 have vetted
the Action Taken Note with the following comments:—
"Seen, thanks. However, copy of the detailed instructions issued, regarding
leasing/licensing of Railway Land to PSUs along with a copy of contract
agreement containing the clause for retrieval of land in case the same is required
by Railway before the expiry of the term of the lease, may be furnished for kind
appreciation of PAC."
Ministry's Comments
Requisite instructions are at Annexures A, B, C, D and E.
Sd/-
(Rashmi Kapoor)
Adviser Finance
Railway Board
[Ministry of Railways’ case No. 2010-BC-PAC/XV/16, dated 24-2-2011]
Comments of the Committee
 Please see para No. 23 of Chapter I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
23 December, 2011 Chairman,
02 Pausa, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
108

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 21ST DECEMBER 2011
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 21st December, 2011 from 1500 hrs. to
1545 hrs. in Chairman's Room (No. 51), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
MEMBERS
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
Lok  Sabha
  2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
  3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
  4. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
  5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
  6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
  7. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
  8. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
  9. Dr. M. Thambidurai
10. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Prakash Javadekar
14. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri H.R. Kamboj — Additional Director
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
109

110
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General (Defence Services)
2. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Principal Director (Railway Audit Board)
3. Shri V . Patwardhan — Director (Defence)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the  representatives
of the Office of the C&AG to the sitting of the Committee convened to consider and
adopt the following Draft Reports.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took  up for consideration the following Draft
Reports, one by one and adopted the same without any modifications:—
(i) * * * * * *
(ii) * * * * * *
(iii) * * * * * *
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken on 16th Report (15th Lok Sabha) of PAC on
'Disaster Management and Land Management in Indian Railways'
(Ministry of Railways); and
(v) * * * * * *
4. Thereafter, the Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports
in the light of factual verification done by the Audit and present the same to both the
Houses of Parliament.
The Committee, then adjourned.
*Matters not related with this Report.

APPENDIX II
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR
SIXTEENTH REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of  Observations/Recommendations 24
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee T otal: 19
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage-79.17
Para Nos. 3-11, 14-20 and 22-24
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which  the T otal: Nil
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage-0
the replies received from the Government:
—Nil—
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: 5
which replies of Government have not been Percentage-20.83
accepted by the Committee and which require
Reiteration:
Para Nos. 1, 2, 12, 13 and 21
(v)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of T otal: Nil
which Government furnished interim replies: Percentage-0
—Nil—
.
111
GMGIPMRND—3814LS—09-04-2012.

112