SERVICE TAX ON BANKING AND
OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2012-2013
SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
79

SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
SERVICE TAX ON BANKING AND OTHER
FINANCIAL SERVICES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.03.2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21.03.2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIA T
NEW DELHI
March, 2013/Phalguna, 1934 (Saka)

PAC No. 2006
Price: ` 50.00
©2013 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIA T
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2012-13) ........................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
PART - I
I. Introductory ........................................................................................... 1
II. Provisions for Defining Banking and other Financial Services (BFNS)...... 1
III. Collection of Service Tax from Banking and other Financial Services ... 2
IV . Audit Examination.................................................................................. 3
PART - A: PROCEDURAL DEFICIENCIES
V. Registration ............................................................................................ 4
VI. Monitoring of Receipt of Service Tax Returns ....................................... 12
VII. Registered Service Providers who have stopped filing Returns ........... 15
VIII. Scrutiny of Returns ................................................................................ 17
IX. List of Books of Account Not Filed ....................................................... 20
PART - B: RULES, REGULATIONS AND SYSTEMS
X. Non-Maintenance of Documents for  Availing  Exemption of Discount
Charges .................................................................................................. 22
XI. Non-Inclusion of Foreclosure Charges in the Assessable Value .......... 26
XII. Separate Accounts for Dutiable and Exempted goods not Maintained ... 27
XIII. Short-Payment of Amount under rule 6 (3) of CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004 ... 28
XIV . Overstatement of CENV AT Credit Balance in ST-3 Returns .................. 30
X V . Service Tax Collected but not Remitted to the Government .................. 30
XVI. Staff Position .......................................................................................... 33
PART-II
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................... 39
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2012-13) held on 20th June, 2012 .......................................................... 46
II. Minutes of the Twenty-seventh Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 19th March, 2013 ..................................... 48
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
 Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
* Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† Elected  w.e.f . 6th December, 2012 vice  Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(iii)

REPORT
PART - I
I.  INTRODUCTORY
This Report is based on the Audit review contained in Section - I of the Report of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2010 No. 15
of 2011-12, Union Government (Indirect Taxes—Service Tax and Customs) relating to
'Service Tax on Banking and other Financial Services'.
2. Financial services refer to services provided by the finance industry. The finance
industry encompasses a broad range of organizations that deal with management of
money. Among these organizations are banks, credit card companies, insurance
companies, consumer finance companies, stock brokerages, investment funds and
some Government sponsored enterprises.
A bank is a financial intermediary that accepts deposits and channels those deposits
into lending activities, either directly or through capital markets. A bank connects
customers with capital deficits to customers with capital surpluses.
Service Tax on Banking and other Financial Services (BFNS) was levied with effect
from 1 July, 2001. The scope of this service has been expanded from time to time
through changes/amendments in the Finance Acts.
II.  PROVISIONS FOR DEFINING BANKING AND OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
  (BFNS)
3. Section 65(12) of the Finance Act, 1994 defines BFN as 'any service' in relation
to:—
(a) Banking Companies and Financial Institutions including Non Banking
Financial Companies (NBFC) with effect from 16 July 2001;
(b) 'Other body corporate' not covered in (a) with effect from 16 August 2002.
Body corporate will include all types of organizations, which are incorporated
under any statute. All the services provided by body corporate will be liable
to Service Tax. The body corporate needs to be a banking company or
financial institution including NBFC;
(c) Foreign exchange broker not covered in (a) or (b) with effect from 1 July
2003. Foreign exchange broker includes any authorized dealer of foreign
exchange. Being an inclusive definition, it covers any person engaged in
foreign exchange broking and mainly intended to rope in other entities (like
individuals, HUFs, firms) who are engaged in foreign exchange broking;
(d) Other commercial concerns not falling under (a) to (c) with effect from
10 September 2004. Cooperative banks which are not covered under the

2
definition of 'banking company’, fall under the category of 'any other
commercial concern' and become taxable under this category of service with
effect from 10 September 2004;
(e) Other persons (including commercial concerns) not falling under (a) to (d)
with effect from 1 May 2006.
The following two services were further included in the definition of banking and
other financial services:
— Banker to an issue service; and
— Cheque, transfer of money including telegraphic transfer, mail transfer and
electronic transfer services.
Credit card services have been removed from 'Banking and other Financial Services'
with effect from 1 May 2006 and are being taxed separately.
III.  COLLECTION OF SERVICE TAX FROM BANKING AND OTHER FINANCIAL
   SERVICES
4. The Service Tax on Banking and other financial service is a major contributor in
Service Tax revenue. Its contribution during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 is 7.09 per
cent (` 3634.94 crore out of ` 51,301.79 crore) and 6.15 per cent (` 3747.65 crore out of
` 60,940 crore) respectively. When asked about the targets fixed for collection of
Service Tax from BFNS and achievements made there against, the Ministry in its
written information stated that no specific targets were set for individual sectors like
Banking and other Financial Services.
5. The Committee further sought to know if all the BFNS who were on the records
of the Income Tax Department subjected to Service Tax assessments and if not, what
measures were contemplated by the Department to bring them into the tax net.
6. In this regard the Ministry in its written submission made to the Committee has
stated as under:—
"As such there is no mechanism available with the field formations to check the
data on assessees filing returns with Income Tax Department. However, vide
letter F. No. 137/151/2011-ST, dated 7th June, 2012 Directorate General of Service
Tax (DGST) has been entrusted with the work of calling for data from the Income
Tax Authorities in respect of persons providing one or the other kind of services
and having income in excess of ` 10 lakh per annum. The data received from
Income Tax authorities would be scrutinized to find out such persons who are
not filling their returns, not registered for Service Tax and not declaring true
value for the taxable services provided by them. Thereafter, such cases would
be forwarded to the jurisdictional authorities for further investigations and
appropriate action under the law."

3
7. On being asked as to whether the present mechanism to identify and bring in
potential assessees providing banking and other financial services in tax net for levy
of Service Tax is effective enough, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"Instructions have been issued to field formations vide letter No. 137/151/2011-
ST dated 23.11.2011, wherein the field formations have been directed that special
cell should be created in each Commissionerate mandated with the task of
identifying potential assessees. It has also been mentioned therein that the cell
should collect list of service providers from various service providers'
associations, yellow pages, local publications, advertisements, regional
registration authorities, websites, regulatory bodies, State Government
Department, Income Tax Department, Reserve Bank of India.
With effect from 1st July 2012, a paradigm change has been effected in the
taxation of services. In the new system a negative list of services has been
provided and all services, except those specified in the negative list, will be
subjected to Service Tax. With this change, the tax base of Service Tax has
widened significantly. It is being attempted to create a database of Service Tax
assessees at the national level through the Directorate General of Service Tax.”
IV .   AUDIT EXAMINATION
8. The performance Audit of Service Tax on Banking and other Financial Services,
covered the period from 2006-07 to 2008-09. Audit objectives were to:—
— Seek assurance that the mechanism to identify and bring in potential
assessees providing banking and other financial services in tax net for levy
of Service Tax was effective;
—  Examine the rules, regulations and procedures to identify ambiguities and
lacunae that were required to be addressed; and
— Identify instances of non-compliance to rules leading to loss of revenue.
9. Test check of records relating to this service was conducted in 60 out of total
74 Commissionerates dealing with Service Tax and it included all the six exclusive
Service Tax Commissionerates and 54 Commissionerates dealing with both Service
Tax and Central Excise.
10. The Audit found procedural deficiencies in registration of assessees, receipt of
returns, scrutiny of returns, ambiguities/inadequacy in rule provisions and non-
compliance. The key findings of Audit are given as under:—
(i) 1142 service providers who had provided Banking and other financial services
and were liable to pay Service Tax but were not on the departmental
registration lists. 65 of these potential assessees were lible to pay Service
Tax of ` 92.12 crore.
(ii) 6 per cent of Service Tax returns were received late and 14 per cent of the
returns were not received at all. Cross verification of Service Tax returns with
income tax returns and other records revealed instances of evasion of Service
Tax totalling ` 28.93 crore.
(iii) The levy of penalty for delayed submission and non-submission of returns
serves as a deterrent but the Department did not impose penalty of

4
` 4.35 crore on defaulting assessees. This amount was 97 per cent of the
total amount leviable (` 4.50 crore).
(iv) The relevant exemption notification did not indicate the treatment of interest
charged for late realisation on discounted bills.
(v) The provisions for Service Tax on foreign exchange broking services provided
two very unequal options.
(vi) Different institutions were following different practices for availing cenvat
credit on interest income earned by the banks resulting in excess availment
of cenvat credit.
(vii) Instances of non-compliance to rules and provisions on incorrect valuation,
incorrect/excess availment and utilisation of cenvat credit, non-remittance
of Service Tax, etc. resulting in revenue impact of ` 251.38 crore.
(viii) No system exists in the Department to co-relate the taxable income as shown
in the Income Tax return with the ST-3 return to identify cases that indicated
the need for further examination due to large gaps.
The Committee have examined in detail the various issues raised by the Audit and
the same have been discussed in detail in the ensuing paragraphs.
PART - A: PROCEDURAL  DEFICIENCIES
V .  REGISTRATION
11. Every person liable to pay Service Tax has to apply for registration within a
period of 30 days from the date of commencement of his business.
12. Audit observed that for registration of eligible service providers, the
Government has relied largely on 'voluntary compliance'. Thus an entity, though
liable to pay Service Tax, can evade tax by not applying for registration.
13. Explaining the reasons for registration of Service Tax assessees through
voluntary compliance, the representative of the Ministry during evidence deposed
before the Committee as under:—
"When Service Tax was introduced and even as of now, the focus of the
Government policy for implementation of Service Tax had been that the
Department was not to follow the normal coercive measures which they might
be following in respect of the Central Excise and Customs assessees, and the
assessees were to be encouraged to voluntarily comply the Service Tax
requirements."
14. He further added:—
"For this purpose, the Department has been running, a media campaign by
issuing a lot of advertisements in the print media, electronic media, outdoor
hoardings, etc. so that the assessees are encouraged to comply with it .... In the
year 2003-04 we had about 4 lakh Service Tax assesses, and today, in the year
2011-12 we have 16 lakh Service Tax assesses. So the number of assesses is

5
gradually growing up and we are taking all necessary action and also on the
basis of the recommendation made by the C&AG necessary action is being
taken."
15. On being asked as to whether the tax payer's awareness programme through
the print and electronic media is enough for registration of eligible service providers,
the Ministry in its written submission has stated that:—
"Regular advertisements are brought out in the print and electronic media to
educate the tax payers. Help desks have been set up in Commissionerates for
answering the tax payers' queries and problems faced by them. Furthermore,
seminars are organised to educate existing and potential taxpayers of changes
in Service Tax law and procedure. For instance, with the recent coming into
effect of the negative list, seminars have been organised in Mumbai, Chennai,
Kolkata, Delhi, Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Chandigarh and Bangalore,
covering the major Service Tax revenue centres. These seminars have been
addressed by Chairman, Member (Service Tax) and other senior officials of
CBEC who are associated with effecting policy changes in Service Tax law.
CDs containing changes in the Service Tax law were distributed through the
various local associations and chambers for distribution among Service Tax
assesses. Being interactive in nature, the policy makers have also had
opportunities to listen to the difficulties faced by the tax payers. These
seminars were webcast live so as to increase their reach and cover a very wide
cross section of society."
16. The Committee also sought to know about the strategy, if any, formulated by
the Ministry for making Service Tax assessees tax compliant and for ensuring that
those collecting Service Tax are depositing it in the exchequer. In response, the Ministry
in its written submission has stated as follows:—
"The strategy adopted for achieving the above objectives would have to be
multi-pronged so as to include efforts aimed at increasing the tax base and
efforts to ensure that those already in the tax net comply with their tax obligations
regularly. With this dual approach in mind, the following key areas emerge that
should be in focus to achieve the stated objectives:—
A. Tax compliance by the service providers who are not registered
(a) Tax payer education by way of open house meeting in co-ordination
with various associations of service providers, service specific
seminars, publicity through print and media about the tax provisions
and Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ);
(b) Hassle Free Registration by conducting e-registration Mela at
periodical intervals arranging for spot verification of documents and
sorting out connectivity problem in remote locations;
(c) Using database of various Third party Sources by cross-verification
of unregistered assessees like trade associations, RBI, Income Tax,
local municipal authorities, yellow pages, Internet, newspapers etc.

6
(Example: TDS data from Income Tax, stamp duty, Registration data,
construction permission data from State Govt.);
(d) Creation of an Inter-Departmental Co-ordination Committee for
sharing of database amongst each other aimed at location service
providers who are not registered;
(e) Issue of Modus-Operandi circulars in Important Tax Evasion Cases
amongst the field officers;
(f) Proactive role of existing Social Service Tax Cells in the
Commissionerates for conducting surveys and giving assistance to
potential tax payers;
(g) Hosting of Web portals of Commissionerates and updating the same
on regular basis giving details of the latest legal provisions and contact
numbers of concerned officers along with timely response to any matter
received by e-mail.
B.  Tax compliance by the service providers who are registered
(a) Identifying Non Filers/Stop Filers of returns by using ACES data and
from Enterprise Data Warehousing (EDW) Team of Systems Directorate
and taking necessary action for recovery wherever due;
(b) Amnesty scheme for the assessees encouraging them to file returns
and making voluntary payment of Service Tax along with interest.
Liberal usage of Section 80 of Finance Act, 1994, may be made by the
field to obviate the fears from the mind of assessees who have defaulted
in paying tax but willing to comply;
(c) Service oriented Audit and Anti-evasion so as to keep focus on service
which are prone to tax evasion e.g. construction service, mining service
and renting of immovable property service;
(d) Selection of top assessees of high revenue yielding sectors and
scrutiny of their Balance Sheets and Profit and Loss Accounts to tally
income reflected in the accounts with the taxable value declared in
ST-3 returns;
(e) Publicity of available deterrent provisions like search, provisional
attachment of property of tax evaders, prosecution and penalty
including penal interest which can act as a deterrent for tax evaders;
(f) Special Investigation Agency mandate specifically for Service Tax
similar to Directorate of Revenue Intelligence in Customs or DGCEI in
Central Excise cases. For this the role and scope of the mandate of
Directorate General of Service Tax may be re-cast by vesting it with
investigation powers in Service Tax cases;
(g) Automated scrutiny of Service Tax returns under ACES module based
on risk parameters for detecting irregularities in tax compliance;

7
(h) MoUs may be signed with few top assessees like SBI, LIC, PSUs having
centralized registration to have access to their Computerized data
directly by the departmental officers for CAAP audit without visiting
their premises.
C. Tax collected but not deposited
(a) The provision of prosecution may be made compulsory in cases where
the tax is collected but not deposited with the exchequer.
(b) Provisional attachment of property may be made compulsory in cases
having tax implication of ` 25 lakhs and above.
(c) Name and address of all registered Service Tax assessees should be
on the web portal of CBEC and it should be open to the public, so that
public must know whether Service Tax paid by them is going to the
Government or not.
The aforesaid points can form the basis for any strategy aimed at the above
stated objects. Annual Action Plans based on the above parameters at the
beginning of the financial year can help in guiding the field formations on a
constant basis. Deterrent action prohibiting the defaulting assessees to utilize
cenvat credit for payment of service can be introduced."
17. Observing that apparent weakness in the tax law for voluntary tax compliance
is lack of stringent penalty system, the Committee sought to know about the measures
taken by the Ministry to make the penalty system more stringent. The Ministry
replied as under:—
"Since the introduction of Service Tax, a number of amendments have been
made in the Finance Act, 1994 on need basis. Earlier the administration of
Service Tax was based upon soft non-intrusive approach. The penal provisions
were reviewed and rationalized (as part of the Budget exercise, 2011) to encourage
voluntary compliance, maximize deterrent effect of the penal provisions especially
directed towards hard core tax evaders.
Key changes in penal provisions are:—
/circle6Maximum late fee for non-filing of returns under Section 70 increased
to ` 20,000.
/circle6Interest rate on tax defaulted revised as 18% with effect from 01.04.2011.
/circle6Penalty for serious offences under Section 78 has been made mandatory
and equal to tax sought to be evaded. Waiver of penalty under Section
80 has been disallowed for offences under this category (which was
earlier permissible).
/circle6Maximum penalty for miscellaneous offences, prescribed under
Section 77 has been increased to ` 10,000.

8
Other measures introduced are:
/circle6Section 89 has been introduced, for prosecution of certain specified
offences involving Service Tax of more than ` 50 lakh, with maximum
of 3 years imprisonment.
/circle6Section 83 has been amended to make sections 9A, 9AA, 9B, 9E, 34A
of the Central Excise Act, relating to prosecution of offences, applicable
to Service Tax.
/circle6Notwithstanding recovery provisions under any other Act, first charge
on assets will now rest with Central Excise and Service Tax, for
recovering the tax dues except in specified circumstances, to enable
faster recoveries."
18. Audit found that the Director General of Service Tax, Mumbai, the nodal agency
to administer Service Tax, had issued a comprehensive action plan in May 2003 to
monitor the administration of Service Tax. As per this instruction dated 26 May 2003,
the Department was required to collect the list of Serive Tax providers from various
service providers associations, yellow pages, other local association publications,
advertisements appearing  in newspapers, regional registration authorities, website,
etc. to identify the unregistered service providers and to get them registered. It has
identified field survey as one of the important mechanisms in the action plan to
identify potential assessees and broaden the tax base. The circular had also suggested
a performance monitoring system for surveys. Every range officer was to be entrusted
with the job of doing surveys to identify potential Service Tax assessees in his
jurisdiction and report the outcome every fortnight to their Commissionerates through
the divisional office.
19. Audit Review of the surveys undertaken by the Department indicated that
none of the 60 Commissionerates test checked had fixed any targets for survey during
2007-08 to 2008-09. No surveys were conducted in 27 out of 60 Commissionerates,
including all the six exclusive Service Tax Commissionerates. Chennai III
Commissionerate did not provide the information on the number of surveys conducted.
Out of 32 Commissionerates where surveys were conducted, 9 Commissionerates
stated that 154 new service providers of BFN were registered through surveys resulting
in additional revenue of ` 1.84 crore during the year 2007-08 to 2008-09. However, no
new  service providers could be registered through Surveys for this service in remaining
23 Commissionerates. Moreover, in the 32 Commissionerates where surveys had
taken  place, the outcome was not monitored as prescribed in the DGST circular.
20. When asked to furnish reasons for not conducting surveys in several
Commissionerates and show justification with regard to identification of potential
service providers in those Commissionerates the Ministry submitted as follows:
"Surveys were not conducted due to shortage of staff in the department as
explained below. Tax on Services was first introduced in July 1994 and was
initially imposed on 3 services only and Service Tax collections were ` 407 crore
which was only 0.06% of the total Indirect Tax collections. Thereafter over the

9
years, there has been an exponential increase in the number of assessees as
well as quantum of Service Tax collections. In 2011-12, total Service Tax collection
was ` 97,389 crore which is 24.8% of the total Indirect Tax collections which
resulted in increased workload for the existing manpower available with the
department. A number of initiatives have been taken in the recent past to tap the
full potential of Service Tax. Till Budget 2011, every year new services were
incrementally brought in the Service Tax net. With effect from 1st July 2012, the
department has made a paradigm change in the taxation of services."
21. To the query of the Committee regarding the number of surveys conducted
during the last three years to identify potential assessees and actual realization of
Service Tax as a result thereof, the Ministry responded as follows:—
“With effect from 1st July 2012, a paradigm change has been effected in the
taxation of services. In the new system a negative list of services has been
provided and all services, except  those specified in the negative list, will be
subjected to Service Tax. With this change, the tax base of Service Tax has widened
significantly. Instructions have been issued to field formations vide letter F. No.
137/151/2011-ST dated 23.11.2011, wherein the field formations have been directed
that special cell should be created in each Commissionerate mandated with the
task of identifying potential assessees. It has also been mentioned therein that
the cell should collect list of service providers from various service providers'
associations, yellow pages, local publications, advertisements, regional
registration authorities, websites, regulatory bodies, State Government
Departments, Income Tax Department, Reserve Bank of India.”
Further, desired information is as under:—
(Amt. in ` crore)
Y ear No. of surveys Assessees Service Tax realised
conducted registered after surveys
2009-10 113 Nil 0.08
2010-11 87 Nil 0.50
2011-12 1003 90 0.44
22. Audit scrutiny also revealed in 26 out of 60 Commissionerates, there were 1142
service providers for this service, who, though liable to pay Service Tax, were not
available on the departmental registration lists. The majority of them were in the
Commissionerates where surveys had not been conducted. However, there were 92
such cases detected in 8 Commissionerates where surveys had been conducted. The
majority of the cases were from Jamshedpur (34 cases) and Ranchi (48 cases)
Commissionerates. Out of the 1142 identified by Audit, data relating to 65 such providers
was obtained from various sources such as Income Tax Returns (14 cases), Registrar
of  Companies (30 cases), Annual Accounts (11 cases) and other sources (10 cases).
It was found that, prima facie, these potential assessees had not paid Service Tax to

10
the extent of ` 92.12 crore. This also implied additional penalty upto ` 92.12 crore with
further interest liability of ` 21.35 crore. The Department had confirmed only two
cases of non-registration upto April 2011 which had a revenue implication of ` 9.94
crore besides interest and penalty.
23. While furnishing reasons for the loss of revenue in respect of non-registration
of potential service providers and also giving the present position regarding recovery
of the same, Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in its written submission
stated as follows:—
"The Audit objections have been examined and are accepted or not accepted
on merits of each case. Wherever it is found that provisions of Acts/Rules have
been violated, remedial measures such as issuance of Show Cause Notice for
recovery of Service Tax and penal action, persuading the tax payer to deposit
the tax, have been taken.
Audit objections in respect of 65 cases are partially accepted. On scrutiny of
these cases, it is observed that:—
(a) 19 Audit objections involving Service Tax of ` 36.47 crore have been
accepted and necessary remedial measures have been taken to
safeguard/recover Government revenue.
(b) 17 Audit objections involving Service Tax of ` 46.12 crore are not
accepted.
(c) In 10 Audit objections involving Service Tax of ` 4.25 crore, assessees
have already been registered with Service Tax Department.
(d) In 2 Audit objections involving Service Tax of ` 0.03 crore, service
provider does not exist on given address.
(e) Remaining 17 cases involving Service Tax of ` 5.34 crore are pending
for  investigation."
24. In respect of the balance 1074 cases of non-registration as pointed out by
Audit during the Financial Year 2008-09, the Ministry replied as under:—
“(i) 370 cases of non-registration were verified and it has been found that:—
(a) 272 service providers were found not existing on the given addresses.
(b) In 24 cases, service providers were under exemption limit.
(c) In 19 cases, service providers were already registered.
(d) In 34 cases, service providers were not providing any taxable service.
(e) In 21cases, service providers are under investigation.
(ii) A list containing 171 service providers is being  obtained by Delhi Service
Tax Commissionerate from Audit.

11
(iii) In 17 cases involving 2 Commissionerates, verification report is yet to be
received.
(iv) In case of Bangalore Service Tax Commissionerate, 208 service providers
have been verified out of total 725 cases and due to paucity of staff and large
number of cases, the verification of remaining 517 cases is currently
underway".
25.  While admitting non-registration of Service Tax assessees, the representatives
of the Ministry during evidence deposed before the Committee that:—
"Till 2010, everything was manual. We had no means to find out which of our
assessees were effectively into our system. for checking it up, I go to RBI and
get a list of people, and then I can measure that these cases are missing. But if
I want to do it for the countrywide as a whole for all the services, it requires
either building up a good electronic system of throwing  up such names or huge
manpower."
26. Furnishing details of NBFCs as received from RBI and the follow-up action
taken by the Department to bring them to the tax net, the Ministry in its written reply
stated as follows:—
"Information received regarding NBFCs from RBI and the Information received
from the field formations is as under:—
(Amount in ` lakh)
Total No. of No. of  NBFCs Show Cause Notices NBFCs not
number NBFCs registered issued and amount required to take
of already after taking involved Service Tax
NBFCs registered the list from registration
as per out of RBI Nos. Amount
the RBI list Col. (i)
(i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi)
14320 2228 46 18 264.62 472
The list provided by RBI has 14,320 NBFCs. On verification, it has been found that
2228 nos. are already registered with the Department, 46 new service providers have
taken registration since then, 472 NBFCs are not required to take Service Tax registration
and in 18 cases Show Cause Notices have been issued. In respect of the remaining
11,556 cases, the following has been reported by Directorate General of Service Tax
(DGST):—
(i) A large number of NBFCs are not traceable/locatable in the jurisdiction of
the concerned zones at the addresses mentioned in the list received from
RBI. In a number of cases, letters addressed have been returned by postal
authorities with the remarks 'Do not exist at the given address", ‘Left', 'No
such addressee' and 'Addressee not found';

12
(ii) Documents submitted by a number of units claiming that they are not required
to be registered, are under scrutiny for further necessary action. In a number
of cases, identification/verification and investigation is in progress;
(iii) Those who have not yet furnished the requisite details are being persuaded
to furnish details for necessary verification and further the field formations
have been directed to complete the  verification and investigation
expeditiously on priority."
VI.  MONITORING OF RECEIPT  OF SERVICE TAX RETURNS
27. Every person liable to pay Service Tax has to assess and pay his own tax. He
has to furnish half yearly returns to the Department. A person failing to furnish timely
returns is liable to pay a penalty subject to a maximum of one thousand rupees.
According to Audit, they had called for the statistics on the returns submission from
all the 74 Commissionerates. The information was furnished by 64 Commissionerates
and 10  Commissionerates did not furnish the requisite information. The information
furnished by 64 Commissionerates showed that a large number of returns were either
not received or received late but the Department had not taken any corrective action.
The position of receipt of returns during the period September 2004 to March 2009 by
the Department is shown in the following table:—
Name of No. of No. of Returns Returns No. of Penalty Penalty
service returns returns received received returns levied and not
due received by due late not waived for levied @
date received late ` 1000/-
submission per return
(Lakh of rupees )
BFN 226490 194151 181474 12677 32339 14.77 435.39
Percentage 85.72 80.12 5.60 14.28
of returns due
/circle6The table shows that six per cent of returns were received late and 14 per
cent of the returns were not received at all. In these test checked
Commissionerates it was seen that they had not followed any monitoring
mechanism to ascertain the reasons for non-submission of returns.
/circle6The Government had exempted small service providers delivering taxable
service upto ` 4 lakh from payment of Service Tax from 1 April 2005. This limit
was increased to ` 8 lakh from 1 April 2007 and ` 10 lakh from 1 April 2008.
Amongst the  returns not received, 301 service providers, whose annual
receipts of BFN had exceeded ` four lakh during the year 2005-06, had not
submitted the returns for the year 2006-07. Further, 440 service providers,
whose annual receipts of BFN had exceeded ` eight lakh during the year
2006-07, but they had not submitted the returns for the year 2007-08. Similarly,

13
513 service providers whose annual receipt of BFN had exceeded ` ten lakh
during the year 2007-08, had not submitted the returns for the year 2008-09.
The Department had not taken any action to ascertain whether the value of
services provided had fallen below exemption limits for these assessees or
they had stopped filing returns to evade payment of tax.
/circle6The levy of penalty for delayed submission and non-submission of returns
serves as a deterrent  but the Department did not impose penalty of ` 4.35
crores on defaulting  assessees. This amount was 97 per cent of the total
amount leviable (` 4.50 crore).
28. While furnishing their comments on the above mentioned Audit observations,
the Ministry in its written replies has stated as under:—
"The period covered by Audit is September 2004 to March 2009. With effect
from 12.05.2007, graded structure of late fee was provided under Rule 7C of
Service Tax Rules, 1994 for late submission of Service Tax returns as follows
[para 6.4 of CBEC Circular No. 97/8/2007-ST (F. No. 137/85/2007-CX.4)
dated 23.8.2007]:—
(a)  ` 500 for delay upto 15 days;
(b)  ` 1000 for delay between 15 days and 30 days; and
(c)  ` 1000 plus ` 100 per day beyond 30 days, till the filing of return, not
exceeding   ` 2000/-.
Prior to 16.5.2008, Section 77 of the Finance Act read as follows:—
77 Penalty for contravention of any provision for which no penalty is provided.
Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Chapter or any rule made
thereunder for which no penalty is separately provided in this Chapter, shall be
liable to a penalty which may extend to an amount not exceeding one thousand
rupees."
29. Submitting details about the present status of receipt of returns during the
period from September 2004 to March 2009, the Ministry has stated as under:—
Name of No. of No. of No. of Amount of Amount of Amount of
service returns returns returns penalty penalty penalty
due received not levied waived recovered
late received ( ` lakh) ( ` lakh) ( ` lakh)
BFN 2,37,593 10,994 18,684 60.32 3.31 31.79
As per updated information collected from the field formations, the total number of
returns not received during the above period is 18,684 and not 32,339 as reported by
Audit.

14
30. On being asked about the methodology that has been adopted by the Ministry
in order to ensures that all the BFNs were complaying with the requirement of filing of
returns of income, the Ministry informed as under:—
"Electronic filing of Service Tax returns has been made mandatory w.e.f. 1.10.2011
(notification No. 43/2011-ST dated 25.8.2011). Monitoring of electronically filed
returns is easier and efficient as compared to  monitoring of manually filed
returns. It may be further pointed out that all the BFNs who are on the record of
the Income Tax may not be subject to Service Tax assessment due to the reason
that under the Service Tax regime, exemption limit is ` 10 lakhs while Income Tax
is charged for the income exceeding ` 1.80 lakhs. Since the exemption limit
under IT Rules is different, which may be the reason for difference in two lists
i.e. under  Income Tax and under Service Tax. However, all the field formations
do take action to indentify and get the BFNs registereds who have crossed the
exemption limit.
Further, the Systems Directorate sends a monthly report to field formations and
CBEC on the status of returns pending for review and correction by officials of
different Commissionerates across India to facilitate monitoring the progress of
processing of returns on a regular basis. Board has also issued a letter [D.O.
No. 201/10/2011-CX.6(Pt.) dtd. 01.06.2012] setting timelines for clearing pending
returns. Further, CBEC has also constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship
of Chief Commissioner of Vizag zone to examine the issues relating to review
and correction process in ACES and to suggest remedial measures. Based on
the recommendations of the Committee further course of action will be taken."
31. When the Committee sought to know whether the Ministry had any database
with regard to the actual number of BFNs filing returns and those who were not filing
returns of income and were not on the records of the Department, the Ministry stated
that the database of non-filers and stop-filers is being developed through the
Directorate General of Service Tax. Furthermore, the registered assessees not filing
Service Tax returns are issued Show Cause Notices when noticed.
32. Regarding the deterrent action taken by the Ministry against errant assessees,
the Ministry inter alia has stated as under:—
"Deterrent action against errant assessees is bing taken by the field formation
depending upon the seriousness of the offence/s. The laws dealing with deterrent
action has been amended to provide strict action against the defaulters.
Section 73 of the Finance Act provides that where any Service Tax has not been
levied or paid or short levied or short paid, the same would be  recovered by
issuance of demand notice to the person chargeable with the Service Tax;
Section 75 of the Act ibid provided that where a person, liable to pay Service
Tax, fails to credit the tax or any part thereof to the account of the Central
Government within the period prescribed, shall pay interest on the said amount
for the delayed period. The rate of interest in the case of delayed payment of

15
Service Tax has been increased to 18% from 13% w.e.f. 1st of April 2011
[Notification No. 14/2011-ST, dated 1.3.2011];
Specific provisions have been laid down under Section 76 of the Act ibid
prescribing therein that if any person, liable to pay Service Tax, fails to pay such
tax, he shall pay such tax along with a penalty not less than ` 100 per day during
which such failure continues or @ 1% of such tax, per month, whichever is
higher;
In addition, with a view to provide for deterrent penal action against service
providers collecting Service Tax but not depositing the same with the
Government exchequer, prosecution in a Court of Law has been specifically
provided for by introducing Section 89(1) (d) through Finance Act, 2011 w.e.f.
8th April 2011."
VII.  REGISTERED SERVICE PROVIDERS WHO HAVE STOPPED FILING RETURNS
33. In the limited scale of verification done by Audit  regarding Income Tax Returns
and other connected records of some of the registered service providers who had
stopped filing returns for Service Tax it was found that 7 assessees in Nagpur
Commissionerate, had not filed their Service Tax returns but had continued to provides
services during the period of non-filing. This resulted in non-payment of Service Tax
of ` 20.33 lakh and interest of ` 4.97 lakh. Some illustrative cases pointed out by Audit
are given below:—
(Amount in lakh  `)
Sl. Commissionerate Name of Assessee   Revenue effect Source of
No. T ax Interest data
1. Nagpur M/s. Berar Finance 7.71 1.88 IT return
2. Nagpur M/s. Leo Marketing 3.00 0.77 IT return
and Auto Deal
3. Nagpur M/s. Mendhekar 2.94 0.57 IT return
Enterprises
34. The response of the Ministry in respect of all the seven assessees that was
pointed out by Audit are given as under:—
"(a) M/s. Berar Finance Ltd: The value taken by Audit from income tax return is
broken into the following nature of income, namely, interest on loans, interest
on investments, securitization income, profit on securitization, misc. income,
Service Tax/education cess credit for earlier year, bad debt recovered, interest
on housing loan and risk mitigation charges. None of these form part of
taxable value under Banking and other financial service. Moreover, scrutiny
of ST-3 returns for the relevant period indicates that assessee has discharged
their Service Tax liability.

16
(b) M/s. Leo Marketing and Auto Deal: The value taken by Audit from income
tax return is broken into the following nature of income, namely profit on sale
of vehicles, income from repairs of vehicles and commission from banking
and financial services. Of this, only commission from banking and financial
services form a part of taxable value, but since the gross receipts were below
the small scale threshold limit of ` 4 lakh and 8 lakhs, respectively in the years
2006-2007 and 2007-2008, assessee was not liable for payment of Service
Tax. The assessee has also surrendered Service Tax registration on 22.7.2005.
(c) M/s. Mendhekar Enterprises: The value taken by Audit from income tax
return is broken into the following nature of income, namely, profit of
Mangla Y . Mendhekar shares account and securities transaction tax, none
of which form part of gross taxable value. In the ST-3 return filed for the
period 2007-08 the assessee has shown total taxable value as 'Nil'. Therefore,
there is no Service Tax liability.
(d) M/s. Deekay Financial Services: The Audit has taken taxable value of services
as shown in the income tax return for the year 2006-2007 as ` 8,68,651/-while
scrutiny of profit and loss account shows break up of nature of income as
commission received and incentive. Though commission does form a part of
gross taxable value, they were below the threshold limit of ` 4 lakh and
hence were not liable to payment of Service Tax. The IT return of the assessee
for the financial year 2006-07 reveals gross total income of ` 2,77,653/- which
also does not corroborate Audit's contention. The assessee has also
surrendered Service Tax registration on 17.11.2005.
(e) M/s. Nidhi Finance and Investment: The value taken by Audit from income
tax return in broken into the following nature of income, namely, interest and
miscellaneous income which do not form part of gross taxable value. The
assessee surrendered Service Tax registration on 14.11.2006 being below the
threshold limit of ` 4 lakh.
(f) M/s. Jain Finance Company: The value taken by Audit form income tax
return broken into the following nature of income, namely, interest and
documentation charges for the year 2007-08. These receipts do not form part
of gross taxable value. Interest is exempt from Service Tax by virtue of section
67 of the Finance Act 1994 read with Rule 6(2) (iv) of the Service Tax
(Determination of V alue) Rules, 2006. The assessee surrendered its Service
Tax registration on 8.6.2005 being below the threshold limit of ` 4 lakh at the
relevant time.
(g)  M/s. Orange City Credit Capital Pvt. Ltd.: The value taken by Audit from
income tax return is broken into the following nature of income, namely,
interest on loans, processing fees, penal charges and vehicle repossession
charges. Of these only processing fees of ` 9500/- in year 2006-2007 and
` 5300/- in year 2007-08 form a part of gross taxable value on which the
Service Tax is recoverable and has not been paid.
Protective show cause notices, all dated 13.10.2011, have been issued in all
the above 7 cases."

17
35. With regard to the steps taken by the Department for identifying the registered
service providers who had stopped filing returns for Service Tax, the Ministry in its
written information has submitted as follows:—
"Instructions have been issued to field formations vide CBEC's letters dated
27.07.2011 and 14.07.2011 wherein they have been directed that a special cell
should be created in each Commissionerate mandated with the task of identifying
potential assessees and stop filers. Electronic filing that has been made
mandatory would make it easier for the Department to monitor the filing of
returns.
Further, a facility has been provided in ACES to generate a report on assessee-
wise details so that the non-filers of ST-3 returns can be identified. A process
note has been circulated to all the Commissioners to make use of this facility.
Commissionerate-wise lists of stop-filers and non-filers of ST-3 returns for the
year 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 has also been prepared and sent to field
formations for taken necessary action. This is being monitored at various levels."
VIII. SCRUTINY OF RETURNS
36. The authority to conduct scrutiny of returns is provided in Rule 5A of the
Service Tax Rules, 1994 which authorizes the Commissioner to empower any officer to
carry out 'Scrutiny, verification and checks, as may be necessary to safeguard the
interest of revenue'. The Rule also allows such an officer to call for any record maintained
by the assessee for scrutinizing the return regarding the correctness of the
assessments made. The Board has also issued guidelines vide letter F.No. 137/27/
2007 CX. 4, dated 8 February 2007, which makes it mandatory to scrutinize returns on
a regular basis. The guidelines clearly envisaged that returns' scrutiny would become
the core function of the Service Tax Ranges.
37. When the Committee sought details regarding the number of cases of Service
Tax returns filed by BFNs that were selected for scrutiny assessments and completed
in the last three years, the Ministry furnished the following:—
(Amt. in ` crore)
Y ear No. of returns of BFNs No. of returns
selected for scrutiny scrutinised
2009-10 4553 5279
2010-11 137540 137461
2011-12 54633 53729
38. Further, as regards the targets fixed for disposal of returns after scrutiny and
achievements made thereagainst, the Ministry submitted:—
"The CBEC vide Circular Number 113/07/2009-ST dated 23.04.2009 has prescribed
norms for scrutiny of ST-3 returns. They are as follows:—

18
(a) The first half yearly returns filed in the financial year by all taxpayers
making tax-payment (cash+credit) over ` 50 lakh (either during the
previous financial year or during the current year) must be scrutinized.
(b) 50% of the first half yearly returns filed in the financial year by all
taxpayers making tax-payments, payment (cash+credit) between ` 25
lakh to ` 50 lakh (either during the previous financial year or during
the current year) must be scrutinized.
(c) After completing the scrutiny of the first two categories, 5% of the
balance returns should be scrutinized, depending upon the time and
manpower available.
Further, the Systems Directorate sends a monthly report to field formations &
CBEC on the status of returns pending for review and correction by officials of
different Commissionerates across India to facilitate monitoring the progress of
processing of returns on a regular bais. CBEC has also issued a letter [D.O. No.
201/10/2011-CX. 6 (Pt.)] dated 01.06. 2012 setting timelines for clearing pending
returns. Further, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Commissioner of
Vizag zone to examine the issues relating to review and correction process in
ACES and to suggest remedial measures has been constituted by CBEC. Based
on the recommendations of the Committee, further action will be taken."
39. As regards scrutiny of returns, Audit review revealed the following significant
deficiencies:—
(i) The compiled departmental data for 67 out of 74 Commissionerates and two
divisions of Delhi ST Commissionerate for the year 2008-09 showed that
12.38 per cent of the returns received for this service (received: 52423 verified
45935) were pending preliminary verification/scrutiny. Six Commissionerates
and two divisions of Delhi ST Commissionerate did not furnish the
information.
(ii) Audit also found 99 cases in 22 Commissionerates where the departmental
officers had scrutinised the returns but failed to detect irregularities like
payment of Service Tax at lower rate, non-levy of interest and penalty, short
payment of interest, etc. which had led to short levy of Service Tax totalling
` 7.02 crore and interest of ` 1.56 crore. Of these, the department had accepted
Audit observations involving revenue of ` 2.15 crore and had recovered
` 1.21 crore and issued SCNs for ` 1.21 crore. An illustrative case is given
below:—
Audit observed that M/s. Citi Financial Consumer Finance India Ltd., in
Delhi ST commissionerate continued to pay Service Tax at the lower
rate during the period between April 2006 to March 2008 even after the
rates has been enhanced from 10.2 per cent to 12.24 per cent with effect
from 18 April 2006. This resulted in short payment of Service Tax of
` 77.33 lakh.
Audit pointed this out in September 2009. The reply of the Department
was awaited (April 2011).

19
(iii) No system exists in the Department to co-relate the taxable income as shown
in the income tax return with the ST-3 return to identify cases that indicated
the need for further examination due to large gaps. When a cross verification
of ST returns with income tax returns and other records maintained by
assessees was conducted it was found that 116 assessees (in 29
Commissionerates) had shown lower figures in ST returns which had Service
Tax implication of ` 21.91 crore and interest of ` 2.94 crore during the period
from September 2004 to March 2009. Two illustrative cases are given below:—
(a) M/s. State Bank of India (Industrial Estate Branch), Balasore, in
Bhubaneswar I Commissionerate was engaged in providing BFN. A
cross verification of Income Tax return with the ST-3 returns filed by
the assessee revealed that the assessee had exhibited taxable value in
Income Tax return and value of taxable services in ST-3 returns as
` 3.93 crore and ` 2.40 crore respectively. In the absence of process of
cross verification, the difference had not been examined. This had
Service Tax implication of ` 14.23 lakh.
(b)  M/s. Cholamandalam DBS Finance Ltd. in Chennai ST
Commissionerate, was offering income received on processing/service
charges, pre-closure charges, insurance/administration charges,
documentation charges and PDC (Post Dated Cheque) Swap charges
for Service Tax.
However, other incomes like reimbursement of expenses towards
cheque bouncing charges, Electronic Clearing Scheme transfer,
Outstation cheque collection, field collection and recovery, post seizure
interest charges were not included for Service Tax purpose for the
financial years from  2006-07 to 2008-09. These incomes have to be
reckoned as consideration for the purpose of levy of Service Tax. Non-
levy of Service Tax on this account worked out to ` 8.99 crore and
interest of ` 2.18 crore.
The Department partially accepted the Audit observation involving
Service Tax of ` 8.55 crore and intimated that SCN for ` 9.43 crore had
been issued in July 2010.
40. The Committee sought to know the reasons for pendency with regard to
preliminary verification/scrutiny of about 12.38 per cent of returns that were received.
Further, in the absence of the same how the Department was able to ascertain the
correctness of the amount of Service Tax that was due and was deposited by the
assessees. To this, the Ministry in its written submission stated as:—
"Norms for scrutiny of returns have been fixed vide Board's Circular Number
113/07/2009-ST, dated 23.04.2009. Service Tax Return Scrutiny Manual has also
been prepared, which has been circulated to the field formation vide Circular
Number 113/07/2009-ST dated 23.04.2009, where by guidelines have been issued
for checking/verifying the ST-3 returns submitted by the service providers,
Electronic filing of Service Tax returns has been made mandatory w.e.f. 1.10.2011
(notification Number 43/2011-ST dated 25.8.2011). Further, the system of ACES

20
(Automation in Central Excise and Service Tax) has been introduced throughout
the county. The system is able to check the correctness of the returns from the
perspective of arithmetical accuracy right away leaving the officers with greater
time to perform a detailed scrutiny based on risk parameters. The system also
provides for automated monitoring of receipts and scrutiny of returns. Thus,
the preliminary scrutiny of returns is now automated in ACES.
Further, the field formations regularly scrutinise the periodical returns filed by
the taxpayers and conduct audit of Service Tax assessees wherein the compliance
with rules, regulations and procedures specified for levy and collection of
Service Tax are verified. If any deviation in compliance of the rules, regulations
and procedures is noticed at any stage, the appropriate actions initiating
issuance of show cause notice etc. are being taken against the defaulters. Anti-
evasion teams have been  strengthened to conduct checks against the service
providers prone to evasion of tax and where there is any reported misuse of tax
laws.
Instructions have also been issued by CBEC vide F.No. 224/02/2012-CX.6
dated 21.2.2012 that the function of detailed scrutiny may be implemented in all
the Ranges. Till such time that ACES does not do the sample selections of
returns, the samples may be selected manually, as prescribed in the scrutiny
manuals. AC/DC/JC/ADC are required to conduct the detailed scrutiny of high
monetary value returns as prescribed in the returns manual. As preliminary
scrutiny is done by ACES system, the probability of recurrence of such lapses
is very low."
41. Elaborating on the position of the scrutiny of returns, the Chairman, CBEC
deposing before the Committee informed the Committee, as follows:—
"We have a system of audit. We see the documents and we see the returns,
which have been filed by the assessees. Out of the returns filed by assessees,
a few are selected for scrutinising on the basis of identified risk parameters.
Now, identified risk parameters are there that if the tax paid by him is going
down or it is going up or if the value of the services provided by him is going
down."
IX.  LIST OF BOOKS OF ACCOUNT NOT FILED
42. Rule 5(2) of Service Tax Rules, 1994, stipulates that every assessee shall furnish
to the superintendent of Central Excise at the time of filing his return for the first time,
a list of books of accounts maintained by the assessee in relation to Service Tax.
The shortfall in receipt of details of books of accounts as pointed out by Audit for
the period from April 2007 to March 2009 in 68 out of all the 74 Commissionerates, is
given below:—
Name of No. of returns received No. of first returns Percentage
service from service providers where list of books of
for the first time accounts not received
BFN 9273 2438 26.29

21
Audit had observed that 26 per cent of service providers had not given the list of
books of accounts maintained by them. During the period from April 2007 to March
2009, in 10 Commissionerates, not a single assessee had  submitted the list of books
of accounts at the time of filing of returns for the first time in respect of BFN.
The Commissionerates had not pursed these cases to ascertain the reasons for
non-submission of these details. Further, six Commissionerates did not provide the
data relating to accounts details being filed with the first ST return despite repeated
pursuance for over six months.
43. While submitting their comments on the above-said audit observations to the
Ministry in its written note has stated that:—
"Non-compliance with the said rules invites penal action. A letter F.No. 137/62/
2011-ST dated 13.07.2011 has been issued to field formations with a view to
ensure compliance to the said rule."
44. On being asked whether any deterrent action was taken against the defaulters,
the Ministry in its written submission has replied as under:—
"The assessees not complying with the provisions of Rule 5(2) of the Service
Tax Rules, 1994 are subjected to deterrent action as per the existing provisions
in the law.
It has been further reported by Bangalore zone that approximately 25,000
assessees file their returns during the last two days of the due date for filing
returns—both existing registrants and new assessees. In view of the huge
volume of work, this work is entrusted to all the staff of the Service Tax
Commissionerate. They were not in a position to identify the first timers and
insist on submission of list of books of accounts due to the sheer workload.
Thus, this is a problem of staff crunch which is sought to be solved by diversion
from Central Excise side to Service Tax. A medium term solution is cadre review
which is also being pursued."
45. When the Committee desired to know about the strategy, if any, had been
formulated by the Department to obtain the list of books of accounts along with the
returns from the defaulters, the Ministry responded as follows:—
"Non-compliance with the Rule 5 (2) of the Service Tax Rules, 1994 invites penal
action. A letter F.No. 137/62/2011-ST dated 13.07.2011 has been issued to field
formations with a view to ensure compliance to the said rule.
Further, a need has been felt to train the Service Tax staff for developing a better
understanding of the various books of accounts maintained by banks and
financial services assessees. This capacity building would also enable the staff
to effectively enforce the disclosure of documents by banks and financial
services assessees as mandated by Board's Circular Number 137/62/2011-ST
dated 13.7.2011."

22
PART-B : RULES, REGULATIONS AND SYSTEMS
X. NON-MAINTENANCE OF DOCUMENTS FOR A V AILING  EXEMPTION OF
 DISCOUNT CHARGES
46. CBEC Notification Number  29/2004 ST dated 22 September, 2004 read with
Number 30/2004 of the same date and Rule 4A of Service Tax Rules provide that
discount charges on bills discounted are exempted from Service Tax provided that the
discount charges are shown in a document containing other essential information
specified in Rule 4A.
47. Audit scrutiny revealed that M/s. Vijaya Bank in Bangalore LTU
Commissionerate had collected discounted charges of  ` 145.21 crore during 2004-05
to 2008-09 on account of bills discounted. The bank had not issued any separate
invoice/bill or challan but had credited amounts net of discount directly to the
customers’ accounts. Consequently, the conditions specified in rule and notifications
for claiming exemption had not been fulfilled. Similarly, SBI commercial branches,
Jaipur and Bhilwara collected ` 4.58 crore as discounting charges and availed exemption
without issuing any documents.
On being pointed out (August, 2009), the LTU Bangalore contended (November,
2009) that under notification 30/2004 the customers were provided with the option of
issuing any document viz. account statements/pass book, vouchers containing
various details required as per Service Tax Rules. It was also stated that this was the
uniform practice followed across the Banking industry considering the magnitude of
the transactions. The reply of the Department did not specify the document(s) issued
by banks that contained all the mandatory information namely name, address and the
registration number of persons providing and receiving taxable service; description,
classification, and value of taxable service and Service Tax payable thereon.
48. When asked about the justification of the Ministry in this regard and action
taken against the above-said banks for the stated deficiencies, the Ministry replied as
follows:—
"Board's letter Number 137/62/2011-Service Tax dated 13.7.2011 has directed
field formations to ensure that in the list furnished by assessee under Rule 5(2)
of Service Tax Rules, 1994 the banking companies and other financial companies
have mentioned the source records from which the document, that is issued by
them in fulfillment of provisions of Rule 4(A)(1) of Service Tax Rules, 1994, is
prepared."
49. Pursuant to the exit conference held by Audit, the Board had stated that Banking
industry was issuing statement of accounts periodically wherein all the charges debited
to parties accounts mentioning clearly the details of discount, interest or other such
charges. However the Board informed that it would consider issuing a suitable
clarification in this regard.

23
50. To a pointed query as to whether the Board had issued suitable clarification on
maintenance of documents for availing exemption on discount charges, the Ministry
in its written information replied as under:—
"Board's letter Number 137/62/2011-Service Tax dated 13.7.2011 has directed
field formations to ensure that in the list furnished by assessee under Rule 5(2)
of Service Tax Rules, 1994, the banking companies and other financial companies
have mentioned the source records from which the document, that is issued by
them in fulfillment of provisions of Rule 4(A)(1) of Service Tax Rules, 1994, is
prepared. CBEC's letter ibid states as follows:—
The C&AG of India has pointed out that Banks and Financial Institutions
should disclose the documents issued to fulfil the mandatory information
requirements for availing exemption on discount charges.
In this regard attention is invited to the first proviso to Rule 4(A)(1) of the
Service Tax Rules, 1994. It provides that 'Provided that in case the provider of
taxable service is a banking company or a financial institution including a non-
banking financial company providing service to any person, an invoice, a bill
or, as the case may be, challan shall include any document, by whatever name
called, whether or not serially numbered, and whether or not containing address
of the person  receiving taxable service but containing other information in
such documents as required under this sub-rule’. Further Rule 5(2) of the Service
Tax Rules, 1994 mentions that every assessee shall furnish to be Superintendent
of Central Excise a list of all the records prepared or maintained by the assessee
for accounting of transactions and all other financial records maintained by him
in the normal course of business.
In order to obviate the problem noticed by C&AG, it may be ensured that in the
list furnished under Rule 5(2), the banking companies and other financial
companies have mentioned the source record from which the document that is
issued by them in fulfilment of provisions of Rule 4(A)(1) is prepared.
It is reiterated that there should be no deviation in following  the above provisions
of Rule 4(A) and Rule 5(2) of Service Tax Rules, 1994."
51. The details about the cases of wrong availment of exemption or abatement
during the years 2009-10 and 2010-11, as furnished by the Ministry are given below:—
Y ear No. of Amount of Service Tax involved Amount recovered
Cases ( ` crore)  ( ` crore)
2009-10 110 339.47 10.53
2010-11 91 250.07 20.23

24
Zone-wise details as received from the Ministry regarding Service Tax cases
involving wrong availment of exemption or abatement are given as under:—
(` crore)
Sl. Name of Zone Number of Cases Amount of Servcie Amount
No. Tax involved Recovered
2009-10 2010-11 2009-10 2010-11 2009-10 2010-11
1. Ahmedabad Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
2. Bangalore Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
3. Bhopal Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
4. Bhubaneshwar Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
5. Chandigarh 6 2 1.0909 0.035 0.0009 0.02
6. Chennai 1 1 1.05 1.04 0 0
7. Cochin 8 0 0.07 0 0.01 0
8. Coimbatore* 0000 0.023 0
9. Delhi 27 16 157.64 204.85 0.0019 0
0.2987
+0.074
10. Hyderabad Nil 1 Nil 0.2987 Nil (Interest)
0.3734
11. Jaipur** 5 3 1.4 0.86 0 0
12. Kolkata 26 34 29.88 3.98 0.164 1.089
13. Lucknow 0 1 0 0.037 0 0
14. Mysore 4 2 0.05 0.03 0.01 0
15. Meerut 4 1 4 1.82 4.018 0.04 0.132
16. Mumbai-I 10 6 6.08 7.24 0.25 0
17. Mumbai-II Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
18. Nagpur Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
19. Pune 1 0 0.12 0 0.12 0
20. Ranchi 1 1 0.04 0.0312 0 0
21. Shillong Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
22. V adodara Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
23. Vishakhapatnam Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
24. LTU Delhi Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
25. LTU Chennai Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
26. LTU Bangalore Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
27. LTU Mumbai Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
28. DGCEI 17 10 140.23 27.65 9.91 18.62
Total 110 91 339.47 250.07 10.53 20.23
*  Single SCN issued for  ` 0.81 cr. pertaining to the year 2009-10 and  ` 1.05 cr. pertaining to
  2010-11.
**  Out of  ` 1.41cr., case of   `  0.41 cr. dropped.

25
52. On being asked to furnish the reasons for slow recovery of Services Tax involved
in availment of exemption or abatement, the Ministry in its written submission stated
as follows:—
"Recovery involves due process of law like adjudication and subsequent appeals
which obviously affects the process of recovery of amount of Service Tax
involved. In most of the cases, the assessees contest their liability to pay
Service Tax and enter into protracted litigation."
53. Regarding the basis for availing exemption or abatement by large number of
assesses involving such a huge amount of Service Tax to which they were not entitled
to, the Ministry replied:—
"Sometimes the service providers wrongly avail exemption and abatement under
the impression that the are entitled for such exemption or abatempent. In other
cases, the assessees do avail these benefits by misrepresenting and suppressing
the relevant particulars."
Valuation of Taxable Service
54. The value of taxable service is determined as per Rule 3 of Service Tax
(Determination of V alue) Rules, 2006. Audit found 64 instances of undervaluation
which resulted in short payment of Service Tax of ` 53.80 crore that was recoverable
with interest of  ` 1.54 crore and penalty.
55. Responding to the irregularities pointed out by Audit, the Ministry stated:—
"Twenty-six of the sixty-four cases mentioned by Audit are separately described
in the succeeding paragraphs. The remaining cases are also circulated to the
field formations for examination and necessary remedial steps. The field
formations are already taking requisite action in this regard. For example:—
(a) In Chandigarh I Commissionerate, Punjab National Bank branches
Sector XVII, Chandigarh and Sector SCID, Chandigarh have deposited
` 2.18 lakh (including interest) on 18.2.2010 and ` 3.17 lakh (including
interest) on 12.7.2010 and show cause notices both dated 10.09.2010
have also been issued to the assessees.
(b) In Rajkot Commissionerate, with respect to M/s Rajkot Nagrik Sahkari Bank
Ltd., the show cause notice dated 14.12.2009 for Service Tax `4.51 lakh
(` 0.58 lakh and ` 3.93 lakh) was confirmed in adjudication, while in
appeal the demand of  ` 4.08 lakh was upheld and amount recovered.
(c) Again in Rajkot Commissionerate, with respect to M/s. Rajkot Nagrik
Sahkari Bank Ltd., the assessee paid the amounts of   ` 0.73 lakh and
` 0.41 lakh (total ` 1.14 lakh) observed by Audit.
(d) In Trivandrum Commissionerate, with respect to M/s. Kerala State
Cooperative Bank Ltd., Audit had observed a liability of `8.16 lakh.
The observation is partially accepted since there is no Service Tax
liability on ` 28 lakh grant from NABARD. The actual liability works
out of ` 5.28 lakh for twenty branches of the Bank, which has been
paid by the Bank.

26
(e) In Jaipur I Commissionerate, with respect, to M/s. JSEL Securiities
Ltd., the audit observation is admitted and show cause notices issued
for Service Tax totalling `1.55 lakh.
(f) In Surat I Commissionerate, with respect to State Bank of India (SCB),
the amount of ` 1.71 lakh has been recovered.
(g) In Vapi Commissionerate, with respect to State Bank of India, (Industrial
Town  Ship Branch, V api), the amount of  ` 4.76 lakh has been recovered.
The field formations are being directed to intimate the action taken and results
thereof to respective Accountant Generals' Office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India."
56. Apprising the Committee of the mechanism that was in place for detecting the
undervaluation, the Ministry submitted as follows:—
"The Service Tax (Determination of Value) Rules, 2006 have been incorporated
w.e.f. 19.04.2006 for determining the value of taxable services. Field formations
are required to determine the value as per these rules. The scrutiny of ST-3
returns, Audit of the records of the assessee and anti-evasion operation are
used to determine cases of undervaluation and short payment of Service Tax."
57. When asked about the steps taken/proposed to be taken to check such
malpractices, the Ministry in its submission stated as under:—
"Whenever any ambiguity is noticed in respect of valuation rules, suitable
clarifications are issued or amendments done. To deter deliberate undervaluation,
non-issuance of invoice and maintenance of false books of accounts are now
punishable offence, attracting imprisonment upto  3 years under Section 89. As
part of the Budget 2012, scope of Section 89(1) has been modified in such a
manner that 'any person who knowingly evades payment of Service Tax' can be
punished with prosecution."
XI.  NON-INCLUSION OF FORECLOSURE CHARGES IN THE ASSESSABLE VALUE
58. Ministry of Finance letter F.No. 345/6/2008-TRU dated 11 June 2008 clarified
that any amount collected by a service provider on account of lending is either
interest or service charges. Pre-closure/fore-closure charges are collected for early
payment of loans. These charges not being 'interest' are required to be treated as
consideration for the services provided and are accordingly leviable to Service Tax
under Section 65(105) (zm).
59. Audit scrutiny revealed that M/s. Infrastructure Development Finance
Corporation Ltd. (IDFC), in Mumbai (ST) Commissionerate, had collected ` 825.54
lakh on account of foreclosure charges of loans during the period April 2006 to
September 2009, on which Service Tax amounting  to ` 99.00 lakh was not paid. This
was recoverable with interest.

27
60. When Audit pointed this in December 2009, the Department accepted the Audit
observation and reported that a Show Cause Notice for ` 98.78 lakh had been issued
in March 2010. Further progress was awaited (April 2011).
61. While providing the current status of the Show Cause Notices (SCN) issued for
recovery of Service Tax which was not paid owing to non-inclusion of foreclosure
charges in the assessable value, the Ministry in its written submission stated as
under:—
"The Show Cause notice dated 12.3.2010 for Service Tax amount of   5.52 crore
(period 2005-06 to September 2009) which includes `  98.78 lakh (period 2006-07
to September 2009) pertaining to this observation. The Show Cause Notices is
pending adjudication."
Cenvat Credit
62. In terms of rule 4 of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004, credit of Excise Duty or
Service Tax paid on any input, capital goods or any input service is allowed to a
provider of taxable service. Credit can be utilised towards payment of Service Tax on
output service subject to the fulfilment of certain conditions.
63. Audit observed that there was incorrect availment and utilisation of cenvat
credit totalling ` 105.30 crore, by providers of banking and financial services in
75 cases. Interest of  ` 6.26 crore was also leviable in these cases. The Department had
accepted Audit observations involving revenue of  ` 9.90 crore, recovered ` 3.07
crore and issued SCNs for ` 9.48 crore.
64. Apprising the Committee about the current status of recovery in the cases
pointed out by Audit, the Ministry furnished the following details:—
(i) "In 46 cases involving ` 52.59 crore, proceedings have been initiated by
issuing Show Cause Notices to the defaulting service providers.
(ii) 24 Audit objections involving ` 49.13 crore have been examined on merit
and have not been accepted.
(iii) 8 cases involving  ` 5.47 crore are pending investigation.
(iv) In 2 cases `  0.33 crore has been recovered".
XII.  SEPARATE  ACCOUNTS  FOR  DUTIABLE  AND EXEMPTED  GOODS  NOT
  MAINTAINED
65. Prior to 1 April 2008, if Cenvat credit had been availed on common inputs and
input services which were used in providing taxable as well as exempted services and
separte account of their use was not maintained, then the output service provider was
allowed to utilise credit only upto 20 per cent of the amount of Service Tax payable on
taxable output service.
66. Audit observed that M/s. Infrastructure Development Finance Co. Ltd., in
Mumbai (ST) Commissionerate, provided infrastructure advisory work to the
International Finance Corporation for World Bank projects in India during the period
2006-07 and 2007-08 and recovered advisory fees. The assessee availed exemption
from Service Tax under notification Number 16/2002 dated 2 August 2002 for services

28
provided to International Organisation. The assessee did not maintain separate
accounts for receipt, consumption and inventory of input services use for taxable and
exempted services.
67. Under law, the assessee was liable to restrict the utilisation of cenvat credit to
20 per cent of the Service  Tax payable during the period 2006-07 and 2007-08. Out of
the 24 months in 2006-07 and 2007-08, the assessee paid Service Tax of ` 1198.04 lakh
in 12 months. While the utilisation of cenvat credit to make these payments should
have been restricted  to ` 239.61 lakh (20 per cent), the actual utilisation was ` 626.65
lakh. This led to excess utilisation of credit of   ` 387.04 lakh which was recoverable
with interest of ` 95.84 lakh.
68.  The Department accepted the Audit observation and stated that a Show Cause
Notice for ` 387.04 lakh had been issued in March 2010.
69. On being asked as to how the Ministry could ensure that there were no revenue
leakages in cases where separate accounts for dutiable and exempted goods were not
maintained, the Ministry replied as under:—
"The assessees not maintaining separate accounts for providing taxable and
exempted services, are required to pay an amount either @ 6% of value of
exempted goods and exempted services or pay an amount as per the formula
laid down under sub-rule (3A) of the Rule 6 to CENV AT Credit Rules, 2004. The
field formations at the time of scrutiny of returns and conducting of audit of the
records of the party take necessary measures to stop revenue leakages on this
count."
70. Apprising the Committee about current status of Show Cause Notice issued for
recovery of ` 387.04 lakh, the Ministry stated that the Show Cause Notice is dated
12.3.2010 for Service Tax amount of ` 5.52 crore (period 2005-06 to September 2009)
which includes, ` 387.04 lakh (period May 2006 to March 2008) pertaining to this
observation and the same was pending adjudication.
XIII. SHORT-PAYMENT OF AMOUNT UNDER RULE 6 (3) OF CENV AT CREDIT
RULES,  2004
71. Rule 6 (3A)(a) read with Rule 6 (3)(ii) of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 prescribe
that the manufacturer of goods or the provider of output services can pay an amount
equal to the credit availed that is attributable to exempted products or execpted
services. The payment can be made on a provisional basis every month.
72. Audit pointed out that M/s. Allahabad Bank in Kolkata ST Commissionerate
rendered various taxable financial services as well as exempted services. The assessee
did not maintain separate accounts for common input services used for taxable and
exempted output services. It determined the amount payable provisionally every
month without considering the interest on cash credit and overdraft facility which
were exempted from Service Tax. Failure to do so had resulted in short-payment of
` 515.56 lakh for the period from April 2008 to March 2009 which was recoverable with
interest of ` 47.69 lakh.

29
73. Audit observed three other similar cases which are tabulated below:—
(in lakh of  `)
Sl. Name of Commissio- Period Income Cenvat Cenvat Short
No. Assessee nerate from credit to credit reversal
exempted be actually  of
output reversed reversed cenvat
services credit
1. M/s. L akshmi Trichy 2008-09 34318 164 Nil 164
Vilas Bank Ltd.
2. M/s. Tamil Nadu Tirunelveli 2008-09 28266 117 5.37 111.63
Mercantile
Bank Ltd.
3. M/s. Global Mumbai ST 2008-09 42668 65.20 8.13 57.07
Trade Finance
Ltd.
74. While submitting their comments on each of the above-said cases, the Ministry
has stated as follows:—
(a) "M/s. Allahabad Bank: The Audit observation is not accepted. The interest
income is specifically excluded in terms of Rule 6 (2) (iv) of Service Tax
(Determination of Value) Rules, 2006. A show cause Notice dated 9.2.2010 for
amount of ` 515.56 lakh has been issued to the assessee.
(b) M/s. Lakshmi Vilas Bank Ltd. and M/s. Tamil Nadu Mercantile Bank Ltd. The
Audit observation is not accepted. Interest on loans do not form part of any
value of taxable services. Interest on loans stands excluded from valuation
in recognition of the principle that interest is compensatory in nature and
not a value addition in the nature of services. Therefore, where interest is
not a component of valuation, the value for Service Tax is only after excluding
the interest portion. When interest does not form part of Service Tax at all, it
is also to be excluded from total turnover. In view of statutory provisions
under section 67 of the Finance Act, 1994 that interest on loan shall not form
part of valuation of services, further exemption circulars will not render the
service as an exempt service and it shall remain an exclusion from valuation
only.  As a result, there is no excess utilization of cenvat credit. A show
Cause Notice dated 24.10.2011 for ` 6.54 crore for period April 2007 to
February 2011 has been issued to M/s. Lakshmi Vilas Bank Ltd. A show
Cause Notice dated 13.10.2011 for ` 3.03 crore for period 2008-09 to 2010-11
has been issued to M/s. Tamil Nadu Mercantile Bank Ltd.
(c) M/s.  Global Trade Finance Ltd. The Audit observation is not accepted. The
assessee has received discount charges amounting to ` 421.58 lakh during
the year 2008-09. The service of factoring is a single composite service
under which two types of charges viz. factoring charges and discount charges

30
are collected. The discount charges are in the nature of interest which is
levied on account of pre-payment made to the customer and are only a part
of the value of the factoring service which is taxable service. Thus, the
receipt of discount charges cannot be treated as a receipt towards exempted
service under Notification Number 29/2004. The said exemption has the effect
of only providing exemption to discount charges and not to the entire
factoring service. Thus, the service of factoring are not exempted service.
Therefore, the discount charges are not required to be treated as value
towards exempted service. The service of factoring does not fall under non-
taxable service, neither is the service exempt from whole of the Service Tax
leviable thereon but it is the only discount value that is actually exempted.
Therefore, provisions of rule 6(3) of CENV AT Credit Rules, 2004 are not
applicable. A protective Show Cause Notice dated 29.4.2010 for ` 57.07 lakh
has been issued to the assessee."
75. Further, as regards the present status of recovery of the amount so short paid
in case of M/s. Allahabad Bank in Kolkata ST Commissionerates, the Ministry in its
written submission has stated that the Show Cause Notice dated 9.02.2010 covering
the period 2008-09 that has been issued to the assessee is pending adjudication.
XIV .   OVERSTA TEMENT OF CENV AT CREDIT BALANCE IN ST-3 RETURNS
76. Audit found that the ST-3 return of M/s. Citifinancial Consumer Finance India
Limited in Delhi ST Commissionerate for the period April 2006 to September 2006 had
a closing balance of cenvat credit of ` 9.47 crore whereas in the ST-3 return for the
period Oct. 2006 to March 2007 the opening balance of cenvat credit had been shown
as ` 11.47 crore. This resulted in excess availment of cenvat credit of ` two crore.
Accepting the above-stated Audit observation it was stated that the account would
be corrected and appropriately reflected in ST-3 return for the period April 2009 to
September, 2009.
77. Apprising the Committee about the present position of recovery, the Ministry
stated that a Show Cause Notice dated 20.10.2011 for amount of ` 199.99 lakh had
been issued to the assessee.
Non-Remittance of Service Tax
XV .  SERVICE TAX COLLECTED BUT NOT REMITTED TO THE GOVERNMENT
78. Section 73A of the Finance Act, 1994 (as amended with effect from 18 April
2006), provides that any person who is liable to pay Service Tax and has collected any
amount in excess of the Service Tax assessed shall forthwith pay the amount so
collected to the credit of the Central Government.
79. Audit scrutiny had revealed that 14 cases of retention of Service Tax collected
amounting to ` 1.41 crore that was recoverable.
80. Submission of the Ministry on the above-said 14 cases that was pointed not by
Audit are as under:—
"Twelve of the fourteen cases mentioned by Audit are described separately in
the succeeding paragraphs. The remaining two cases are of M/s. Rajasthan

31
Financial Corporation for Servive tax of  ` 1.94 lakh for which Show Cause
Notice dated 25.1.2011 has been issued to the assessee and M/s. Guru Share
Brokers Pvt. Ltd. Jaipur for Service Tax ` 1.82 lakh for which the assessee has
deposited the amount vide challans dated 10.12.2009 and 18.12.2009."
81. A few cases as pointed by Audit and the submission of the Ministry thereon
are illustrated below:—
"Para 1.5.1—Audit observation
On scrutiny of records of M/s. Central Bank of India, Civic Centre, Bhilai, in
Raipur Commissionerate, Audit observed that during 2006-07 to 2008-09 the
assessee had collected Service Tax of  ` 158.28 lakh from customers but deposited
only ` 84.74 lakh through challan and retained an amount of ` 73.54 lakh. This
resulted in irregular retention of Service Tax of ` 73.54 lakh, which was
recoverable with interest and penalty.
Audit pointed this out to the Department in September 2009, Reply was awaited
(April 2011).
The Ministry's submission is mentioned below:—
A show cause notice dated 13.10.2010 was issued to the assessee. It includes
the demand for Service Tax of ` 73.54 lakh raised in this objection. Assessee
has reported that it is discharging Service Tax on their taxable activities and
also collecting Service Tax from other tax payers on behalf of the Central
Excise Department. There are two separate accounts for these activities. Due
to clerical error some entries were posted vice versa  in these two accounts,
which has been subsequently corrected. The claim of the assessee is pending
verification.
Para 1.5.2—Audit observation
Audit observed that after reduction in rates of Service Tax from 12.36 per cent to
10.30 per cent with effect from 24 February 2009, 10 assessees (six branches of
State Bank of India, four branches of State Bank of Patiala) in three
Commissionerates continued charging the higher rate from their customers and
collected Service Tax of ` 135.30 lakh in the month of February and March 2009
but deposited Service Tax of ` 112.75 lakh at the lower rate. This resulted in
undue retention of Service Tax of ` 22.55 lakh which was required to be recovered
with interest and penalty. Audit pointed this out to the Department in September,
2009 & December 2009. Reply was awaited (April 2011).
In this regard, the reply of the Ministry is mentioned below:—
The Audit objection is admitted. One case of State Bank of India for Service Tax
of ` 6.16 lakh has already been adjudicated. Five cases of State Bank of India
for Service Tax of ` 0.67 lakh, ` 1.8 lakh, ` 1.92 lakh, ` 4.28 lakh and ` 1.65 lakh
(amount recovered), the show cause notices are pending adjudication. In two
cases of State Bank of Patiala the show cause notices for Service Tax of

32
`  0.33 lakh and ` 1.54 lakh are pending adjudication. Another show cause
stands issued to State Bank of Patiala, The Mall, Patiala for Service Tax of
` 14.59 lakh for the period February 2009 to January 2011. One show cause
notice for ` 3.50 lakh pertaining to State Bank of Patiala, Sector 8C, Chandigarh
Commercial Branch is under process of issuance.
Para 1.5.3—Audit observation
On reconciling the Ledger Accounts, which contains the details of the Service
Tax collected  by the assessees, with the ST-3 returns for the period 2006-07 to
2008-09, Audit observed that M/s. Bank of India in Delhi ST Commissionerate
collected Service Tax of ` 4.01 crore but paid only ` 3.59 crore. This resulted in
short payment of Service Tax amounting to ` 41.29 lakh, which was required to
be recovered with interest and penalty.
Ministry has submitted that: The Bank of India has discharged the Service Tax
liability of ` 41.29 lakh by debiting from their cenvat credit account."
82. Apprising the Committee regarding the reasons for not depositing huge amount
of Service Tax collected from consumers with the exchequer, the Ministry has stated
that non-payments of taxes by a taxpayer are attributable to a propensity among a
section of taxpayers to evade tax.
83. When the Committee sought to know the details regarding the number of cases
of service providers who had collected Service Tax from consumers but had not
deposited with exchequer during the year 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11,
amount of tax involved therein, recovery during that period and number of service
providers against whom punitive action was taken and demand-cum-SCN issued, the
Ministry submitted the following particulars:—
Y ear Service providers who Recovery during the No. of service providers
have  collected  the period against  whom  punitive
Service  Tax   from action   taken   and
consumers but not demand cum SCN issued
deposited with exchequer
No. Amount No. Amount No. of Amount
involved involved SCN involved in
(` in crore) ( ` in crore) issued the SCNs
issued Details
of other action
taken, if any
(` in crore)
2007-08 307 130.79 152 51.64 170 147.52
2008-09 386 259.40 263 132.74 207 223.11
2009-10 548 294.55 374 130.36 290 431.21
2010-11 870 450.08 554 245.32 398 241.36
Total 2111 1134.82 1343 560.07 1065 1043.20

33
84. Then the Committee further desired to know as to how the Ministry ensured
that the Service Tax collected by the assessee was duly remitted to the Government.
In reply, the Ministry has stated as under:—
"By regular scrutiny of returns, anti-evasion operations and audit of the records
of the assessee, it is verified that entire tax collected by the assessee from
service recipients has been credited into Government account. In case of any
deviation, necessary action is taken against the defaulters."
85. Asked to state about the mechanism that was prevalent to check this practice,
representative of the Ministry during evidence deposed before the Committee that:—
We do not have any foolproof system. We are depending on a trust based
system. We are only randomly checking where there have been breaches of
trust, through risk based scrutiny, through selective audit and on the basis of
complaints, that is why, if we have that comprehensive physical control which
used to be there during the British days, then the possibility of leakage would
be much less. But then Government has consciously taken the decision that
they want to threat the traders as stakeholders and promote them to comply
voluntarily."
86. Regarding the provisions for imposing penalty on the defaulters, the Ministry
in its written reply has submitted:—
(i) "Section 75 of the Finance Act provides that where a person, liable to pay
Service Tax, fails to credit the tax or any part thereof to the account of the
Central Government within the period prescribed, he shall pay interest on
the said amount for the delayed period;
(ii) The rate of interest in the case of delayed payment of Service Tax has been
increased to 18% from 13% w.e.f. 1st of April 2011 by issuance of notification
Number 14/2011-ST, dated 1st March, 2011;
(iii) Specific provisions are laid down under Section 76 of the Act ibid prescribing
therein that if any person, liable to pay Service Tax, fails to pay such tax, he
shall pay such tax along with a penalty not less than ` 100 per day during
which such failure continues or @ 1% of such tax, per month, whichever is
higher; and
(iv) In addition, with a view to provide for deterrent penal action against service
providers collecting Service Tax but not depositing the same with the
Government exchequer, prosecution in a Court of Law has been specifically
provided for by introducing Section 89(1) (d) through Finance Act, 2011”.
XVI. STAFF POSITION
87. One of the main reasons furnished by the Ministry for procedural deficiencies
in registration of assessees, receipt of returns and scrutiny of returns is, shortage of
staff at various levels.

34
88. To a pointed query of the Committee whether the present staff strength was
adequate enough for overall management of Service Tax, the Ministry made the
following submission:—
"Tax on Services  was first introduced in July 1994 and was initially imposed
on three services only, basically confined to services provided by public
sector entities in the telecom and insurance sectors making its collection
relatively easier. The collection during the year 1994-95 was ` 411 crore.
With the increase in number of services under its umbrella as well as the
number of assessees, at the time of the last Cadre Restructure in 1999-2000,
the total Service Tax collection was ` 2072 crore. Thereafter, over the years,
the exponential increase in number of assessees as well as quantum of Service
Tax collected resulted in increased workload for the existing manpower
available  with the Department.”
89. The relevant details in this regard submitted by the Ministry are give as
under:—
Workload Indicators
Workload Indicator 2002-03 2010-11 2011-12 % Growth over
2002-03 in 2011-12
No. of ST Assessees 1,33,531 16,30,317 18,17,415 1261
Revenue Collection
(in ` crore)
Revenue 2002-03 2011-12 2012-13 (BE) % Growth over Estimated %
2002-03 and 2011-12 Growth over
2002-03 and
2012-13
Service Tax 5000 96670 124000 1800 2380
90. As seen from above table, the total number of Service Tax assessees have
increased from about 1.34 lakh in 2002-03 to about 18.17 lakh in 2011-12; an increase of
more than 12.5 times in less than a decade. Further, revenue realization in Service Tax
has increased by 1800% in the year 2011-12 over 2002-03, and it is likely to increase by
2380% in the current fiscal (as per budgetary estimates) (2012-13).
91. Amongst other major changes which contributed to increase in workload  relating
to Service Tax, Ministry has inter-alia enumerated the following:—
“(i) Allowing Cenvat on Services in 2002 and its later expansion to cross utilization
among goods and services, requiring harmonization of the two taxes, namely
the Service Tax and Central Excise
(ii) T axation on import of services in 2002

35
(iii) Refund of taxes paid on services exported and taxes paid on input services
used in export in 2005 and subsequent expansion of refund to taxes paid on
inputs on export of services in 2006 as also reimbursement of taxes paid on
input services used on export of goods
(iv) Introduction of web-based services to clients since December, 2006 with a
view to facilitate the user clients.”
92. On being asked as to how the work relating to Service Tax is still being attended
to, the representative of the Ministry deposing before the Committee stated that
majority of Service Tax related work is presently being attended by the staff diverted
from the Central Excise and Customs formations.
93. Regarding cadre review, Revenue Secretary during evidence deposed before
the Committee as:—
“We have already moved a case for cadre review. Unfortunately, for the last ten
years, in CBEC, they did not have a cadre review.”
He further added that:—
"We are coming to a situation where one-third of our revenues are to come from
Service Tax where we just do not have the staff. Therefore, we need to have a
quantum jump in the requirement of staff for Service Tax.”
94. Elaborating further on this aspect, the Chairman, CBEC informed the Committee
as follows:—
"Sir, we started with very small field formations. Even today, the entire Service
Tax that we had collected in the last year was ` 97,000 crore. If my figures were
right, we have something like 4,000 to 5,000 officers deployed for this purpose
as against 40,000 officers for Excise, for collecting roughly the same amount of
excise excluding petroleum. Now, the point is that we are trying to do as much
as possible within the existing constraint of the manpower while recognizing
that the challenge is increasing and we need to measure up to that challenge.
The first thing is to provide sustenance level of facilities to the taxpayers. So,
till 2010, everything was manual. We were registering people and we were
getting their returns; we had no ready means to find out which of our assessees
were effectively into our system. For checking it up, I need to go to RBI and get
a list of people, and then I can measure that these cases are missing. Rightly, Sir,
the C&AG has been able to point out those things. But if I want to do it for the
countrywide as a whole for all the services, it requires either building up a good
electronic system of throwing up such names or huge manpower. So, we took
stock of the whole thing last year. We have roughly 15 lakh to 16 lakh registered
assessees and six lakhs or so are filing returns. The first step we took is that
everybody has to now file the return electronically.”
95. Apprising the Committee of the problems in getting adequate staff, Secretary
Revenue while depositing before the Committee stated that:—
"In the Ministry of Personnel, their stance is that whenever we do a cadre
review for all Ministries, we stick to a yardstick of not allowing more than ten to
fifteen per cent increase."

36
96. The proposal as submitted by CBEC for cadre restructuring and reorganization
of the field formations is given as under:—
Formations Existing Proposed
Central Excise Zones 23 39
Central Excise Commissionerates 93 119
Central Excise Audit Commissionerates 0 39
Commissionerates CE Appeals 64 39
Service Tax Zones 0 6
Service Tax Commissionerates 7 22
Service Tax Audit Commissionerates 0 6
Commissionerate Service Tax Appeals 0 6
Customs/Customs (P) Zones 11 20
Customs/Custom (P) Commissionerates 34 60
Commissionerate Customs Appeals 8 20
Out of 119 proposed Central Excise Commissionerates, 87 Commissionerates
would be Integrated Central Excise & Service Tax Commissionerates. Share of
Service Tax in the projected revenue collection of these Commissionerates is
likely to be 35-40% of total indirect tax revenue generated by these
Commissionerates. The proposal also envisages strengthening of Directorate
General of Service Tax, Large Taxpayers Units and Service Tax Wing of CBEC.
97. In order to meet the manpower requirement for improvement in efficiency of the
Service Tax administration, the Committee during evidence sought to know the details
about total manpower requirement. The Ministry in a written note submitted to the
Committee stated as follows:—
Manpower Requirement: Originally, the Cadre Restructuring proposal envisaged
increase in staff strength from existing 66808 to 95168 posts in various grades.
The proposal was accepted by the Department of Expenditure. However, later
on, at the behest of DoPT, the Department of Customs & Central Excise reduced
the staff requirement from 95168 to 86888. Thus, presently the cadre restructuring
proposal envisages creation of additional 20080 posts in various grades.
Share of Service Tax stream in the projected total staff strength of 86888 works
out to 14990 posts in various grades. Following Table indicates the requirements
of additional staff strength for Service Tax stream [including the staff
requirements for Service Tax work of Integrated Central Excise & Service Tax
Commissionerates, Service Tax Audit and Appeals set-up of these
Commissionerates, DG (Service Tax), LTU and Commissioner (Service Tax), DG

37
(Service Tax), LTU and Commissioner (Service Tax) inCBEC], as assessed in the
cadre restructuring proposal:—
Staff Requirements of Service Tax Stream
(as projected in the Cadre Restructuring Proposal—2010)
Sl. Grade & Existing Designation Total Staff
No. Requirement
1. Chief Commissioner 7
2. Commissioner 56
3. Addl./Joint Commissioner 120
4. Dy./Asst. Commissioner 757
5. Sr. PS 10
6. P.S. 56
7. Steno 751
8. Superintendent CE 3638
9. Inspector CE 4803
10. CAO 45
11. A.O. 267
12. DOS/STA 992
13. TA 1257
14. LDC 201
15. Head Havaldar/Havaldar/Sepoy 2010
Grand Total 14990
98. Elaborating on their need for adequate staff strength, the Finance Secretary
informed the Committee as follows:—
"Sir, the point being made is that for Service Tax, separate staff was not approved.
So, it involves taking staff away from the excise and customs formations, and
utilising them for Service Tax. Initially, as my colleague mentioned, where the
amount was very small and it ran into ` 4,000 crore or so, it was a separate issue.
Today, the growth in Service Tax even in the last two months has been close to
about 42 per cent. Last year, we had collected about ` 90,000 crore from
Service Tax. We do anticipate about 35 per cent growth in the current year. This
is in spite of the fact that we are doing nothing really to tap the balance nine
lakh registered assessees, or those who are not even registered assessees.
So, we have already moved a case for cadre review. Unfortunately, for the last
ten years, in CBEC, they did not have a cadre review.
The basic point is that we have three areas—Customs, Central Excise and now
Service Tax. Last year, our total revenue from the indirect taxes was ` 395,000

38
crore, of which close to ` 90,000 crore was from Service Tax and this has shown
the maximum buoyancy growth. It means that we are coming to a situation
where one-third of our revenues are to come from Service Tax, where we just do
not have adequate staff. Therefore, we need to have a quantum jump in the
requirement of staff for Service Tax. While we may take whatever measures we
may for additional computerisation, e-filing etc., but unless a person goes on
the ground and checks—like an hon. MP mentioned as to whether someone,
having collected Service Tax has deposited it or not to check this aspect,
somebody has to go and check on the ground. Honestly speaking, I am stuck
regarding the cadre review.”

PART-II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
The Banks and other Financial Services accept deposits and channels those
deposits into lending activities, either directly or through capital markets and
connect customers with capital deficits to customers with capital surpluses by acting
as Financial Intermediary. The Service Tax on the Banking and other Financial
Services (BFN) was levied with effect from 1 July, 2001 and it is a major contributor
to Service Tax revenue. Its contribution during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 was
7.09 per cent ( ` 3634.94 crore out of ` 51,301.79 crore) and 6.15 per cent
(` 3747.65 crore out of  ` 60,940 crore) respectively. Audit conducted a
comprehensive review of the performance of this sector with a view to (i) seek
assurance that the mechanism to identify and bring in potential assessees to tax net
is effective enough; (ii) examine the rules, regulations and procedures to identify
ambiguities and lacunae therein, and (iii) to identify instances of non-compliance
with rules leading to loss of revenue. The Committee's examination of Service Tax
on Banking and other Financial Services revealed several procedural deficiencies
in registration of assessees, receipt of returns and scrutiny of returns. Further,
instances of non-compliance with rules and provisions on incorrect valuation,
incorrect/excess availment and utilization of cenvat credit, non-remittance of Service
Tax, etc. had resulted in revenue leakages. Furthermore, Service Tax of `1.41 crore
was collected but not remitted to the Government. These issues along with the related
issues have been examined in detail by the Committee and commented upon suitably
in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. While the law clearly envisages that every person liable to pay Service Tax has
to apply for registration within a period of 30 days from the date of commencement of
businesses, the Committee note that, in 26 out of 60 Commissionerates, there were
1142 service providers, who, though liable to pay Service Tax, were not available on
the departmental registration lists. Out of these 1142 assessees, 65 potential
assessees had not paid Service Tax to the extent of ` 92.12 crore with additional
penalty upto ` 92.12 crore and further interest liability of `21.35 crore. The
Committee were apprised that out of 6517 cases involving Service Tax of ` 46.12
crore have not been accepted by the Government. In respect of 19 Audit objections
involving Service Tax of ` 36.47 crore, necessary remedial measures have been
taken to recover Government revenue. 17 cases involving Service Tax of ` 5.34
crore were pending investigation. While deploring the belated remedial measures
being taken by the Department, the Committee should like to be apprised of the
latest status of cases that are pending investigation within 03 months of the
presentation of this Report and also the detail of the 17 cases not accepted by the
Government and the reasons therefor.
3. The Committee are concerned to note that out of 1074 cases of non-registration
pointed out in Audit, only 370 cases had been verified by the Ministry, 21 cases were
39

40
under investigation and in case of 188 service providers verification report was yet
to be received as on 31.07.2012. In case of Bangalore Service Tax Commissionerate,
out of 725 cases only 208 service providers had been verified and the verfication of
remaining 517 cases was underway but obviously hamstrung due to paucity of staff.
Furthermore, while admitting the problem of non-registration of Service Tax
assessees, the Secretary, Department of Revenue testified before the Committee
that till 2010, they had no means to find out as to which of the assessees were
effectively into the system and underlined the need for building up a good electronic
system and engagement of additional manpower to deal with the problem. The
Committee are concerned to note that though Service Tax was levied with effect from
1 July, 2001, no whole-hearted and sustained efforts have been made by the Ministry
either to build up a good electronic system for this purpose and engage the additional
manpower. Apparently, the Service Tax was levied without working out the methodology
for its effective implementation even after having realized the immense revenue
potential of Service Tax and its rampant evasion. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the efforts made by the Department during the last 11 years to ensure
that the work of collection of Service Tax from Banking and other Financial Services
does not suffer for want of manpower and introduction of good electronic system.
The Committee further recommend that the verification of 517 cases be expedited
and they be apprised of the same.
4. Notably, the Government have largely relied on "Voluntary Compliance" for
registration of eligible service providers. The Committee have been informed that to
make the service providers aware of the registration, the Department has been
running a media campaign by issuing a number of advertisements in the print/
electronic media, displaying outdoor hoardings, etc. Further, help desks have been
set up in the Commissionerates for answering the tax payers queries and the problems
faced by them. Seminars have been organized in Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Delhi,
Ahmedabad, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Chandigarh and Bangalore. While Voluntary tax
compliance is a laudable objective, the considered view of the Committee is that the
results have been far from encouraging. The Committee feel that with proper focus
on non-intrusive but penetrating methods of collecting data through the instruments
like returns and surveys, the Government would be able to widen the tax base and
ensure better tax compliance. The Committee urge the Ministry to make all out
efforts to ensure that while the Government remain assessee-friendly, tax evaders
are dealt with stringently and that non-compliance becomes a costly proposition.
The Committee are also of the opinion that if need be, measures taken in respect of
Central Excise and Customs assessees also be taken with regard to Service Tax
assessees i.e. for registration of eligible BFNs.
5. As per the action plan issued in May 2003 by the Director General of Service
Tax, Mumbai, field surveys had been identified as one of the important mechanisms
to identify and broaden the tax base. The Committee are disappointed that none of the
60 Commissionerates test checked in Audit had fixed any targets for surveys during
2007-08 to 2008-09 and no surveys were conducted in 27 out of 60 Commissionerates.
Out of 32 Commissionerates,  where surveys were conducted, in 9 Commissionerates
154 new service providers of BFNs were registered. However, no new service provider
could be registered through surveys for this service in remaining

41
23 Commissionerates. In 32 Commissionerates where surveys had taken place, the
outcome was not monitored as prescribed in the DGST circular. Moreover, during
the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 although the number of surveys conducted was
113 and 87 respectively, no assessees were registered thereafter. Again, during the
year 2011-12, out of 1003 surveys conducted only 90 assessees were registered
realizing ` 0.44 crore only as a Service Tax. The Committee deplore that field
surveys, construed as an important mechanism for widening the tax net have not
been carried out with right earnestness by the Commissionerates. The Committee
are dismayed that the Department was devoid of any mechanism to assess, monitor
and enhance the efficiency of survey operations. Though instructions have been
issued to file formations on 23.11.2011 to create special cell in each
Commissionerates mandated with the task of identifying potential assessees, the
Committee find the reply of the Ministry silent regarding the status of creation of
these cells in all the Commissionerates, the number of cells created so far and the
number of service providers that were brought to the tax net as a result thereof. The
Committee believes that these survey operations, if conducted methodically and
efficiently, would discover new assessees and bring additional tax revenue to the
Government. The Committee would like to be apprised of the present position of
creating these cells Commissionerate-wise and the outcome thereof.
6. The Committee find that a large number of returns for Service Tax by BFNs were
either not received or received late by the Department. During the period September,
2004 to March, 2009, about six per cent of the returns were received late and 14 per
cent of the returns were not received at all. Surprisingly, the Commissionerates had
not followed any monitoring mechanism to ascertain the reasons for non-submission
of returns. The Committee note that amongst the returns not received, 301 service
providers, whose annual receipts had exceeded ` four lakh during the year 2005-06
had not submitted the returns for the year 2006-07. Further, 440 service providers
whose annual receipts had exceeded ` eight lakh during the year 2006-07 had not
submitted the annual returns for the year 2007-08. Similarly, 513 service providers
whose annual receipts had exceeded ` ten lakh during the year 2007-08 had not
submitted the returns for the year 2008-09. The Committee are deeply concerned to
note that the Department had not initiated any action to ascertain the reasons for not
filing annual returns. The Committee further find that the Department had not levied
penalty on defaulting assessees which constituted about  97 per cent of the total
amount leviable (` 4.50 crore). Apparently, the defaulting assessees are either allowed
to go scot-free or let off with lighter punishment. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Ministry devise a foolproof system so as to ensure that all the BFN assessees,
taxable under Service Tax Rules file their returns regularly. The Committee should
be informed within 3 months about the system so desired. Further, defaulting assessees
be suitably penalized to act as a deterrent.
7. The Committee further observe that 7 assessees in Nagpur Commissionerate
had not filed their Service Tax returns but they had continued to provide services
which were subjectable to tax during the period of non-filing. This resulted in
non-payment of Service Tax of ` 20.33 lakh and interest of ` 4.97 lakh. It was
submitted before the Committee that protective Show Cause Notices have been issued

42
on 13.10.2011 in respect of all the said 7 cases and that instructions have been
issued to field formations on 14th and 27th July, 2011 to create special cell in each
Commissionerate mandated with the task of identifying potential assessees and stop
filers. The Committee, therefore, recommend that field Commissionerates should
periodically monitor the cases where assessees have stopped filing returns and the
Committee be apprised by the Ministry about the latest position with regard to Show
Cause Notices issued, within 03 months of the presentation of this Report.
8. Every individual liable to pay Service Tax has to assess and voluntarily pay the
tax. Further, half-yearly returns are to be furnished to the Department. An assessee
failing to furnish timely return is liable to pay a penalty subject to a maximum of
` 1000. The information furnished by the Ministry relating to BFN for the period
September, 2004 to March, 2009, reveals that out of 2,37,593 returns due during
the said period as many as 18,684 were not received. The Committee further note
that out of ` 60.32 lakh of penalties levied, penalties of ` 25.22 lakh has not been
recovered. While emphasizing the need for effective monitoring of Service Tax
returns and timely recovery of penalties imposed, the Committee would like to be
informed about the current position with regard to recovery of outstanding penalties
of ` 25.22 lakh, and the efforts made by the Ministry to ensure timely recovery of
outstanding dues within 03 months of the presentation of this Report. The Committee
also strongly express the need for taking stringent action against the defaulters and
also have a re-look at the penalty provisions as the present penalty is insufficient to
act as a deterrent with regard to non-submission of returns.
9. The Committee are shocked to learn that the vital database of the actual number
of BFNs filing returns and those who have failed to do so, is not available with the
Department. The Committee was informed that such data base is not being developed
by the Directorate General of Service Tax. Further, the registered assessees who were
not filing Service Tax returns are issued Show Cause Notices. Obviously, the
Department cannot function effectively and monitor their collection of Service Tax
from BFNs in the absence of vital database. The Committee would, therefore, urge the
Department of Revenue to put in place an effective mechanism to facilitate monitoring
of the progress of revenue receipts and processing of returns on a periodical basis.
10. Audit scrutiny of returns revealed that during 2008-09 (i) in
67 Commissionerates 12.38 per cent returns received were pending preliminary
verification/scrutiny; (ii) in 22 Commissionerates, there were 99 cases in which
Department failed to detect irregularities like payment of Service Tax at lower rate,
non-levy of interest and penalty, short payment of interest, etc. leading to short levy
of Service Tax totalling ` 7.02 crore and interest of ` 1.56 crore; (iii) there was no
system in place to co-relate the taxable income as shown in the Income Tax return
with the ST-3 return; and (iv) 116 assessees had shown lower figures in ST returns
which had Service Tax implication of ` 21.91 crore and interest of ` 2.94 crore
during the period from September, 2004 to March, 2009. Accepting the Audit
observation, the Department issued Show Cause Notices for ` 9.43 crore in July,
2010. On the issue of 12.38% of returns that were received and were pending
preliminary verification/scrutiny, the Committee have been apprised that norms  for

43
scrutiny of returns have since been fixed and Service Tax Return Scrutiny Manual
has been prepared, guidelines have been issued for checking/verifying the ST-3
returns. Further, electronic filing of Service Tax returns made mandatory w.e.f.
01.10.2011, the system of Automation in Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES) has
been introduced throughout the country and instructions have also been issued by
CBEC on 21.02.2012 that the function of detailed scrutiny be implemented in all the
Ranges. The Department, however, could not furnish reasons for their failure to
have timely verification/scrutiny of returns. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the revenue due and realized as a result of the various corrective measures
initiated by the Ministry and recommend a comprehensive review for identification
of bottlenecks, if any, in the present system of scrutiny of returns, and overcome the
same through appropriate policy intervention.
11. The Committee are distressed to note that no system exists in the Department
to co-relate the taxable income as shown in the Income Tax Return with the ST-3
returns to identify cases for further scrutiny. Cross verification of a few ST returns
with Income-tax returns had revealed Service Tax implication of ` 21.91 crore and
interest of ` 2.94 crore during the period September, 2004 to March, 2009.
Consequently, the Department issued SCNs for ` 9.43 crore in July, 2011. Taking
note that the Ministry had initiated steps to safeguard the revenue interest, the
Committee recommend a suitable but effective system be devised for correlating the
data of various Departments and ensuring that the revenue due to the Government is
collected without remiss.
12. As per Rule 5(2) of Service Tax Rules, 1994, every assessee shall furnish to
the superintendent of Central Excise at the time of filing his return for the first
time, a list of books of accounts maintained by the assessee in relation to Service
Tax. Despite clear statutory provision, the Committee note that 26 per cent of service
providers had not given the list of books of accounts maintained by them. During the
period from April, 2007 to March, 2009, in 10 Commissionerates, not a single
assessee had submitted the list of books of accounts at the time of filing of returns
for the first time in respect of BFN. The Committee are surprised that the
Commissionerates did not pursue these cases to ascertain the reasons for
non-submission of these details. The Ministry attributed staff crunch and lack of
proper training to the available staff of Service Tax Department as the main hurdles
in the implementation of the Service Tax Rules. Since effective scrutiny of relevant
books of accounts is imperative for ensuring proper assessment of Service Tax, the
Committee urge the Ministry to take urgent measures to augment the staff strength
and also to train the Service Tax staff for developing a better understanding of the
various books of accounts maintained by BFN assessees. The Committee should
like to be apprised of the necessary follow-up action taken in this direction and the
outcome thereof. Further, as regards the strategy formulated to obtain list of books
of accounts alongwith the returns from defaulters, the Department reported that
non-compliance with the Rule 5(2) of the Service Tax Rules, 1994 invites penal
action and a letter has been issued to field formations to ensure compliance to the
said Rule. The Committee would like to be apprised about the number of defaulters
prosecuted so far as a result thereof.

44
13. The Committee further find that there were 110 cases of wrong availment of
exemption or abatement during 2009-10 and 91 cases during 2010-11. The amount
of Service Tax involved therein is ` 339.47 crore and ` 250.07 crore respectively.
The Committee are concerned to note that only `10.53 crore and `20.23 crore
respectively have been recovered by the Department. Further zone-wise details as
received from the Ministry indicates that maximum number of wrong availment of
cases have been noticed in the Kolkata zone. While 27  cases during 2009-10 and
16 cases during  2010-11 involving Service Tax of  ` 157.64 crore and ` 204.85
crore respectively were noticed in Delhi zone, out of which only ` 0.0019 crore has
been recovered during the year 2009-10. Similarly, 64 instances of undervaluation
with short payment of Service Tax of  ` 53.80 crore was detected in the Audit. The
Committee are concerned to note  that the entire  process involved has resulted in
locking up of substantial  revenue  for the years 2009-10 and 2010-11. The Committee,
therefore, urge the Government  to revisit the extant provisions of Service Tax law
and the rules  framed thereunder so as to ensure that the Service Tax  dues are
collected effectively and within the given time frame.
14. In terms of Rule 4 of the Cenvat Credit  Rules, 2004 credit of Service Tax paid
on any input service is allowed to a provider of taxable service. The Committee notice
incorrect availment and utilization of cenvat credit totaling `105.30 crore by
providers of banking and financial services in 75 cases  including  interest  of `6.26
crore. The Committee have been apprised that in 46 cases  involving `52.59 crore,
proceedings have been initiated by issuing Show  Cause  Notices to the defaulting
service providers and 8 cases  involving ` 5.47  crore  are pending investigation. The
Ministry has not submitted the reasons for allowing Cenvat Credit incorrectly.
Furthermore, in cases where the Ministry has differed from Audit, no justification
has been adduced before the Committee. Merely issuing Show Cause Notices  cannot
be constructed as action taken  by the Ministry.The Ministry needs to explain to the
satisfaction of the Committee the reasons  for the same  and also the  initiatives
taken to ensure that all such leakages are plugged and that there are no such
recurrences.
15. The Committee further find that as per the provisions, the assessee was liable
to restrict the utilization of cenvat credit to 20 percent of the Service Tax payable
during the period 2006-07 and 2007-08. Out of the 24 months in 2006-07 and 2007-
08, the assessee paid Service Tax of  `  1198.04 lakh in 12 months. While the
utilization of cenvat credit to make these payments should have been restricted to
` 239.61 lakh  (20 percent) the actual  utilization was ` 626.65 lakh. This led to
excess utilization of credit of ` 387.04 lakh which was recoverable with interest of
` 95.84 lakh. The assessee also did not maintain separate accounts for receipt,
consumption and inventory of input services used for taxable and exempted services.
The Committee have been informed that the field formations at the time of scrutiny
of returns and while auditing the records of the party take necessary measures to
stop revenue leakages on this count. The Committee seek explanation as to how the
mechanism failed in these cases which resulted in a considerable loss of revenue to
the Government. The Department has reported that SCN of ` 5.52 crore (period
2005-06 to September, 2009) including ` 387.04 lakh had been issued in March,
2010, which is pending adjudication. The Committee would like to be apprised about
the latest position in this regard.

45
16. Further, failure to consider the interest on cash credit and overdraft facility
which were exempted from Service Tax had resulted in short-payment of  ` 515.56
lakh for the period from April, 2008 to March, 2009 which was recoverable with
interest of ` 47.69 lakh. The SCN dated 09.02.2010 issued for the period 2008-09
is pending adjudication. Again, incorrect reflection of cenvat credit in ST-3 returns
of M/s Citi Finance Consumer Finance India Limited in Delhi ST Commissionerate
for the period April, 2006 to September, 2006 resulted in excess availment of Cenvat
credit to the extent of `  two crore. Show Cause Notice dated 20.10.11 for a demand
of  `  199.99 lakh has been issued to the assessee. Having observed that in a large
number of cases the basic prerequisite i.e. proper maintenance of records is wanting,
the Committee would like the Ministry to enumerate the concrete measures taken
by them to ensure compliance with the instructions regarding maintenance of records.
17. Section 73A of the Finance Act, 1994 (as amended w.e.f. 18th April, 2006)
provides that any person who is liable to pay Service Tax and has collected any amount
in excess of the Service Tax assessed should without fail, pay the amount so collected
to the credit of the Government. The Committee find that during the years 2007-08 to
2010-11, there have been 2111 cases in which service providers have collected the
Service Tax to the tune of ` 1134.82 crore but had not deposited the same in the
Exchequer. During the same period, recovery of  ` 560.07 crore involving 1343 cases
has been effected. Further, out of the 2111 cases, 1065 cases pending realization are
under litigation and the revenue involved is to the extent of  ` 1043.20 crore. The
Committee are perturbed to note that the amount involved in the SCNs issued constitute
nearly 90% of the total amount that was collected by the service providers from the
consumers but not deposited with exchequer. The Committee desire that the adjudication
process be expedited and recoveries be made at the earliest.
18. The Committee note that there is a lack of perspective planning in the matter
of deployment of staff on such a vital source of revenue collection viz., Service Tax.
Taking into consideration the amount of revenue collected from Service Tax and
Central Excise during the year 2011-12, the Committee are surprised to find that in
contrast to the deployment of nearly 40000 officers for excise, only 4000 to 5000
officers have been deployed for Service Tax stream and that too after withdrawing
from the Central Excise stream.  Apparently, Service Tax wing has been working for
more than 15 years, with no staff of its own. The Committee are dismayed to note the
helplessness expressed both by the Finance Secretary and Chairman, Central Board
of Excise & Customs in this regard especially when, Ministry of Finance is itself
one of the nodal authorities for examining and sanctioning requisite staff to
Ministries. The Committee feel that the staff requirement be examined on priority
basis by the concerned authorities in order to ensure that the Service Tax Collections,
which have increased phenomenally from ` 407 crore in 1994-95 to Rs. ` 97,389
crore in 2011-12 does not suffer for want of human resource.
N
EW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
19 March, 2013 Chairman,
28 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES  OF  THE  FOURTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2012-13)  HELD  ON  20TH  JUNE,  2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Wednesday, the 20th June, 2012 from
1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
3. Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana
4. Shri Ashok Tanwar
5. Dr. Shashi Tharoor
6. Dr. Girija Vyas
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
10. Shri J.D. Seelam
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri J.N. Gupta — Dy. CAG (Revenue Audit)
2. Ms. Sandhya Shukla — P r. Director (Customs)
Representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
(Department of Commerce)
1. Shri R.S. Gujral — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Goel — Chairman, CBEC
3. Ms. Sheila Sangwan — Member (Service Tax), CBEC
4. Shri V .K. Garg — Joint Secretary (TRU-II)
5. Shri Arun Sahu — DG (Systems)
46

47
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Audit Officers to
the Sitting of the Committee. The Chairman then apprised the Members that the
Sitting was convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) on the subject 'Service Tax on Banking and other
Financial Services and Duty Drawback Scheme', based on the C&AG's Report
No. 15 of 2011-12, Union Government (Indirect Taxes—Service Tax and Customs).
The Committee decided to discuss the subject relating to 'Serivce Tax on Banking and
other Financial Services' during the Sitting and discuss the subject relating to 'Duty
Drawback Scheme' at a later date. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) were called in. Before commencing the examination,
the Chairman made it clear that the deliberations of the Committee were confidential
and were not to be divulged to any outsider until the Report on the subject was
presented to the Parliament. The Committee then proceeded with the examination of
the subject.
3. The Members asked questions about the deficiencies in the procedures regarding
registration of service tax assesses, filing of returns, scrutiny of service tax returns,
ambiguities and inadequacies in rule provisions apart from non-compliance which
had financial implications. The Members also sought reasons for not including in the
departmental registration list those service providers who were liable to pay Service
Tax, reasons for late/non-receipt of Service Tax returns, mechanism for identifying the
potential service tax payers, steps initiated to ensure that the service tax collected
from assessees is duly remitted to Government, measures initiated to bring non-
banking financial companies under the tax net, availability of human resources in the
Department of Revenue for collection of Service Tax, mechanism for calculating the
under-valuation of taxable services and so on. The representatives of the Ministry
clarified the various issues raised by the Members and assured that the information
which was not readily available with them would be furnished to the Committee
expeditiously.
4. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) and asked them to furnish the requisite information as
sought by the Members within a week. He also stated that the representatives may be
asked to re-appear before the Committee if further clarifications on the subject were
required. The representatives of the Ministry were informed that they would be
examined separately on the 'Duty Drawback Scheme'. The Chairman also thanked the
representatives of the office of the C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance
to the Committee in the examination of the subject.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD  ON 19TH MARCH, 2013
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 19th March, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1615 hrs.
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Y esso Naik
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
7. Shri Ashok Tanwar
8. Dr. Girija Vyas
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri Prakash Javadekar
11. Shri J.D. Seelam
12. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.L.K. Raja — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
6. Shri S.L. Singh — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
48

49
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India
1. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
2. Shri Venkatesh Mohan — Director General of Audit
3. Ms. Anim Cherian — Principal Director (ST)
4. Shri Rajiv Kumar Pandey — Principal Director of Audit
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then,
apprised that the meeting had been convened to consider the following Draft Reports
of the Committee:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** ***
(vii) *** *** ***
(viii) *** *** ***
(ix) *** *** ***
(x) "Service Tax on Banking and other Financial Services" based on C&AG
Report  No. 15 of  2011-12, Union Government  (Indirect  Taxes-Service Tax
and Customs).
3. Giving an overview of the issues contained in the Draft Reports and the comments
of the Committee thereupon, the Chairman solicited the views/suggestions of the
Members.
4. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft
Reports. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to
Parliament on a convenient date.
5. The Chairman thanked the Members for their active participation in the
consideration and adoption of the Reports.
The Committee then adjourned.
***Matter not related to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—6052LS(S-4)—23-07-2013.