42
UNECONOMIC BRANCH LINES IN INDIAN
RAILWAYS
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FORTY-SECOND  REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FORTY-SECOND  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
UNECONOMIC  BRANCH  LINES  IN  INDIAN
RAILWAYS
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2011
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)

PAC  No.  1950
Price: Rs.  28.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12)...................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11)...................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11)................................................................................. (vii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (ix)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory .............................................................................. 1
II. Status of Pending Audit paras in the Ministry of Railways ......... 2
III. Uneconomic Branch Lines in Indian Railways .......................... 5
IV . Identification of Uneconomic Branch Lines .............................. 5
V. Financial Appraisal of Branch Lines.......................................... 6
VI. Inadequate Cost Reduction Measures ...................................... 8
VII. Upgradation of Lines................................................................. 9
VIII. Closure of Branch Lines ............................................................ 10
PART II
Observations/Recommendations ............................................................. 14
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of Sub-Committee-I of the Public
Accounts Committee held on 22nd December, 2010.................. 17
II. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of Public Accounts Committee........
held on 23rd September, 2011 .................................................... 19

COMPOSITION  OF   THE   PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2011-2012)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
21. *Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1.    Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.    Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3.    Smt.  A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
(iii)
* Elected  w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide  the vacancy occurred vice  Smt. Jayanti Natarajan
appointed Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.

COMPOSITION  OF   THE   PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2010-2011)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. *V acant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
*Vacancy occurred vice Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
19th January, 2011.
(v)

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11)
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal — Alternate Convenor
3. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Kalraj Mishra
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Forty-second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Uneconomic Branch Lines in Indian Railways' based on Paragraph No. 2.5.1 of
C&AG Report No. CA 19 of  2008-09 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil)
for the year ended March 2007 relating to the Ministry of Railways.
2. The above mentioned Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was
laid on the Table of the House on 24th July, 2009.
3. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time frame, the Public Accounts
Committee (2010-11) took up the subject for detailed examination and report. A Sub-
Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation with the
Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of the Ministry of Railways.
4. In the process of the scrutiny of the Audit Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports
pending with the Ministry of Railways, the Sub-Committee came across certain pending
Paragraphs/Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on very important issues and
considered it prudent to examine and report the same alongwith the Non-Compliance
issue. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee took up the above-mentioned Paragraph of
(the respective) Audit Report for in-depth examination.
5. The Sub-Committee-I took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways on the subject at their sitting held on 22.12.2010. The Committee considered
and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 23.09.2011. The Minutes of the sittings
form Appendices to the Report.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
7. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee and the Sub-Committee for
taking oral evidence and obtaining information on the subject.
8. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives
of the Ministry of Railways for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and
furnishing information that the Committee desired in connection with the examination
of the subject.
9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller  and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
15 November, 2011 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

PART I
REPORT
I. Introductory
The Reports of the Comptroller  and Auditor General of India, after being laid in
Parliament in accordance with Article 151 of the Constitution of India, stand referred to
the Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. As it becomes practically impossible
for the Public Accounts Committee to examine each and every paragraph contained in
the Audit Reports, the Committee adopt a selective approach and take up a few relatively
more important paragraphs for in-depth examination at the beginning of their term
every year. The paragraphs, not selected for examination, are dealt with by means of a
procedure devised by the Committee whereby the Ministries/Departments are required
to furnish the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on all the non-selected Audit
paragraphs to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure).
2. Taking cognizance of inordinate delay on the part of the Ministries/Departments
in furnishing the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee in their
105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that with effect from 31st March,
1996 the Action Taken Notes on all the Paragraphs of the Reports of the C&AG, which
are not formally taken up by the PAC for examination and Reports presented thereupon
should be furnished to the Committee within four months of the laying of the Audit
Reports.
3. During 2000-01, the Committee in their 9th Report, (13th Lok Sabha) decided that
the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes furnished by the respective Ministries/
Departments should be categorized by the Audit under three broad heads namely
'Accepted', 'Partially Accepted' and 'Not Accepted'. Subsequently the Committee also
decided that a brief on the Action Taken Notes categorized as 'Not Accepted' should
be furnished by the Office of C&AG, clearly indicating the reasons for such
categorization as well as the points of difference between Audit and the Ministry/
Department concerned. The Remedial Action Taken Notes and briefs on  'Not-accepted'
paras are then circulated to the Members of the PAC for their perusal. If situation
warrants, any of these categorized Paras/Reports/Subjects could be taken up for in-
depth examination and Report. From the year 2009-10 onwards, the Public Accounts
Committee have been examining vigorously the subject 'Non-compliance by the
Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected
Audit Paragraphs' and the Reports thereon are also being presented to the Parliament.
These Reports too undergo the same stages of 'Action Taken Reports' and 'Action
Taken Statements'. In this manner the Remedial Action Taken Notes reach the stage of
finality.

2
4. Even after devising an elaborate system, the Committee note with concern that
many Ministries/Departments have been unable to furnish the remedial/corrective
Action Taken Notes to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure which has a special Monitoring Cell) within the prescribed time line of four
months. As per the information furnished by Department of Expenditure on 25th June,
2010 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on a total number of 4191 Chapters/
Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/Departments.
5. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject of 'Non-compliance by
the Ministries/Departments is timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of
the C&AG" on Paragraph 2.5.1 of Report No. CA 19 of 2008-2009 dealing with
"Uneconomic Branch Lines in Indian Railways'' for detailed examination during the
year 2010-11. A Sub-Committee was constituted to examine the issue in detail, prepare
separate Reports on each defaulting Ministry/Department concerned with the subject
and place the same before the Main Committee for their consideration. In the process,
the Sub-Committee obtained Background Notes/Preliminary Materials and Written
Replies/Post evidence replies from the Ministries/Departments concerned. The Sub-
Committee also took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways on
22.12.2010. This Report pertains to the Remedial/Corrective action Taken Notes on this
Audit Paragraph pending with the Ministry of Railways.
II. Status of pending audit paras in the Ministry of Railways
6. According to Department of Expenditure a total number of 4191 Chapters/
Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/Departments and out of these a total
of 408 paras were pending with the Ministry of Railways on which the Ministry was
required to furnish Action Taken Notes. However, Audit informed the Sub-Committee
that as on 31st May 2010, a total of 3462 paragraphs were pending  with all the Ministries
on which Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes (ATNs) were  due. Out of these, a
total of 411 Audit Paragraphs were pending with the Ministry of Railways on which
Action Taken Notes were not furnished.
7. ATNs with regard to Para 2.5.1 "Uneconomic Branch Lines in Indian Railways"
of Report No. CA 19 of 2008-09, presented to Parliament on 24th July, 2009 were
pending with the Ministry.
8. The Committee were informed by the Audit that Action Taken Notes in respect of
Para 2.5.1 "Uneconomic Branch Lines in Indian Railways" were sent back to the Ministry
for some clarification on 14th March, 2011 and the vetted Action Taken Notes on this
para were awaited.
9. In the above context, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the exact
number of Audit paragraphs received by the Ministry of Railways in the last two years.
The Ministry in its written reply stated that CAG's Report for the year ending 2007-08
and 2008-09 contained  172 and 104 paras respectively.

3
10. When the Committee wanted to know the status of pending Audit Paragraphs,
the Financial Commissioner, Railway Board while deposing before the  Committee as
under:—
"The total pendency of A TNs as on date upto the year 2008-2009 is 448 and not
411. Out of this, 357 pertain to the year upto 2007-2008, of which 236 ATNs have
been replied to Audit and they are under consideration of Audit; 92 ATNs have
been returned by Audit after consideration with further quries or clearance and
we are processing those; and 29 of them are finalised and are under submission
to the Finance Ministry. Now, as far as the first time replies are concerned, only
26 ATNs are pending for first time reply. We have commitment to give first time
replies to all 26 before 31 December. We also have given ourselves a target of
finalising at least 50 per cent of the A TNs outstanding on date by 31 March.”
11. Subsequently, the Committee were informed by the Ministry in a written
submission as under:—
The position as on 14.1.2011, in respect of Audit paras pertaining to last two years,
is explained below year-wise:
Report for the year Report for the year
ending 2007-08 ending 2008-09
Total paras received 172 104
Finalised and Replies 62 14
sent to Ministry of
Finance
Pending with Audit for vetting 75 64
Net Pendency with Ministry 35 26
No. of Audit paras awaiting 03 04
replies for the first time
12. The Ministry has also submitted as under:—
"...in June 2010, 411 Audit Paras (including 153 ATNs where even initial replies
had not been sent) were pending. During the year, 104 paras have been added
from C&AG's Report for the year ended 2008-09. Out of this total pendency of
515 paras, 87 ATNs have been finalized and sent to Ministry of Finance. As on
14.1.2011, 307 Audit paras are pending with Audit for vetting. 34 Paras are under
Hindi translation and will be sent to Ministry of Finance shortly. At present, only
11 paras are pending for submission of initial response/reply to the Audit and
sincere efforts are being made to finalize ATNs in these cases as well.”
13. The Committee desired to know as to what mechanism the Ministry had devised
or proposed to devise, to ensure  that the Action Taken Notes were submitted within
the stipulated time of four months. In response, the Ministry in a note stated as
under:—

4
On receipt of CAG's Report in the Ministry, Audit Paras are immediately circulated
to the Executive Officers concerned within the Ministry for Preparation of ATNs.
Following schedule is proposed for expeditious disposal of Audit Paras:
Stage Expected time
Railway's comments 2 months
Examination of Railway's comments in 1 month
Board's office
Audit vetting 1 month
14. In this regard, the Financial Commissioner, Railway Board while deposing before
the Committee had submitted that they were trying to get their systems improved and
were trying to have better monitoring systems.
15. Putting forth the problems faced in timely submission of Action Taken Notes,
the Ministry in its written reply, further added as under:—
“In cases of performance Review Paras or Thematic/Special Audit Paras where
all Railways are involved requiring extensive collection of information, the above
time limit is difficult to be adhered to.
The time consumed gets multiplied when Audit makes observations on the
A TNs proposed by the Ministry of Railways, requiring back references to the
Zonal Railways/Divisions, and sometimes further to field units. In some cases,
in the event of a disagreement between Audit and the Executive, ATNs get  held
up and a lot of avoidable time is consumed in the finalization process.
Finalized ATNs are also required to be submitted to Ministry of Finance
alongwith Hindi version, which at times delays submission of the same.”
16. When the Committee specifically asked if any responsibility was ever fixed for
not furnishing remedial Action Taken Notes on the pending audit paragraphs, the
Ministry in a written submission replied as under:—
“Officers responsible for not furnishing replies expeditiously on pending Audit
Paras are being counselled and sensitized from time to time to be more cautious
and prompt. Further, as directed by Ministry of Financé, non-submission of
A TNs within the stipulated time will henceforth be a criterion  for reviewing of
Annual Performance Appraisal of Executives concerned.”
17. On being  queried as to when the Action Taken Notes on these pending
paragraphs were likely to be submitted for  further compliance, the Ministry replied as
under:—
“All efforts are being made to submit the A TNs, where initial replies have not
been submitted to Audit, by the end of January 2011. Further, 50 per cent of the
total outstanding are targetted to be cleared by the end of March 2011 and the
remaining ones soon thereafter.”
18. When asked about the efficacy of computerization  system in complying with
the replies in real time period i.e. four months, the Financial Commissioner, Railway

5
Board while deposing before the Committee stated:—
“Actually, this particular subject does not give itself to very much of
computerization.  These are textual reports with lot of text. We can only take the
numbers outstanding  and the dates from which they have been issued.  This
kind of statistics is being maintained on computers in the Railway Board as well
as in the Zonal Railways and the production units. We can reconcile the numbers,
but actually each A TN is an audit paragraph, which has to be replied to the full
satisfaction of audit and the Hon'ble PAC so that we are able to explain why we
have gone  wrong where we have gone wrong; and what we have done to
improve the  system so that we do not  repeat that kind of error or what system
changes are required and have been put in place? So, for each A TN we have to
go through this process.”
The representative further added that the computerization has not helped very
much in this case.
III. Uneconomic branch lines in Indian Railways
19. The narrow gauge lines and such lines that join the main line network at one end
only are termed as branch lines. Branch lines in Indian Railways (IR) are as old as the
railway system, many of them are more than 100 years old, and have become integral
part of the system. IR have accepted that, despite concerted  efforts to enhance
earnings from branch lines operation, most of these lines remain commercially unviable.
Audit para revealed that the collective loss of all uneconomic branch lines across IR
was  ` 497.86 crore  in 2005-06 (105 lines), which increased to ` 635.08 crore in
2006-07 (95 lines).
IV . Identification of uneconomic branch lines
20. Audit observed that several high level Committees over the years had
recommended that all such uneconomic branch lines where alternative modes of
transport existed or could be  developed, should be closed down so as to  reduce, to
the extent possible, the losses which accrued to IR year after year.
21. Regarding the details about the number of Uneconomic Branch Lines (UBL) and
the losses incurred during the year 2004-05 to 2008-09, the Ministry of Railways
submitted as under:—
Y ear  No. of UBLs Cost (in crores of Net loss (in crores of
rupees) rupees)
2004-05 110 414 405
2005-06 111 502 451
2006-07 104 323 425
2007-08 106 710 422
2008-09 100 786 732

6
22. On being asked about the mechanism in place for identification of  Uneconomic
Branch Lines, the Ministry in a note has furnished as under:—
“Every year a review of the financial results of uneconomic branch lines is
conducted  to ascertain their remunerativeness or otherwise. The number of
lines found uneconomical varies from year to year on account of variations in
traffic and/or the  working expenses.
Railway Convention Committee (1977) recommended that in regard to the
unremunerative Branch Lines, the capital cost, to be exempted from dividend
payment, should be worked out by adopting 'marginal coast' principle.  Therefore,
for the  purpose of working out losses in the uneconomic branch lines, the
principle  of Marginal costing  is applied. In the marginal cost analysis, the
operating expenses are split into variable and fixed costs. The principle of marginal
costing  takes into consideration only variable costs, which for the present
purpose means working expenses. There working expenses of a branch line are
divided into two parts:
(i) Directly charged expenditure which can ab-initio be identified as pertaining
to  a branch line like staff costs etc.
(ii) Indirectly charged expenditure which is not directly identified for the branch
line but is booked for Division as a whole like fuel cost, wagon maintenance
costs etc. Pro-rata distribution of this expenditure is attributed to the branch
line.
For working out return of a branch line, the additional earnings accruing as a
result of construction of branch line, on a main line (already existing) are also
credited to the branch line. Similarly for working out additional expenses, only
long term variable costs due to additional traffic are considered.
The main factor responsible for making a line uneconomic is the low density of
traffic on that line. The narrow gauge lines, in addition, suffer from various
disadvantages like break of gauge involving transshipment, short lead, severe
competition from roadways etc.”
V . Financial appraisal of branch lines
23. Audit found that the process of compilation of financial results of branch lines
was found defective in some zones.  The financial results communicated to Railway
Board were not comprehensive and accurate. In four zones [Western Railway (WR),
South East Central Railway (SECR), North Eastern Railway (NER) and Northeast Frontier
Railway (NFR)] financial results were not being compiled for   46 branch lines (WR28,
SECR6, NER7 and NFR5) and the remunerativeness of  these lines was therefore not
susceptible to verification. In East Central Railway (ECR) also, financial  results of only
the five branch lines identified as uneconomic were maintained, while in North Central
Railway (NCR), only the branch lines already identified as uneconomic prior to formation
of the zone were included in the list of uneconomic branch lines without conducting
any scrutiny of the performance of all branch lines.

7
24. When the Committee enquired whether any mechanism had been put in place
for conducting the financial appraisal of Uneconomic  Branch lines, the Ministry
submitted as under:—
“Detailed codal provisions for financial appraisal of un-remunerative branch
lines are enshrined in Para. 924 to 927 of Indian Railways Administration and
Finance Code.
As per these provisions, apart from taking measures to increase the earnings,
the Railways should also see that uneconomic services are reduced to the minimum
extent, consistent with their social and commercial obligations. The case of each
branch line or a section of a branch line (other than a worked line), the earnings
of which are less than the working expenses, should be specially brought to the
notice of the General Manager by the Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts
Officer so that a report may be made to the Railway Board for  consideration of
the question of closing the line, partially or totally, if its retention is not considered
necessary. General Manager should, while  forwarding the review made by the
Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer, also comment on the economic
purpose served by branch line in an area. The branch line should not be looked
at isolation but as part of an integrated railway system.”
25. On being asked if financial appraisal was available centrally as an integrated
web-based system for the Indian Railways, the Ministry of Railways in its written
submission stated:—
“Financial appraisal of Un-remunerative branch lines are submitted to the Ministry
of Railways annually by the zones as per prescribed time-table, based on the
codal  rules and also the guidelines circulated by the Ministry from time to time.
The same is available centrally with the Ministry, year-wise. However, the data is
not  web-enabled, since this is an annual exercise  which does not necessitate
frequent data uploading.”
26. When the Committee sought to know about the number of branch lines identified
as Un-economic since March, 2004, loss assessed during the period 2009-10 and
anticipated loss during 2010-11, the Ministry in its submission to the Committee stated
as:—
“Number of Un-remunerative branch lines added between 2002-03 and 2008-09
is 14. The number of un-remunerative branch lines which have become
remunerative between 2002-03 and 2008-09 is 29. The loss assessed during the
period 2008-09 is ` 732.01 crore out of which ` 82.15 crores is on account of the
four NG Heritage Railways. Thus net loss is `. 649.85 crores, i.e. 0.90% of Working
Expenses of Indian Railways (` 71839 crores in 2008-09). The losses for 2009-10
is currently under compilation and will be submitted, once the exercise is complete.
For 2010-11, the losses can be compiled only after the closure of the financial
year.”
27. The Financial Commissioner, Railway Board while deposing  before the Committee
submitted as under:—
“The audit para on un-economic branch lines was based on the list of un-
economic branch lines of 2002-03 where there were 115 branch lines which were

8
declared to be un-economic—51 in BG, 41 in MG and 23 in NG. Out of these, till
date 29 lines are no longer in that list. They have become economic. But 14 more
new lines have come into that list. So, the position today is there are 100 un-
economic branch lines.  This list is quite dynamic and the  fact that 29 have come
out of that list is testimony to the fact that we are trying very hard to  try and
make them economic. Each line which gives us a loss has a different solution.”
The representative further added:—
“…we do not cost trains before their introduction in the sense that when a train
is to be introduced we do not work out the  economics. It is introduced on the
basis of demand—whether it is by passenger committee or it is by the zonal
railway users' committee or by the hon. Members of Parliament or by MLAs…”.
The representative, however, assured that they would think in terms of having
some kind of a train costing system which was not hitherto prevalent.
28. The Committee were given to understand that on receipt of Railways Reforms
Committee (RRC) recommendation for closure of un-economic branch lines, the then
Minister of Railways wrote in March, 1985 to the Chief Ministers of ten States and one
Union Territory for closure  of these un-economic branch lines or share 50 per cent of
the losses between the States and Centre. However, none of the State Governments
had agreed either for closure of the lines or for sharing the losses on 50:50 basis.
29. When asked about the steps taken to make the State Governments agreeable for
closure of un-economic lines and sharing the losses on 50:50 basis, the Ministry in a
written submission stated:—
“Due to persistent efforts from Ministry of Railways, some projects for New
Lines, Gauge conversion and doubling projects are being shared by the State
Government, PSUs, Ports etc.”
VI. Inadequate cost reduction measures
30. Audit observed that no cost reduction measures were directed by Railway
Board for implementation in 46 un-economic branch lines identified by the Executive
Director's Committee for cost reduction over 11 zones and IR had continuously incurred
losses every year on the operation of Un-economic Branch Lines. Even though more
than four years had elapsed since Railway Board had instructed (July, 2004) the zones,
barring two lines [Southern Railway (SR)—Sharanur-Nilambur and Eastern Railway—
Sheoraphuli-Tarakeshwar], cost cutting measures were not implemented at all and the
zones were incurring losses every year. The collective loss on account of operating
these 11 Un-economic Branch Lines without implementing the  envisaged cost cutting
measures was ` 33.24  crore during 2005-06 to 2006-07.
31. The Committee were informed that the Zonal Railways had been advised to
continue their efforts to persuade the State Governments to agree for the closure of
such lines and also, the Railways were taking steps to reduce the working expenses on
unprofitable lines.

9
32. When the Committee desired to know about the steps taken to reduce the
working expenses on such lines, the Ministry in its reply submitted as under:—
"The various cost cutting measures already taken have been classified into
following categories:—
1. One train only/Reduction in train services in 10 sections.
2. Mobile Booking Clerk in 2 sections.
3. Withdrawal of staff in 2 sections.
4. Introduction of rail bus in 1 case.
5. Additional Train to improve earnings in 4 lines.
6. Outsourcing of commercial activities in 8 sections.
7. Downgradation of stations in 4 cases.
8. Curtailment of train services/reduction in train services in 4 sections.
9. Outsourcing of Safaiwalas  in 2 sections.
10. Signalling improvement resulting in increase in trains in 1 section.
11. Introduction of Travelling Gateman in 4 lines.
12. Tourist Package introduction in 5 cases.
13. Gauge Conversion/Doubling work/Bridge work taken up in 10 lines.
14. Closure of Station/Section stoppage of operations in 2 sections".
VII. Upgradation of  Lines
33. Gauge Conversion is considered as  an important measure to make unviable
lines viable ones. In this context, the Chairman, Railway Board in his deposition before
the Committee submitted as under:—
"In 1993, we  took a momentous decision in the history of the Indian Railways
when it  was decided that the Railways would  go in for unigauge. Now, 17 years
have passed and we have seen the benefits which  have accrued from that
decision of the people. As of now, we have converted nearly  24,000 to  25,000
kilometers of metre gauge and narrow  gauge lines. It has changed the whole
Rajasthan State, which has benefited from it. It has changed the North Bihar, and
now the U.P. area where also we have converted in a big way and much more
benefits are going to accrue. Similarly, in Assam also, we have converted huge
tracks of metre gauge and we have been able to reach remotest corner of the
North-Eastern States,  and much more is to be done because the conversion is
going on."
He further elaborated:—
"We have nine lines that are getting converted to  broad gauge and they will be

10
brought  into the main frame of the railway network and will provide further hope
of development in that area and then we will be left with a few ones.".
VIII. Closure of  Branch  Lines
34. Regarding the un-economic Branch Lines the Committee were informed  by the
Ministry  that Indian Railways Enquiry Committee (1936-37); Committee on Transport
Policy and  Co-ordination (1959); Estimates Committee (1967-68); National Transport
Policy  Committee (NTPC)  (April, 1978) etc. had recommended closure of these  lines
on the ground that these lines acted as a drag on the financial viability of the Railways,
whereas some other committees viz. the Public  Accounts Committee (1968-69);
Un-economic Branch Lines Committee (1969); Administrative Reforms Commission
(1970); Railway  Convention Committee (1973); High level Committee on Social Burdens
(January 1978); Railway Fare and Freight Committee (1993) etc. had inter-alia
recommended continuation of these Un-economic Branch Lines contingent upon
passing of the losses to the State Governments, taking measures to improve  viability
of these lines, meeting the losses out of public revenue of  State or Centre, deeming
these lines were serving public interest,  reimbursement of losses by the State
Governments to the Railways etc.
35. On being asked about the steps taken to improve the viability of Un-economic
Branch Lines, close them, share the financial burden with concerned  State Government
especially in the light of the recommendations of Committees/Commissions, the Ministry
in a written reply stated:—
"On receipt of RRC recommendation for closure of un-economic branch lines,
the then Minister of Railways  Shri Bansi Lal wrote a letter in March, 1985 to the
Chief Ministers of ten States and one Union Territory.
The letter requested  the States to agree to the   closure of un-remunerative
branch lines; alternatively share the losses with the Ministry of Railways on
50:50 basis.
The main problem in closing the identified un-economic lines is the resistance
from the concerned State Governments despite the various incentives offered to
them.
However, the Zonal Railways have been advised to continue their efforts to
persuade the State Governments to agree to the closure of such lines. Meanwhile,
the Railways are taking steps to reduce the working expenses on such lines as
already discussed above.
Further, the plan of action has been advised to the Zonal Railways  vide Railway
Board's  letter No. 97/TC(M&S)/17/6, dated 17.2.1998.
I. To reduce working expenses, the following measures may be taken wherever
required:
(a) Downgradation of stations into contractor-operated halts.
(b) Introduction of 'One Engine Only' system whereby only one train can

11
be in the section at any time. This obviates the need for block working and hence
reduces the staff requirement.
(c) To introduce tourist packages on the pattern of Kalka-Shimla section
to make it viable.
(d) Curtailment of train services including running  of trains only during
day time, cancellation of trains on Sundays and other holidays etc.
(e) Issue of passenger tickets by Travelling/Booking Clerks on the trains
running on the section.
(f) Dismantling of sidings.
(g) Dismantling of signalling equipments.
II. To explore the possibility of improving earnings  on some of the branch lines,
it may be considered to:
(a) Introduce rail car service with reduced loads.
(b) Increase frequencies of trains.
III. The dialogue  with the State Governments concerned may be continued  to
persuade them to agree to the closure  of the Un-economic Branch Lines  where
the  above steps may not be helpful. Efforts may also be made to persuade the
State Governments concerned   to agree to the closure of the remaining 25  lines
recommended by the  Railways Reforms Committee. Similar efforts may be made
by the Western Railway for closure of the remaining  lines in Gujarat  where
adequate road facilities exist at present.
The action taken by Railways  is being pursued  vide FC/Railways' letter 11.1.2000.
Some Railways have   replied that measures like 'One Train Only' system, down
gradation of stations, package tours, etc. to reduce working  expenses and
improve viability have been implemented successfully in respect of a few lines.
In respect  of some lines the matter  is  being pursued with State Governments."
36. In March,  2002, the Railways constituted a Committee consisting of  five Executive
Directors (ED) of the Railway Board  to study the  economics  of each branch line so as
to identify major  causes  due to which the branch line was losing its entity, suggest
remedial measure for reducing losses and identify  the branch lines amenable   to
concession and the models of  concessions to be followed in each case. The Committee
submitted its report in March 2004. Out of 126 lines, 115 branch lines were identified as
un-economic. Out of these, seven branch lines were recommended for closure. Various
cost cutting measures for curtailing losses were suggested in respect of 59 branch
lines, while no action was proposed for the remaining 49 lines. Based on these
recommendations, Railway Board  had instructed (in July,  2004) the zones to implement
cost cutting measures only in 13 lines. No directions were issued for the closure of
identified Un-economic Branch Lines.
37.  Asked to explain why any direction for the closure of seven Un-economic
Branch Lines was not issued, the Ministry in a written reply submitted:

12
"The Ministry of Railways had evolved a positive plan, as part of Unigauge
Policy, to integrate the 7 un-economic branch lines into the Indian Railways BG
network, keeping in view  the economic necessity, local demands and State
Goverments' social obligation concerns.
Accordingly, 5 out of 7 un-economic branch lines have taken up for conversion
to BG .
The following  sections have not been closed for the following reasons:—
1. Himatnagar-Khadbrahma—This section continues to be operated  on socio-
political grounds.  The Zonal Railway had advised the State  Government of
Gujarat for giving consent for closure of the Un-economic Branch Lines
situated in Gujarat. But the Government of Gujarat did not agree with the
proposal of closure stating that  the Railway line passes through rural/tribal
areas of Gujarat connecting remote and underdeveloped pockets. The area
can be developed by the gauge conversion of these Railway Lines for
development  of these backward belts.
2. Mavli-Baridadri — An average  number of 2226 passengers travel in this
section daily. The average daily earning is ` 99,928. Possibility is being
examined  to put halt  agents instead of booking clerks at Bhinder and Kanor
stations."
38. The Committee were also informed by the  Ministry that out of six
recommendations only first two recommendations of the Executive Directors Committee
(2002) had been approved by the Board and rest of the recommendations were under
consideration.
39. Asked about the time frame envisaged for taking a final view on the
recommendations of the Executive Director's Committee (2002),  the Ministry admitted
in its written note that:—
" No time frame  has been given. The definition of un-remunerative branch lines
will be revisited since unigauge policy has given benefit in overall connectivity,
asset management and productivity. Evaluation of branch lines should not be
looked at in isolation but as part of an integrated Railway System as envisaged
in the codal provisions."
40. However, the Chairman, Railway Board during his deposition  before the
Committee gave his views as under:—
"........We have to now take a holistic view of the whole railway operations. And
if Indian Railway is viable and if some parts of it are not viable, we should not
denigrate it. There are systems where when we have reached, we may not be able
to say that 15 kilometres or 50 kilometres of line is economic or un-economic,
but it is a part of the big whole. That whole is more important and these parts
make that whole. When we are talking of inclusive growth and we are talking of
socially desirable lines now to be built and being debated in both Lok Sabha and
Rajya Sabha,  we have to take a fresh  look at what is economic and  what is

13
 un-economic. But what is more important  is that if something is  un-economic,
can we curtail  that expenditure there to reduce our losses there?  What  I want
to bring  out here, as the Chairman of the Railway Board this is my humble
request to you, that we should not think of closing the lines but we should think
of cutting down the expenditure."
He further elaborated:—
"We have now as today things stand, about hundred lines, euphemistically said
as un-economic lines, 52   of them are broad gauge, 28 are meter gauge and 20  are
narrow gauge. Out of that, there are six lines which are now strategic lines. I
think, the nation  needs  them and we have to run them. There are four heritage
railways;  they are the pride of the nation."
41. Audit had observed   that the Railways Reforms Committee (RRC) of 1983 had
recommended 57 un-economic  branch lines for closure, out of which 19 lines could
only be permanently closed till the Executive Director's Committee was constituted in
2002.
42.  With regard to the steps taken to  ensure the closure of these Un-economic
Branch Lines as recommended by RRC  of 1983, the Ministry in a note  has submitted
as under:—
"Minister of Railways wrote to the concerned State Governments in March ,1985
regarding closure of 40 Un-economic Branch Lines. It was further  recommended
in the letter   that in case State Governments do not desire to close  the lines they
should share 50% of the losses incurred by the Railways.
Most of the State Governments did not respond. The Chief Minister of
Puducherry had replied that due to socio-political considerations the lines cannot
be closed and the State can also not share the losses on 50:50 basis."

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS
1. The Committee note that as per information of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) 4191 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were
pending as on 25th June, 2010. According to the data furnished by Audit in this
regard, a total of  3462 Paragraphs were pending with all the Ministries as on 31st
May, 2010. Having observed the discrepancies of figures pertaining to pendency of
cases between the Ministry and the Audit, the Committee, would urge the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Expenditure, to reconcile the pendencies and report the correct
figures to them.
2. The Committee found that 448 paras were pending with Ministry of Railways.
The Railways attributed the delay in furnishing the ATNs to large geographical
spread area, the time consumed in collecting replies from several far flung units of
the Railways and reconciling the same. Repudiating the assertion of the Ministry, the
Committee reiterate that four months time for submitting the ATNs was decided only
after taking into consideration all such constraints. While expressing their
displeasure over the failure of the Ministry in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes, the Committee, recommend that the issue of pendency of Remedial/Corrective
Action Taken Notes be reviewed periodically by the Chairman, Railway Board himself
to ensure that information is collected timely from the Zones/Units and is submitted
within the stipulated period.
3. The Committee note that Indian Railways has envisaged various measures to cut
down the expenditure on these Un-economic Branch Lines and also to explore the
possibility of improving earnings on some other branch lines. These include —
(a) Downgradation of stations into contractor-operated halts. (b) Introduction of  ‘One
Engine Only' system whereby only one train can be in the section at any time which
obviates the need for block working and thus reduces the staff requirement. (c) To
introduce tourist packages on the pattern of Kalka-Shimla section to make it viable.
(d) Curtailment of train services including running of trains only during day time,
cancellation of trains on Sundays and other holidays etc. (e) Issue of passenger
tickets by Travelling/Booking Clerks on the trains running on the section. (f)
Dismantling of sidings. (g) Dismantling of signalling equipments. (h) Introduce rail
car service with reduced loads. (i) Increase frequencies of trains. The Committee
however are pained to note that the measures line 'One train only' system,
downgradation of stations, package tours, etc. to reduce working expenses and improve
viability have been implemented successfully only in respect of a few lines. The
Committee are of the considered view that these measures be pursued vigorously and
applied to all those branch lines where they could ensure that the Un-economic Branch
Lines become viable. Further, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry
to take up the matter with the State Governments again in order to ensure that the
14

15
losses incurred currently are reduced to barest minimum if not curtailed fully and
apprise the Committee of the same.
4. The Committee while scrutinizing the subject found that in the year 2002-03,
there were 115 branch lines which were declared to be un-economic — 51 in Broad
Gauge (BG), 41 in Metre Gauge (MG) and 23 in Narrow Gauge (NG). Out of these, 29
lines have become economic, but 14 more new lines were added into that list making
100 branch lines un-economic. The Committee are happy to note that the efforts of
the Ministry had fructified and converted 29 un-economic lines into remunerative
ones. However, they regret to note 14 lines are still far from viable. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry conduct a comprehensive and time bound study by
experts to look into the matter and take necessary measures to mitigate their financial
burden.
5. The Committee are constrained to note that the losses on Un-economic Branch
Lines are getting accentuated year after year and the loss during the period 2008-09
is ` 732.01 crore. The Committee desire that the Ministry put in place a Train
Costing System and compute expenses vis-a-vis tentative earnings at project estimate
stage itself. In this regard, the Committee urge the Ministry to conduct half yearly
survey which would enable it to cut down the anticipated loss during the financial
year. The Committee would also like to be informed about the losses incurred during
the year 2009-10 and 2010-11.
6. The Committee find that the Ministry having gone in for uni-gauge project, had
given the benefit in overall connectivity, asset management and productivity. It had
converted nearly 24000 to 25000 Kilometres of metre gauge and narrow gauge lines
and owing to gauge conversion many States like Rajasthan, Bihar, UP, Assam and
North Eastern States had benefited. Appreciating the Ministry's action, the Committee
desire that the Ministry expedite the uni-gauge project wherever it is feasible so as to
arrest the ever growing losses which had an impact on the dwindling earnings of the
Indian Railways. The Committee also note that the Ministry's move to have a re look
on the definition of Un-economic Branch Line. The Committee, would like to be
apprised about the same and to what extent redefining the Un-economic Branch Lines
had helped in curtailing the losses on these lines.
7. The Committee find that the Indian Railways Enquiry Committee (1936-37), the
Committee on Transport Policy and Coordination (1959), the Estimates Committee
(1967-68), the National Transport Policy Committee (NTPC), (April 1978) etc.
recommended closure of Un-economic Branch Lines on the ground that these lines
acted as a drag on the financial viability of the Railways, whereas some other
Committees viz. the Public Accounts Committee (1968-69), Un-economic Branch
Lines Committee (1969),  Administrative Reforms Commission (1970), The Railway
Convention Committee (1973), the High level Committee on Social Burdens (January
1978), Railway Fare and Freight Committee (1993) etc. had inter-alia recommended

16
continuation of these Un-economic Branch Lines contingent upon passing of the
losses to the State Governments, taking measures to improve the viability of these
lines, meeting out the losses out of public revenue of  State or Centre, deeming these
lines are serving public interest. The Committee are of the view that mere constitution
of Committees/Commissions is no solution until their recommendations are translated
into action in letter and spirit in a time bound manner.
NEW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI,
15 November, 2011 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX   I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I  OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) ON  "NON-COMPLIANCE BY THE MINISTRIES/
DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF ACTION TAKEN
NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED PARAGRAPHS OF THE
C&AG OF INDIA" HELD ON 22ND DECEMBER, 2010
The Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Wednesday, the
22nd December, 2010 from 1600 hrs to 1710 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
S
ECRETARIA T
1.   Shri Rajshekhar Sharma — Director
2.   Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of  India
Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General (Railways)
Representatives of the Ministry of  Railways
1. Shri Vivek Sahai — Chairman, Railway Board and
ex-officio Principal Secretary to the GoI
2. Shri Samar Jha — Financial Commissioner, Railways and
ex-officio Secretary to the GoI
3. Shri A.P. Mishra — Member Engineering, Railway Board and
ex-officio Secretary to the GoI
4. Shri Sudesh Kumar — Member Electrical Railway Board and
ex-officio Secretary to the GoI
5. Shri Sanjiv Handa — Member Mechanical, Railway Board and
ex-officio  Secretary to the GoI
6. Shri V .N. Tripathi — Member Staff, Railway Board and
ex-officio Secretary to the GoI
17

18
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor, Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts
Committee, welcomed the Members and representatives of the  Office of the C&AG of
India to the sitting of the Sub-committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Sub-committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
"Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the Non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India."
3. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened for
taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways on the subject
relating to "Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of
Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Pargraphs of the C&AG of India." The
Convenor also informed the Members that the meeting will proceed with a discussion
on two paras viz. para 2.5.1 "un-economic Branch Lines in Indian Railways" and para
3.1.1 "Idle Investment on a New Line" of CAG Report No. CA 19 of 2008-09.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Railways were called in and the
Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-committee. The representatives
first, briefed the Sub-committee on the initiatives taken by their MInistry in timely
submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs of C&AG. They also, inter-alia, threw
light on the current status of pending paras in their Ministry and difficulties faced by
the Ministry in replying to the pending Audit Paragraphs within the stipulated time
frame. The deliberations were also held on the two paras on "Un-economic Branch
Lines in Indian Railways" and "Idle Investment on a New Line". The representatives
replied to various queries of the members of the Sub-committee during the sitting.
5. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of  the Ministry of Railways for
appearing before the Sub-committee and for furnishing information in connection with
the examination of the subject. The Convenor also thanked the officers of the office of
the C&AG of India for providing assistance to the Sub-committee in the examination of
the subject.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX   II
MINUTES  OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 23RD SEPTEMBER  2011
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 23rd September, 2011 from
1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Room  No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri  Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
8. Shri Adhi Sankar
9. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
10. Shri K. Sudhakaran
11. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Naresh Gujral
15. Shri Prakash Javadekar
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
6. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
19

20
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of  India
1. Shri K.P. Sasidharan — Director General (AB)
2. Ms. Subha Kumar — Director General  (Report Central)
3. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director (ESM)
4. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director (AFN)
5. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Principal Director (Railway Audit Board)
2 . * *  * * **
3 . *  * * * **
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports, one by one, for
consideration and adoption:
( i ) * *  * * **
(ii) * *  *  *  * *
    (iii)  Draft Report on ‘Uneconomic Branch Lines in Indian Railway’;
(iv) * *  *  *  * *
( v ) * *  * * **
(vi) * *  *  *  * *
(vi) * *  *  *  * *
(vii) * *  *  *  * *
(vii) * *  *  *  * *
  (viii) * *  *  *  * *
5. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all but one Draft Report mentioned
at Sl No. (vii) above, with some modifications/suggestions.
* * *  * * *
6 . * *  * * **
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the adopted Draft Reports in
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to the
House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
****Part not related to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—3510LS—12-01-2012.