43
IDLE INVESTMENT ON A NEW LINE
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2011-2012
FORTY-THIRD REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FORTY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
IDLE INVESTMENT ON A NEW LINE
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19 December, 2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 December, 2011
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2011/Agrahayana, 1933 (Saka)


PAC No. 1951
Price : ` 25.00
© 2011 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12).................. (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11).................. (v)
COMPOSITION  OF  THE  SUB-COMMITTEE -III OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11)............................................................................. (vii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................ (ix)
REPORT
PART 1
  I. Introductory ....................................................................... 1
   II. Status of Pending Audit para in the Ministry of Railways .. 2
  III. Idle Investment on a new line
(a) Construction of a New Line........................................ 7
(b) Implication of the Project ............................................ 7
(c) Filling up of Vacancies ............................................... 8
(d) Target for Completion of Project ................................ 8
(e) Cost Overrun .............................................................. 9
(f) Idling of Assets .......................................................... 9
PART II
Observations/Recommendations ............................................. 11
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of Sub Committee-I of the Public
Accounts Committee held on 22nd December, 2010........... 13
II. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of Public Accounts Committee
held on 23rd September, 2011.............................................. 15

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya  Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javadekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Mishra
*21. Shri J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
(iii)
*Elected w.e.f. 29th August, 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July, 2011.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya  Sabha
*16. V acant
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
(v)
*Vacancy occurred vice Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State w.e.f.
19th January, 2011.

COMPOSITION OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11)
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab — Convenor
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal — Alternate Convenor
3. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Kalraj Mishra
(vii)

(ix)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2011-12), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Forty-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Idle Investment on a New Line' based on Paragraph No. 3.1.1 of C&AG Report
No. CA 19 of 2008-09 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil) for the year
ended March 2007 relating to the Ministry of Railways.
2. The above mentioned Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India was
laid on the Table of the House on 24th July, 2009.
3. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected
Audit Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time frame, the Public
Accounts Committee (2010-11) took up the subject for detailed examination and report.
A Sub-Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation with
the Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of the Ministry of Railways.
4. In the process of the scrutiny of the Audit Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports pending
with the Ministry of Railways, the Sub-Committee came across certain pending
Paragraphs/Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on very important issues and
considered it prudent to examine and report the same alongwith the Non-Compliance
issue. Accordingly, the Sub-Committee took up the above-mentioned Paragraph of
(the respective) Audit Report for in-depth examination.
5. The Sub-Committee-I took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways on the subject at their sitting held on 22.12.2010. The Committee considered
and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 23.09.2011. The Minutes of the sittings
form Appendices to the Report.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
7. The Committee thank the predecessor Committee and the Sub-Committee for
taking oral evidence and obtaining information on the subject.
8. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Railways for tendering evidence before Sub-Committee and furnishing
information that the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the
subject.
9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
15 November, 2011 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory
The Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, after being laid in
Parliament in accordance with Article 151 of the Constitution of India, stand referred to
the Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. As it becomes practically impossible
for the Public Accounts Committee to examine each and every paragraph contained in
the Audit Reports, the Committee adopt a selective approach and take up a few relatively
more important paragraphs for indepth examination at the beginning of their term
every year. The paragraphs, not selected for examination, are dealt with by means of a
procedure devised by the Committee whereby the Ministries/Departments are required
to furnish the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on all the non-selected Audit
paragraphs to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure).
2. Taking cognizance of inordinate delay on the part of the Ministries/Departments
in furnishing the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee in
their 105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that with effect from
31st March, 1996 the Action Taken Notes on all the Paragraphs of the Reports of the
C&AG, which are not formally taken up by the PAC for examination and Reports
presented thereupon should be furnished to the Committee within four months of the
laying of the Audit Reports.
3. During 2000-01, the Committee in their 9th Report, (13th Lok Sabha) decided
that the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes furnished by the respective Ministries/
Departments should be categorized by the Audit under three broad heads namely
'Accepted', 'Partially Accepted' and 'Not Accepted'. Subsequently the Committee also
decided that a brief on the Action Taken Notes categorized as 'Not Accepted' should
be furnished by the Office of C&AG, clearly indicating the reasons for such
categorization as well as the points of difference between Audit and the Ministry/
Department concerned. The Remedial Action Taken Notes and briefs on 'Non-accepted'
paras are then circulated to the Members of the PAC for their perusal. If situation
warrants, any of these categorized Paras/Reports/Subjects could be taken up for
in-depth examination and Report. From the year 2009-10 onwards, the Public Accounts
Committee have been examining vigorously the subject 'Non-compliance by the
Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected
Audit Paragraphs' and the Reports thereon are also being presented to the Parliament.
These Reports too undergo the same stages of 'Action Taken Reports' and 'Action
Taken Statements'. In this manner the Remedial Action Taken Notes reach the stage of
finality.
4. Even after devising on elaborate system, the Committee note with concern that
many Ministries/Departments have been unable to furnish the remedial/corrective

2
Action Taken Notes to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure which has a special Monitoring Cell) within the prescribed time line of
four months. As per the information furnished by Department of Expenditure on
25th June, 2010 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on a total number of 4191
Chapters/Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/Departments.
5. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject of "Non-compliance
by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs
of the C&AG" on Paragraph 3.1.1 of Report No. CA 19 of 2008-2009 dealing with
"Idle Investment on a new line" for detailed examination during the year 2010-11.
A Sub-Committee was constituted to examine the issue in detail, prepare separate
Report on the defaulting Ministry/Department concerned with the subject and place
the same before the Main Committee for their consideration. In the process, the Sub-
Committee obtained Background Notes/Preliminary Materials and Written Replies/
Post evidence replies from the Ministries/Departments concerned. The sub-Committee
also took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways on 22.12.2010.
This Report pertains to the Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes on this Audit
Paragraph pending with the Ministry of Railways.
II. Status of Pending Audit Paras in the Ministry of Railways
6.  According to Department of Expenditure, a total of 4191 Chapters/Paragraphs
were pending with various Ministries/Departments and out of which 408 paras were
pending with the Ministry of Railways for furnishing Action Taken Notes. However,
audit informed the Sub-Committee that as on 31st May 2010 a total of 3462 paragraphs
were pending with all the Ministries on which Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes
(ATNs) were due. Out of these, a total of 411 Audit Paragraphs were pending with the
Ministry of Railways on which Action Taken Notes were not furnished.
7. A TNs with regard to Para 3.1.1 "Idle Investment on a new line" of Report No.
CA 19 of 2008-09, were pending with the Ministry and related to the Audit Report
which was presented to Parliament on 24th July, 2009.
8. The Committee were informed by the Audit that Action Taken Notes in respect
of Para 3.1.1. "Idle Investment on a new line" were sent back to the Ministry for some
clarification on 11th February, 2011 and the vetted Action Taken Notes on this Para
were awaited.
9. In the above context, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the exact
number of Audit paragraphs received by the Ministry of Railways in the last two years.
The Ministry in its written reply stated that CAG's Report  for the year ending 2007-08
and 2008-09 contained 172 and 104 paras respectively.
10. While furnishing details regarding the status of pending Audit Paragraphs,
the Financial Commissioner, Railway Board deposing before the Committee during oral
evidence stated as under:—
"The total pendency of ATNs as on date upto the year 2008-2009 is 448 and
not 411. Out of this, 357 pertain to the year upto 2007-2008, of which 236
ATNs have been replied to Audit and they are under consideration of Audit;

3
92 ATNs have been returned by Audit after consideration with further queries
or clearance and we are processing those; and 29 of them are finalised and are
under submission to the Finance Ministry. Now, as far as the first time replies
are concerned, only 26 A TNs are pending for first time reply. We have the
commitment to give first time replies to all 26 before 31 December. We also
have given ourselves a target of finalising at least 50 per cent of the ATNs
outstanding as on date by 31 March."
11. Subsequently, the Committee were informed by the Ministry in a written
submission as under:—
The position as on 14.1.2011, in respect of Audit paras pertaining to last two
years, is explained below year-wise:
Report for the year Report for the year
ending 2007-08 ending 2008-09
Total paras received 172 104
Finalised and Replies 62 14
sent to Ministry of
Finance
Pending with Audit for 75 64
vetting
Net Pendency with 35 26
Ministry
No. of Audit paras awaiting 03 04
replies for the first time
12. The Ministry also submitted as under:—
".....In June 2010, 411 Audit Paras (including 153 ATNs where even initial
replies had not been sent) were pending. During the year, 104 paras have
been added from C&AG's Report for the year ended 2008-09. Out of this total
pendency of 515 paras, 87 A TNs have been finalized and sent to Ministry of
Finance. As on 14.1.2011, 307 audit paras are pending with Audit for vetting.
34 Paras are under Hindi translation and will be sent to Ministry of Finance
shortly. At present, only 11 paras are pending for submission of initial response/
reply to the Audit and sincere efforts are being made of finalize ATNs in these
cases as well."
13. When the Committee desired to know about the mechanism the Ministry had
devised or proposed to devise, to ensure that the Action Taken Notes were submitted
within the stipulated time of four months, the Ministry in its written submission stated
as under:—
On receipt of CAG's Report in the Ministry, Audit Paras are immediately
circulated to the Executive Officers cocnerned within the Ministry for

4
preparation of ATNs. Following schedule is proposed for expeditious disposal
of Audit Paras:
Stage Expected time
Railway's comments 2 months
Examination of Railway's comments in 1 month
Board's office
Audit vetting 1 month
14. In this regard, the Financial Commissioner, Railway Board while deposing
before the Committee had submitted that they were trying to get their systems improved
and have a better monitoring system in place.
In a post evidence questionnaire, the Railway Board was asked to explain the
monitoring system in place. The Ministry in its written submission has stated as under:
"Action Taken Notes on Audit Paras are required to be submitted to the
Ministry of Finance within four months of presentation of the C&AG's Report
to the Parliament. On receipt of CAG's Report in the Ministry, Audit Paras are
immediately circulated to the Executive Officers concerned for preparation of
ATNs.
II. Constraints/difficulties are, however, experienced in finalizing ATNs as per
above schedule in cases of Performance Review Paras or Thematic/Special
Audit Paras where all Railways are involved requiring extensive collection of
information.
III. The time consumed gets multiplied when Audit makes observations on the
A TNs proposed by the Ministry of Railways requiring back references to the
Zonal Railways/Divisions and sometimes further to field units. In some cases,
in the event of a disagreement between the Audit and the Executive, ATNs
get held up and a lot of avoidable time is consumed in the finalization process.
IV . For ensuring timely submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on the Audit
Paragraphs of C&AG, a Cell in the Ministry of Railways, under the supervision
of a very senior officer of the rank of Adviser, is in place. This Cell works in
close co-ordination with Executive Officers of various Directorates within the
ministry, the Zonal Railways and the Audit. Similarly, at the Zonal Railway
level, Accounts Department, headed by a senior officer of Sr. Administrative
Grade rank, functions as the nodal Department for processing matters related
to C&AG for co-ordinating with Heads of the Departments(HoDs) of different
functional areas. While the Cell in the Ministry of Railways works with a view
to meeting the target dates stipulated in each case, and regular follow up is
done at appropriate levels, delays take place in a number of cases for various
reasons as brought out above.

5
V.  Since 17.06.2010 when the first meeting of COS was held for reviewing progress
in the submission of ATNs, the following steps have been taken to ensure
timely finalization of ATNs.
(i) Disposal of pending A TNs was included as one of the Agenda items in
the monthly Board Meetings for four months since July 2010. The status
of A TNs has again been reviewed in January 2011 by Board in its meeting.
(ii) Pending status of Audit references on Action Taken Notes shall be one
of the parameters to be seen in the Annual Performance Report of the
Executive Director concerned.
(iii) A S tanding Audit Committee has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Financial Commissioner/Railways for monitoring and
reviewing the submission of ATNs on CAG's Audit Paras and ATRs on
PAC’s recommendations as per the guidelines of Ministry of Finance.
(iv) ATN Adalats are also organized to resolve any stalemate between Audit
and the Ministry and first such ATN Adalat/workshop was held on
31.12.2010.
(v) Recently, audit paras have been categorized into three different
categories viz Category 'A' under which comes very old paras up to the
year 2000, Category 'B' which includes paras from year 2001 to 2008 and
Category 'C' having cases for the year 2008-09. While efforts are made to
clear all pending paras, a Special drive is being launched to clear Category
'A' cases.
VI. On 17.06.2010, the total pendency with  the Ministry was 411 ATNs out of
which replies to 153 ATNs were not sent to Audit even for the first time.
During the year, 104 paras were added from C&AG's Report for the year
ended 2008-09. Concerted efforts made have resulted in finalization of
200 cases during a period of one year, details given below:
Total Paras where Pendency Replies
Pendency even first reply with Audit submitted to
was not sent M/o Finance
since
17.6.2010
Position as on 515 153 111 ---
17.6.2010
Position as on 315 Nill 161 200
31.7.2010
With 161 cases presently pending with audit for their vetting, it is expected
that a substantial number of ATNs will get finalized in the coming months."

6
15. Putting forth the problems faced in timely submission of Action Taken Notes,
the Ministry in its written reply, further added as under:—
"In cases of Performance Review Paras or Thematic/Special Audit Paras where
all Railways are involved requiring extensive collection of information, the
above time limit is difficult to be adhered to.
The time consumed gets multiplied when Audit makes observations on the
A TNs proposed by the Ministry of Railways, requiring back references to the
Zonal Railways/Divisions, and sometimes further to field units. In some cases,
in the event of a disagreement between Audit and the Executive, ATNs get
held up and a lot of avoidable time is consumed in the finalization process.
Finalized ATNs are also required to be submitted to Ministry of Finance
alongwith Hindi version, which at times delays submission of the same."
16. When the Committee specifically asked if any responsibility was ever fixed for
not furnishing remedial Action Taken Notes on the pending audit paragraphs, the
Ministry in a written submission has replied as under:—
"Officer responsible for not furnishing replies expeditiously on pending Audit
Paras are being counselled and sensitized from time to time to be more cautious
and prompt. Further, as directed by Ministry of Finance, non submission of
ATNs within the stipulated time will henceforth be a criterion for reviewing of
Annual Performance Appraisal of Executives concerned."
17. On being queried as to when the Action Taken Notes on these pending
paragraphs were likely to be submitted for further compliance, the Ministry replied as
under:—
"All efforts are being made to submit the A TNs, where initial replies have not
been submitted to Audit, by the end of January 2011. Further, 50 per cent of
the total outstanding are targetted to be cleared by the end of March 2011
and the remaining ones soon thereafter."
18. When asked about the efficacy of computerization system in complying with
the requirement of furnishing replies within the prescribed time period of four months,
the Financial Commissioner, Railway Board in his deposition before the Committee
stated:—
"Actually, this particular subject does not give itself to very much of
computerization. These are textual reports with lot of text. We can only take
the numbers outstanding and the dates from which they have been issued.
This kind of statistics is being maintained on computers in the Railway Board
as well as in the Zonal Railways and the production units. We can reconcile
the numbers, but actually each A TN is an audit paragraph, which has to be
replied to the full statisfaction of audit and the Hon'ble PAC so that we are
able to explain why we have gone wrong; where we have gone wrong; and
what we have done to improve the system so that we do not repeat that kind
of error or what system changes are required and have been put in place? So,
for each ATN we have to go through this process."

7
The representative further added that the computerization had not helped very
much in this case.
III.  Idle Investment on a New Line
(a)  Construction of a New Line
The construction of a new broad gauge rail line between Hassan and Bangalore
via Shravanabelgola (166 kms) at an estimated cost of ` 412.91 crore was sanctioned by
the Railway Board in the year 2001. Construction of rail line between Hassan and
Shravanabelgola (41.17 km) was completed (January 2006) at a cost of ` 140 crore.
19. Apprising the Committee regarding the observations made by Audit, the
Ministry in its written submission stated that Hassan-Shravanabelgola new line section
was opened and operated for a noble cause under direction of the Government. Further,
its closure became unavoidable as continuing the operation did not render it viable.
20. In this context, the Committee desired to know if the direction of the Government
was the sole criterion for opening of a new line and if not what was the initial justification
and intended objective for the construction of this new line. To this, the Ministry of
Railways in its written note submitted as under:
"The section from Hassan to Shravanabelgola was opened to passenger traffic
primarily to enable the pilgrims to attend the "Mahamastakabisheka" of
Lord Bahubali which was held during February, 2006 which comes once in
12 years. The proposed railway line would provide direct shorter rail link between
Banguluru and Hassan via Shravanabelgola and its will serve Banguluru, Tumkur,
Mandya and Hassan Districts of Karnataka."
(b) Implication of the Project
21. The Audit scrutiny revealed that though the rail line was opened for the
passenger traffic on 07 February, 2006, the conditions put forth by the Commissioner,
Railway Safety (CRS) were not complied with. The CRS while inspecting the new line
had authorized its opening of the line to passenger traffic with the condition that
regular open line staff may be posted to operate and maintain the line within one month
from the date of opening otherwise the authorization would be deemed to have been
cancelled and the line closed for traffic. The CRS had also pointed out that side drains
were not provided and that there was deficiency of ballast cushion at several locations.
He had directed to carry out one round of machine tamping after recouping the ballast
deficiency. Further, the CRS had directed the Railways to stop running the passenger
trains and consequently, the line was closed for traffic with effect from12 July, 2006.
Thereafter, no action had been taken by the Railways till November, 2007 when joint
inspection of the line was conducted by Construction and Open line authorities to
reassess the works.
22. The Audit had also observed that a Memorandum of Understanding was
signed for executing six works as per CRS observations. However, the contracts for
ballast procurement and the other works were awarded only in February, 2008 and one
work for construction of side drains was in progress (March 2008).

8
23. When the Committee enquired about the conditions that were actually stipulated
by CRS for running the train, the Member Engineering, Railway Board deposing before
the Committee stated:—
"........the slope should be further flattened: there should be more side drains
constructed; the ballast cushion should be improved. The fourth was that
adequate men should be posted for its maintenance. The other three conditions
were fulfilled. But the fourth of posting people could not be."
(c)  Filling up of Vacancies
24. The Ministry in a written submission made to the Committee had informed that
CRS had withdrawn the authorization due to Railway's failure to post regular
maintenance staff, as stipulated in the authorization letter and the section remained
closed for traffic w.e.f. 12.7.2006.
25. With regard to the steps taken to fill up the vacancies, the Ministry informed
the Committee as under:—
"The staff required for maintenance as per reduced yard stick was sanctioned.
Recruitment to fill up 4701 group "D" posts was initiated as per sanction
issued vide letter No. W/SWR/438/HAS-SBGL dated 13.3.2006 and notification
issued on 21.7.2007. Physical efficiency test was also commenced on
03.01.2008 at 3 places. However, the process had to be postponed
from10.01.2008 on the advice of the Chief Secretary, Home Department,
Government of Karnataka due to widespread local objections, demonstrations
and agitations by certain organisations all over the State. During these
agitations, trains were stopped, railway officers/premises ransacked and
physical efficiency test proceedings were disrupted. General Manager of the
Railway had also requested the State Government on numerous occasions
for providing all necessary assistance for maintaining law and order during
the recruitment proceedings."
26. Member Engineering, Railway Board, however, while deposing before the
Committee on the issue of filling up of vacancies, submitted as:—
"Construction in other areas is in progress but recruitment of men has still
not been done. In Railways for the last about four years hardly any recruitment
has taken place. Now, in the December end recruitment notices have been
issued and we expect that in another four or five months we will be able to
recruit persons and we will then post them immediately on this line."
(d) Target for Completion of  Project
27. Fixing of time line for the completion of project is indeed very important to
ensure timely completion of the project. On being asked whether there was any initial
target fixed for completion of the entire Benguluru-Hassan new line project, the Ministry
in its note stated that there was no initial target fixed for completion of the project.

9
28. When asked to explain as to why the project was being treated as a non-
targeted work, the Ministry in its written submission stated as:—
"This is a new line construction project connecting the stations on existing
rail network i.e. Benguluru and Hassan. Unless these stations are connected
by new line, project cannot be said to be completed. Hence, there will be one
target for the entire project. If small stretches/sections are completed and
trains start playing, this may not yield desired results and will not be financially
viable also. In new line project, unless full line is commissioned, part opening
does not yield much returns."
29. To a pointed query about the time line by which the project was likely to be
completed, the Member Engineering, Railway Board desposed:—
"by 2011, may be in six to eight months, definitely we will commission this
section."
30. However, the Ministry in its written note informed the Committee that it was
not feasible to fix target date for completion of the balance section of the project owing
to land acquisition problems and acute constraint of resources. It was further added
that Government of Karnataka was yet to hand over the required land despite several
requests made of them.
(e) Cost Overrun
31. When Committee enquired about the anticipated cost overrun owing to delay
in completion of the entire project, the Member Engineering, Railway Board in his
deposition before the Committee submitted as under:—
"Regarding Hassan-Benguluru line, this project was sanctioned in the year
1996-97. The length is 166 km; the sanctioned cost of the project was ` 413
crore. The present cost—almost 14 years have passed—is ` 913 crore; we
have spent about ` 395 crore on this line till 31st March, 2010. This year we
spent ` 60 crore more. Totally we spent about ` 455 crore."
(f) Idling of Assets
32. Audit had observed that inordinate delay on the part of the Railway to comply
with the conditions putforth by the CRS had resulted in closure of the line within six
months of its opening rendering the entire investment of ` 140 crore as unproductive
for the last two years. Besides, Railway had to bear dividend liability amounting to
` 18.20 crore on this investment. Expenditure of  ` 0.73 crore was also incurred on track
maintenance and staff posted for the watch and ward duty.
33. When the Committee asked the Ministry to justify the investment of ` 140
crore coupled with dividend liability of ` 18.20 crore and maintenance expenditure of
` 0.73 crore, the Ministry in its response has informed the Committee as under:—
"In any new line project like this one, section can be completed only in
patches as works cannot proceed in all sections simultaneously for various
reasons such as non-availability of land in continuous stretches, availability

10
of funds and permanent way materials, etc. Hence, execution in new line
projects is planned in stages for completion. But it is not necessary that each
completed section could be put to use in operations as in the case of gauge
Conversion or Doubling as the New Line works are always done in virgin area
and traffic will not materialize immediately. The particular section between
Hassan and Shravanabelgola was opened and operated for a noble cause
under the direction of the Government and closure became unavoidable as
the efforts made to get maintenance staff posted got stuck and as continuing
the operation was not viable. This cannot be treated as idling of assets/
infructuous expenditure."

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee note that according to Department of Expenditure as on
25th June, 2010, 4191 Remedial/Corrective Action Taken Notes were pending with
various Ministries/Departments of Government of India whereas according to Audit,
the pendency was 3462 paragraphs as on 31st May, 2010. The Committee desire that
the discrepancy in the data be reconciled and they be apprised of the same. Further,
the Committee noted that 448 paras were pending with the Ministry of Railways
alone. The Committee urge the Ministry to take all necessary measures so as to
submit Action Taken Notes well within the stipulated time period of four months.
2. During the course of examination of the reasons for delay in submission of
Action Taken Notes, the Committee were assured by the Ministry that it would finalise
by 31st March, 2011 at least 50 per cent of the outstanding Action Taken Notes. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry put in place a more effective Monitoring
System and ensure that the Action Taken Notes are furnished well within the period
of four months and apprise them of the tangible outcome of such efforts.
3. The Committee note that for timely submission of Action Taken Notes on the
Audit Paragraphs, a Cell in the Railways is in place. Such a huge pendency of ATNs
with the Railways raises serious questions as to the efficacy and effectiveness of the
Monitoring Cell. The Ministry has also informed that regular follow up is done to
meet the target date fixed in each case. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
procedure, the time line prescribed and the follow up action being taken for timely
submission of ATNs. Further, the Committee were informed by the Ministry that
disposal of pending ATNs was included in the agenda items in the monthly Board
Meetings for four month since July 2010. The status of ATNs was again reviewed in
January, 2011 by Board in its meetings. The Committee are constrained to note that
status of ATNs has been reviewed in January, 2011 i.e. after six months since its
inclusion in the monthly Board Meetings in July, 2010. The Committee therefore
recommend that pendency of ATNs be reviewed regularly to ensure timely disposal of
ATNs. The Committee are happy to note that ATN Adalats/Workshop are also being
organized to resolve any stalemate between the Audit and the Ministry and first such
ATN Adalat/Workshop was held on 31.12.2010. The Committee would, however, like
to be informed about the tangible outcome of these ATN Adalats. Here the Committee
note that the term ATN Adalat has not been used in conventional sense but it is
essentially a workshop organized occasionally for reconciliation of differences
between the Railways and the Audit over ATNs. The Committee would therefore like
to caution the Ministry to refrain from indulging in such terminological ambivalence
causing confusion. The Committee also note the Ministry's categorization of Audit
paras namely Category 'A'-very old paras upto the year 2000, Category 'B'-paras
from year 2001 to 2008 and Category 'C' comprising cases for the year 2008-09.
Though efforts are being made to clear all pending paras and a Special drive is being
11

12
launched to clear Category 'A' cases, the Committee would like to be apprised of the
time line for disposal of ATNs put under various categories.
4. The Committee note that the construction of new broad gauge line between
Hassan and Benguluru via Shravanabelgola (166 kms) at an estimated cost of  `412.91
crore was sanctioned by the Railway Board in the year 1996-97. The construction of
a rail line between Hassan and Shravanabelgola (41.17 km) was completed in
January, 2006 at a cost of `140 crore. However, the Committee note that the revised
cost as on 31st March, 2010 was `913 crore and `455 crore had already been spent
by then. The cost overrun is more than cent percent the sanctioned cost which reflects
improper planning and unconscionable delay in the execution of the project. The
Committee urge the Ministry to make proper and realistic project assessment and
lay down firm procedures for project execution to avoid time and cost overruns. The
Committee would strongly recommend that the reasons for this cost escalation for
this faulty planning and implementation be enquired and action be taken to fix
responsibility so that it would prevent such recurrences.
5. The Committee are constrained to note that there was no initial target fixed for
completion of the entire Benguluru-Hassan new line project. The Committee are
unable to accept the plea of the Ministry that it was not feasible to fix target date for
completion of all sections simultaneously for various reasons. Obviously, in the absence
of any stipulated target, the project completion was delayed inordinately which resulted
in cost overrun. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry henceforth
fix target date(s) for completion of project within the stipulated time frame. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the completion of Benguluru-Hassan rail line
within the year 2011.
6. The Committee find that the Hassan-Shravanabelgola rail line was opened for
passenger traffic on 7 February, 2006 and subsequently closed from 12 July, 2006 as
one of the conditions stipulated by the Commissioner, Railway Safety (CRS) was not
complied with. The Committee find that the CRS had authorized opening of the line to
passenger traffic with the condition that regular open line staff may be posted to
operate and maintain the line within one month from the date of opening. However, the
Ministry did not post regular maintenance staff and this resulted in closure of the
line. Whereas the Committee were assured by the Ministry that vacancies would be
filled up and adequate staff posted on this line. The Committee therefore desire to be
apprised of the action taken to implement the assurance given to them. Further, the
Committee may be apprised of the necessary measures taken to ensure that the
assets created do not remain idle.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
15  November, 2011 Chairman,
24 Kartika, 1933 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE-I OF PUBLIC
ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11) ON "NON-COMPLIANCE BY THE
MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF
ACTION TAKEN NOTES ON THE NON-SELECTED
PARAGRAPHS OF THE C&AG OF INDIA"
HELD ON 22ND DECEMBER, 2010
The Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Wednesday,
the 22nd December, 2010 from 1600 hrs. to 1710 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Rajshekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representative of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General (Railways)
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways
1. Shri Vivek Sahai — Chairman, Railway Board
and ex-officio Principal Secretary to the GOI
2. Shri Samar Jha — Financial Commissioner,
Railways & ex-officio Secretary to the GOI
3. Shri A.P. Mishra — Member Engineering, Railway Board &
ex-officio Secretary to the GOI
4. Shri Sudesh Kumar — Member Electrical, Railway Board &
ex-officio Secretary to the GOI
5. Shri Sanjiv Handa — Member Mechanical, Railway Board &
ex-officio Secretary to the GOI
6. Shri V .N. Tripathi — Member Staff, Railway Board &
ex-officio Secretary to the GOI
13

14
2. At the outset, Hon'ble Convenor , Sub-Committee-I of the Public Accounts
Committee, welcomed the Members and representatives of the Office of the C&AG of
India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
"Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely submission of Action Taken
Notes on the Non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of India".
3. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened
for taking oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Railways on the
subject relating to "Non-compliance by the Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Paragraphs of the C&AG of
India". The Convenor also informed the Members that the meeting will proceed with a
discussion on two paras viz. para 2.5.1 "Uneconomic Branch Lines in Indian Railways"
and para 3.1.1 "Idle Investment on a New Line" of  CAG Report No. CA 19 of 2008-09.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Railways were called in and
the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The representatives
first, briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry in timely
submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs of C&AG. They also, inter alia, threw
light on the current status of pending paras in their Ministry and difficulties faced by
the Ministry in replying to the pending Audit Paragraphs within the stipulated time
frame. The deliberations were also held on the two paras on "Uneconomic Branch
Lines in Indian Railways" and "Idle Investment on a New Line". The representatives
replied to various queries of the members of the Sub-Committee during the sitting.
5. The Convenor then thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Railways for
appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing information in connection
with the examination of the subject. The Convenor also thanked the officers of the
office of the C&AG of India for providing assistance to the Sub-Committee in the
examination of the subject.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2011-12) HELD ON 23RD SEPTEMBER, 2011
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 23rd September, 2011 from
1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
7. Shri Jagdambika Pal
8. Shri Adhi Sankar
9. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
10. Shri K. Sudhakaran
11. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Tariq Anwar
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Naresh Gujral
15. Shri Prakash Javadekar
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
6. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
15

16
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri K.P. Sasidharan — Director General (AB)
2. Ms. Subha Kumar — Director General (Report Central)
3. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director (ESM)
4. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director (AFN)
5. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Principal Director (Railway Audit
Board)
2. **** ****  ****
3. **** **** ****
4. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports, one by one, for
consideration and adoption:
(i) **** **** ****
(ii) **** **** ****
(iii) **** **** ****
(iv) **** **** ****
(v) **** **** ****
(vi) **** **** ****
(vii) **** **** ****
(viii) Draft Report on 'Idle Investment on a New Line'.
5. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all but one Draft Report mentioned
at Sl. No. (vii) above, with some modifications/suggestions.
**** **** ****
6 . **** **** ****
7. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the adopted Draft Reports in
light of the factual verifications, if any, made by the Audit and present them to the
House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
****Part not related to this report.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. N ame of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006.
(A.P)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co. Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28 Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2621,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605001.
TAMIL  NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600014.
UTTAR  PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P.)
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.