ROLE OF TEA BOARD IN TEA
DEVELOPMENT IN INDIA
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Sixty-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2013-2014
HUNDREDTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
100

HUNDREDTH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2013-2014)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ROLE OF TEA BOARD IN TEA DEVELOPMENT
IN INDIA
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Sixty-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.02.2014
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on 06.02.2014
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February, 2014/Magha, 1935 (Saka)

PAC  No.  2027
Price:  ` 57.00
© 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2013-2014) ................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  which  have  been
accepted  by the Government .......................................... 15
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government....................................................... 43
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration.................... 44
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies...................... 46
APPENDICES
Z  I. Minutes  of  the  Sixteenth Sitting of  the Public Accounts
Committee (2013-14) held on 30.01.2014................................ 48
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their Sixty-fifth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha)............................................................................ 50

COMPOSITION OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambidurai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
†18. Shri  Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
††20. Dr. V . Maitreyan
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Smt. Ambika Soni
SECRETARIA T
1.    Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2.    Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
(iii)
* Elected w.e.f. 14th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija V yas appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban
Development & Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his
retirement as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
†† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister
of State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2013-14), having been authorized
by the Committee, do present this Hundredth Report  (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Sixty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on “Role of Tea Board in Tea
Development in India” relating to the Department of Commerce, Ministry of Commerce
and Industry.
2. The Sixty-fifth Report was presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on 16 January,
2013 and tabled in Lok Sabha on 26 February, 2013 and laid in Rajya Sabha on
27 February, 2013. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 17th July, 2013. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted this Report at the sitting held on 30 January, 2014.
Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4.  The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixth-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
31 January, 2014 Chairman,
11 Magha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Sixty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Role of Tea Board in Tea
Development in India' based on C&AG Report No. 10 of  2011-12 (Performance Audit),
Union Government (Scientific Departments) relating to Ministry of Commerce and
Industry.
2. The Sixty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the Speaker,
Lok Sabha on 16 January, 2013 and tabled in the Lok Sabha on 26 February, 2013 and
laid in Rajya Sabha on 27 February, 2013. The Report contained twenty Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
and have been categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1—4, 5, 7—16, 18, 19 and 20
Total: 18
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government:
—NIL—
Total: Nil
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of  Government  have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration:
Para No. 17
Total: 01
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:
Para No. 6
Total: 01
Chapter V

2
3. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department
of Commerce) furnish at the earliest final/conclusive Action Taken Note on the
Observation/Recommendation contained in para No. 6 of their Sixty-fifth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) in respect of which Ministry have furnished interim reply.
4. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed many
systemic and other deficiencies that plague the Tea Board and the tea industry which
inter-alia included failure of Tea Board to effectively discharge its basic regulatory
role with the more than 80 percent of small growers remaining outride the ambit of  Tea
Board; highly tolerant inspection regime coupled with underterring penalties and gross
information deficit on activities of various stakeholders resulting in ineffective control
over the trade; increase in the total area of commercially unproductive bushes posing
a serious threat to the industry with declining productivity; presence of redundant,
rigid and gaping holes in various provisions in the extant laws governing the tea
industry standing in the way to effective regulation; dismal rate of replantation of
aging tea plants despite the launch of the Special Purpose Tea Fund (SPTP) in 2007 to
facilitate large scale plantations; lower increase in price realization from export of
Indian tea due to inferior quality, adverse product mix and other marketing factors;
want of tangible research activities resulting in absence of any patents filed or any
deliverables transferred for the use of tea industry; declining export share; diversion
of funds for plan to Non-Plan expenditure, etc.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
on the observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixty-fifth
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this
Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee will now deal with the Action
Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in
the original Report which either need reiteration or merit comments.
I. Declining Productivity of  Tea
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 2)
6. The Committee in their Sixty-fifth Report had expressed concern over the
declining productivity of tea from 1865 kg per hectare in 1997 to 1663 kg per hectare in
2008, steady decline in the prices fetched by the Indian tea over the last decade as
compared to countries like Sri Lanka and Mauritius, increase in the cost of production
with India having the highest cost of production amongst tea producing countries in
the world and the only country where cost of sales was above the auction realization.
The Committee further observed that while India's production share declined from
41 percent in 1950 to 26 percent in 2008, India's export share had also declined from
48 per cent in 1950 to a dismal 12 percent in 2008 putting it at a mediocre fourth position
in overall world rankings in terms of volume of tea export. In an area where the  country
can take a lot of pride with tea being indigenous to India and a glorious heritage of
taste, what is intriguing is the fact that the import of tea had gone up from
1.37 million kg. in 1992-93 to 25 million kg. in 2009. It was in the above context that the
C&AG decided to conduct a performance audit of the role of Tea Board in the Tea
Development of India and scrutinized records of its functioning covering the period

3
from 2002-03 to 2008-09. The deficiencies observed in Audit were, largely accepted by
the Ministry of Commerce.
7. The Ministry of Commerce in its Action Taken Notes has stated as under:
“It's a fact that India's percentage share in the world market has declined in
terms of quantity of teas from other tea producing countries. But in absolute
terms of quantity and value of tea the export from India has increased. India
has exported 173.73 m. kgs., tea in 1993 (15.03% of world export market). In
2010 India exported 222.02 m. kgs., but the market share is lower. In value
terms too, India has registered an increase. While unit value of tea exported in
1993 was Rs. 65.19 per kg., the unit value of teas exported in 2010 was Rs.
137.75 per kg. thereby, registering an increase of 111.31%.
To develop successful promotional and marketing strategies, Tea Board will
conduct market surveys in the strategically potential markets like Russia
UAE, Iran, USA to capture consumer likes and dislikes and trends during the
12th Five Year Plan. After such thorough market research, Tea Board will
prepare more pro-active measures for strong brand building and differentiated
value addition to tea products as per the consumer demands.
Tea Board has modified two schemes: (i) Scheme for participation in Fairs and
Exhibitions with Tea Board, and (ii) Brand Support Scheme for providing
promotional support to Indian exporters of branded Indian teas in the overseas
markets."
8. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Commerce & Industry
(Department of Commerce) admitted the declining quantity of India's percentage
share in the World Tea Market in absolute terms of quantity of tea and value of tea but
submitted that the export from India has increased with the unit value of tea exported
registering an increase of as high as 111.31% in 2010 as compared to the figures of
1993. The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry's proposal for
promotional & marketing strategies during the XII Plan period and the Tea Board's
plan to conduct market surveys in potential markets in XII Five Year Plan be
implemented expeditiously so that India attains its pre-eminent position in world tea
export.
II. Non-enumeration of Small Tea Growers Resulting in Failure of Tea Board to
Effectively Discharge its Regulatory Role
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 3)
9. The Committee were deeply concerned that even after 57 years of existence of
the Tea Board, as of 2010, 125216 tea growers constituting more than 80 percent of the
small growers continue to remain outside the ambit of the Tea Board and were continuing
tea cultivation without requisite permission in terms of the provisions of the Tea Act,
1953. The Committee observed that non-enumeration of such a large number of small
growers remain one of the most important cause of failure of Tea Board to effectively
discharge its basic regulatory role while also adversely impacting the effectiveness of
its other functions. The Committee's examination revealed that redundant and rigid

4
provisions of the governing Tea Act and the rules framed there understood in the way
of possible facilitation of regularization of these growers. While sections 12 and 14 of
Tea Act, 1953 and Rule 30A of the Tea Rules, 1954 mandates a tea garden owner to
furnish specific documents in support of his ownership/grant/lease of the land, survey
maps, soil suitability reports, etc. for grant of planting permission or registration of the
tea garden, these existing laws simply do not have any provision for post facto planting
permission thereby disabling regularization of plantations already in existence. The
Committee noted that the provision for issuance of permit for planting tea under
sections 12 and 14 of the Tea Act was incorporated to fulfill the country's obligation to
the International Tea Agreement which was in force at the time of enactment of the Act,
the main thrust of which was to regulate over production and glut in the global tea
market by means of earmarked quotas of production. Startlingly, by the Ministry's own
admission, even though the aforesaid Agreement expired way back in 1956, these
archaic and redundant provisions of the Act still continued to be enforced by the Tea
Board. The Committee recommended that sections 12 & 14 of the Tea Act may be
suitably amended.
10. In its Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Commerce has stated as under:
"Enumeration of Small Tea Growers in all the major tea growing States is
underway either with the help of the concerned State Governments or directly
through the field offices of the Board. The survey in Assam and Himachal
Pradesh  has since been completed. In Tripura and South India it is nearing
completion. Survey in West Bengal has also been completed, the final report
is awaited. The Tea Board's proposal for deletion of section 12 to section 16
of the Tea Act is under active consideration of the Government."
11. The Committee are pleased to note that the Tea Board has initiated steps to
undertake the enumeration work of small tea growers in all the major tea growing
States with requisite surveys already completed in some States. The Committee are,
however, concerned to note that the issue of amendment/deletion of section 12 to 16 of
the Tea Act which contains archaic and redundant provisions standing in the way of
possible facilitation of regularization of small tea growers, has been hanging fire for
long. The Committee therefore reiterate that the concerned State Governments should
complete the task of enumeration in a time bound manner and concrete efforts be
made for amending/deletion of sections 12 to 16 of  Tea Act expeditiously.
III.  Need for Alternate Documentary Evidence for Identification of Small Tea
Growers and also Sensitization Drive for Enlistment
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 4)
12. The Committee were dismayed to find that the difficulties faced by the small
growers are further compounded as they are required to produce documentary evidence
of legal ownership of the land under plantation and other mandatory supporting records
for registration. Land being a State subject, State Governments, grappling with this
onerous responsibility of establishing title deeds of the area under tea cultivation,
were already issuing possession certificates issued to them. The Committee however,
found that for availing individual benefits such as subsidy for replanting/rejuvenation

5
or irrigation, the grower still needs to establish legal ownership of the land under
cultivation, for which requisite revision of relevant providions of the extant laws remains
the only solution. Considering the imperatives of expeditious enumeration of small tea
growers with a view to bringing them under the ambit of the regulatory framework, the
Committee desired that the Ministry make an all out effort towards a two pronged
strategy to regularize all existing unlisted growers within a specific time-frame while
also simultaneously enforcing a stringent registration/enlistment of any new plantation.
To this end, the Committee desired the Ministry to also explore other alternate means
of enlistment such as issue of valid identity cards to 'qualified tea growers', not
necessarily linked to their ownership of land under cultivation so that genuine tea
growers are not deprived of the benefits due to them for want of land documents. The
Committee further recommended that such efforts should be adequately augmented
by an aggressive sensitization drive on the benefits of registration/enlistment and also
provision of appropriate platforms and incentives to motivate these excluded small tea
growers to come forward on their own to enlist themselves. The Committee observed
that the Ministry's ongoing endeavour for a complete census to create a database of
small tea growers throgh surveys by State Governments enlistment from growers
Associations, Self Help Groups, etc., through long overdue and much belated, are
nevertheless the need for the hour and desired that the same should be expeditiously
carried out. The Committee also hope that the setting up o a separate Small Growers
Directorate and the proposed IT based National Programme on Tea Regulation for a
complete computerized data on tea growers by the  12th Five Year Plan period would
pave the way for a more robust and effective regulation of the Tea Industry. The
Committee requested the Ministry to keep them apprised.
13. In its Action Taken Notes, the Ministry stated:
“Issue of valid identity cards to qualified tea growers
Tea Board has already launched a Project for issuance of Bio-Metric cards to
the small tea growers for establishing their valid identify. This Bio-Metric
card is not linked with their ownership right over the land under tea cultivation
rather it would help them in getting all assistance from the Board through self
help groups/producer societies. Holding bio-metric card is one of the
pre-requisites for the growers for securing membership of self help groups/
producer societies.
Sensitization drive on the benefits of enlistment
One of the primary tasks assigned to the development officers deployed
under the Small Grower Development Directorate is to carry out a complete
enumeration of the small growers under their respective area jurisdiction and
issue each and every grower with a bio-metric card. Secondly, the growers are
to be motivated to become members of the SHG/Producer societies to reap
collectively all the benefits being made available through the Plan schemes to
Tea Board.

6
Status of survey of Small Tea Growers (STG) in various States
1. Assam: As reported earlier, first phase of survey was completed in
14 districts. The 2nd phase covering the remaining 13 districts has also since
been completed. While the full report on the 1st phase is available, the same
for the 2nd phase is awaited. The combined survey data for the two phases
made available indicate that the total number of growers in the State add up to
77,879 covering an area of 1,40,935 acres. Tea Board has initiated the process
of physical verification and issuing bio-metric cards to the growers.
2. West Bengal: The field survey has been completed and final report is
awaited from the State Government. The survey data made available to the
Board indicate that there are 21,375 growers holding tea are of 88,963 acres.
3. Tripura: The survey is under progress. So far, 2255 growers holding an
area of 5398 acres have been enumerated. The State Government has indicated
that the complete formal report will be furnished shortly.
4. Himachal Pradesh: The survey has been completed and report received
indicates that there are, 3123 growers holding an area of 1693 acres.
5. South India: The zonal office of the Board has so far enumerated 42104
growers covering the total tea area of 88994 acres spread over three States,
namely, Tamil Nadu (36456 growers), Kerala (5657 growers) and Karnataka
(01 grower).
Summary
Sl. State No. of Growers Tea Area in acres
No. enumerated
1. Assam 77879 140935
2. West Bengal 21375 88963
3. Tripura 2255 5398
4. Himachal Pradesh 3123 1693
5. South India 42104 88994
Total 146736 325983
Establishment of separate Directorate for Small Tea Growers
The head office of the Directorate has been established at Dibrugarh in Assam
and it became functional from 1st April, 2013. First batch of 39 technical
officers have joined the Directorate and they are presently undergoing training.
The 2nd batch is expected to join shortly.

7
Deployment of Development Officers at Grass Root Level
It is proposed to deploy the Development Officers (DO) in all the important
clusters where the small growers are concentrated so as to reach out to 3000
to 5000 growers by one DO. With such placement, it is endeavoured to reach
out to every small tea grower in the country. The job responsibilities of the
DOs include identification and enumeration small growers, measurement of
tea area owned by them, actual production of green leaf and the factories to
which they supply the green leaf. Each of the growers would be provided
with a bio-metric identification card and the growers would be motivated to
become member of SHG/Producer Society, which in turn could establish a
linkage with a Bought Leaf Factory or an estate factory. By establishing such
one to one linkage, it would be possible to ensure a transparent mechanism
for auguring a fair price for the green leaf supplied by the growers.
Development of Factory Advisory Officers
The Factory Advisory Officers (FAO) would be placed in all the tea growing
regions for providing technical support to the tea factories for adopting
Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) and they will be closely monitoring
performance of the factories, with regard to the quality of green leaf procured,
type of tea made, mode of disposal, price realized and green leaf price paid to
the growers etc.
National Programme on Tea Regulation
The Tea Board's proposal for launching a National Programme for Tea
Regulation during the XII Plan period is under active consideration of the
Government."
14. The Committee are pleased to note that in pursuance of their
recommendations, the Ministry has initiated various measures for registration of
small tea growers including the Project for issuance of high tech Bio-Metric cards to
small tea growers for establishing their valid identity for availing benefits of schemes
of the Tea Board. The Committee desire that they be apprised of the tangible benefits
acrued to the small tea grower as a result of the Ministry's endeavour towards
enlistment. Appreciative of the proposal of the Tea Board for launching a National
Programme for T ea Regulation during the XII Plan period, the Committee urge that
the programme be launched expeditiously and the Committee apprised.
IV . Dismal Rate of Replantation of Aging Commercially Non-Productive Tea Plants
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 10)
15. The Committee were appalled to find that even after the launch of the Special
Purpose Tea Fund (SPTF) in 2007 to facilitate large scale plantations, the rate of
re-plantation averaged at 1.53 percent per annum which hitherto hovered disally at
0.5 percent per annum. The issue of the imperative need for a continuous and steady
re-plantation had engaged the attention of the Committee since 1969 and the PAC
(1987-88) in their 107th Report of 8th Lok Sabha, particularly observed that the failure
of the Tea Board of India to ensure re-plantation at the rate of 2 percent per annum of
the total planted area as per the Scheme intimated to the PAC (1969-70) affected the

8
industry both quantitatively and qualitatively and had urged for close monitoring of
the progress of plantation in coordination with planaters, research bodies and plantation
workers. While admitting that achievement of 2 percent per annum target of re-plantation
depends largely on the industry's initiative and availability of resources for investment,
the Ministry of Commerce in their Action Taken Notes on the aforesaid observation
had stated that a National Committee was set up to draw up a long term strategy and
plan for the tea industry. The Committee were constrained to observe that the gravity
of the present day crisis facing the Indian tea industry could perhaps been avoided
had the Ministry taken up earnest action on the observations/recommendations of the
earlier PACs for effective implementation. While reiterating their earlier recommendation
that realistic and achievable targets for re-plantation be fixed after a scientific and
coherent assessment of fund needs and mobilization of all resources including
technological know-how to ensure achievement of the targets fo fixed, the Committee
observed that the need of the hour called for serious retrospection on the part of the
Ministry and the Tea Board and come forth with a comprehensive and concrete plan of
action for rejuvenation of our tea industry, increase in production, productivity and for
preserving its quality and image. The current domestic demand for tea as well as global
tea market must factor in while preparing such a plan, in consultation with all stakeholders
as well as experts and scientists connected with the tea industry. In their considered
view all out and comprehensive strategy must be evolved in order to secure the
pre-eminent position of Indian tea in the world trade.
16. The Ministry in its Action Taken Notes submitted as under:
“Due importance has been given to the recommendations of the Committee
with regard avolving a comprehensive and concrete plan of action for
rejuvenation of our tea industry; increase in production, productivity and for
preserving its quality and image. Factoring of current domstic demand for tea
as well as global tea market to secure the pre-eminent position of Indian tea in
the world trade.
While preparing the strategic plan of action for the XII Plan period, basides
the baseline survey of all tea gardens in the country, an elaborate exercise
had been undertaken in consultation with all stakeholders as well as experts
and scientists connected with the tea industry. The domestic as well as export
demands were factored in while estimating the targets of production for the
XII Plan period in the Tea Board's proposal.
In keeping with the production and export targets, XII Plan schemes aimed at
increasing production, productivity, improving quality and product mix, market
promotion, workers welfare and R&D support measures have been formulated
in the Tea Board's proposal."
17. In view of the imperative need for the sustained and steady re-plantation to
replace the aging tea plants, which had also engaged the attention of PAC (1969-70)
and PAC (1987-88), the Committee had recommended for serious retrospection on
the part of the Ministry and the Tea Board to come forth with a comprehensive and
concrete plan of action for rejuvenation of our tea industry for increase in production,

9
productivity and for preserving its quality and image. The Committee observe that the
Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry contains assurance that the
recommendation of the Committee would be given due importance while preparing
the strategic Plan of Action for the XII Plan period but significantly no clear targets
for re-plantation of tea gardens have been given. The Committee therefore urge the
Government to fix clear targets for tea re-plantation, year-wise and they be apprised.
V . Want of Tangible Research Activities and Need for Stipulation of Stringent
Regulation for Enforcement of Mandatory Standards of Indian Tea
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 15)
18. The Committee were concerned to note the Audit findings that during the
period under review neither any deliverables were transferred for the use of the tea
industry nor were any patents filed indicating want of tangible research activities. The
Committee were of the considered view that continuous renovation of field assets and
Research & Development on a sound footing covering not only technologies and
processes but also financial, organizational, managerial and marketing aspects are
essential for sustainable growth in both quality and quantity tea production. Admittedly,
research work on various areas viz. integrated nutrient management; development of
new superior tea cultivars with higher yield, quality and resistance to drought, biotic
stresses, etc; innovative approaches to tea manufacturing and processing
technologies; integrated package for electronic essential for quality testing/monitoring
of tea; quality improvement and value added tea products; pest control and disease
management; effect of climate change in tea; and health benefits of tea were being
carried out by various research institutes. The Committee desired that the research
should produce quantifiable and positive outcomes backed by requisite statistical
data on the input output co-relation on the investments made vis-a-vis productivity
and quality enhancement. Stately, tea factories are also being advised to go in for
ISO 22000 HACCP certification as part of their modernization drive to raise the quality
of tea to confirm to norms of ISO 3720, the international standard for tea. The Committee
emphasised that such certifications have become a compelling necessity as they provide
the much needed credibility and brand image to Indian tea products in the international
market. The Committee, therefore desire that the Tea Board to come out the stringent
regulations for effective enforcement of the mandatory standards and also encouraged
additional accreditations which though not mandatory are nevertheless best adhered
to so as to gain further competencies and brand building in global tea marketing.
19. In its Action Taken Note the Ministry of Commerce and Industry stated as
under:
“Tea Board while monitoring and evaluating ongoing research activities
conducted by three Tea Research Institutes (TRA, UPASI and DTR&DC) in
India advised to the research organizations for generating tangible results/
information in the form of technology development/commercialization,
patenting, research publication etc. Research Evaluation Committee meeting
organized by Tea Board used to deliberate the above issues in line with the
requirement of the industry.

10
During the period under report a large number of technology were developed/
commercialized and provided to the industry for its utilization. Also, a patent
(microbial kit) was filed for the detection of microbes in the tea factory
machineries. To other products (green p3 as plant defense booster and
polyphenol reached tea tablets) were developed and will be processed for
patenting. Two clonal cultivars were developed for the utilization of tea
industry and five clones are under final stage of evaluation. Five seed varieties
have undergone trial and at their final stage of evaluation. More than hundred
research papers have been published in different national and international
journals.
The following salient achievements are noted:
1. Package of practices was developed for organic tea cultivation for
different plantation areas (Darjeeling, Assam and South India).
2. Promising Phosphorous solubilizing bacteria isolated from Darjeeling
tea soil are ready to be used to developed bio-fertilizers (phosphate
solubilizing) for Darjeeling tea industry.
3. New planting design for mechanical harvesting was developed.
4. Commercialization was done for consortia of ten bacterial biocontrol
agents against tea disease.
5. Recommendation was released for ammonium salt of glyphosate as a
post emergence herbicide for weed control in tea.
6. Mass production technique of biocontrol agents have been standardize
and recommended to the industry for its preparation.
7. A technology was developed for biocontrol of termite pest in tea.
8. Developed technology for preparation of green & black soluble tea
(which can be used as antioxidant, beverage and food additives).
9. Developed technology for Phosphate enriched vermicompost and
vermiwash for foliar application.
The stress is on focused industry driven tea research wherein the outputs are
quantifiable and applicable to the industry.
To ensure uniform minimum standard for all tea factories, Tea Board has
asked TRA and UPASI to standardize tea manufacturing process to ensure
quality tea production for separating and removing common impurities in
Tea, like sand, stones, non-magnetic tramp metal pieces, ash etc. and magnetic
impurities like iron and rust powder, de-stoner, de-dust etc., grade separator,
which can be followed uniformly all over country."
20. The Committee are happy to note that in pursuance of their recommendation,
the Ministry has made tangible achievement in the field of Tea Research and
Development. However, the Committee find that the reply of the Ministry is completely

11
silent on the important aspect of the Committee's recommendation for prescribing
stringent regulations for enforcement of mandatory standards for quality of Indian
tea. What is further disquieting is that despite the oft-repeated concern expressed by
the Committee to gain further competencies and brand building in global tea
marketing by encouraging additional accreditions, there is no mention of the same in
the Action Taken Notes of the Ministry. The Committee would like the Government to
take this issue with utmost seriousness and action taken in this regard may be
apprised to them.
VI. Dismal Performance in the Exports sectors of the Tea Industry
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 17)
21. Dismal performance in the exports sector of the tea industry revealed itself in
the declining export share from 15.17 percent in 1993 to 11.15 percent in 2010. The
Committee noted with profound concern that market diversification efforts including
exploring new markets through the overseas offices of  Tea Board and other promotional
activities have not yielded any effective results and the three schemes for promoting
exports viz., Export Incentive Scheme. Transport Subsidy Scheme and Export Promotion
Scheme have not made even marginal impact having benefited a mere 11 percent of
total exporters. Intriguingly, ` 36 crore was spent on domestic promotion campaign
without specifying the outcomes achieved. The Committee observe that enhanced
differentiated customer needs all over the world changing the hitherto bulk tea demand
as a commodity to that of value added tea products in branded packs underlies the
imperatives of product diversification for increasing global market share of Indian tea.
The Committee had made a similar recommendation as early as 1969, but unfortunately
the counsel remained largely unheeded. Further, keeping in view that branding and
value addition go hand in hand and have emerged as the best strategy to retain
customer, the Committee recommended that the Tea Board initiate more pro-active
measures for strong brand building and differentiated value addition to tea products
as per the consumer demands after conducting a thorough market research. The
Committee also desired that the Tea Board should make tangible efforts to continuously
identify and imbibe evolving successful marketing strategies such as niche marketing,
cost leadership, extensive distribution networks, customer focus and quick delivery of
products while also moving towards an efficient e-marketing strategy to capture the
vast sale potential of Indian tea.
22. In its Action Taken Notes, the Ministry stated as under:
“Its a fact that India's percentage share in the world market has declined in
terms of quantity of teas from other tea producing countries. But in absolute
terms of quantity and value of tea the export from India has increased. India
has exported 173.73 m. kgs., tea in 1993 (15.03% of world export market).
In 2010 India exported 222.02 m. kgs., but the market share is lower. In
value terms too, India has registered an increase. While unit value of tea
exported in 1993 was ` 65.19 per kg., the unit value of teas exported
in 2010 was ` 137.75 per kg. thereby, registering an increase of
111.31%.

12
To develop successful promotional and marketing strategies, Tea Board will
conduct market surveys in the strategically potential markets like Russia
UAE, Iran, USA to capture consumer likes and dislikes and trends during the
12th Five Year Plan. After such thorough market research Tea Board will
prepare more proactive measures for strong brand building and differentiated
value addition to tea products as per the consumer demands.
Tea Board has modified two schemes (i) Scheme for participation in Fairs and
Exhibitions with Tea Board, and (ii) Brand Support Scheme for providing
promotional support to Indian exporters of branded Indian teas in the overseas
markets."
23. The Committee note the assurance of the Government that the Tea Board
will conduct market surveys in the strategically potential markets like Russia, UAE,
Iran, USA to capture consumer likes and dislikes in order to develop successful
promotional and marketing strategies and thereafter prepare strong brand building
measures for Indian tea. The Tea Board has  notably modified two schemes for providing
promotional support to Indian tea exporters. The Committee should like to be apprised
of the outcome of these measures in due course.
VII. S trategic Vision to meet the Challenge of Restoring the Country to its Original
First Position in the Global Tea Market
Observation/Recommendation (Para No. 20)
24. The Committee found that many systemic and other deficiencies plague the
Tea Board and the Tea Industry. In order to meet the growing challenges of a fiercely
competitive global trade in tea, steep decline in India's tea export from 48% to 12%, the
Tea Board needs to initiate urgent measures to address the problems so that India
attains its pre-eminent position in terms of quality and quantity of tea produced. The
Committee further recommended that the small growers may also be brought within the
purview of the Tea Board by effecting necessary amendments in the Tea Act while
ensuring that statutory amenities and facilities are provided to the tea plantation
workers including health and education of their families. The Committee also reiterated
the recommendation of the Departmentally Related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Commerce made in their 102nd Report of 15th Lok Sabha pertaining to consideration
for a compensation package for workers laid off during the gestation period of
re-plantation. The Committee, therefore, ardently hoped that the strategic vision of the
Ministry of Commerce to meet these challenges would accomplish not only its mission
of restoring the country to its deserved original position in the global tea market but
also fulfil its social obligations of a more promising standard of living of all those who
are dependent on the fortunes of the tea industry. The Committee therefore reiterated
the need for comprehensive review of the extant legislation and the working of the
Tea Board in order to boost production and productivity of Indian tea and to ameliorate
the living conditions of the workers engaged in the tea industry.

13
25. The Ministry in its Action Taken Note submitted as under:
“compensation package for workers laid off during the gestation period of
re-plantation":
Uprooting and replanting does not render any worker being laid off during
the gestation period. In fact, more number of man days is required for uprooting
and replantation and upkeep of the young plantations during the gestation
period. Regular and annual programmes of replanting activity would generate
additional work relating to rising of nurseries, uprooting, preparation of land
for replanting and after care of young tea plants during gestation period.
While working out compensation package for the replantation during the
12th Plan Period, as proposed by the Tea Board, revenue loss arising out of
the crop loss during the gestation period of 5 years from uprooting of old tea
has also been factored in. The revised package is expected to encourage the
tea gardens to take up replanting in right earnest.
“providing amenities and facilities to the tea plantation workers including
health and education of their families”:
A comprehensive HRD scheme has been formulated for implementation during
the 12th Five Year Plan. The scheme provides for extending various facilities
for the tea garden workers towards improving health, hygiene of the workers’
families and education of the wards of the tea garden workers.
Initiation of suitable measures to address the growing challenges of the tea
industry so that India attains its pre-eminent position in terms of quality and
quantity of tea produced.
Due importance has been given to the recommendations of the Committee
with regard evolving a comprehensive and concrete plan of action for
rejuvenation of our tea industry, increase in production, productivity and for
preserving its quality and image. Factoring of current domestic demand for
tea as well as global tea market to secure the pre-eminent position of Indian
tea in the world trade.
While preparing the strategic plan of action for the XII Plan period besides
the baseline survey of all the tea gardens in the country, an elaborate exercise
had been undertaken in consultation with all stakeholders as well as experts
and scientists connected with the  tea industry. The domestic as well as
export demands were factored in while estimating the targets of production
for the XII Plan period.
In keeping with the production and export targets, XII Plan schemes aimed at
increasing production, productivity, improving quality and product mix, market
promotion, workers welfare and R&D support measures have been formulated
and under consideration of the Government.

14
Comprehensive amendment of the Tea Act
In order to make the Tea Act more relevant to the present day context and to
face the emerging challenges, a comprehensive amendment of the Tea Act is
under consideration of the Government. It includes substantial increase in
the penalties for major contraventions as well.
“Review of working of Tea Board”:
The Indian Institute of Management, Kolkata has been engaged for
undertaking a study on the organization structure and management of
Tea Board and to suggest suitable measures for improving working efficiency
of the Board. The study is under progress and focus areas of the study
include the following areas:
(i) To review the functioning of the organization.
(ii) To suggest systemic changes in the organization structure and
associated roles and responsibilities of its employees.
(iii) To suggest mechanism for data capture and dissemination.
(iv) To suggest improvements in processes so that routine queries of the
top management can be answered more quickly and more accurately.
(v) To review existing use of Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) and to suggest changes, if any, for improvement and efficiency.
26. The Committee take note of the various initiatives taken by the Ministry for
restoring the country to its deserved original position in the global tea market. The
Committee, however, exhort the Ministry to ramp up its efforts so that India restores
its pre-eminent position in world tea export. Further, the Committee ardently urge
the Government to ameliorate the living conditions of the tea plantation workers and
the rules regarding compensation package for workers laid off during gestation
period of re-plantation may also be reviewed.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
The Tea Board of India came into being, as a statutory body under the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry, in the year 1954 and remains the apex body for overall development of
tea industry in India. Its functions, as defined under Section 4 of the Tea Act, 1953 span across
a wide spectrum and inter-alia include developmental, regulatory, research, marketing and
promotional activities. Various aspects of the working of the Tea Board had been examined by
earlier PACs and rampant deficiencies in its performance pointed out time and again. The
Committee, however, observe that despite their earlier recommendations/observations to
overcome such lacunae, the Government have not been able to put in place the much needed
corrective mechanism. The PAC (1969-70) and PAC (1987-88) had recommended for development
of alternative markets and exploration for expansion into emerging markets of developing countries,
association of competent personnel engaged in the trade for export promotion, review of
functioning of Tea Centres abroad, encouragement for quality tea production especially Darjeeling
tea, product diversification and value addition to tea, augmentation of research work on tea and
dissemination of its results to the planters for practical application, review of the requirement
of quantitative growth and qualitative improvement of tea industry which had been affected due
to the Government's failure to make a realistic assessment of actual funding needs for plantation
of tea and also failure to ensure re-plantation, review of the whole question of subsidy vis-a-vis
further growth of the Industry, etc. The Committee find that many of these observations hold
relevance in equal measure and reverberate in their current findings. This is symptomatic of the
systemic failure plaguing the T ea Board and undoubtedly reveals the extent of
complacency that has seeped into its functioning while also exposing its unpreparedness
to rise to the growing challenges of a fiercely competitive global trade in tea as reflected
by the relegation of the country's ranking to the second position with China overtaking
India which hitherto was the reigning top tea producer in the world for nearly a century.
[Para 1 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Keeping in view the increasing competition in the world market, five strategically important
markets viz. U.S.A., Russia, Kazakhstan, Iran and Egypt have been selected for extensive and
intensive promotional intervention through execution of five specific activities over five years.
The activities identified are 'Extensive promotion of India Tea Logo (familiarization/creating
awareness)', 'Engagement with the local trading community', 'Consumer-oriented promotion',
'Utilization of Social Media' and 'Focus 
on export of value-added teas by putting in place
infrastructure enablers'.
15
S-3/E/REPORT 2014/4186LS/4186LS(1-25)

16
The above countries were selected based on the parameters of "Market
Attractiveness and Potentiality" and "Ability to compete by the Indian Tea Industry".
The foremost objective of the entire exercise is to position. "Indian Tea" as an over-
arching umbrella brand under which five identified promotional activities would be
designed, coordinated and implemented through reinforcing "Brand India" connects
amongst the target trade and consumers. This is expected to result in prominent brand
recall for "Indian Tea" over the short to medium term so as to translate into significant
increase in value market shares in the targeted markets for years to come. The country-
specific activities identified have been planned for implementation through event
management/advertising agencies, who would be guided by dedicated Project
Management Groups (PMGs) constituted for the respective countries.
Many tea promotion events have been successfully organized in 5-5-5 countries
except Egypt. The event in Iran, Russia, Kazakhstan and USA have been highly
appreciated by the Exporters as well as Importers and has resulted in increased
awareness of Indian tea among local consumers and helped in enhancement of visibility
of packaged teas containing Indian tea. As a positive development there have been
signing of several MoUs for Indian Tea Promotion, like MoU between Indian Tea
Association and Iranian Tea Association in Iran, MoU between Rusteacoffee
Association and Tea Board in Russia.
Special Advertisement is being released in leading overseas Trade journals and
electronic media, Journalists are being invited to India to have a firsthand knowledge
on Indian tea industry.
For visual advertisement, facebook page has been launched in Russian language
targeted towards Russian and Kazak consumers. The process for utilizing social  media
in an aggressive way is under process.
In store promotion both in Russia and Kazakhstan is also being planned where
leading Indian packaged tea brands shall be displayed in shelves of popular
departmental stores.
For promoting  Indian Brand, the use of Indian Tea Logos on 100% Indian tea
packets is being streamlined for brand promotion purpose. Negotiation with popular
tea brands in Russia for the purpose of putting Indian tea logo on their package are in
final stage.
Tea Park development is in progress at Siliguri (West Bengal) and others are
proposed at Guwahati and Kolkata (in Kolkata Port Trust area).
For promoting tea consumption as a health wellness and lifestyle drink especially
among youth, opening of Tea Boutiques by providing financial assistance to
entrepreneurs is under process.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller  and Auditor General
Ministry has outlined the action taken and proposed to be taken for Tea
promotion. The action taken by Tea Board for promotion of Tea in four countries and
plans of action contemplated for brand promotion were verified with reference to

17
relevant documents and found to be correct. Most of the actions were taken only
during last one to two years and some of the proposed actions were included in the
XII plan period, which is yet to be approved by Government. The ultimate result of
such initiatives would only be known after sometime. Hence, no further comments.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce  O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note the declining productivity of tea from
1865 kg. per hectare in 1997 to 1663 kg. per hectare in 2008, steady decline in the
prices fetched by the Indian tea over the last decade as compared to countries like
Sri Lanka and Mauritius, increase in the cost of production with India having the
highest cost of production amongst tea producing countries in the world and the only
country where cost of sales was above the auction realization. The Committee further
observe that while India's production share declined from 41 percent in 1950 to
26 percent in 2008, India's export share had also declined from 48 percent in 1950 to a
dismal 12 percent in 2008 putting it at a mediocre fourth position in overall world
rankings in terms of volume of tea export. In an area where the country can take a lot of
pride with tea being indigenous to India and a glorious heritage of taste, what is
intriguing is the fact that the import of tea had gone up from 1.37 million kg. in 1992-93
to 25 million kg. in 2009. It was in the above context that the C & AG decided to conduct
a performance audit of the role of Tea Board in the Tea Development of India and
scrutinized records of its functioning covering the period from 2002-03 to 2008-09. The
deficiencies observed in Audit were, largely accepted by the Ministry of Commerce.
[Para 2 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It's a fact that India's percentage share in the world maket has declined in terms
of quantity of teas from other tea producing countries. But in absolute terms of quantity
and value of tea the export from India has increased. India has exported 173.73 m. kgs,
tea in 1993 (15.03% of world export market). In 2010 India exported 222.02 m. kgs. but
the market share is lower. In value terms too, India has registered an increase. While
unit value of tea exported in 1993 was Rs. 65.19 per kg., the unit value of teas exported
in 2010 was Rs. 137.75 per kg. thereby, registering an increase of 111.31%.
To develop successful promotional and marketing strategies, Tea Board will
conduct market surveys in the strategically potential markets like Russia, UAE, Iran,
USA to capture consumer likes and dislikes and treands during the 12th  Five Year
Plan. After such thorough market research, Tea Board will prepare more pro active
measures for strong brand building and differentiated value addition to tea products
as per the consumer demands.
Tea Board has modified two schemes (i) Scheme for participation in Fairs and
Exhibitions with Tea Board, and (ii) Brand Support Scheme for providing promotional
support to Indian exporters of branded Indian teas in the overseas markets.

18
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
While accepting the Committee's contention, the Ministry has outlined the
promotional and marketing strategies to be undertaken during XII Plan period. Tea
Board's plan to conduct market surveys in potential markets in XII Five Year plan is at
proposal stage. Further, out of two schemes mentioned in the reply, "Brand Support
Scheme" was not a modified scheme, rather it is a new scheme proposed to be
implemented during XII Plan period and "schemes for participation in Fairs and
Exhibitions" which was originally implemented in XI Plan period was modified only in
April 2013 for implementation during XII Plan period.
The effectiveness of these two schemes and proposed market survey in potential
markets cannot be commented at this stage unless some quantifiable benefits accrue.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated  12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are deeply concerned that even after 57 years of existence of the
Tea Board, as of 2010, 125216 tea growers constituting more than 80 per cent of the
small growers continue to remain outside the ambit of the Tea Board and are continuing
tea cultivation without requisite permission in terms of the provisions of the Tea Act,
1953. The Committee observe that non-enumeration of such a large number of small
growers remains one of the most important cause of failure of Tea Board to effectively
discharge its basic regulatory role while also adversely impacting the effectiveness of
its other functions. The Committee's examination revealed that redundant and rigid
provisions of the governing Tea Act and the rules framed thereunder stood in the way
of possible facilitation of regularization of these growers. While sections 12 and 14 of
Tea Act, 1953 and Rule 30A of the Tea Rules, 1954 mandates a tea garden owner to
furnish specific documents in support of his ownership/grant/lease of the land, survey
maps, soil suitability reports, etc. for grant of planting permission or registration of the
tea garden, these existing laws simply do not have any provision for post facto planting
permission thereby disabling regularization of plantations already in existence. The
Committee note that the provision for issuance of permit for planting tea under sections
12 and 14 of the Tea Act was incorporated to fulfil the country's obligation to the
International Tea Agreement which was in force at the time of enactment of the Act, the
main thrust of which was to regulate over production and glut in the global tea market
by means of earmarked quotas of production. Startlingly, by the Ministry's own
admission, even though the aforesaid Agreement expired way back in 1956, these
archaic and redundant provisions of the Act still continue to be enforced by the
Tea Board. The Committee recommends that Sections 12 and 14 of the Tea Act may be
suitably amended.
[Para 3 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

19
Action Taken
Enumeration of Small Tea Growers in all the major tea growing States is underway
either with the help of the concerned State Governments or directly through the field
offices of the Board. The survey in Assam and Himachal Pradesh has since been
completed. In Tripura and South India it is nearing completion. Survey in West Bengal
has also been completed, the final report is awaited.
The Tea Board's proposal for deletion of Section 12 to Section 16 of the Tea Act
is under active consideration of the Government.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
The Enumeration work as stated in the reply is yet to be completed in all respect
to achieve the desired objective. The proposal for deletion of Section 12 to Section 16
of the Tea Act, 1953 has not been sent to Government as yet. Though the reply is
factually incorrect to this extent, the fact remains that Tea Board has initiated steps for
amending the concerned sections of the Tea Act as recommended by the Committee.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are dismayed to find that the difficulties faced by the small
growers are further compounded as they are required to produce documentary evidence
of legal ownership of the land under plantation and other mandatory supporting
records for registration. Land being a State subject, State Governments, grappling
with this onerous responsibility of establishing title deeds of the area under tea
cultivation, were already issuing possession certificates issued to them. The Committee
however, find that for availing individual benefits such as subsidy for replanting/
rejuvenation or irrigation, the grower still needs to establish legal ownership of the
land under cultivation, for which requisite revision of relevant provisions of the extant
laws remains the only solution. Considering the imperatives of expenditious
enumeration of small tea growers with a view to bringing them under the ambit of the
regulatory framework, the Committee desire that the Ministry make an all out effort
towards a two pronged strategy to regularize all existing unlisted growers within a
specific timeframe while also simultaneously enforcing a stringent registration/
enlistment of any new plantation. To this end, the Committee desire the Ministry to
also explore other alternate means of enlistment such as issue of valid identity cards to
'qualified tea growers', not necessarily linked to their ownership of land under cultivation
so that genuine tea growers are not deprived of the benefits due to them for want of
land documents. The Committee further recommend that such efforts should be
adequately augmented by an aggressive sensitization drive on the benefits of
registration/enlistment and also provision of appropropriate platforms and incentives
to motivate these excluded small tea growers to come forward on their own to enlist
themselves. The Committee observe that the Ministry's ongoing endeavour for a
complete census to create a database of small tea growers through surveys by State

20
Governments enlistment from growers Associations, Self Help Groups, etc., though
long overdue and much belated, are nevertheless the need of the hour and desire that
the same should be expenditiously carried out.  The Committee also hope that the
setting up of a separate Small Growers Directorate and the proposed IT based National
Programme on Tea Regulation for a complete computerized date on tea growers by the
12th Five Year Plan period would pave the way for a more robust and effective regulation
of the Industry. The Committee would like the Ministry to keep them apprised.
[Para 4 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
 (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Issue of valid identity cards to qualified tea growers
Tea Board has already launched a Project for issuance of Bio-Metric cards to the
small tea growers for establishing their valid identity. This Bio-Metric card is not linked
with their ownership right over the land under tea cultivation rather it would help them
in getting all assistance from the Board through self help groups/producer societies.
Holding bio-metric card is one of the pre-requisites for the growers for securing
membership of self help groups/producer societies.
Sensitization drive on the benefits of enlistment
One of the primary tasks assigned to the development officers deployed under
the Small Grower Development Directorate is to carry out a complete enumeration of
the small growers under thier respective area jurisdiction and issue each and every
grower with a bio-metric card. Secondly, the growers are to be motivated to become
members of the SHG/Produce societies to reap collectively all the benefits being made
available through the Plan schemes of Tea Board.
Status of survey of Small Tea Growers (STG) in various States
1. Assam: As reported earlier, first phase of survey was completed in 14 districts.
The 2nd phase covering the remaining 13 districts has also since been completed.
While the full report on the 1st phase is available, the same for the 2nd phase is
awaited. The combined survey data for the two phase made available indicate that the
total number of growers in the State add up to 77,879 covering an area of 1,40,935 acres.
Tea Board has initiated the process of physical verification and issuing bio-metric
cards to the growers.
2. West Bengal: The field survey has been completed and final report is awaited
from the State Government. The survey data made available to the Board indicate that
there are 21,375 growers holding tea area of 88,963 acres.
3. Tripura: The survey is under progress. So far, 2255 growers holding an area of
5398 acres have been enumerated. The State Government has indicated that the complete
formal report will be furnished shortly.
4. Himachal Pradesh: The survey has been completed and report received
indicates that there are, 3123 growers holding an area of 1693 acres.

21
5. South India: The zonal office of the Board has so far enumerated 42104 growers
covering the total tea area of 88994 acres spread over three States, namely, Tamil Nadu
(36456 growers), Kerala (5657 growers) and Karnataka (01 grower).
Summary
Sl. State No. of Growers Tea Area in acres
No. enumerated
1. Assam 77879 140935
2. West Bengal 21375 88963
3. Tripura 2255 5398
4. Himachal Pradesh 3123 1693
5. South India 42104 88994
Total 146736 325983
Establishment of separate Directorate for Small Tea Growers
The head office of the Directorate has been established at Dibrugarh in Assam
and it became funtional from 1st April, 2013. First batch of 39 technical officers have
jointed the Directorate and they are presently undergoing training. The 2nd batch is
expected to join shortly.
Deployment of Development Officers at Grass Root Level
It is proposed to deploy the Development Officers (DO) in all the important
clusters where the small growers are concerntrated so as to reach out to 3000 to 5000
growers by one DO. With such placement, it is endeavored to reach out to every small
tea grower in the country. The job responsibilities of the DOs  include identification
and enumeration small growers, measurement of tea area owned by them, actual
production of green leaf and the factories to which they supply the green leaf. Each of
the growers would be provided with a bio-metric identification card and the growers
would be motivated to become member of SHG/Producer Society, which in turn could
establish a linkage with a Bought Leaf Factory or an estate factory. By establishing
such one to one linkage, it would be possible to ensure a treansparent mechanism for
auguring a fair price for the green leaf supplied by the gorwers.
Deployment of Factory Advisory Officers
The Factory Advisory Officers (FAO) would be placed in all the tea growing
regions for providing technical support to the tea factoreis for adopting Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) and they will be closely monitoring performance of the
factories, with regard to the quality of green leaf procured, type of tea made, mode of
disposal price realized and green leaf price paid to the growers etc.
National Programme on Tea Regulation
The Tea Board's proposal for launching a National Programme for Tea Regulation
during the XII Plan period is under active consideration of the Government.

22
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
Ministry has outline various steps taken for the benefit of small tea growers. All
the actions taken or proposed to be taken were verified with reference to documents
made available to audit and found to be in tune with the reply. However, any tangible
benefit accruing from he action taken ascertained at this stage. Ministry should not
only update the progress, but also highlight achievements/benefits accruing from
such action to the Committee periodically. No further comment to offer at this stage.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note with profound concern that a highly tolerant inspection
regime coupled with undeterring penalties and gross information deficit on activities
of various stakeholders of the trade remains the major impediment in the exercise of
effective control over them resulting in failure to ensure fair practices and quality
products. Surprisingly, the Committee find that even the penalties stipulated under
section 36 to 42 of the Tea Act for major contraventions such as illegal cultivation,
illicit export etc. still remained unrevised and abysmally low at Rs. 1000-Rs. 5000. The
Committee also note that lack of adequate manpower inhibited regular periodic
inspections of the activities of manufacturers/buyers of tea, with inspections invoked
only on complaints received. Further, non-submission of requisite returns by the
manufacturers and buyers on a regular basis compromised effective monitoring and
also timely compilation of tea statistics. The Committee observe that a system
incorporating instantaneous access to crucial real-time data not only on tea statistics
but also information on manufacturers/buers coupled with a robust inspection regime
with inbuilt provisions for mandated periodic as well as surprise checks by an
empowered inspection team with requisite powers of search and seizure and state-of-
art technical support and a stringent enforcement of deterrent punitive/financial
penalties remains one of the key requirements to meet the increasing challenges of
high technology trading malpractices all across the globe. The Committee deprecate to
find that the much belated initiative of the Ministry to engage Indian Institute of
Management (IIM), Kolkata to re-engineer the existing process of information collection
and create an online database with provisions for e-auction system, electronic sale for
non-auction route, online buying system, etc. is still in the proposal stage. The Committee
are, therefore, distressed to note that the Tea Board is way behind in their e-commerce
initiative for more transparent, reliable, accessible and faster transactions. Needless to
say, this leaves a huge gap in the race for a sharp-competitive edge in the global market
while also compromising effective monitoring of the trade. The Committee, therefore
recommend that the Tea Board ramp up its effort to introduce e-commerce supported
by a Computerized Management Information System to register business transactions
and commercial operations of Tea Board through automated documentation and an

23
online real time database. The Committee would like the Ministry to apprise them on
the action taken in this regard.
[Para 5 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
 (15th Lok Sabha])
Action Taken
Revision of penalties stipulated under Sections 36 to 42 of the Tea Act for major
contraventions
In order to make the Tea Act more relevant to the present day context and to face
the emerging challengers, a comprehensive amendment of the Tea Act is under active
consideration of the Government. It includes substantial increase in the penalties for
major contraventions.
Regular periodic inspections of the activities of manufacturers/buyers of tea
For ensuring regular periodic inspections of gardens/factories/warehouses, a
detailed inspection schedule is to be drawn up for inspecting all gardens/factories/
warehouses in the country shortly.
On-line submission of E-returns
Software has been developed and put in place for enabling the manufacturers to
submit the production details on line w.e.f. 1st January, 2013. In addition,  field officers
have been mandated to collect and collate production details each month for the tea
gardens falling under their respective jurisdiction.
On-line sale of Tea Waste
An electronic platform has been established for online sale of  Tea Waste w.e.f.
1st October, 2012.
Pan India E-auction
Proposal to integrate all the public Tea Auction centers in the country for
facilitating Pan India online trading and the discussion in this regard with the stake
holders have been initiated and it is expected to start the Pan India E-auction from
1st July, 2013.
Tea Councils to Monitor the quality of tea exports and imports for re-export
In order to closely monitor the quality of tea exported and that imported for
re-export after value addition, two tea councils one each for North India and South
India have been set up with membership drawn from representatives of producer,
exporter and tea tasters.
Cancellation of Exporter Licenses
Strict actions are now being taken for non-submission of requisite returns on
time. 157 permanent exporters license have since been cancelled on account of
non-submission of export returns. Show cause notices are also being issued for
non-submission of returns.

24
Commercial operations of Tea Board
Tea Board being a Regulatory Body for the tea industry, it is not involved in any
commercial operations.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
As stated earlier, the proposed amendments to Tea Act are yet to be sent to
Government for approval. As informed by the Tea Board the necessary amendment
would be placed in the next board meeting to be held on 24th June, 2013 and thereafter
the proposal sent to Government for consideration.
In respect of other facts mentioned in the reply such as periodic insepections,
E-cancellation of export licenses etc., the action taken by the Tea Board was verified
and found to be correct.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee observe that a strong and vibrant legal framework with a strict
enforcement regime is undoubtedly the first essential step for any effective regulation.
The Committee are, however, anguished to find the Ministry's indifference to this very
important aspect as exuded by the presence of numerous redundant, rigid as well as
gaping holes in the various provisions in the extant laws governing the tea industry
standing in the way to effective regulation, which the Ministry have so far chosen to
ignore all through their nearly six decades of existence. They deplore that the initiative
to amend the Tea Act for exempting small tea growers from the purview of Sections 12
and 14 and also for revision of penalties as provided under Sections 36 to 42 is still in
the proposal stage. Taking cognizance of the fact that the long overdue response of
the Ministry is a little too less and too late, the Committee recommend that a
comprehensive review of all existing legislations/regulations be carried out and a well
crafted framework, alive to the present global challenges and customized to the ground
realities, by way of requisite amendments to existing laws or formulation of new
regulations wherever needed, be brought out expeditiously, in a time bound manner
and the Committee apprised.
[Para 7 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In order to make the Tea Act more relevant to the present day context and to face
the emerging challenges, a comprehensive amendment of the Tea Act is under active
consideration of the Government. It includes substantial increase in the penalties for
major contraventions as well.

25
Vetted Remards of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
The Proposal comprehensive amendments to the Tea Act were scrutinized and
found correct. The proposal contained increasing the quantum of penalty from one
thousand rupees to five lakh rupees for violation of various provisions of Tea Act.
However, the proposal is yet to be submitted to the Government. The key amendments
in the Tea Act should be intimated to the Committee.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that India's production share in
global tea production had declined from 29.80 percent in 1993 to 23.76 percent in 2010.
Notably, while productivity in respect of all major tea producing countries had been
increasing over the period from 1994 to 2009, productivity in India had been declining.
The Committee find that one of the primary reasons for low productivity and
substandard quality of tea in India was aging plantations and the total area under
commercially unproductive bushes alarmingly increased from 42 percent in 1997 to
57 percent in 2009 posing a serious threat to the Tea Industry. What, however, concerns
the Committee is the criticality of the situation as brought home by the fact that at the
current pace of re-plantation, it would take as long as 149 years to wipe off the
back-log. Admittedly, the stark statistics as submitted by the Ministry that as per their
latest baseline survey of  2011, as much as 37 percent of the total standing tea bushes
in India  are more than 50 years old, the economic threshold age for tea plants as
compared to that of China. Wherein nearly one-third of its plantations, equivalent to
the total current area in India, is less than 10 years of age exposing the level of
comparative disadvantage the country suffers in terms of productivity. The Committee
observe that an aggressive re-plantation drive remains the main solution to the present
crisis facing the tea industry. The Committee therefore would like the Government to
draw a long term re-plantation plan indicating the age of current plantation and the
time schedule for re-plantation for the next twenty years and then apprise them.
[Para 8 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Board agrees with the audit observations with regard to low productivity
and declining quality due to aging of the plantations. Due importance has been given
to this aspect and suitable modifications have been made in the XII Plan, as proposed
by the Tea Board. It contains making the incentives attractive for the tea plantations to
take up replanting in right earnest. The special drive made during the XI Plan period
did in fact helped in accelerating the average rate of replanting to the level of 1.54% per
annum as against the dismal rate of 0.5% per annum during the previous plan periods.

26
As per the baseline survey of all tea gardens in the country, the extent of area
with age of bushes more than 50 years stood at 148523 ha. as of 1.4.2012. It has been
targeted for renovation of 47,000 ha. i.e. 1/3 of the old tea area during the XII Plan
period. At this rate it would be feasible for complete renovation of old tea areas over
the next 20 years as recommended by the Committee.
Physical achievement, however, would depend upon the financial resources to
be made available through the plan schemes of the Board in commensurate to the
physical targets.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
While agreeing to Committee's observation, Ministry outlined its action plan for
re-plantation of ageing Tea Bushes during XII Plan, which was verified with reference to
relevant documents and found to be correct. However, the Ministry has sought adequate
financial resources to meet the desired target. No further comment on this issue.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
Mindful of the fact that re-plantation, besides being a capital intensive activity
with resultant loss of crop arising out of uprooting and a long gestation period of a
minimum of five years time before the new tea bushes gives yield and almost Nil
returns on investment during the gestation period, the Committee feel that, as of now,
adequate Governmental support in the form of subsidy remains the only effective
means for inducing planters to go in for large scale re-plantation. In this context,
keeping in view the fact that the Tea Industry sustains the livelihood of a sizeable
section of the population, the Committee support the recommendation of  the Department
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Commerce made in their 102nd Report of
15th Lok Sabha pertaining to consideration for a compensation package for workers
laid off during the gestation period of re-plantation. The Committee are also concerned
to note the failure of the Tea Board to evaluate the long term impact of rejuvenation
pruning which have a lesser gestation time and is one of the most important operations
next to plantation determining the productivity of tea bushes. The Committee desire
that due importance should be given to rejuvenation pruning as well and the Tea
Board should put in necessary checks and procedures to ensure that it is carried out
during the prescribed period in order to get the maximum yield.
[Para 9 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
 (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The compensation package for Re-plantation
The compensation package for re-plantation as worked out for the XII Plan
period includes offsetting the revenue loss arising out of the crop loss during the
gestation period of five years from uprooting of old tea.

27
A technical committee has been constituted to revisit the Unit Cost and revise it
in commensurate with the actual cost of replanting after factoring in wage cost and
input cost at periodic interval. The membership of the technical committee comprises
of representatives of Tea Research Institutes—TRA, UPASI-TRF, Tea industry,
NABARD and the Tea Board.
Compensation package for workers laid off during the gestation period of re-plantation
Uprooting and replanting does not render any worker being laid off during the
gestation period. In fact, more number of man days is required for uprooting and
replantation and upkeep of the young plantation during the gestation period. The
regular annual programme of replanting activity would generate additional work relating
to arising of nurseries, uprooting, preparation of land, planting and after care etc.
The long term impact of rejuvenation pruning
The evaluation of both rejuvenation pruning and replantation has been carried
out as a part of the evaluation of the XI Plan schemes of Tea Board. The reported
results comparing the impact of the rejuvenation and replantation indicated only a
marginal increase in productivity in the case of rejuvenation pruning as this operation
does not allow replacement of old tea bushes. On the other hand uprooting of old tea
bushes and replanting with high yielding clones resulted in much higher productivity
when compared with that of rejuvenation pruning.
However, considering the fact that uprooting and replanting in hilly areas with
steep slopes in not only a difficult task but also leads to loss of valuable top soil due
to soil erosion, rejuvenation pruning and infilling and inter-row planting is supported
with subsidy for the tea gardens located in hilly areas under the Plantation Development
scheme, as proposed by the Tea Board.
Suitable guidelines have been framed for undertaking rejuvenation pruning and
consolidation of old tea areas through infilling of vacancies/inter row planting for
increasing the bush population in unit area. The disbursement of subsidy has been
linked with actual physical progress made in the field in respect of pruning, infilling or
inter-row planting as the case may be. This has been proposed by the Tea Board.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
Although the Ministry did not agree for any direct compensation package to the
workers laid off during gestation period, compensation for revenue loss arising out of
crop loss has been proposed in the XII Plan period. Other proposals and action taken
by the Ministry such as framing of guidelines and linkage of disbursement of subsidy
to physical progress of work were verified and found to be in tune with the reply.
However, the result of all such steps/actions would take some time to culminate.
Hence, no further, comment at this stage.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated12th July, 2013]

28
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are appalled to find that even after the launch of the Special
Purpose Tea Fund (SPTF) in 2007 to facilitate large scale plantations, the rate of
re-plantation averaged at 1.53 percent per annum which hither to hovered dismally at
0.5 percent per annum. The issue of the imperative need for a continuous and steady
re-plantation had engaged the attention of the Committee since 1969 and the PAC
(1987-88) in their 107th Report of 8th Lok Sabha, particularly observed that the failure
of the Tea Board of India to ensure re-plantation at the rate of 2 per cent per annum of
the total planted area as per the Scheme intimated to the PAC (1969-70) affected the
industry both quantitatively and qualitatively and had urged for close monitoring of
the progress of plantation in coordination with planters, research bodies and plantation
workers. While admitting that achievement of 2 percent per annum target of re-plantation
depends largely on the industry's initiative and availability of resources for investment,
the Ministry of Commerce in their Action Taken Notes on the aforesaid observation
stated that a National Committee was set up to draw up a long term strategy and plan
for the tea industry. The Committee are constrained to observe that the gravity of the
present day crisis facing the Indian tea industry could perhaps been avoided had the
Ministry taken up earnest action on the observations/recommendations of the earlier
PACs for effective implementation. While reiterating their earlier recommendation that
realistic and achievable targets for re-plantation be fixed after a scientific and coherent
assessment of fund needs and mobilization of all resources including technological
know-how to ensure achievement of the targets so fixed, the Committee observe that
the need of the hour calls for serious retrospection on the part of the Ministry and the
Tea Board and come forth with a comprehensive and concrete plan of action for
rejuvenation of our tea industry, increase in production, productivity and for preserving
its quality and image. The current domestic demand for tea as well as global tea market
must factor in while preparing such a plan, in consultation with all stakeholders as well
as experts and scientists connected with the tea industry. In their considered view all
out and comprehensive strategy must be evolved in order to secure the pre-eminent
position of Indian tea in the world trade.
[Para 10 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Due importance has been given to the recommendations of the Committee with
regard evolving a comprehensive and concrete plan of action for rejuvenation of our
tea industry; increase in production, productivity and for preserving its quality and
image. Factoring of current domestic demand for tea as well as global tea market to
secure the pre-eminent position of Indian tea in the world trade.
While preparing the strategic plan of action for the XII Plan period, besides the
baseline survey of all the tea gardens in the country, an elaborate exercise had been
undertaken in consultation with all stakeholders as well as experts and scientists
connected with the tea industry. The domestic as well as export demands were factored
in while estimating the targets of production for the XII Plan period in the Tea Board's
proposal.

29
In keeping with the production and export targets, XII Plan schemes aimed at
increasing production, productivity, improving quality and product mix, market
promotion, workers welfare and R&D support measures have been formulated in the
Tea Board's proposal.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
While accepting the recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry has stated
that recommendation/observation have been suitably incorporated in the XII Plan
documents, which are expected to result in increase in production, improving quality
etc. The XII Plan is yet to be approved by the Government. We do not have further
comment to offer. However, Ministry should update the quantifiable results of action
to the Committee periodically.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
Inadequacy of funds was one of the main reasons for tardy pace of re-plantation.
Worse, the failure of the Tea Board to realistically estimate requirement of funds for
re-plantation and want of proper intervention is evident from the fact that the Tea
Board spent a mere Rs. 21.06 Cr. During the X Five Year Plan and yearly Rs. 18.87 Cr. In
the first four years of the XI Plan (March, 2011) against the worked out capital
investment of Rs. 6091.21 Cr. for replantation of  2,47,610 hectares of tea bushes aged
more than 40 years as on 1st January, 2009. The enormity of the task of re-plantation of
aged bushes spread over 2,47,610 hectares calls for development of a perspective plan
and concerted action plan. The Committee recommend a comprehensive perspective
plan to developed and implemented in a phased/time-bound manner for re-plantation
of all tea bushes more than 50 years within the 12th Plan period. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the detailed plan along with the time lines for re-plantation for the
12th Plan year-wise and hectare-wise.
[Para 11 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It has been targeted to renovate 47,000 ha. i.e. 1/3 of the old tea area during the
XII Plan period. Extensive consultations have been made with the stake holders and it
has been pointed out that uprooting beyond 2% per annum would not be economically
feasible for sustaining the cash flows. Hence, it would be difficult proposition for
re-plantation of all tea bushes more than 50 years within the 12th Plan period. However,
it would be quite feasible for complete renovation of old tea areas over the next
20 years as recommended by the Committee elsewhere. Physical achievement, however,
would depend upon the financial resources to be made available through the plan
schemes of the Board in commensurate to the physical targets.

30
The year-wise targeted area for renovation of old aged bushes during the
XII Plan, as proposed by the Tea Board, is as under:—
(Area in Ha.)
Y ear Replantation Rejuvenation Total
2012-13 6000 1000 7000
2013-14 7000 1000 8000
2014-15 8000 1500 10000
2015-16 9000 1500 10500
2016-17 10000 2000 11500
Total 40000 7000 47000
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has submitted its action plan
for re-plantation/renovation of old age bushes. Hence, no further comments.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee find that the SPTF launched in the year 2007 for extending financial
support in the ratio of 50% loan component, 25% subsidy and 25% cost to be borne by
the industry met with only modest achievements as the low rate of subsidy component
did not result in planters going in for large scale re-plantation. The Committee's
examination revealed that the identification of the areas for re-plantation, basically left
to the option of growers and done usually in batches, strengthens the case for an
imperative need for devising a much more attractive and incentivized subsidy scheme
for re-plantation, factoring in all hitherto inhibitive reasons and an aggressive awareness
drive amongst the growers on the long term benefits of re-plantation. The Committee
appreciate the proposal to make the SPTF more attractive by discontinuation of the
loan component w.e.f. 1.4.2012, revising the unit cost after factoring in wage and input
costs and also enhancing the subsidy rate. The Committee are pleased to note the
other initiative of the Government to provide incentives for re-plantation through the
provision of Income Tax exemption under section 33AB of the Income Tax Act under
which 40% of the taxable income is exempted from tax provided the funds so exempted
are utilized for replanting and other developmental activities as notified by the Tea
Board under the Tea Development Account Scheme. The Committee also desire that
the Ministry give due weightage to the suggestions given by the institute of Plantation
Management, Bangalore that the identified beneficiaries of a more robust and attractive

31
Scheme be implemented through Authorized Financial Institutions from a consortium
of Banks to ensure financial discipline required for the implementation of critical
development Schemes like the SPTF with Tea Board acting as the facilitator. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this behalf.
[Para 12 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The incentives for replantation have been made more attractive by including the
following benefits to the applicants during the XII Plan period:
1. Upward revision of rate of subsidy from 25% to 30%.
2. Compensation crop loss during the gestation period.
3. Payment of part of subsidy in advance for raising nursery to ensure
availability of adequate and good quality planting material.
4. Relaxation of age limit for erstwhile close tea gardens.
The consortium arrangement with the banks was tried and tested during the
XI Plan period and it did not yielded desired results despite the fact that the long term
loan was made available at soft rate of interest. It would, therefore, may not be worthwhile
to implement the scheme through a consortium of banks.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
Inclusion of stated benefits in the SPTF scheme in the XII Plan period was
verified and found to be correct. Ministry however, did not agree to the recommendation
of IPM regarding involvement of consortium of banks in the scheme due to non-
achievement of desired results during XI plan period. Ministry should periodically
inform the result of the action taken for success of the Scheme to the Committee. No
further comments to offer.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note the failure of the Tea Board to provide relevant maps and
data pertaining to tea gardens to Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) resulting
in non-commencement of the remote sensing project costing Rs. 5 crore. For
identification of area for re-plantation using Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
(NDVI) techniques of satellite data processing. Mindful that the applications of remote
sensing technology have emerged as cost effective means for efficient management of
the nation's natural resources and a promising tool for sustainable development, the
Committee deplore callousness on the part of Tea Board which resulted in delay in

32
mapping of potential areas for replantation, the proverbial first step in any large scale
re-plantation scheme. The Committee also note with profound concern the failure of
the Tea Board to popularize use of even mechanical aids such as pruning machines,
widely in practice in other tea producing countries for reduction of labour cost as well
as for increasing efficiency. Notably, in this age of rapid improvements in technological
prowess, timely up-gradation of technology/techniques and mechanization holds the
key for constant improvements of efficiency in any industry. The Committee, therefore,
recommend an aggressive modernization drive for replacement of old inefficient
practices with more state-of-the are machines and mechanical aids to bring about more
efficiency and productivity at lower cost. To this end, the Committee desire adequate
popularization campaigns strongly advocating the benefits of these mechanical aids
supported by affordable, easy and accessible finance to help growers obtain these
aids.
[Para 13 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The required maps have since been collected from each garden and provided to
Regional Remote Sensing Service Center (RRSSC), Kolkata.
As recommended by the Committee, necessary provision for extending subsidy
(up to 25% of cost) for the following mechanical aids/equipments has been incorporated
in the XII Plan, in the proposal of the Tea Board:—
(i) mechanical harvesting equipments;
(ii) pruning machines; and
(iii) JCVs for uprooting old tea bushes.
The Government is considering for implementation of the Scheme during the
XII Plan period. Thereafter, wide publicity to the scheme would be given to all stake
holders.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
Tea Board has submitted maps in respect of Assam and West Bengal to ISRO.
Action taken by the Ministry based on recommendation of the Committee for inclusion
necessary provisions in XII Plan as well submission of maps to ISRO was verified.
No further comments to offer.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are dismayed to note that lower increase in price realization from
export of Indian tea was primarily due to inferior quality, adverse product mix and other
marketing factors. The Committee further note with concern that the percentage of

33
orthodox tea production in India which was as high as 66 per cent in 1961 of the total
production came down drastically to a mere 8 per cent in 2005, though it is the orthodox
tea variant which the world market demands. The Committee find the Tea Board's
efforts towards conversion from CTC (Cut, Tear and Crush) variant of tea to orthodox
tea production through their various Schemes such as Orthodox Tea Production
Susbsidy Scheme, Quality Up-gradation and Product Diversification and Price subsidy
Scheme, did not meet the desired objectives of correction of imbalance in the product
mix and product diversification due to various deficiencies viz. absence of a benchmark
for perceptible increase in orthodox tea production; excess/irregular payment of
subsidy; non-maintenance of proper record of payment of subsidy to small growers
and ineffective monitoring of impacts/benefits accrued. The Committee desire that
theTea Board's proposal for revision of the subsidy Scheme for the XII Plan period to
further incentivize the growers and producers to switch from CTC to orthodox tea
production should be effectively implemented for timely achievement of targets. The
Committee further desire that a strict monitoring regime be put in place to ensure that
the off take of subsidies co-relate to actual quantifiable out comes in terms of higher
production of the Orthodox tea variant. The Committee also find that the failure of the
Tea Board to take action for reduction in the cost of production as one of the main
factors contributing to the declining productivity. Keeping in view that cost advantage
if not cost leadership is, but, one of the most prominent strategies for competition
advantage in marketing of any commodity the Committee desire that the Ministry
should not undermine this aspect. The Committee, therefore, recommend a systemic,
periodic and regular cost studies with mandatory follow up action to identity elements
contributing to cost escalation with a view to initiate immediate steps for appropriate
and quick redressal thereof. Further, the Committee note deficiencies in training
activities under the Human Resource Development Scheme aimed at improving the
productivity of manpower for overall cost reduction. The Committee observe that
constant skill up-gradation of workers/pluckers as well as capacity building of
entrepreneurial skills of managers through appropriate training inputs and exposure to
new methods, procedures, technology and mechanical aids is needed for the Indian
tea industry to synchronizes itself to the advancing global market requirements. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Tea Board should pay full and proper attention
to this vital aspect and devise appropriate training modules for all levels of workers in
the tea industry in collaboration with reputed training institutes in India and abroad.
[Para 14 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
1. The production incentives scheme for production of orthodox and green tea
has since been revised for implementation during the XII Plan period, as
proposed by the Tea Board.
2. The Tea Board has proposed to provide a flat rate subsidy @ Rs. 3/- per kg. of
actual production of orthodox and green tea under the XII Plan scheme.
3. For encouraging incremental production, it has been proposed by the Tea
Board to provide incentives ranging from Rs. 1 to Rs. 5 depending upon the

34
increase over the base production. The incentive will be determined by taking
into account the moving average production over the five years immediately
proceeding the application year which will be treated as base production. If
the actual production in the applied year is more than this base production,
the difference is treated as increment volume eligible for additional incentive.
4. For creating more processing facilities for orthodox tea and green teas, it has
been proposed by the Tea Board to extend support in the form of subsidy
@40% for setting up of green tea, orthodox tea and specialty tea factories.
5. Due importance has been given for imparting training to the tea plantation
workers for their skill up-gradation and also organize executive programmes to
the tea plantation managers through reputed institutes.
6. A standing technical committee comprising the representatives of Tea Research
Institutes, Tea industry, Tea Board and NABARD for periodical review of the
unit cost by taking into consideration of the enhancement of wages and
escalation of input costs.
7. A centralized subsidy flow monitoring system has been established to ensure
that the subsidy amount reaches the eligible applicants. Fund are being
transferred through RTGS mechanism.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
Ministry in its reply outlined the action taken/proposed to be taken in respect of
each of Committee's recommendation. Most of the actions are proposed to be taken
during XII Plan period, which is yet to be approved. Hence, no further comments to
offer at this stage. However, the Ministry should apprise the Committee about actual
implementation of the proposed actions periodically, so that the desired objectives are
achieved.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are, concerned to note the Audit findings that during the period
under review neither any deliverables were transferred for the use of the tea industry
nor were any patents filed indicating want of tangible research activities. The Committee
are of the considered view that continuous renovation of filed assets and Research
and Development on a sound footing covering not only technologies and processes
but also financial, organizational, managerial and marketing aspects are essential for
sustainable growth in both quality and quantity tea production. Admittedly, research
work on various areas viz. integrated nutrient management; development of new superior
tea cultivars with higher yield, quality and resistance to drought, biotic stresses, etc;
innovative approaches to tea manufacturing and processing technologies; integrated

35
package for electronic essential for quality testing/monitoring of tea; quality
improvement and value added tea products; pest control and disease management;
effect of climate change in tea; and health benefits of tea are currently being carried out
by various research institutes. The Committee desire that the research should produce
quantifiable and positive outcomes backed by requisite statistical data on the input
output co-relation on the investments made vis-a-vis  productivity and quality
enhancement. Stately, tea factories are also being advised to go in for ISO 22000
HACCP certification as part of their modernization drive to raise the quality of tea to
confirm to norms of ISO 3720, the international standard for tea. The Committee
emphasis that such certifications have become a compelling necessity as they provide
the much needed credibility and brand image to Indian Tea products in the international
market. The Committee, therefore desire that the Tea Board to come out the stringent
regulations for effective enforcement of the mandatory standards and also encourage
additional accreditations which though not mandatory are nevertheless best adhered
to so as to gain further competencies and brand building in global tea marketing.
[Para 15 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Tea Board while monitoring and evaluating ongoing research activities
conducted by three Tea Research Institutes (TRA, UPASI and DTR&DC) in India
advised to the research organizations for generating tangible results/information in
the form of technology development/commercialization, patenting, research publication
etc. Research Evaluation Committee meeting organized by Tea Board used to deliberate
the above issues in line with the requirement of the industry.
During the period under report a large number of technology were developed/
commercialized and provided to the industry for its utilization. Also, a patent (microbial
kit) was filed for the detection of microbes in the tea factory machineries. To other
products (green p3 as plant defense booster and polyphenol reached tea tablets) were
developed and will be processed for patenting. Two clonal cultivars were developed
for the utilization of tea industry and five clones are under final stage of evaluation.
Five seed varieties have undergone trial and at their final stage of evaluation. More
than hundred research papers have been published in different national and international
journals.
The following salient achievements are noted:
1. Package of practices was developed for organic tea cultivation for different
plantation areas (Darjeeling, Assam and South India).
2. Promising Phosphorous solubilizing bacteria isolated from Darjeeling tea soil
are ready to be used to developed bio-fertilizers (phosphate solubilizing) for
Darjeeling tea industry.
3. New planting design for mechanical harvesting was developed.
4. Commercialization was done for consortia of ten bacterial bio-control agents
against tea disease.

36
5. Recommendation was released for ammonium salt of glyphosate as a post
emergence herbicide for weed control in tea.
6. Mass production technique of bio-control agents have been standardize and
recommended to the industry for its preparation.
7. A technology was developed for bio-control of termite pest in tea.
8. Developed technology for preparation of green and black soluble tea (which
can be used as antioxidant, beverage and food additives).
9. Developed technology for Phosphate enriched vermicompost and vermiwash
for foliar application.
The stress is on focused industry driven tea research wherein the outputs are
quantifiable and applicable to the industry.
To ensure uniform minimum standard for all tea factories, Tea Board has asked
TRA and UPASI to standardize tea manufacturing process to ensure quality tea
production for separating and removing common impurities in Tea, like sand, stones,
non-magnetic tramp metal pieces, ash etc. and magnetic impurities like iron and rust
powder, de-stoner, de-dust etc., grade separator, which can be followed uniformly all
over country.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
Action taken by the Ministry in research and development was verified and
found to be in tune with the reply. However, with respect to Committee's final
recommendation regarding stringent regulation for effective enforcement of mandatory
standards, no action has yet been proposed by the Ministry. This may need to be
considered by the Committee.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
Patenting a product and getting Geographical Indication (GI) tag not only ensures
that none other than those registered as authorized users are allowed to use the
popular product name but also identifies the product to the region of origin while also
giving competitive advantage  in marketing the product. Undoubtedly, filing of patents
for variants of tea of indigenous Indian origin is important for patronizing it for
promotion abroad as well as for effective deterrent action on their unauthorized
marketing. The Committee, are however, dismayed to find that after the Darjeeling Tea
was proudly declared as the first Geographical Indication tagged product of India in
2004-05, the Tea Board could not file a single patent despite the great variants of
indigenous Indian tea with glorious heritage of taste and demanded globally. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry take urgent steps to identity these
indigenous variants eligible for the GI tag and file for their patents and the Committee
be apprised.
[Para 16 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

37
Action Taken
Darjeeling Tea (Logo & Word) has been registered as composite GI  in 2003. The
other great variants of Indigenous Indian tea are Assam and Nilgiri teas with glorious
heritage of taste. The Assam Orthodox tea (Logo & Word) and Nilgiri Orthodox Tea
(Logo & Word) have already been registered as composite GIs in 2007 by Tea Board in
India, to provide protection to these teas from various infringements and deceptive/
misleading business practices under TRIPS agreement. Again in 2007, only Tea Board
applied for getting registration of 'Darjeeling' as Protected Geographical Indication
(PGI) with European Commission and in 2011 and the Board succeeded to get Darjeeling
Tea Protected under EU. It became the First Indian Product to be protected as PGI in
EU for it's uniqueness and special characteristics. Therefore, it can be stated that Tea
Board has taken steps for it's major indigenous variant teas for getting composite GI
(Logo & Word) and got the same.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
Ministry in its reply stated that in addition to Darjeeling Tea, Assam Orthodox
Tea was also registered as composite GI. It was, however, observed that Assam
Orthodox Tea were registered for protection within India. Ministry should take efforts
to get them protected even outside India as in the case of Darjeeling Tea, as
recommended by the Committee.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee hope that the project 5-5-5 Scheme concentrating efforts for
increasing export to five major countries through execution of five specific activities
for five years stated to commerce from the year 2012-13 at the cost of Rs. 5.5 crore
produce the desired result. The Committee further desire aggressive marketing campaign
for brand promotion including the possibility of outsourcing such activities to
professional private agencies for focused targeted campaigns on specially identified
potential consumer groups with adequate linkages to incentives and disincentives for
effective and timely achievement of targets. The Audit had observed that these
founctions could instead be performed through the Economic Wing in the Indian
Missions/Posts abroad in harmoney with their earlier recommendation. The Committee
therefore reiterate that the role and performance of these foreign offices be reviewed
and evaluated in the light of the valuable assistance rendered by out Missions/Posts
abroad and the Committee apprised. Having regard to the remedial reasures proposed
for implementation during the 12th Plan period emphasizing on inter-alia health,
wellness and lifestyle aspects of tea for enhanced tea consumption among the youth;
infrastructure development like tea parks; tea warehouses, laboratories, etc. through
Public Private Partnership, visual advertisements through social networks etc. the
Committee recommend that the Ministry monitor the implementation of these initiatives;
set up a robust monitoring mechanism and apprise the Committee in course of time.
[Para 18 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

38
Action Taken
Many Tea promotion events have been successfully organized in 5-5-5 countries
except Egypt. The event in Iran, Russia, Kazakhstan & USA have been highly
appreciated by the Exporters as well as Importers and has resulted in increased
awareness of Indian tea among local consumers and helped in enhancement of visibility
of packaged teas containing Indian tea. As a positive development there have been
signing of several MoUs for Indian Tea Promotion, like MoU between Indian Tea
Association & Iranian Tea Association in Iran, MoU between Rusteacoffee Association
and Tea Board in Russia.
Special Advertisement are being released in leading overseas Trade journals
and electronic media. Journalists are being invited to India to have a first hand
knowledge on Indian tea industry.
For visual advertisement, face book page has been launched in Russian language
targeted towards Russian and Kazak consumers. The process for utilizing social media
in an aggressive way is under process.
In store promotion both in Russia and Kazakhstan is also being planned where
leading Indian packaged tea brands shall be displayed in shelves of popular
departmental stores.
For promoting Indian Brand, the use of Indian Tea Logos on 100% Indian tea
packets is being streamlined for brand promotion purpose. Negotiation with popular
tea brands in Russia for the purpose of putting Indian tea logo on the package are in
final stage.
Tea Park development is in progress at Siliguri (West Bengal) and others are
proposed at Guwahati and Kolkata (in Kolkata Port Trust area).
For promoting tea consumption as a health wellness and lifestyle drink specially
among youth, opening of Tea Boutiques by providing financial assistance to
entrepreneurs in under process.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
The Ministry has furnished the same reply as submitted to Sl.No. 1 of the
Committee's Recommendation.
In this connection it is reiterated that initiative of plan of action stated in the
reply was taken during last one to two years. The efficacy of such initiative would only
be evident after some time.
The aspect of review of the role and performance of foreign offices and evaluation
as reiterated by the Committee has not been dealt with by the Ministry in their reply.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]

39
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are concerned to note diversion of funds from Plan to Non-Plan
from time to time for meeting Non-Plan expenditure, inadequate internal generation of
funds, total dependence on Government support for every activity and weak financial
management and internal controls. Further the Committee note that the rate of cess on
tea has been revised to maximum permissible limit of 50 paise/kg. for all variants of tea
other than Darjeeling Tea for which the rate of cess is 20 paise/kg. Apparently, the
projected cess collection of Rs. 48 crore per annum is grossly inadequate for the
overall development of the tea industry and the expansion of the activities of the Tea
Board. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Tea Act, be amended suitably so
that the rate of cess can be calibrated as per the requirements. Keeping in view that
dictum that increase in revenue generation is one of of the most significant markers of
the financial growth of any organization, the Committee also wise to impress upon the
Tea Board not to undermine the importance of revenue generation and put in sustainable
operational measures for self reliance in financial matters. The PAC (1988-89) had also
observed that grant of subsidy did not speak highly of the entrepreneurial ability of
tea industry. In this context, the Committee recommend that dependence on subsidies
and other Government support should be taken as temporary alleviative measures
which ought to be phased out eventually, moving towards a more profitable regime.
The Committee also recommend streamlining and restructuring of internal audit system
for more effective and efficient internal control system commensurate with the extent
of activities undertaken, which is but the sine-qua-non of a robust financial management
system.
[Para 19 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Plan fund was used under non-plan heads to meet the operational expenses of
plan implementation. However, from the year 2011-2012 such diversions have been
completely stopped.
To bridge the gap between Government receipt and expenditure, thrust is being
given to generate more IEBR (Internal Extra Budgetary Resources). With such effort,
IEBR has increased from Rs. 99.94 Lakh in the begining of 11th Plan (2007-08) to
Rs. 260.52 Lakh in the terminal year of the 11th Plan (2011-12). However, the Board, as
a Non-commercial/Non-proft making concern, does not have wide avenues to generate
Internal Resources except for some receipts against license issuance and interest on
short term deposits.
Regarding Tea Cess, proposal for amendment of Tea Act to ensure that the rate
of cess can be calibrated as per the requirements is under active consideration of the
Ministry.
For better and effective Internal Audit mechanism and to establish a sound
Financial Control mechanism, Tea Board has appointed independent Chartered
Accountant Firm for preparation of Accounts Manual as the first steps towards ensuring
better financial management. Appointment of an outside independent Internal Auditor
to take up the Internal Audit job is in its final stages.

40
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
The fact of increase in IEBR, non diversion of fund since 2011-12 and proposal
for calibration of the rate of Tea Cess through amendment of Tea Act was verified and
found to be correct. Tea board has initiated action for preparing an Accounts Manual
and also for appointing an Internal Auditor.
The suggestion that Tea Board should explore options for revenue generation in
order to be less dependent on govt. subsidy has not been given the importance it
deserves mainly on the ground that Tea Board being a non-commercial/non-profit
making concern, does not have wide avenues to generate resources. This aspect
needs to be reviewed by the Ministry.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
Observation/Recommendation
To sum up, the Committee finds that many systemic and other deficiencies
plague the Tea Board and the Tea Industry. In order to meet the growing challenges of
a fiercely competitive global trade in tea, steep decline in India's tea export from 48% to
12%, the Tea Board needs to initiate urgent measures to address the problems so that
India attains its pre-eminent position in terms of quality and quantity of tea produced.
The Committee further recommend that the small growers may also be brought within
the purview of the Tea Board by effecting necessary amendments in the Tea Act while
ensuring that statutory amenities and facilities are provided to the tea plantation
workers including health and education of their families. The Committee also reiterate
the recommendation of the Departmentally related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Commerce made in their 102nd Report of 15th Lok Sabha pertaining to consideration
for a compensation package for workers laid off during the gestation period of
re-plantation. The Committee, therefore, ardently hope that the strategic vision of the
Ministry of Commerce to meet these challenges would accomplish not only its mission
of restoring the country to its deserved original position in the global tea market but
also fulfill its soial obligations of a more promising standard of living of all those who
are dependent on the fortunes of the tea industry. The Committee therefore reiterate
the need for comprehensive review of the extant legislation and the working of the Tea
Board in order to boost production and productivity of Indian tea and to ameliorate the
living conditions of the workers engaged in the tea industry.
[Para 20 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
"Compensation package for workers laid off during the gestation period of
re-plantation"
Uprooting and re-planting does not render any worker being laid off during the
gestation period. In fact, more number of man days is required for uprooting and

41
re-plantation and upkeep of the young plantations during the gestation period. Regular
and annual programmes of re-planting activiity would generate additional work relating
to rising of nurseries, uprooting, preparation of land for re-planting and after care of
young teas during gestation period. While working out compensation package for the
re-plantation during the 12th Plan period, as proposed by the Tea Board, revenue loss
arising out of the crop loss during the gestation period of 5 years from uprooting of old
tea has also been factored in. The revised package is expected to encourage the tea
gardens to take up replanting in right earnest.
"Providing amenities and facilities to the tea plantation workers including health
and education of their families"
A comprehensive HRD scheme has been formulated for implementation during
the 12th Five Year Plan. The scheme provides for extending various facilities for the tea
garden workers towards improving health, hygiene of the worker families and education
of the wards of the tea garden workers.
Initiation of suitable measures to address the growing challenges of the tea industry
so that India attains its pre-eminent position in terms of quality and quantity of tea
produced.
Due importance has been given to the recommendations of the Committee with
regard evolving a comprehensive and concrete plan of action for rejuvenation of our
tea industry, increase in production, productivity and for preserving its quality and
image. Factoring of current domestic demand for tea as well as global tea market to
secure the pre-eminent position of Indian tea in the world trade.
While preparing the strategic plan of action for the XII Plan period besides the
baseline survey of all the tea gardens in the country, an elaborate exercise had been
undertaken in consultation with all stakeholders as well as experts and scientists
connected with the tea industry. The domestic as well as export demands were factored
in while estimating the targets of production for the XII Plan period.
In keeping with the production and export targets, XII Plan schemes aimed at
increasing production, productivity, improving quality and product mix, market
promotion, workers welfare and R&D support measures have been formulated and
under consideration of the Government.
Comprehensive amendment of the Tea Act
In order to make the Tea Act more relevant to the present day context and to face
the emerging challenges, a comprehensive amendment of the Tea Act is under
consideration of the Government. It includes substantial increase in the penalties for
major contraventions as well.
"Review of working of Tea Board"
The Indian Institute of Management, Kolkata has been engaged for undertaking
a study on the organization structure and management of Tea Board and to suggest
suitable measures for improving working efficiency of the Board. The study is under
progress and focus areas of the study include the following areas:

42
(i) To review the functioning of the organization.
(ii) To suggest systemic changes in the organization structure and
associated roles and responsibilities and its employees.
(iii) To suggest mechanism for data capture and dissemination.
(iv) To suggest improvements in processes so that routine queries of the
top management can be answered more quickly and more accurately.
(v) To review existing use of Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) and to suggest changes, if any, for improvement and efficiency.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
Ministry's reply is silent on Committee's recommendation that small growers be
brough within the purview of the Tea Board by effecting necessary amendments in the
Tea Act.
Proposals as narrated in the reply were verified with reference to the XII Plan
document submitted to Government and found to be correct.
Proposal for amendment of Tea Act, however, is yet to be submitted to
Government.
As observed, most of the actions stated in the reply are in proposal stage.
Actual benefit can be ascertained only after implementation of such proposals. Hence,
no further comments to offer.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
43

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation
Dismal performance in the exports sector of the tea industry revealed itself in the
declining export share from 15.17 per cent in 1993 to 11.15 per cent in 2010. The Committee
note with profound concern that market diversification efforts including exploring new
markets through the overseas offices of Tea Board and other promotional activities did
not yield any effective results and the three schemes for promoting exports viz., Export
Incentive Scheme. Transport Subsidy Scheme and Export Promotion Scheme did not
make even marginal impact having benefited a mere 11 per cent of total exporters.
Intriguingly, Rs. 36 crore was spent on domestic promotion campaign without specifying
the outcomes achieved. The Committee observe that enhanced differentiated customer
needs all over the world changing the hitherto bulk tea demand as a commodity to that
of value added tea products in branded packs underlines the imperatives of product
diversification for increasing global market share of India tea. The committee had made
a similar recommendation as early as 1969, but unfortunately the counsel remained
largely unheeded. Further, keeping in view that branding and value addition go hand
in hand and have emerged as the best strategy to retain customer, the Committee
recommend that the Tea Board initiate more pro active measures for strong brand
building and differentiated value addition to tea products as per the consumer demands
after conducting a thorough market research. The Committee also desire that the Tea
board should make tangible efforts to continuously identify and imbibe evolving
successful marketing strategies such as niche marketing, cost leadership, extensive
distribution networks, customer focus and quick delivery of products while also moving
towards an efficient e-marketing strategy to capture the vast sale potential of Indian
tea.
[Para 17 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It's a fact that India's percentage share in the world market has declined in terms
of quantity of teas from other tea producing countries. But in absolute terms of quantity
and value of tea the export from India has increased. India has exported 173.73 m. kgs,
tea in 1993 (15.03% of world export market). In 2010 India exported 222.02 m. kgs, but
the market share is lower. In value terms too, India has registered an increase, While
unit value of tea exported in 1993 was Rs. 65.19 per kg., the unit value of teas exported
in 2010 was Rs. 137.75 per kg. thereby, registering an increase of 111.31%.
44

45
To develop successful promotional and marketing strategies, Tea Board will
conduct market surveys in the strategically potential markets like Russia UAE, Iran,
USA to capture consumer likes and dislikes and trends during the 12th five year plan.
After such thorough market research Tea Board will prepare more pro active measures
for strong brand building and differentiated value addition to tea products as per the
consumer demands.
Tea Board has modified two schemes (i) Scheme for participation in Fairs and
Exhibitions with Tea Board, and (ii) Brand Support Scheme for providing promotional
support to Indian exporters of branded Indian teas in the overseas markets.
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
This reply is the same as stated in Sl. No. 2 of Committee's recommendation. As
stated earlier, Plan of Action proposed in XII Plan period would take some time to
materialize. The Ministry should inform the Committee about the quantifiable benefit
accruing from such action plans periodically.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee deprecate that the rehabilitation of closed tea gardens, a regulatory
role of the Tea Board as mandated under Section 16E of Tea Act, 1953 suffered heavily
due to reluctance of banks to carry out restructuring as per the Scheme devised
affecting the livelihood of 11,417 workers working in 12 gardens with financial liability
of Rs. 92.51 crore of which Rs. 70.33 crore was towards liability of banks. The Committee
find that such a situation resulted due to the failure of Tea Board to obtain formal
commitment through bilateral agreement/MoUs with the financing banks at the time of
formulation of the Scheme. The Committee are saddened to observe that lack of oversight
in the formulation of the scheme resulted in non-achievement of targeted rehabilitated
of closed tea gardens and desire that the Tea Board should exercise utmost care to
ensure that such schemes having implications for the very livelihood of tea growers
are not rendered dysfunctional due to want of appropriate and legally enforceable
agreements with the financing banks. The Committee's examination further revealed
many inherent limitations of the enabling provisions made in Section 16 of the Tea Act
mainly providing for handing over the management of sick tea gardens to authorized
persons/private entrepreneurs for rehabilitation viz. absence of provision for any sort
of compensation either to the existing owner or for management/development of the
tea garden; provision of only caretaker status to the authorized persons without
ownership rights over land making them unable to mobilize funds from banks; maximum
tenure of only 11 years giving little time for either any meaningful return on investment
or to make the garden turn around; and unfavourable verdict of Courts/Govt./putting
the onus of bearing the liabilities of the tea garden under liquidation to the private
entrepreneurs. Noting that such difficulties have resulted in poor response from the
public to take up the management control for requisite rehabilitation of the sick tea
gardens, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should bring forth appropriate
amendments to the Act to rectify the limitations and also desire that a conducive
package be worked out with adequate incentives to make the offer attractive enough
for private sector to invest so that sick tea gardens are turned around in the minimum
possible time for higher productivity.
[Para 6 of the 65th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The limitations of the enabling provisions made in Section 16 of the Tea Act as
pointed out by the Committee are being examined and suitable amendments would be
considered for amending the entire Chapter III A of the Tea Act.
46

47
Vetted Remarks of O/o Comptroller and Auditor General
The proposal for amendment of entire Chapter IIIA of the Tea Act including
section 16 is scheduled to be placed in next Board meeting of Tea Board to be held in
24th June, 2013. Hence, no further comment to offer.
Sd/-
Additional Secretary
[Ministry/Department of Commerce O.M. No. 48018/1/2013-Plant-A
dated 12th July, 2013]
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
31 January, 2014 Chairman,
11 Magha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
(Vide Para 2 of Introduction)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2013-14) HELD ON 30TH JANUARY, 2014
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 30th January, 2014 from
1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri N.K. Singh
11. Smt. Ambika Soni
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Jaya Kumar T. — Additional Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
48

49
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh —  Dy. C&AG
2. Smt. Usha Sankar —  Dy. C&AG
3. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit
4. Smt. Ila Singh — Director General of Audit
5. Shri C. Gopinathan — Director General of Audit
6. Shri Jayant Sinha — Pr. Director of Audit
7. Shri Purushottam Tiwari — Pr. Director of Audit
8. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Pr. Director of Audit
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised
that the meeting was convened to consider and adopt nine Draft Reports (five Original
and four Action Taken Reports) of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up
the following draft Reports for consideration:
(i) * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
(ii) ** * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
(iii) * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
(iv) * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
(v) * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
(vi) * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
(vii) * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
(viii) * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *; and
(ix) Draft Report on Action Taken on the 65th Report (15th Lok Sabha) on
'Role of  Tea Board in Tea Development in India'.
3. After detailed deliberations, the Committee then took up Draft Reports one by
one for consideration and adoption. The Draft Reports at Sl. No. (i), (ii) and (iii) were
adopted with some modifications/amendments that are given as annexure and the rest
were adopted without any changes. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to
finalise these Reports, in light of their suggestions and the factual verifications received
from the Audit and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
**** Matter does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX  II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY-FIFTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations: 20
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1-4, 5, 7-16, 18, 19 and 20 Total: 18
Percentage - 90%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations  which  the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
replies received from the Government:
Total: 0
—NIL— Percentage - 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Total: 1
Para No. 17 Percentage - 5%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which Government have furnished interim replies:
Total: 1
Para No. 6 Percentage - 5%
50
GMGIPMRND—4186LS—15.05.2014.