66
EXPENDITURE INCURRED ON
INTEREST ON REFUNDS OF TAXES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Department of Revenue)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2012-2013
SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
EXPENDITURE INCURRED ON
INTEREST ON REFUNDS OF
TAXES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Department of Revenue)
Presented to Hon’ble Speaker on : 16 January, 2013
Presented to Lok Sabha on ..............................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ................................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
January, 2013/Pausa, 1934 (Saka)

PAC No. 1993
Price:  ` 25.00
© 2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in  Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-2013)  . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
REPORT
PART I
I. Introductory  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
II. Audit Findings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
III. Constitutional Provisions and Relevant Rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
IV . Accounting Procedure by Ministry  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
PART II
Observations/Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
APPENDICES
               I. Minutes  of   the   Eleventh  Sitting  of  the  Public  Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 30th August, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . . 13
II. Minutes of  the Twentieth Sitting of Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 28th December, 2012  . . . . . . . . . . 16

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
(iii)
*Elected w.e.f.  6th December,  2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
†Elected w.e.f . 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
 28th October, 2012.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Sixty-sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Expenditure
incurred on interest on Refunds of Taxes’ based on C&AG Report No. 1 of  2011-12
Union Government—Accounts of the Union Government relating to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue).
2. The Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2011 was laid on the Table of the House on 24th April, 2012.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) on the subject at their sitting held on 30th August, 2012.
The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on
28th December, 2012. Minutes of the Sittings form Appendices to the Report.
4. The Committee have unanimously recommended that the Ministry of Finance
cannot make departure from the established financial procedure as enshrined in the
Constitution. In their considered view, reporting of interest liability to Parliament
would bring greater transparency in financial administration of the country, uphold
the spirit of the Constitution and help reduce interest burden, bring more efficiency in
tax administration and reinforce Constitutional morality. For facility of reference and
convenience, the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee have been
printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for tendering evidence before them and
furnishing the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the
examination of the subject.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR.  MURLI  MANOHAR  JOSHI
28 December, 2012 Chairman,
07 Pausa, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
PART  I
I.  INTRODUCTORY
This Report is based on para 4.1.1 of Report No. 1 of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the year 2011-12, Union Government—Accounts of the Union
Government relating to 'Expenditure incurred on interest on refunds of taxes'.
2. One  of the important features of tax administration is the issue of Refunds.
Refunds arise in cases wherein the assessee satisfies the Assessing Officer that the
amount of tax paid by him or on his behalf or treated as paid by him or on his behalf for
any assessment year exceeds the amount with which he is properly chargeable under
the Income Tax Act for that year. In cases where the aggregate of Advance Tax, Regular
Tax, Tax Deducted at Source etc. so collected exceeds that tax determined on comple-
tion of the assessment or as amended after giving effect to the appellate orders, then
the assessee is entitled for refunds. Where refund of any amount becomes due to the
assessee under the Act, he shall, subject to the provisions of Section 244A of Income
Tax Act 1961, be entitled to receive, in addition to the said amount, simple interest
thereon calculated in the prescribed manner. Further, no claim is required for interest
on refunds.
3. Section 244A of Income Tax Act, 1961 deals with 'Interest on refunds'. The said
Section reads as follows:
"Where refund of any amount becomes due to the assessee under this Act, he
shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be entitled to receive, in addition
to the said amount, simple interest thereon calculated in the following manner,
namely:—
(a) where the refund is out of any tax [paid under section 115WJ or] [collected
at source under section 206C or] paid by way of advance tax or treated as
paid under section 199, during the financial year immediately preceding the
assessment year, such interest shall be calculated at the rate of [one-half per
cent] for every month or part of a month comprised in the period from the
1st day of April of the assessment year to the date on which the refund is
granted:
Provided that no interest shall be payable if the amount of refund is less
than ten per cent of the tax as determined  [under sub-section (1) of section
115WE or sub-section (1) of section 143 or] on regular assessment;
(b) in any other case, such interest shall be calculated at the rate of [one-half
per cent] for every month or part of a month comprised in the period or
periods from the date or, as the case may be, dates of payment of the tax or
penalty to the date on which the refund is granted".

2
II.  AUDIT  FINDINGS
4. Audit observed that the Department of Revenue/Central Board of Direct Taxes
was classifying the interest on refunds of excess tax as reduction in revenue and this
incorrect practice had been commented upon in the last two years CAG's Report on
Union Accounts as well as in CAG's Report on Direct Taxes for the year 2008 and in
earlier years also, but no corrective action was taken by the Department.
The expenditure on interest on refunds of taxes for the last five years is as
follows:
Years                       Expenditure on interest on
                                         refunds of taxes (` in crore)
2006-07           3693
2007-08            4444
2008-09            5778
2009-10             12951
2010-11             10499
Total            37365
5. Audit scrutiny revealed, that as in the past, no budget provision for interest
on refunds was made in the Budget Estimates for the financial year 2010-11 and an
expenditure on interest on refunds amounting to ` 10,499 crore was incurred by the
Department, in contravention of Article 114 (3) of the Constitution. Expenditure of the
order of  ` 37,365 crore on interest payments had been incurred over a period of the last
five years without obtaining approval of the Parliament through the necessary
appropriations as ordained by the Constitution.
6. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in its reply to the
above-said Audit observation (March, 2012) stated that they sought to continue with
the existing practice of treating interest payments on the refunds as a reduction from
gross tax collection owing to the fact that providing for such expenditure through the
budget would be administratively burdensome, apart from the fact that the amounts to
be paid as interest is of a highly variable nature leading to inaccuracies in estimation.
It has further been stated that interest on refunds, being a statutory obligation, is not
an operational expenditure like salary, office expenses, etc.
7. According to Audit, the classification of transactions relating to expenditure
as laid down in the Delegation of Financial Powers Rules, 1978 clearly defines interest
as an item of expenditure. Audit also noted that in the Budget of 2001-02, under the
Demand No. 34—Direct Taxes, a provision of  ` 92 crore was obtained under the head
'Interest on refunds of excess tax'.

3
III.  CONSTITUTIONAL  PROVISIONS  AND  RELEV ANT  RULES
8. Article 114 of the Constitution dealing with Appropriation Bills states as:
"(1) As soon as may be after the grants under Article 113 have been made by the
House of the People, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the
appropriation out of the Cosolidated Fund of India of all moneys required to
meet—
(a)   the grants so made by the House of the People; and
(b)   the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India but not
        exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously
         laid before Parliament.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in either House of Parliament
which will have the effect of varying the amount of any expenditure charged
on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the decision of the person presiding
as to whether an amendment is inadmissible under this clause shall be final.
(3) Subject to the provisions of Articles 115 and 116, no money shall be withdrawn
from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by
law passed in accordance with the provisions of this Article.’’
9. According to Article 266 all revenues received by the Government of India, all
loans raised by the Government, and all moneys received by the Government of India
form part of one consolidated fund called 'the Consolidated Fund of India'. The
Consolidated Fund of India has to be distinguished from the public account of India.
10. Further as per Article 283:
"the custody of the Consolidated Fund and the withdrawal of moneys therefrom
and all other matters connected therewith shall be regulated by law made by
Parliament and until such provision is made by rules made by the President".
11. Rule 8 of Delegation of Financial Powers Rules, 1978, enumerates categories
of expenditure. Along with salaries, wages, medical treatment, etc. interest has also
been classified as expenditure (primary unit of appropriation).
12. There exists a separate Appropriation for 'Interest Payments' and each year,
expenditure on interest payment is authorized, based on the approvals obtained from
Parliament through the Appropriation Act.
IV .  ACCOUNTING  PROCEDURE  BY  MINISTRY
13. While furnishing its comments on the Audit observation, the Ministry of
Finance in its written information submitted as follows:—
"The policy matter was subjected to detailed deliberations in the year 2001 and
with the approval of the then Finance Minister a decision was taken that 'interest
on refunds would continue to be treated as an outgo from the gross tax collection
and is not to be shown as expenditure for collection'. The said practice has since
been followed in the Department.

4
However, the matter was continued to be agitated by Audit and therefore, an
in-depth examination of the matter was again undertaken recently in 2011. With
the approval of the then Finance Minister, it has been decided that the existing
practice to treat Interest payment on refunds as 'reduction from gross tax collection'
and part of 'Deduct-Refund' sub head shall continue."
14. Elaborating on the issue, the Chairperson, CBDT in her deposition before the
Committee stated during evidence as follows:—
"Section 244 (A) of the Income Tax Act makes no distinction between the refund
and the interest on it. The interest is simply calculated by us at a particular rate
at no discretion. We have no discretion from the first day of April following the
financial year till the date we have calculated it becomes par. So,  the refund
which is being given to a person, we do not indicate that this is refund and this
is part as also interest of it. It is just a whole quantum which does include the
interest part. But there is no distinction. It is just a refund of tax plus interest. But
there is no distinction separately. It is later in accounting that we consolidate. In
fact, for the past financial year and even till date we have not actually got the
calculations or what was the interest on the amount of refund.
That is yet under calculation out of the total. So, when we pay out of the
Consolidated Fund of India the refunds which as per GFR Rule 270(4) is not to be
treated as expenditure or appropriation. So, interest is part of that and that has
gone out. There is no separate accounting."
15. Having observed that the then Finance Ministers decided to continue with
this existing practice, the Committee during evidence desired to know that 'whether the
Executive have the decision-making power on this aspect or Legislature should have
a role in it'. In response, Chairperson CBDT, deposed before the Committee that 'it is
the Legislature's power and the Executive certainly is not the final authority at all’.
16. On being asked as to whether at any point of time this matter was discussed
in the Cabinet or it was an individual decision of two separate Finance Ministers,
Chairperson, CBDT deposing before the Committee submitted that:
"It was the decision of the Finance Ministers only. It never went to the Executive
or the Cabinet to decide it all. This was the interpretation of the Department as
understood always and the Finance Ministers agreed to it."
17. When asked as to why interest payments on refunds had been treated as a
reduction from gross tax collection while Delegation of Financial Power Rules 1978
clearly defined that such interest was an item of expenditure, the Ministry in its written
reply stated as under:
"Interest on refunds being statutory obligation is not a part of operational
expenditure like salary, office expenses etc. and cannot be treated as a part of
cost of collection. Cost of collection essentially represents administrative costs
which mean the direct costs for running of the particular organisation—
predominantly the cost of running the Department. The interest payment on
refund has no correlation with the earning of revenue and, therefore, it cannot be
related in any way with the performance of revenue.

5
Moreover, the amount of excess tax is retained in the Consolidated Fund and not
by the Income Tax Department and, therefore, the interest outgo on such refunds
can neither be an expenditure of the Income Tax Department nor a part of cost of
collection."
18. Audit pointed out that in the Budget of 2001-02, under the Demand No. 34—
Direct Taxes, a provision of  ` 92 crore was obtained under the head 'interest on
refunds of excess tax'. To a query of the Committee as to why this practice was
discontinued from the year 2002-03 onwards, the Ministry in its written replies submit-
ted as follows:—
"Genesis of the issue can be traced back to CBDT Instruction dtd. 13/10/1988
issued vide F.No. 380/24/86-IT(B) wherein CBDT directed the field offices to
classify payment of interest on delayed refund of disputed tax under the "minor
head 108 Interest Paid on Delayed refund of disputed tax" below the Major
Head 2020.
This instruction was issued at the time when refunds were required to be claimed
through separate applications and interest was paid in accordance with the then
applicable provisions of the Act. This interest had following components:
(i) Section 214, relating to payment of interest to the assessee on the excess
amount paid as advance tax.
(ii) Section 243, relating to payment of interest to the assessee for delay in
granting the refund after a claim for refund was made or after the refund
was determined.
(iii) Section 244, relating to payment of interest to the assessee for delay in
granting refund as a result of appeal etc.
Clearly the components of interest u/s 243 and 244 were on account of delay in
granting the refunds as per the statute. In fact the heading of Section 243 was
'Interest on Delayed Refunds'. The provisions of sections 214, 243 and 244  were
withdrawn from AY 1989-90 onwards. These were replaced by a new Section
244A. As per the new provision of law passed by the Parliament, there is no
concept of delay of refund and the previous concept was done away with. Thus,
instruction dated 13/10/1988, the basis of CAG observation was rendered un-
operational and superfluous. Thus AY 1989-90 onwards there was a paradigm
shift in the way/manner interest on refunds was paid to the taxpayers.
In fact, it is to be noted that the said instruction dated 13/10/1988 was not
implemented by the field offices due to change of law and administrative
difficulties. Vide letter dated 19/03/1996 issued through F.No. 380/8/90-IT(B) it
was again informed to the Chief Controller of Accounts that as interest on
refunds is paid under Section 244A of the IT Act 1961 alongwith the refund, it is
decided not to treat this as an expenditure.
However the matter continued to be agitated upon by the audit. The issue was
dealt at length within the Ministry of  Finance during the period 1999 to 2003.
Department of Economic Affairs provided, for ` 92 crores under the head interest

6
payment on refund of excess tax for BE 2001-02. This was a solitary instance.
The said policy matter was subjected to detailed deliberations in July 2001 and
with the approval of the then Finance Minister a decision was taken that "interest
on refunds would continue to be treated as an outgo from the gross tax collection
and is not to be shown as expenditure for collection". The said practice has
since been followed in the Department. The matter was deliberated once again in
great detail and with the approval of Finance Minister on 19/09/2011, it was
again decided that the existing practice to treat Interest payment on refunds as
"Reduction from gross tax collection" and part of "Deduct-Refund" sub-head
shall continue."
19. With regard to Ministry's reply that  a provision for such expenditure through
the Budget would be administratively burdensome', the Committee further desired to
know the administrative constraints faced by the Department in doing so. The
Ministry in its reply stated as follows:
"If the recommendation of CAG is accepted then it would imply that such
expenditure would have to be through budgetary grants sanctioned by the
Integrated Finance Unit (IFU) to the Budgetary Authorities. The extent of
administrative burden it will raise can be foreseen from the fact that there are
around 300 Budgetary Authorities (CsIT), each with at least 15 Assessing Officers
scattered in about 730 offices located around the country. During FY 2011-12
refunds have been issued in more than one crore cases. It must be appreciated
that in view of the highly variable nature of the amounts to be refunded, the
period for which it has been retained etc., no mathematical model either exists or
can be devised to predict accurately the amount of the Interest required to be
paid u/s 244A in a particular Financial Year by more than 4000 Assessing Officers.
Even if an attempt to make some estimate for interest payment by each AO is
made, it will be highly subjective, without any logic or basis and accordingly, it
is imperative that such an exercise will result into inaccurate estimates being
given to the IFUs. The natural corollary would be that whenever there is shortfall
of estimation of interest outgo in a particular Circle/Ward,  the processing of
refunds will come to a grinding halt till further expense under this head is allocated.
Delay in allocation of funds will unnecessarily result in further enhancing the
amount of interest u/s 244A to be paid in the cases that would remain pending
due to shortage of funds. Thus, routing the interest through the budgetary
mechanism will inevitably cause administrative quagmire that will adversely affect
early processing of refund returns, increasing the outgo of interest
u/s 244A, poor tax payer services and harassment of  tax payers and thereby rise in
tax payer grievances. This will be insurmountable and seriously undermine the
efforts of the CBDT of the past several years to provide better tax payer services.
In case, the interest outgo is considered separately as a charged expenditure,
due to the absence of any firm/verifiable data available in advance at the stage of
Budget Estimates (BE) about the likely refund outgo on:
(a) processing of pending returns and interest payable thereupon,

7
(b) the likely refund outgo on processing of the returns of income to be filed
in the next year and interest payable thereupon, and
(c) the likely refund outgo on account of the appellate orders (the number
and outcome on the issues not known in advance) which are decided in
the next year coupled with the amount already recovered through recovery
strategies etc.
The entire exercise will be susceptible to conjectures. Moreover, with the
increased bilateral and multi-lateral economic activity with several countries,
any delay in adhering to the improved services will be detrimental to the image of
the Indian Tax Administration.
Hence as stated above, the payment of interest on refunds being highly variable
no mathematical model either exists or can be devised to predict accurately the
amount of the Interest required to be paid u/s 244A in a particular Financial
Year."
20. Elaborating further on the issue of administrative difficulties, Chairperson
CBDT testified before the Committee as under:
"Separate accounting of interest on refunds as an item of expenditure and
providing for the separate Budget head will lead to very serious administrative
difficulties as correct estimation of provision will not be possible. I would submit
once again that this is a payment by the public of India as per their own estimate
as to what they judge their taxes to be due. We have no say in it in the sense that
the Ministry of Finance has no say. Therefore, for us to judge how much extra tax
has been paid by somebody, how much refund will be due from the Consolidated
Fund of India is not at all possible to estimate in a Budget Estimate for a year
because returns necessarily are not filed on a particular date. They are filed
across the year. People file them all the 12 months of the year. They are due for
salary at the end of July. We extended the date to August but the returns have
not been filed. Those who are business people are getting it audited and then file
it by September-October. Returns are not yet coming. Some have started filing
the returns in April itself. So, we have no control. The Ministry of Finance, the
CBDT and the field offices have no control on the filing of the returns or payment
of taxes by assessees which is suo motu. That is part of their democratic right. If
we try and estimate, we have no manner of estimating it. We can only estimate
once all the returns have been filed."
21. On being asked whether the Ministry had analysed the reasons for inaccura-
cies in estimation, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under:—
"It is humanly impossible to estimate the likely interest outgo by each assessing
officer who are scattered in about 730 offices located around the country. If the
task is to be done for more than one crore number of refund cases, the estimation
of likely interest outgo will definitely suffer owing to the lack of advance
knowledge or information about:
/circle6the claims which may be made in the returns of income in the ensuing year,

8
/circle6the decisions which the appellate authorities may take in the ensuing year,
/circle6the decision on rectification applications etc. taken at various levels in the
ensuing year.
Therefore, it is reiterated that no mathematical model either exists or can be
devised to predict accurately the amount of the Interest required to be paid
u/s 244A in a particular financial year by aggregating the needs of Assessing
Officers scattered throughout the country in 730 offices.
It is, therefore, evident that Department cannot take any steps whatsoever to
make accurate estimation of the interest outgo by each assessing officer."
22. Audit pointed out that this  incorrect practice has been commented upon in
the last two years C&AG's Report on Union Accounts as well as in C&AG's Report on
Direct Taxes for the year 2008 and in earlier years also. When asked whether any action
has since been taken by the Department in this regard, the Ministry in its written
submission stated as under:
"The said policy matter has been clarified by the Department time and again as
under:
(i) In the budget of 2001-02, the interest on refund of excess tax was shown
under major head '2020' and a provision of  ` 92 crore was made. However,
looking to the appropriate facts and circumstances of the matter,
deliberations were initiated soon thereafter in the Ministry of Finance. In
a meeting held by Finance Secretary on 10th July, 2001 with Secretary
(Revenue), Secretary (Expenditure) and Chairman CBDT, a decision was
taken that "interest on refunds would continue to be treated as an outgo
from the gross tax collection and is not to be shown as expenditure for
collection". The said decision was thereafter approved by the Finance
Minister on 17/07/2001.
(ii) The above decision was communicated to the Budget Division of DEA
for further action and accordingly, in the budget of 2002-03, the interest
on refund of excess tax was reduced to nil for the RE  of 2001-02 and no
BE was given for the year 2002-03. The practice of not putting "interest
on refund of excess tax" under any head continued thereafter in the
Budget of 2003-04 onwards.
(iii) The Budget Division of  DEA vide their letter dated 10/05/2002 informed
the Dy. Director General of Accounts, O/o CGA that a decision has been
taken with the approval of the Finance Secretary that interest on refunds
of excess tax would be treated as refund of revenue as was the practice
earlier by the CBDT.
(iv) O/o the C&AG vide letter dated 28/11/2003 sought if the issue has
been re-examined. Reply was made vide F. No. 385/06/2001-ITB
dated 31/08/2004 addressed to the Dy. C&AG, after seeking prior
approval of Revenue Secretary, stating that as the matter has already

9
been examined and approval of the Finance Minister taken to treat
interest on refund as an outgo from revenue, no review of the well-
established procedure  for accounting of interest on refunds is presently
considered necessary.
(v) Reply to the O/o C&AG was made vide F.No. 385/41/2008-IT(B) dated
19/01/2009 reiterating the earlier position.
(vi) The issue was again raised by Audit in C&AG report No. 26 of  2010 and
therefore, an in-depth examination of the matter was again undertaken.  It
was again decided with the approval of Hon'ble Finance Minister on
19/09/2011 that the existing practice to treat Interest payment on refunds
as "Reduction from gross tax collection" and part of "Deduct-Refund"
sub-head shall continue. It was communicated to Director General of
Audit giving detailed reasons for the same by Chairman CBDT vide his
DO letter dated 13/03/2012."
23. To Audit's observation that treating interest on refunds as 'reduction in
revenue' is a breach of Article 114(3) of the Constitution, the Ministry in its written
reply has stated as follows:
"The taxes collected by the Union Government are credited into the Consolidated
Fund of India (CFI). Apart from the due tax on the income, the taxes so collected
include the excess tax paid than due on the correct income and the interest
payable by the taxpayer on delayed payment of taxes due [such as interest
u/s 234A, 234B, 234C, 220(2), 201(1A) etc.]. In other words, the refund payable to
a tax-payer is the amount due to it in accordance with the provisions of the
Income Tax  Act.
A comparative chart of Interest received u/s 234A/234B/234C & 220(2) for the
past four years vis-a-vis interest paid u/s 244A etc. is given hereunder:
Financial Interest received u/s  234A, Interest paid on
Y ear 234B, 234C & 220(2) of the IT Refunds u/s 244A
Act (in  ` cr.) (in  ` cr.)
2007-08 4394 4410
2008-09 6344 5800
2009-10 16795 6876
2010-11 15978 10195
As interest received is part of Gross tax collection logically speaking, interest
paid should be part of outgo from Gross tax collection. Moreover, refund of such
excess money to the tax payer and consequent payment of interest thereupon
will consequently be payable out of the gross tax revenues and not out of the
appropriation separately. The payment on both these accounts has the sanction
of the Parliament in the form of the enabling provisions under the Income Tax
Act, 1961.

10
Moreover, the outgo of interest u/s 244A is regularly monitored at the macro
level by the Parliament through Standing Committee on Finance, Public Accounts
Committee and Parliamentary Questions asked in both the Houses  of the
Parliament. Parliamentary Committees have been regularly guiding the Department
on this aspect. CBDT believes that the best way to handle this matter is through
administrative changes that  include technological interventions and  Business
Process Re-engineering especially in the way Returns of Income are processed.
The Department has already taken giant strides in recent years to improve the
time taken to process returns especially refund returns. This would not have
been possible without the watchful eyes and guidance of the Parliament."
24. When asked whether the opinion of the Ministry of Law was obtained on the
matter, the Ministry in its written submission as well as during evidence replied in the
negative.
25. To the suggestion of the Committee that the Ministry should first consult the
Attorney General and the Ministry of Law on the subject and then have a discussion
with the Comptroller and Auditor General on this subject, the Revenue Secretary
assured the Committee during evidence that:
"You have kindly shown us the way as to how to take this forward. Obviously it
has not been the intention of the Department anyway to bypass the Constitution.
The Constitution is supreme. There is no doubt about it and no  amount of
administrative difficulty can be cited in  order to say that we will not follow the
Constitution. That  has not been the idea. It will never be the idea of the Ministry
to do so. We would certainly look into this  how the constitutional provisions
are satisfied and yet, we find a way in which we satisfied the CAG. This
hon. Committee should be satisfied. I think that is what we have to do so that we
do not have the difficulties which we encountered in 2001  when we made it. If we
cannot  do anything, it leads to chaos in refunds. At the same time, you have
rightly said that constitutional provisions have to be followed. We will consult
and we will come back to the Committee with what is constitutionally correct,
legally correct and also administratively feasible."
26. In the meanwhile, the Committee sought the views of Ministry of Law and
Justice on the subject, who referred the matter to Attorney General for India for his
considered opinion. Lt. Attorney General dwelling on the provisions of the Constitu-
tion relating to Appropriation Bill, the Consolidated Fund of India and the Custody of
the Consolidated Fund as contained in Articles 114, 266 and 283 of the Constitution
opined that:
"The objection taken by the Comptroller and Auditor General with regard to the
practice followed in relation to payment of interest on refunds of excess tax is
completely justified. The proper procedure would be to clearly indicate the tax
collection as a receipt and estimate the interest  payable on refund of taxes as an
expenditure. I agree with the view of the C&AG that the reason given with regard
to administrative difficulties is not tenable."

PART  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDA TIONS
The Committee note that the Department of Revenue incurred an expenditure
of ` 37,365 crore on interest on refunds alone during 2006-07 to 2010-11. When the
amount of tax paid exceeds the amount of tax payable, the assessee is entitled to a
refund of the excess amount. Simple interest at the prescribed rate is payable on the
amount of such refund. Refund of any amount as a result of any order passed in appeal
or other proceedings is also admissible along with simple interest at the prescribed
rate. The Department has been classifying interest on refunds of taxes as 'reduction
in revenue' instead of treating it as an item of expenditure by netting off interest on
refunds from tax receipts rather than including this expenditure item in the Budget
Estimates. The Ministry/Department bypassed Parliament and contravened the
Constitutional provisions. The Committee note that under Article 110(e), the declaring
of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or
increasing of any such expenditure comes within the scope of Money Bill. A charge
on the Consolidated Fund of India is payable only after having been authorized under
the due appropriation made by law passed in accordance with Article 114(3) of the
Constitution which clearly stipulates that no money shall be withdrawn from the
Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation made by law.
2. The Committee note that the Financial Powers vested under Delegation of
Financial Powers Rules, 1978 clearly describes "interest" as an item of expenditure.
Asked to explain why the interest payments on refunds was being treated as a reduction
from gross tax collection rather than the same being incorporated in the Budget
Estimate, the Ministry submitted that the interest payment on refunds has no
co-relation with the Revenue earnings and therefore, it cannot be co-related with the
performance of revenue. The Ministry further  contended that the amount of excess
tax is retained in the Consolidated Fund of India and not with the Income Tax
Department and, therefore, the interest outgo on such  refunds is not to be treated as
an expenditure  of the Income Tax Department nor a part of cost of its collections. The
Committee are of the considered view that interest payment, as specified, is an item of
expenditure under Delegation of Financial Powers Rules and there is also a separate
appropriation which clearly provides for interest payments of Union Government and
therefore, the Department cannot claim an exception with regard to interest on
refunds. The Committee wish to remind the Ministry that during the year 2001-02,
under Demand No. 34— Direct Taxes, a provision of  ` 92 crore was made under the
Head 'Interest on Refunds of Excess Tax', a practice which needs revival. Moreover,
as admitted by the Department the tax collected  is deposited in the Consolidated Fund
of India and not retained by the Department and therefore in terms of Article 266 of
the Constitution, the Department has no legal authority to withdraw the "interest" on
excess tax collected/refunds without recourse to Appropriation law passed by
Parliament.
11

12
3. The Committee are concerned to note that  an expenditure to the tune of
` 37,365 crore on interest payments on refunds had been incurred over a period of
last five years in blatant disregard to Constitutional provision. The Chairperson,
CBDT conceded before the Committee that regularization of expenditure incurred
on interest on refunds is a matter of Legislative power to be exercised by Parliament.
Mindful of the mandatory Constitutional provisions governing the financial procedure,
the Committee reiterate that a mandatory Constitutional provision requiring specific
parliamentary approval cannot be disregarded with Ministerial approval on ground of
administrative constraint or difficulty. The Committee wish to remind the Department
that Article 114(3) clearly mandates that no money shall be withdrawn from
Consolidated Fund of India  except under 'Appropriation' made by the Legislature.
The Committee therefore, call upon the Ministry to work out a proper accounting
procedure in conformity with Constitutional provisions and financial rules.
4. The Committee are surprised to note that  the Ministry of Finance did not
consider it expedient or necessary to seek the opinion of the Ministry of Law in the
matter. On a reference being made by the Committee, the Ministry of Law and Justice
furnished the opinion of the Lt. Attorney General. According to Lt. Attorney General
the objection taken by the Comptroller and Auditor General  with regard to the
practice followed in relation to payment of interest on refunds of excess tax is
completely justified. The proper procedure would be to clearly indicate the tax collection
as a  receipt and estimate the interest payable on refund of taxes as  an expenditure.
The Lt. Attorney General concurred with the view of the C&AG that the reason given
with regard to administrative difficulties is not tenable. Further, the Revenue Secretary
conceded before the Committee that the Constitutional provisions have to be followed
and assured to report back to the Committee to devise a procedure which is
Constitutionally  correct and administratively feasible. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the corrective action taken by the Government to ensure that a suitable
administrative procedure is devised in accordance with the Constitution and the
Financial Rules within three months of the presentation of this Report.
5. Having regard to the fact that the Annual Budget is prepared ex-ante based
on sound principles of estimation, the Committee find no valid ground as to why the
Department cannot make broad estimates of interest liability on tax refunds based on
the studied trends of the past. Moreover, the Constitution and the financial procedure
provides for additional or supplementary grants and finally, in case the expenditure
exceeds Parliamentary authorization, the excess expenditure is reported to Parliament
annually by the C&AG and regularized, through appropriation (Excess) Act, on the
recommendation of the PAC. In their considered view reporting of interest liability to
Parliament would bring greater transparency in financial administration of the
country, uphold the Constitution, help reduce interest burden and bring efficiency in
tax administration.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 December , 2012 Chairman,
07 Pausa, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2012-13) HELD ON 30TH AUGUST, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 30th August, 2012 from
1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2.  Dr. M. Thambidurai
3. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
6. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
7. Dr. Shashi Tharoor
8. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri Prakash Javadekar
11. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
12. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
13. Shri J.D. Seelam
14. Shri N.K. Singh
15. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
         1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Malashri Prasad — Deputy CAG
2. Shri R.S. Mathrani — DG (Central Expenditure)
3. Shri Jayant Sinha — P r. Director (Report Central)
13

14
4. Shri Manish Kumar — Pr.  Director (Direct Taxes-I)
5. Shri B. Basantia — Pr.  Director (Direct Taxes-II)
Representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance
(Departments of Revenue and Expenditure)
1. Shri R.S. Gujral — Finance Secretary & Secretary Expenditure
2. Shri Sumit Bose — Revenue Secretary
3. Dr. Poonam Kishore Saxena — Chairperson, CBDT
4. Shri S.C. Jaini — Member (R) CBDT
5. Ms. Ranisingh Nair — DGIT (Systems)
6. Ms. Anjuly Chib Duggal — Addl. Secretary (Exp.)
7. Shri Jawahar Thakur — CGA
8. Shri Rajat Bhargava — JS (Budget)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised the Members that the
Sitting was convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Departments of Revenue and Expenditure) on the subject 'Expenditure incurred
on interest on refunds of  Taxes', based on para 4.1.1 of the C&AG Report No. 1 of
2011-12, Union Government, Accounts of the Union Government. Thereafter, the officers
of the C&AG of India briefed the Committee on the issue contained in the Audit para.
3. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Departments of Revenue
and Expenditure) were called in. Before commencing the examination, the Chairman
made it clear that the deliberations of the Committee were confidential and were not to
be divulged to any outsider until the Report on the subject was presented to the
Parliament. The Committee then proceeded with the examination of the subject.
4. The Revenue Secretary, after introducing his colleagues to the Committee
explained the factual position on the issue contained in the Audit para. The Members
then sought reasons for payment of ` 37,365 crore as interest on excess tax paid by the
taxpayers over a period of five years without obtaining necessary approval of the
Parliament as stipulated by Article 114(3) of the Constitution. Further, reasons were
also sought for not providing interest on refunds as an item of expenditure when
payment of interest was treated as an item of expenditure according to the Delegation
of Financial Power Rules 1978. The Committee also wanted to know whether the matter
was placed before the Cabinet and whether the Ministry of Law and Justice was
consulted in the matter before taking such a decision. The representatives of the
Ministry of Finance replied in the negative. Then, the Committee asked the Ministry to
outline the administrative constraints for not complying with the discipline of
Parliamentary Financial Control and the action taken by the Ministry to overcome
such constraints. The representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) and the Central Board of Direct Taxes replied to the various queries of the

15
Members. The Ministry was advised to devise ways and means of accounting in
consultation with C&AG in order to comply with the constitutional provisions. The
Chairman also directed the representatives to consult the Ministry of Law and Justice
in the matter and if necessary, the Committee may send for them again.
5. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Departments of Revenue and  Expenditure). The Chairman also thanked the
representatives of the Office of the C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance
to the Committee in the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record.
 The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 28TH DECEMBER, 2012
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28th December, 2012 from 1500 hrs. to 1610 hrs.
in Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Shri  Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
10. Shri J.D. Seelam
11. Shri N.K. Singh
12. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri P. Sesh Kumar — Director General (C)
2. Shri Nand Keyolar S. — Director General
3. Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General
4. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General
16

17
5. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director (RC)
6. Ms. Geetali Tare — Principal Director
7. Shri Maneesh Kumar — Principal Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives
of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the sitting of the
Committee. The Chairman, then apprised that the meeting was convened to consider
and adopt the six Draft Reports circulated to them by the Secretariat.
3. The  Committee then took-up the following Draft Reports one by one for
consideration:
( i ) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Report on "Expenditure Incurred on Interest on Refunds of Taxes"
based on C&AG Report No. 1 of  2011-12;
(iv) *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** *** ***
4 . *** *** *** ***
5. During the further course of consideration, some Members suggested minor
modifications in the draft Original Reports. After some discussions and deliberations,
the Committee adopted all the Draft Reports and authorized the Chairman to finalise
these Reports in light of the factual verifications received from the Audit, if any, and
present the same to the Hon'ble Speaker on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
Draft Reports and active participation in the consideration and adoption of the
Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
*** Matter not related to this report.
GMGIPMRND—4651LS—1.3.2013.