Presented to Lok Sabha on 29 April, 2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 29 April, 2010
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2010/Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka)
TWENTIETH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
DEVELOPMENT OF LAND BY
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY  OF  URBAN DEVELOPMENT

P.A.C. No. 1915
Price:  Rs. 84.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10)...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government.............................................................. 8
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from  the
Government......................................................................... 68
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which  replies
of  Government have not been accepted by the Committee
 and which require reiteration .............................................. 69
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which
Government have furnished interim replies ......................... 75
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of  Public Accounts Committee
(2009-10) held on 26.04.2010................................................ 76
II. Analysis  of   the   Action   Taken   by   the   Government
on  the  Observations/Recommendations  of  the   Public
Accounts  Committee  contained  in their Fifty-fifth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ...................................................... 78

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
*Shri Gopinath Munde  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18.
$Vacant
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri S.L. Singh — Committee Officer
* Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant Singh
resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
$ Vice Shri Ashwani Kumar retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee  (2009-10), having been  authorised by
the Committee, do present this Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on  Action
Taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifty-fifth Report  (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Development of Land
by Delhi Development Authority".
2.  This Fifty-fifth Report was presented to  Lok Sabha on 30.8.2007. Replies of the
Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Report were
received on 23.10.2008 and updated replies on 15.9.2009. The Committee considered
and adopted the Twentieth Report at their sitting held on 26th April, 2010. Minutes of
the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3.  For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommenda-
tions of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4.  The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5.  An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the  Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given
at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 V aisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
I.  Introductory
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations  of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Fifty-fifth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Chapter II of the  Report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India for the year ended March, 2005, No. 2 of  2006 (Performance
Audit), Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies) relating to "Development of
Land by Delhi Development Authority".
2. Fifty-fifth Report of the Public Accounts Committee, which was presented to
Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2007 contained 13 Observations/Recommendations. The
Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been
received from the Ministry of Urban Development and these are categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:—
Paragraph  Nos. 95, 96, 99 and 100 - 106
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 107
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government  have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph No.  97 and 98
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnised interim replies:
-Nil-
3. In their Fifty-fifth Report, the Committee had examined execution of
6 developmental schemes undertaken by Delhi Development Authority in Dwarka and
Rohini at a total expenditure of Rs. 605 crore. These schemes relate to—(i)  Development
of 1769.88 hectares of land for housing colonies at Pappan Kalan in Dwarka Phase I;
(ii) Construction of master plan road in Dwarka Phase I; (iii) Maintenance of parks and
plantation activities in the north zone; (iv) Development of  224.90 hectares of land for
residential colonies in Dwarka Phase II; (v) Construction of master plan road in Dwarka
Phase II; and (vi) Development of 472.20 hectares of land for housing colonies in
Sectors 23,24 and 25 in Rohini. The Committee's examination of the subject had revealed

2
several deficiencies in the implementation of the schemes such as—mismatch in budget
allocation and expenditure; lack of financial control over expenditure; non-adherence
to codal provisions in award of works; award of work without ensuring availability of
structural drawings, materials and clear sites; non-recovery of outstanding amount
from the defaulting contractor; weak internal audit system; and lack of co-ordination
with other concerned civic and public utility agencies etc.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Urban Development have
been reproduced in the  relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs,
the Committee have dealt with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their
Observations/Recommendations made in the Original Report, which need reiteration
or merit comments.
II. Lack of Financial Control over Expenditure
[Paragraph No. 97 of the 55th Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
5. The Committee in their 55th Report had noticed that DDA had incurred an
expenditure of Rs. 19.56 crore on four Master Plan road related work in Dwarka Project
in February 2001 in anticipation of administrative approval and expenditure sanction in
violation of Section 2.1 of CPWD Works Manual, which stipulate that no expenditure
should be incurred without prior administrative approval and sanction of the competent
Authority and that award or execution of works should be based on technical sanction.
Even though, DDA claimed that normal procedure could not be followed while awarding
these work ostensibly on grounds of urgency, scrutiny of record revealed that execution
of these works was held up due to unresolved funding issues with the Delhi Government
and there were delays ranging from 10 months to over three years in completing these
works besides cost escalation. Worse, as many as 30 major work have been taken up
by DDA as a matter routine by  invoking the Clause of urgency over the last five years.
While noting that the connotation of the circumstances that are deemed 'urgent' as
envisaged in Rule 17 of the DDA Budget and Account Rules is vague and not properly
codified and has the concomitant scope for its misuse or manipulation, the Committee
had recommended that DDA should lay down a definite set of guidelines/parameters
where under a particular work can be taken up as an emergent case. The Committee had
urged upon DDA that the cases that are deemed emergent should be kept to the barest
minimum possible and efforts should be made to ensure that work are executed after
due process with prior approval and sanction of the competent Authority.
6. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Urban Development have stated as
under:—
"A Circular No. 610 has been issued by DDA vide No. EM 1(10)(2007/Cir./(PAC)
Audit Paras/DDA/ 3916 dated 24.10.2007 wherein guidelines have been issued/
reiterated for taking up the work in anticipation of AA & ES of AA & ES
(Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction) on emergent basis."
7. The Committee are dismayed to find that no concrete action had  been taken by
the Ministry of Urban Development on their recommendations for laying down definite
set of guidelines/parameters for taking up a particular work as an emergent case

3
and to keep such cases to the barest minimum possible. The DDA was just content
with issuing a Circular of routine nature to the field Units/Offices reiterating that no
works should be undertaken without  proper administrative approval and expenditure
sanction of competent authority. The Committee are of the opinion that mere issue of
such Circulars will not yield desirable results unless these are backed by close and
effective monitoring at the DDA level to ensure that the  contents of Circulars are
implemented/followed in the right earnest by the officials at field level obviously, DDA
have chosen not to take any drastic measures to revamp their existing procedures so
as to remedy this chronic malady. Such lackadaisical and half-hearted measures will
not bear any fruit unless DDA view such deviations seriouly and take stringent
deterrent action against the delinquent/erring officials. The Committee, therefore,
reiterate their earlier recommendations that DDA should lay down a definite set of
guidelines/parameters, where under a particular work can be taken up as an emergent
case, and the cases that are deemed urgent should be kept to the barest minimum
possible.
III. Construction of Master Plan Roads by DDA
[Paragraph No. 98 of the 55th Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
8. The Committee in their 55th Report had noticed that DDA had taken a unilateral
decision to construct Master Plan roads in Dwarka Project, Narela sub-City and Rohini
Sub-City and in the trans-Yamuna areas with it's own funds although the Construction
of these Roads came under the purview of the Public Works Department of Delhi
Government. This decision was taken on the plea that funds from PWD, Delhi were not
coming up in the same pace as that of progress of development work in Dwarka.
Subsequently, a policy decision was taken by DDA  to construct Master Plan roads in
the colonies developed by them on the condition that the cost thereof would be
recovered from the land/house allottees. The Committee had expressed apprehension
that continuation of this practice, if unchecked, would lead to a situation  wherein
DDA have to shoulder the entire responsibility for constructing all the roads in Delhi,
being Master Plan roads, and the cost burden is unjustifiably passed on to the allottees
and civic population. The Committee had, therefore, urged upon DDA to hold
consultations with the Government of NCT of Delhi at the highest level so as to put an
end to this practice. They had also recommended that an institutional coordinating
mechanism should be set up in DDA and the Government of NCT of Delhi so that the
Government  of NCT of Delhi allots funds for construction of Master Plan roads
expeditiously. In exceptional cases where it becomes imperative for DDA to Construct
Master Plan roads, the Committee had called upon DDA to recover  the cost from
GNCTD at the earliest instead of overburdening the civic population.
9. In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Urban Development have stated as
under:—
"The matter was taken up by DDA with GNCTD for refund of expenditure
already incurred as well as future funding of MP Roads. But, PWD, GNCTD
turned down the request saying that the expenditure on development of MP
roads is borne by the allottees as DDA loads such expenditure on them while

4
working out the cost of the projects. It is felt that this system should continue.
Hon'ble LG has agreed with the proposal submitted and decided that DDA
should construct all Master Plan Roads including the Master Plan roads having
ROW of 30 mtr. and above in its Development area. The matter, therefore, stands
closed and the expenditure incurred by DDA on Master Plan roads has been/is
being booked to the respective works/schemes."
10. The Committee are not inclined to accept the stand taken by the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi that expenditure on development of Master Plan
roads has to be borne by allottees as DDA loads such expenditure on them while
working out the cost of the project and that this system should continue. This is not
only contrary to what the Committee had recommended in their 55th Report, but also
illogical and totally unjustified. What is surprising to the Committe is the fact that
let alone refund of expenditure already incurred by DDA on the projects completed,
even in respect of future projects, the Govenment of National Capital Territory of
Delhi have turned down the request of DDA to bear the expenditure on construction of
Master Plan roads, which is anything but reprehensible. In the same breath, the
Committee deprecate the lack of seriousness displayed by DDA to such an important
issue. There is no evidence to suggest as to whether DDA had at any stage made any
efforts to thwart the proposal of the Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi and have meekly surrendered/capitulated to the diktat of the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi. The Ministry of Urban Development have also
apparently not taken any initiative to intervene in the matter and plead the case of
DDA before the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi and rather chose
to remain a mute spectator in the entire episode, which is anything but regrettable. At
this stage the Committee can only urge upon the Ministry of Urban Development to
take up the matter afresh with the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
so that at least in respect of future projects undertaken by DDA, the expenditure
incurred on construction of Master Plan roads is borne by the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi and is not unjustifiably passed on by DDA to the allottees.
IV . Award of Work without ensuring clear site
[Paragraph No. 101 of the 55th Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
11. The Committee in their original Report had observed that in respect of five cases
of works relating to Dwarka Project, DDA not only failed to ensure clear site at the time
of award of the works but also did not remove the various hindrances that came in the
way of execution of Project, which is a clear violation of codal provisions of the CPWD
Works Manual. This resulted not only in delay in execution of these works by 10 to 38
months but also avoidable cost escalation of Rs. 7.29 crore. The Committee's examination
had also revealed that much of the so called unavoidable hindrances originated from
lack of sound planning and institutionalized mechanism for coordination with concerned
civic agencies and absence of a synchronized action plan for execution of the works in
cooperation with other agencies in DDA. The Committee has recommended that all the
five cases of works, which resulted in cost overrun of Rs. 7.29 crore and time overrun
of more than 5 years, should be thoroughly investigated with a view to fixing
responsibility on the concerned officials. The Committee had further recommended

5
that DDA should strictly adhere to the codal provisions for ensuring availability of
clear and unhindered site before award of work and the clause for taking up works on
emergency basis should be confined to the rarest of the rare cases. The Committee had
also asked DDA to set up an institutionalized mechanism in coordination with other
civic agencies so that the obstacles and hindrances are timely detected and
expeditiously removed so that the works are taken up and completed on time.
12. In their reply, the Ministry of Urban Development have stated as under:—
(i) All the files relating to award of work have been sent by DDA to the Chief
Vigilance Officer vide No. FO to CE (DWK) 3(41) 2005/6/pt. 3651 dated
22.10.2007.
(ii) Instructions have been issued by the Engineer Member's office vide
Circular No. 611 issued vide No. EM (10) 2007/Cir. (PAC) Audit Paras/
DDA/3914 dated 24.10.2007.
(iii) Instructions have been issued by the Engineer Member's Office Vide
Circular No. 610 issued vide No. EM (10) 2007/Cir. (PAC) Audit Paras/
DDA/3916 dated 24.10.2007.
13. Subsequently, in their updated Action Taken Note, the Ministry have stated
that the cases are still under investigation in the Vigilance Department of DDA.
14. The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation, DDA have initiated
action for investigation into the five cases of works, wherein substantial cost and time
overruns were involved. However, to their utter dismay, the Committee find that even
after more than two years of the presentation of their 55th Report, the cases are still
under investigation in the Vigilance Department of DDA. The Committee deplore the
lack of urgency shown by DDA in this regard, which is anything but regrettable. The
Committee urge upon DDA to expedite the vigilance investigation in the cases so that
the same are completed within a definite timeframe and responsibility fixed to the
concerned officials. They would like to be apprised of the precise action taken in this
regard within three months from the presentation of this Report to Parliament. The
Committee are constrained to note that except for issuing routine instructions by the
Member-Engineer's office to the filed units, no concrete remedial steps appear to
have been taken by DDA to prevent recurrence of this chronic malady of time and cost
overrun in the execution of works. The Committee regret that no action has been
taken on their recommendation for putting in place an institutionalized mechanism
for coordination with other civic agencies for timely execution of the works. The
Committee reiterate that DDA in coordination with other civic agencies should set up
such a mechanism within three months for expeditious detection and removal of the
obstacles/hindrances, failing which responsibility be fixed on the officials concerned.
V . Injudicious Decision to Reverse Rescission of Contract
[Paragraph No. 103 of the 55th Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
15. In their original Report, the Committee had observed lack of a definite policy in
DDA to deal with cases arising out of the failure of its contractors to complete the work

6
within the stipulated timeframe as manifested in imprudent handling of the work of
construction of peripheral storm drain in sectors 1 and 2 of Dwarka, which was awarded
to M/s N.R.B. Associates at a tendered amount of Rs. 1.46 crore with stipulated date of
start and completion as 8 October 1996 and 7 October 1997 respectively. However, the
work was rescinded on 5 August 1998 due to delay in completion of the work. Strangely,
relying on assurances given by the firm for expeditious completion of the work, it was
subsequently decided on 7 June 2001 to revoke the decision to rescind the contract
and allowed the contractor to resume the work. As the firm could not complete the
work, the contract was finally rescinded on 1 March 2003 and the proposed civic
amenity could not be put in place for over 5 years. The Committee had noted that at the
time of final rescinding of the contract, the contractor had completed work worth
Rs. 1.14 crore and the balance of the work was awarded to another firm in October 2003
at their tendered amount of Rs. 96.09 lakh against estimated cost of Rs. 84.15 lakh. The
work was finally completed in September 2005. The Committee were surprised to note
that Work Advisory Board of DDA had decided to reverse the rescission of the contract
merely on the basis of assurances given by the contractor and without conducting
any due diligence and realistic assessment of the capabilities, track record and intention
of the firm and hence was injudicious. The Committee had asked DDA to recover the
amount of Rs. 28.03 lakh compensation leviable, along with interest, under the terms of
the contract from the contractor without any further delay and also to have a provision
for black listing such defaulting contractors.
16. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have replied that a recovery suit has
been filed in the Court and the successive hearings of the case have been held in the
Court and action to debar the agency has since been taken and the agency stands
debarred from further tendering in DDA for indefinite period vide Orders issued vide
No. F. 4(8) 172/Secy/CRB/2003/Pt./954 dated 18.9.2003.
17. The Committee note that DDA have filed a suit in the Court for recovery of the
compensation from the defaulting firm, M/s NRB Associates and have also debarred
it from participating in further tendering in DDA for an indefinite period. They
expect the DDA to pursue the case vigorously in the Court of Law and would like to be
apprised of the outcome in this regard. The Committee, however, find that the Action
Taken Reply of the Ministry is conspicuously silent with regard to measures taken
by DDA to put in place a definite policy and guidelines to deal with cases of default of
contractors to complete the work on time. Further, the Action Taken Reply is also
silent with regard to setting up a mechanism by DDA whereby due diligence of the
contractor is conducted so as to assess realistically his/her financial capacity and
capability to undertake works with a view to obviate the cases of dafault by them. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should take up the
matter with DDA so that they put in place comprehensive manual/guidelines
whereunder works are awarded to only those contractors whose financial status and
track record is proven. An appropriate clause should also be incorporated in the
tender document as well as in the agreement for imposition of penalty in the event of
any time and cost overrun in the completion of the Project as well as for abandoning
the Project midway. Besides, a provision for blacklisting such contractors from

7
participating in any future tenders should be suitably incorportated in the tender
document.
18. To sum up, the Committee find from the Action Taken Notes furnished by the
Ministry of Urban Development that despite being the administrative Ministry, they
have not been able to prevail upon the DDA to streamline its Rules/Procedures with a
view to prevent recurrence of various lapses/deficiencies and shortcomings etc. that
were brought to light by Audit from time to time. The Committee note that instead to
urging upon the DDA to take measures for cleaning up the mess in DDA, the Ministry
have rather regrettably endorsed all the actions taken by DDA. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should not let the things go a
drift in DDA and take proactive and result-oriented steps to set the DDA house in
order. If need be, the DDA  Act should be suitably amended to this effect.

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  ACCEPTED BY
THE  GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations
During the period from 2000-01 to 2004-05,  DDA  spent Rs. 2,061.56 crore on
development of land under various developmental schemes. The specific works
undertaken under these schemes included construction of master plan roads, development
of green belts, levelling and dressing of land, construction of storm water drains, internal
drains and water supply lines, construction of connected underground water tanks and
pump houses and maintenance works. The Committee note that expenditure on 19 such
developmental schemes exceeded Rs. 10 crore each. Out of these, 6 developmental
schemes involving a total expenditure of Rs. 605 crore and constituting about 29 per cent
of the total expenditure were taken up in Dwarka and Rohini. These schemes relate to—
(i) Development of 1769.88 hectares of land for housing colonies at Pappan Kalan in
Dwarka Phase I; (ii) Construction of master plan road in Dwarka Phase I; (iii) Maintenance
of parks and plantation activities in the North Zone; (iv) Development of 224.90 hectares
of land for residential colonies in Dwarka Phase II; (v) Construction of master plan road
in Dwarka Phase II; and (vi) Development of 472.40 hectares of land for housing colonies
in sectors 23, 24 and 25 in Rohini.
[Para 95 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
This relates to facts of the matter and no specific action needs to be taken.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note with concern that the execution of the aforesaid six
developmental schemes in Dwarka and Rohini by DDA revealed mismatch in budget
allocation and expenditure; lack of financial control over  expenditure; non-adherence
to codal provisions in award of works; award of works without ensuring  availability of
structural drawings, materials and clear sites; inadmissible  payments due to non-
adherence to specifications; non-recovery of outstanding amount from the defaulting
contractor; poor planning and coordination of works, inadequate quality control; and
weak internal audit and lack of co-cordination with other concerned civic and public
utility agencies. The specific instances of  irregularties/lapses as highlighted by Audit
8

9
are—(i) Expenditure of Rs. 19.56 crore was incurred in anticipation of administration
approval  and expenditure sanction, which was irregular; (ii) Lack of adequate scrutiny
of tender rates and comparison with rates accepted for similar works during the same
time leading to an  additional expenditure of Rs. 7.43 crore; (iii) Delay in completion of
works ranging  up to over three years as well as cost  escalation of Rs. 7.29 crore; and
(iv) Construction of command tanks and water reservoirs without  linking with the
actual availability of water so as to enable their utilization leading to idling of an
expenditure of Rs. 33.78 crore incurred on construction of these tanks and  reservoirs
due to lack of water. These along  with other issues have been dealt with in details by
the Committee in the succedding paragraphs.
[Para 96 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth  Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
These  issues have been dealt in the reply given  in various other paras.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that 3 works relating to the strengthening of roads at Dwarka
Phase II Group I, Phase I Group III and Phase I Group II were awarded by DDA at rates
higher than that of a similar work awarded around the same time in Dwarka Phase I
Group I in as much as that the cost difference in these cases were Rs. 3.08 crore,
Rs. 1.93 crore and Rs. 2.42 crore respectively. These works were awarded in the same
months and the nature  of the items of works were identical  in all the cases. This, in
fact, resulted in  and additional expenditure of Rs. 7.43 crore. The Ministry  have
contended  that though works were similar, the actual site condition, scope and  quantum
of work differed in all cases. It was further stated that in the first tender M/s Unitech,
the contracting firm, inadvertently quoted a rebate  of 14.1 per cent on the quoted rates
and the firm was not prepared to reduce  the rates for the other two works. However,
after negotiations Rs. 73 lakh was reduced in one tender and in another tender, Rs. 2.18
crore was reduced  by the contractor. All the three tenders were considered to be more
nearer to the market rate that the first tender. The Ministray further stated that at the
instance of Vice-Chairman, DDA the Works Advisory Board held five meetings and the
rates were reduced to a reasonable level. The Committee,  however, find that in these
three cased the works were awarded at rates  above the estimated cost by 11.46, 9.98
and 11.72 per cent respectively whereas the works in Dwarka Phase I Group I was
awarded above the  estimated cost by 1.30 per cent only. This means that these three
works were awarded at rates higher than that of the work in Dwarka Phase I Group I by
10.16, 8.86 and 10.42 per cent respectively. The Committee are surprised to note that
how  a private firm like M/s Unitech could inadvertently quoted the rates at rebate
without calculating the margin of profit from the work. The Committee do not accept
the DDA's contention that all the three tenders were considered to be more nearer to
the market rate than the first tender.

10
The Committee recommend that in future a mechanism should be put in place
whereby the rates offered for works by the contractors are invariable compared with
the rates accepted for similar works within the same timeframe and the number of items
in each work are clearly quantified so that  the quantum or scope of the work is
properly specified with a view to  ensuring that deals are made transparent and no extra
payments are paid to the contractors and that the financial interests of the Authority
are secured needless to point out that such efforts would help the common man as
DDA adds all costs to plot/flat allottees.
[Para 99 of 55th  Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
DDA has reported that the Chief Engineers are observing  the guidelines already
laid down in CPWD Manual-II which provide  for comparing the rates with similar
nature of work awarded in immediate past while deciding the  tenders. However, as
recommended a Circular No. 612 has already been  issued  vide No. EM 1(10)2007/Cir.
(PAC) audit Paras/DDA/3915 dated 25.10.2007 for emphasizing the necessity of
adherence to the codal provisions. A copy of the Circular is attached as Annexure 'B'.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government  of India.

ANNEXURE  'B'
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
ENGINEER MEMBER'S SECTT.
No.: EM 1(10)2007/CIR. (PAC AUDIT PARAS) DDA/3915 October 25, 2007
CIRCULAR No. 612
Sub: Award of the work higher than the prevailing market rate of similar work.
The CAG during the audit of "Development works in DDA" observed that some
of the works were awarded by DDA on rates higher than that of a similar works
awarded around the same time in nearby location and this resulted in an audit
inspection of substantial action. DDA's contention was not accepted and has been
criticized by Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha). The PAC  has
recommended  that in future a mechanism should be put in place whereby the rates
offered for a work by contractors are invariably compared with the rates accepted  for
similar works within the same timeframe and scope of  work is properly specified with
a view to ensure that the deals are made transparent and no extra payments are
allowed to the contractors.
In this regard, the attention is drawn to instructions contained  in Para 18.4 to 18.17
of CPWD Works Manual 2003 which are self-explanatory. It is  emphasized that apart
from the justified market rates, the rates should be compared with those accepted for
similar works  at the same time; and large variations should not be allowed.  If the rates
are quoted higher  even after  repeated call of tenders, the negotiations may be conducted
within the guidelines of CVC and the detailed reasons for accepting higher rates may
be recorded invariably.
Non-compliance of the instructions shall be viewed seriously.
This issues with the approval of EM, DDA.
Sd/-
[A.P. SINGH]
Chief  Engineer [HQ]
Copy to:—
1. All CEs (Civil/Elect.), DDA with 20 spare copies for further distribution amongst
SEs and EEs Jt. CAO/FO & CE (HQ), DDA.
2. CE (QC), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
11

12
3. CE (Design), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under
his control.
4. CVO, DDA with 16 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
5. CAO, DDA.
6. Project Manager (Flyover) GR.-I and II, DDA with 7 spare copies each for
circulation among EEs and FOs.
7. Director (System) for necessary action.
8. Director (Hort.) North & South, DDA with 10 spare copies each for  circulation
among Jt./Dy. Directors.
9. Director (MM), DDA with 7 spare copies for circulation among EEs and FOs
under his control.
10. Director (Works), DDA/Director (PR), DDA.
11. EO-I, II, III & EE (PPC), DDA.
12. Dy. CAO (Plan), DDA.
13. Sr. R.O. (RTI), DDA.
14. Hindi Officer for Hindi version Please.
15. Copy to file No. EM. 8(2)98/All Zones/04/DDA/Pt.
Copy also forwarded to:—
1. PS to VC, DDA for kind information of the latter.
2. PS to EM, DDA for kind information of the latter.
3. PS to FM, DDA for kind information of the latter.
Sd/-
Director  [Works]
Observations/Recommendations
As per CPWD Works manual, no tender shall be invited  unless stipulated material
are available or are likely to be received before the works commences and essential
architectural and structural drawaings together with specifications are ready for being
made available to the contractor at the time of invitation of tenders. The Committee
note that DDA awarded the  works construction of a peripheral storm water drain in
Sectors 1 and 2 of  Dwarka without ensuring availability of structural drawing and
material to a contractor, M/s NRB Associates in September 1996 for completion by
October 1997. As the firm failed to complete the work, the contract was  rescinded and
the remaining work was awarded in October 2003 to another contractor namely
M/s Sushil Kumar & Company at tendered amount of Rs. 96.09 lakh for completion by
17 July, 2004. The work was finally completed in September 2005 after  lapse of more
than one year due to non-availability of structural drawings and non-availability or
short supply of steel and cement, which were to be supplied by the Department. The

13
contract value for M/s NRB Associates was Rs. 1.47 crore and the cost over run
thereof was approximately Rs. 28.03 lakh. The Ministry have informed the Committee
that the Work Advisory Board of DDA gave approval  for the  remaining  works to be
taken up based on using M-25 Grade as mandatory requirement as per revised concrete
code  IS 456-2000. This necessitated revision of structural design/drawings based on
revised  code  and thus led to some  delay in the work. A steep rise in the prices of steel
and cement during this period had also resulted in delay in execution of the work. The
works were delayed  due to reasons beyond the control of DDA. Only a part of site was
not available  and accordingly only some part  of the work was held up due to hindrance
beyond control, while the work was in progress in the rest  of the available site. The
Committee are not convinced by the reply of the Ministry for the reason that the new
IS Code was revised way back in July 2000 whereas  the balance work was awarded in
October 2003. Hence  the structural drawings should have been prepared as per the
new IS Code  well before the award of the work to the second contractor. Further, as per
Section 15.2.1.3 of the CPWD Works  Manual, it was incumbent upon the DDA to
ensure availability of the materials before commencement of the work. Based on the
facts of the circumstances,  the Committee cannot but  come to the conclusion that the
works were not delayed due to reasons beyond the control of DDA but due to lack of
proper planning as well as concerted efforts. It is grossly erroneous on the part of
DDA to justify the delay on the ground that only a part of the site was not available
and, accordingly, only a part of the work was  held up while the work was in progress
in the rest of available site which is nothing but to trivialize the issue to defend its
lapses.
The Committee recommend that DDA should set up a monitoring cell which should
meet at frequent internals to take stock of the progress of works with particular reference
to ensuring strict adherence to codal provisions of ensuring availability of structural
drawings and unhindered site before  award of work.
[Para 100 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Engineer Member, DDA conducts detailed review of the progress of works/schemes
provided  in the Budget at Zonal level every month wherein concerned Chief Engineers,
Superintending Engineers, Executive Engineers, superintending Engineers (P),
Dy. Chief Accounts Officers, Finance Officers, including officers of Planning/Design,
Architectural, and Horticulture Wings  of the Zones remain present. Detailed review is
also  conducted by the  concerned Chief Engineers every month in respect of other
works (not covered in EM's  review). Thus the monitoring is being done at both the
levels. However, Chief Engineers have already been directed vide letter No. EM 1(10)
2007/Circular (PAC Audit Paras/DDA/217, dated 24.12.2007 (Attached as Annexure 'I')
to constitute a Cell at Zonal level for close monitoring and providing feedback to E.M.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.

ANNEXURE  I
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
 ENGINEER  MEMBER'S  OFFICE
No.: EMI (10) 2007/ Circular (PAC Audit Paras) DDA/217 Dated 14.12.2007
Sub: Monitoring of the Construction Projects by Project Monitoring Cell at Zonal
Level.
   The Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) made observations on
"Development of Land, DDA" as contained in the Fifty-Fifth Report that a work of
construction of peripherial drain was awarded to the agency without ensuring the
availability of drawings and materials, and the work was delayed due to lack of proper
planning and concerted efforts on the part of DDA, which resulted into cost overrun.
  The Committee recommended that DDA should set up a monitoring cell which
should meet at frequent intervals to take stock of the progress of works with particular
reference to ensuring strict adherence to codal provisions of ensuring availability of
structural drawings and unhindered site before award of work.
   The above observations of the PAC have been examined at Headquarter and it
has been decided by Engineer Member, DDA that all the Chief Engineers shall evolve
Monitoring mechanism within their Zones with representative from Finance for the
above purpose so as to ensure adherence to codal provisions before and after award
of the work as directed by PAC. The Monitoring Cell shall meet every month and keep
the office of EM apprised of the action taken on the subject.
  Non-compliance of instructions shall be viewed seriously.
Sd/-
NZ, EZ, SEZ, SWZ,  DWK (Rohini, Elec.) (A.P. Singh)
Chief Engineer                  Chief Engineer (HQ)
DDA, New Delhi.
Observations/Recommendations
Section 15.2.1.3 of the CPWD Works Manual provides inter-alia that availability of
clear site, funds and approval of local bodies should be ensured before approval of the
Notice Inviting Tenders. These are necessary to ensure that works once awarded are
executed without any hindrance of delay, which may entail escalation in costs. The
Committee are concerned to note that despite this codal provision, in five cases of work
relating to Dwarka Project, DDA not only failed to ensure clear site at the time of award
of the works but also could not get removed hindrances such as pipe line running below
the site, electric duct sewer work in progress, shifting of electric pole and MTNL cable,
non- availability of drawings of a bridge etc. This resulted in delay in execution of these
works by 10 to 36 months and avoidable cost escalation of Rs. 7.29 crore.
14

15
  The Committee's examination of the five cases of works revealed that much of the
so called unavoidable hindrances were manifestation of lack of sound planning and
institutionalized mechanism for coordination with concerned agencies and absence of
a synchronized action plan for execution of the works in cooperation with other agencies
in DDA. Even though DDA was very much conscious of the possible cost escalation
and felt that early award of works was necessary for avoiding the same, however, the
benefits of taking up projects early on were nullified due to total lack of initiative in
taking timely efforts to remove the hindrances resulting in avoidable time and cost
overruns. The Committee observe that frequent invoking of clause 10 CC of tender
agreements which sanctifies extra payment for cost escalation to the contractors on
account of delays in execution of the works arising from the hindrances, give raise to
the suspicion about the possibility of deliberate exploitation of this very clause by
DDA officials in nexus with the contractors, whereunder DDA would sanction the
works without ensuring clear sites and removing obstacles and hindrances that may
arise in the course of execution of the works so that the works may get delayed and the
constractors could be extended undue favours in the form of cost escalation.
  The Committee recommend that all the five cases of works, which resulted in cost
overrun of Rs. 7.29 crore and time overrun of more than 5 years, should be thoroughly
investigated with a view  to fixing responsibility on the concerned officials. The
Committee further recommend that DDA should strictly adhere to the codal provisions
for ensuring that clear and unhindered site is available before award of work and the
clause for taking up works on emergency basis should be confined to the rarest of the
rate cases and is not resorted to on a regular basis. In this regard, the Committee
concur with the view expressed by the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development
during evidence that ideally the project must be taken up only after the site clearances
are available. To achieve this, Committee would like DDA to set up an institutionalized
mechanism in coordination with other civic agencies so that the obstacles and
hindrances are timely detected and expeditiously removed so that the works are taken
up and completed on time.
[Para 101 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(i) All the files relating to award of work have been sent by DDA to the Chief
Vigilance Officer vide No. FO to CE (DWK) 3(41) 2005/6/Pt. 3651
dated 22.10.2007. (Copy Attached as Annexure 'C')
(ii) Instructions have been issued by the Engineer Member's office vide Circular
No. 611 issued vide No. EM(10) 2007/Cir.(PAC) Audit Paras) DDA/ 3914
dated 24.10.2007 (Copy attached as Annexure 'G')
(iii) Instructions have been issued by the Engineer Member's office vide Circular
No. 610 issued vide No. EM(10) 2007/Cir.(PAC) Audit Paras) DDA/3916
dated 24.10.2007 (Copy attached as Annexure 'A')
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.

ANNEXURE  'C'
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ENGINEER (DWARKA)
No.: F.O. to CE(DWK.) 3(41)2005-06/PL/3651     Dated 22.10.07
To,
The Chief  Vigilance Officer,
Vigilance Cell, DDA,
Vikas Sadan, INA,
New Delhi.
Sub: Minutes of the meeting held in the Chamber of V .C., DDA on 26.9.07
It is intimated that Performance Audit on Dev. of land by DDA was conducted by
the Audit Party from the office of the A.G. (Audit) and the paras were included in the
55th report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha). A meeting was held in the Chamber of the
Vice-Chairman, DDA on 26.9.07 to decide the modus operandi for preparing Action
Taken Notes on the observations/recommendations contained in the 55th report of the
Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on "Development of land by the DDA."
As decided in the meeting action in respect of para -Chief Engineer (HQ)—5(i) for
transfer of all the records relating to these five works to the Vigilance Deptt. for
investigation is to be taken by this zone. Accordingly, following files are being forwarded
herewith along with a copy of minutes of the said meeting and copy of the observations/
recommendations of the PAC. "Any other record whatsoever needed will be made
available as soon as the same is asked for. However, concerned EEs/SEs are being
directed to send the relevant records to the Vigilance Branch.
1. F.O. to CE(DWK.) 1(733) C-13/DDA.(1 to 12/N/&1 to 416/C)
2. F.O. to CE(DWK.) 1(734) C-13/DDA.(P-1 to 10/N and 1 to 275/C)
3. F.O. to CE(DWK.) 1(735) C-13/DDA.(P-1 to 7/N/and 1 to 124/C)
4. F.O. to CE(DWK.) 1(736) C-17/DDA.(P-1 to 7/N and 1 to 205/C)
5. F.O. to CE(DWK.) 1(796) C-13/DDA.2003-04(P-1 to 151/C and 1 to 10/N)
Encl:  As above.
Sd/-
(S.R. Solanki)
Chief  Engineer (Dwarka)
16

ANNEXURE  'G'
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
[ENGINEER MEMBER'S SECTT.]
No.: EMI (10) 2007/CIR. (PAC AUDIT PARAS) DDA/3914 October 25, 2007
CIRCULAR No. 611
Sub: Undue  prolongation of contract and payment of escalation under Clause 10 CC.
The Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) made observations on
"Development of land by DDA" that in five cases of work relating to Dwarka Project,
DDA not only failed to ensure clear site at the time of award of works but also  could
not remove the hindrances such as pipeline running below the site, electric duct, sewer
work in progress, shifting of electric poles and MTNL cables, non-availability of
drawings of bridge etc. This resulted in delay in execution of these works on the part
of the DDA by 10 to 38 months and avoidable cost escalation too. Scrutiny of these
cases revealed that much of the so-called avoidable hindrances, were manifestation of
lack of sound planning and institutionalised mechanism for close co-ordination with
concerned civic agencies and absence of a synchronized action plan for execution of
works in co-operation with other agencies in DDA. It was further observed that the
misuse of Clause 10 CC might not be ruled out where the contracts are extended for
unduly long period.
  In this regard, it is to emphasize that as soon as any project is conceived, all such
obstacles such as MTNL/BSNL, DJB/MCD, NDPL, overhead/underground line should
be identified and action should be taken in advance for their shifting etc. so as to
ensure to provide the site to the agency free from all such hindrances/obstacles.
Further, close co-ordination should be held by the NIT approving authority with
respective agencies and counterparts within DDA; and work should not be allowed to
be delayed on such issues.
Where the exigency demands to take up the work in anticipation of removal of such
obstacles, it will be responsibility of the Executive Engineer to pursue the matter with
relevant agencies and keep higher offices as well as NIT issuing authority informed of
such problem indicating the action required, if any, at their level. If the executing
agency is made responsible for removal of such services, it should be clearly brought
out in NIT.
Misuse of power by granting extension of time without levy of compensation and
allowing undue benefit to the agency shall be viewed seriously.
   The instructions shall be adhered strictly by all the concerned. This issues with
the approval of EM, DDA.
Sd/-
[A.P. Singh]
Chief  Engineer (HQ)
17

18
Copy to:—
 1. All CEs (Civil/Elect), DDA with 20 spare copies for further distribution amongst
SEs and EEs. Jt. CAO/FO & CE (HQ) DDA.
2. CE(QC),DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
3. CE(Design), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under
his control.
4. CVO, DDA with 16 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EES under his
control.
5. CAO, DD.
6. Project Manager (Flyover), Gr-I and II, DDA with 7 spare copies each for
circulation among EEs and FOs.
7. Director (System) for necessary action.
8. Director (Hort.) North & South, DDA with 10 spare copies each for circulation
among Jt./Dy. Directors.
9. Director (MM), DDA with 7 spare copies for circulation among EEs and FOs
under his control.
10. Director (Works), DDA/Director (PR), DDA.
11. EO-I, II, III & EE(PPC), DDA.
12. DY . CAO (Plan), DDA.
13. Sr. R.O. (RTI), DDA.
14. Hindi Officer for Hindi version please.
15. Copy to File No. EM. 8(2)98/All Zones/04/DDA/Pt.
Copy also forwarded to:—
1. PS to VC, DDA for kind information of the latter.
2. PS to EM, DDA for kind information of the latter.
3. PS to FM, DDA for kind information of the latter.
Sd/-
Director [Works]

ANNEXURE  A
 DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
[ENGINEER MEMBER'S SECTT.]
No.: EMI(10) 2007/CIR(PAC AUDIT PARAS) DDA/ 3916 October, 2007
CIRCULAR No. 610
Sub: Award of work and incurring of expenditure without A/A & E/S.
 The Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on 'Development of Land by
DDA' observed that the work was taken up in anticipation of A/A & E/S and substantial
expenditure was incurred. they further observed that neither the Ministry of Urban
Development nor DDA had made efforts for circumscribing the circumstances under
which the works were taken on urgent basis and no justification is seen for awarding
such large number of works without obtaining prior approval and sanction.
   A number of instructions have been issued in this regard from time to time that no
work should be undertaken or any liability/expenditure incurred thereon without proper
A/A & E/S of the competent authority. The latest instructions issued vide this office
O.M. No Dtd. 23-1-06 may be referred to.
   It is enjoined upon all the field units that where the exigencies of the work demand
and the work is required to be taken up in anticipation of A/A & E/S, the nature of
urgency should be clearly brought out in the record and approval of the competent
authority i.e. VC. DDA should invariably be obtained. Where action for call of tenders
etc. is taken up in anticipation of A/A & E/S, simultaneously the preliminary/detailed
estimate should be processed for formal A/A & E/S in a time bound manner.
  The above instructions may be strictly adhered by all concerned. This issues with
the approval of EM, DDA.
Sd/-
[A.P. Singh]
Chief  Engineer [HQ]
Copy to:—
1. All CEs (Civil/Elect.), DDA with 20 spare copies for further distribution amongst
SEs and EEs, Jt. CAO/FO & CE (HQ),. DDA.
2. CE (QC), DDA with 10 spare copies for  circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
3. CE (Design), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under
his control.
19

20
4. CVO, DDA with 16 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
5. CAO, DDA
6. Project Manager (Flyover), Gr. I and II, DDA with 7 spare copies each for
circulation among EEs and FOs.
7. Director (System) for necessary action.
8. Director (Hort.), North & South, DDA with 10 spae copies each for circulation
among Jt./Dy. Directors.
9. Director (MM), DDA with 7 spare copies for circulation among EEs and FOs
under his control.
10. Director (Works), DDA/Director (PR) DDA.
11. EO-I, II, III & EE (PPC), DDA.
12. DY . CAO (Plan), DDA.
13. Sr. R.O. (RTI) DDA.
14. Hindi Officer for Hindi version please.
15. Copy to File No. EM.8(2)98/All Zones/04/DDA/Pt.
Copy also forwarded to:—
1. PS to VC, DDA for kind information of the latter.
2. PS to EM, DDA for kind information of the latter.
3. PS to FM, DDA for kind information of the latter.
Sd/-
Director [Works]
[Para 101 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (status as on 10th September, 2009)
DDA has informed that the cases are still under investigation in the vigilance
department of DDA.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
Observations/Recommendations
According to Clause 504.8 of the Ministry of Surface Transport specifications
contract unit rate for a work shall be paid in full carrying out all the required operations
and no separate payment should be made for primer coat/tack coat. Audit scrutiny of
the work relating to Master Plan Road Phase I Group III Dwarka veiled that an amount

21
of Rs. 32.68 lakh was released by DDA during December 2001 to June 2004 for payment
to the contractor for primer coat/tack coat though there was no such stipulation or
requirement in the schedule of quantities attached to the tender documents/agreement.
According to Audit, no separate payment was to be made for primer coat/tack coat and
it should have been included in the unit rate of work as a whole. This was also clarified
by Chief Engineer in Novemeber, 2004. Similarly in another work of Master Plan Road
Phase I Group I, Dwarka, Rs. 41.14 lakh was separately paid to the contractor for primer
coat/tack coat. The Chief Technical Examiner as well as the Chief Engineer clarified that
the amount were not payable. Accordingly, DDA withheld Rs. 32.68 lakh and Rs. 46.48
lakh respectively from the payments made for these 2 works pending final action to be
taken on receipt of reports from the Vigilance Department and the Chief Technical
Examiner. The Committee was informed that the matter was subsequently referred to
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) and a view on the balance payment is being in
DDA on the observations of CVC. The Committee regret to note that despite clear
specifications laid down by the Ministry of Surface Transport that contract unit rate
for a work includes all the required operations including prima coat/tack coat, DDA has
conveniently ignored or by passed these specifications resulting in release of excess
amount to the contractor in 2 works relating to construction of Master Plan roads.
Though the amount was withheld subsequently in view of the instructions by the
Chief Engineer, nevertheless these instances point to lack of proper understanding
and interpretation the work specifications relating to construction of road.
The Committee trust that in future DDA would take adequate precautions to that no
extra amount is paid to the contractor for carrying out these operations/items, which
per se are subsumed in the contract unit rate for the work as a whole.
[Para 102 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is clarified that the observations are based on Central Technical Examiner's
observations. The Central Technical Examiner has accepted the  contention of the
DDA and as informed by the   Executing   Engineer,   Vig. VI. D.D.A vide No. F.26(03)/
Vig./IV/347/5739 dated 30.6.2006 (Annexure 'H') that the relevant paras have been
dropped by CVC. Therefore, there may not be any need for issuing further circular as
the action of the concerned Executive Engineer was in order and the issue has already
been dropped by Central Technical Examiner as well as Vigilance Cell of D.D.A.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.

ANNEXURE  'H'
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
(VIGILANCE  BRANCH)
No.: F 26(03)03 Vig./IV/347/5739 Dated 30.6.06
The Chief Engineer (Dwarka),
D.D.A., Mangla Puri,
New Delhi.
Sub: CE's report regarding Master Plan Road in Group-I Phase-I, Dwarka.
Ref: (i)  Your off ice letter No. CE/DWK/13(231)WD-6/2002/1503 dated 9.6.06.
(ii) This office letter No.F. 26(3)03/Vig./IV/113/5329 dated 19.6.06.
In continuation to this office letter cited above. It is to inform that Para Nos. 11.2.10
& 11.2.11 have been dropped by CVC. It is for your information please.
Sd/-
Ex. Engineer (Vig.) VI
D.D.A.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee's examination has revealed that there is lack of a definite policy in
DDA to deal with cases arising out of the failure of its contractors to complete the work
within the stipulated time frame. This was best manifested in its imprudent handling of
the work of construction of peripheral of storm water drain in Sectors 1 and 2 of
Dwarka. As per records, this work was awarded to a firm, M/s N.R.B. Associates at its
tendered amount of Rs. 1.46 crore with stipulated date of start and completion as 8
October, 1996 and 7 October. 1997 respectively. However, the work was rescinded on 5
August, 1998 on the ground of delay in completion of the work. Relaying on assurances
given by the Firm for expeditious completion of the work, it was subsequently decided
with the approval of the Chief Engineer on 7 June, 2001 to revoke the decision to
rescind the contract and allowed the contractor to resume the work. As the firm could
not complete the work, the contract was finally rescinded on 1 March, 2003. Due to the
flip-flop by DDA in the decision making process, the proposed civic amenity could not
be put in place for over 5 years. The Committee note that at the time of final rescinding
of the contract, the contractor had completed work worth Rs. 1.14 crore and the balance
of the work was awarded to another firm in October, 2003 at their tendered amount of
Rs. 96.09 lakh against estimated cost of Rs. 84.15 lakh. The work was finally completed
in September, 2005. The Committee are surprised to note that the Work Advisory Board
of DDA had decided to reverse the recession of the contract merely on the basis of
assurances given by the contractor and without conducting any due diligence and
22

23
realistic assessment of the capabilities, track record and intention of the firm and hence
was injudicious. As a result there was unavoidable delay in completion of the work as
well as cost escalation, which is anything but regrettable.
The Committee would like DDA to recover the amount of Rs. 28.03 lakh compensation
leviable, along with interests under the terms of the contract from the contractor
without any further delay. The Committee trust that DDA must have provision for
black listing such defaulting contractors.
[Para 103 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(i) A recovery suit has been filed in the Court and the next date of Rearing is us
29.4.2008.
(ii) Action to debar the agency has since been taken and the agency stands
debarred from further tendering in DDA for indefinite period vide Orders issued
vide No.F.4(8)172/Secy./CRB/2003/Pt./954 dated 18.9.2003. (Copy attached as
Annexure 'D'.)
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.

ANNEAURE  'D'
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
Contractor's Registration Board
1st  Floor Vikas Minar
New Delhi-110002.
No. F.4(8)I/72/Secy./CRB/2003/Pt./954 Dated 18.09.03
OFFICE ORDER No. 90/2003
Whereas M/s. N.R.B. Associates, 5, Fancy Lane, Calcutta (Now-Kolkata) 70000,
registered in Class-1(B&R) in CPWD vide registration No. 5/1216. File No. 59(5)95/
GS-I/V(B&R)SE-3/Cal., were awarred the work of D/o 1769.88 hect. land at Dwarka
Project Ph.1 i/c alternative plots around village Amberhai,  Bagdola & Manglapuri. SH:
C/o peripheral storm water drains in Sec. 1 & 2 costing Rs. 1.47 crores on 8.10.96 having
stipulated date of completion 7.10.97.
Whereas the performance of the contractor was found quite un-satisfactory right
from the date of start of the work.
Whereas the contractor could not complete the work and the same was finally
rescinded.
Whereas on the request of the agency the aforesaid rescission was revoked by
W.A.B. on 7.6.01 with the condition that the balance work would be completed by the
agency within one year
Whereas M/s. N.R.B. Associates again backed out of their commitments to complete
the work, W AB decided to debar the agency for further tendering in DDA with the
direction not to issue tender to them in DDA.
Whereas a show cause notice was issued to M/s. N.R.B. Associates at their both
the known addresses but the same was received back undelivered from the postal
department.
[Para 103 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (status as on 10th September, 2009)
DDA has informed that as intimated earlier a recovery suit has been filed in the
Court and the next date of hearing of the case in  the Court is 25th November, 2009.
As regards black listing of the firm, it stands barred from further tendering in DDA
for indefinite period.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
S-1/E/Report 2010/2535Ls/ Job No- 36 to 43
24

Observations/Recommendations
The Committee are dismayed to find that DDA do not have a system for
synchronizing creation of infrastructure and their utilization. Based on the Project
Report prepared in July 1992, which envisaged water requirement of 80 MGD (Million
Gallons per Day) to cater to an anticipated population of about 12 lakh in the sub-
city, DDA planned the construction of four command tanks in Phase I and two in
Phase II for the supply of water to the general public.  By March, 2004, DDA had
created a storage capacity of 36 MGD whereas the quantum of water received from
the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) was only 2 MGD, which was subsequently increased to
3 MGD with effect from July 2004. As a result, three out of the four command tanks
constructed in Dwarka in between 1999 to 2004 at an expenditure of Rs. 29.14 crore
remained idle as of December 2005. The Committee note that based on the present
population in Dwarka, the requirement of water was actually only 10 MGD as of
February 2005  and thus the construction of the command tanks was not linked with
the actual requirement as well as availability of water. The Committee observe that
this quantum of 3 MGD of water being supplied by DJB or in fact   even the full
present requirement of 10 MGD was within the capacity of command tank No. 2 alone
and hence the money invested on the remaining three unused tanks could have been
avoided till the increased supply of water is obtained from DJB. The Committee are
not convinced by the Ministry's explanation that such big tanks cannot be
constructed within a short period in view of the fact that the command tanks were
completed within a period of 2 to 3 years whereas the township like Dwarka took
about 10 years to come up. The Committee do not accept the DDA's stand that the
cost factor for early construction of the command tanks is beneficial as the cost of
construction has now increased manifold for the simple reason that prolonged non-
use of underground structures faces the risk of their progressive deterioration
requiring additional funds for their repair so as to render them usable at a subsequent
stage. In addition expenditure on manpower for managing these tanks approximately
comes to around Rs. 3.00 lakh per year. Moreover, the huge money invested on these
assets  could always have been used on other more important and pressing
requirements. The  Committee are baffled that DDA started construction of the fifth
tank despite the fact that only three tanks are partially in operation at present due to
inadequate water supply/pressure. What is missing in this whole episode is lack of
anticipation and coordination with the concerned  agencies as well as prioritizing of
schemes and the objective of creating infrastructure, which is actually required and
that can be immediately used on its completion.
The Committee urge upon DDA to take up the matter at appropriate levels to get the
required quantity of water from DJB so that the unused command tanks are put to use
without any delay. They also recommend that DDA should put in place a proper
mechanism in coordination with other civic bodies like DJB to ensure that resources
are invested wisely and assets created therefrom do not remain idle.
[Para 104 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
25

26
Action Taken
The matter is being pursued vigorously by DDA with Delhi Jal Board. A letter to this
effect has also been written vide No. CE (DWK)26(1)07/WS/3638 dated 19.10.2007
(Copy attached as Annexure 'E'). The matter is being pursued further during the
coordination meetings with the Delhi Jal Board (Annexure 'M').
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.

ANNEXURE  'E'
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ENGINEER [DWARKA]
DWARKA PROJECT OFFICE
MANGLAPURI, NEW DELHI.
No. CE/DWK/26(1)07/WS/3638 Dated: 19.10.07
To,
The Member (Water),
Delhi Jal Board, G.N.C.T.D.,
Varunalaya Building Phase-II,
New Delhi.
Sub: Command Tanks constructed by DDA in Dwarka Zone not used due to
short-supply of water from DJB.
D.D.A. has constructed 4 Nos. Command Tanks i.e. CT-1, CT-2, CT-3 and CT-4 in
different Sectors of Dwarka zone as per the schemes approved by Delhi Jal Board.
Delhi Jal Board is supplying only 2.8 MGD water with the result only two Nos. Command
Tanks are in use. Balance two Nos. Command Tanks constructed by DDA are lying
unused due to short supply of water from Delhi Jal Board. As per the present habitation
in Dwarka Zone, the present requirement of Water is 8 MGD and Delhi Jal Board is
supplying only 2.8 MGD water.
In view of above, it is requested that keeping in view the present habitation and
demand, minimum 8 MGD water be supplied to Dwarka area and this help DDA to put
in use all the 4 nos. of command tanks constructed by DDA and the DJB water shall be
made available to all the residents of the Dwarka Zone.
[Er. S.R. Solanki]
Chief  Engineer [Dwarka]
Copy to:—
1. Engineer Member, DDA for kind information.
2. Chief Engineer (South), Delhi Jal Board, Varunalaya Building, Jhandewalan,
New Delhi.
3. S.E., CC-17, DDA for necessary action.
Sd/-
Chief  Engineer [Dwarka]
27

ANNEXURE 'M'
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
[E.M'S SECTT.]
No. EM3(25)86/Vol-17/DDA/1985 Dated: 31.5.07
9.6.07
MINUTES  OF  THE  MEETING
Sub: Issue between DDA and DJB:
A meeting has convened on 17.5.07 at 11.30 A.M. in the Conference Hall to discuss
the various issues belonging to DDA and DJB.
List of the officers who attended the meeting is annexed.
The various issues due for discussion were circulated alongwith the meeting notice.
Deliberations about these issues are reflected as under:—
A.  Levy of Infrastructure Fund
During the discussion, DJB officers intimated that the total dues against the
infrastructure charges were Rs. 33,66,92,622/-, which were already conveyed to DDA.
However, the same has now been reduced to Rs. 25,95,38,912/-, after adjusting the
amount received thereafter from DDA and correction made on account of some colonies
shown at two places. The details of the revised amount was given there itself in the
meeting.
CE(DWK), DDA, informed that after reviewing, the total pending liabilities against
DDA are Rs. 18,49,00971/- only. DDA's claims against DJB are listed at 'B' on P-3. DDA
officers further informed that this amount of Rs. 18,49,00971/- also includes the following
which are not payable to DJB as described in next para. The details of this amount have
already been sent to SE(P) water/DJB by SE(DWK) vide letter No. F2(61)06/CC-2/
DDA/1040 dated 15.5.07.
(i) The Infrastructure charges for Slum & JJ colonies & others:—
DJB has claimed Rs. 1,51,62,003 for six colonies developed by DDA, on behalf
of Slum & JJ & IAAI, DDA has just carried out the work on their behalf,
therefore, the infrastructure fund shall be payable by them only & is not justified
to be levied on DDA. Moreover, in one of the meeting held in the chamber of
Chief Secretary, Govt. of NCT it was decided that this amount against the Slum
& JJ Colonies shall be charged to plan fund of Delhi Govt. (copy enclosed).
Hence this amount is not agreeable.
28

29
The other dispute is of Rs. 12,00,000/- still withheld by DDA on account of
deptt. charges from the already withheld amount of Rs. 1,63,47855/- which are
not payable as per the policy of DDA, however, the balance withheld amount
was already released, beside this Rs. 46,048/- of East Zone is also not
considered while finalizing the details of dues.
Therefore, the total amount of these account comes out to Rs. 16406051/-.
(ii) An amount of Rs. 4,75,24,389/- has been paid to DJB for various colonies by
DDA after the statement reflecting an amount of Rs. 33,66,92,622/- was sent
to DDA. This amount shall be adjusted from this statement.
(iii) An amount of Rs. 9176828/- as detailed in the enclosed list is a disputed
amount as some of the schemes have been reflected twice in the statement.
The same may be adjusted.
After accounting for the above amounts at (i), (ii), (iii) the net amount payable
to DJB at this stage works out only Rs. 10,35,07,415/-
In addition to the above amounts, DJB, also made a demand on account of
the following:—
An amount of Rs. 1,60,49,838/-, for the infrastructure fund of 20 different
societies of Dwarka is included in this amount of Rs. 18,49,00971/-. In this
regard it was informed by Director (Bldg.) that DDA only forwards the
service schemes submitted by the society, to DJB for their approval. The
demand for Central storages charges and infrastructure fund should directly
be raised by DJB to the President/Secretary of the society under intimation
to Building Section for information only.
President/Secretary of the society deposit the Central Storage charges
and infrastructure fund directly to DJB. Moreover, no intimation of approval
of plans & deposited amount is sent by the President/Secretary of the
society to the Building section of DDA. In this regard it was intimated that
it will not be possible for DDA to collect the charges from the society on
behalf of DJB. Therefore, the amount should be collected one time from
the society by DJB before the approval of the scheme & issuing the NOC.
However, just to help out the DJB it was decided that the list of the
defaulters may be given to DDA so as to stop the issue of completion
certificate if not issued so far or stoppage of water supply after proper
notices if possible.
DJB also demand the payment of Rs. 9,73,97,817/- as the 4th instalment of
the infrastructure fund for water supply scheme in various zones but as
per the decision taken earlier during the last meeting held on 15.7.04 between
VC, DDA and CEO/DJB, (copy enclosed) 4th instalment of infrastructure
fund of water supply scheme is payable to DJB only when water is actually
provided by DJB. In view of this, this amount is not payable at this stage
hence should have not  included in above amount.

30
In veiw of the above, it was informed by DDA officers that at present only
an amount of Rs. 10,35,07,514/- is payable to DJB but as DJB has to pay
the proportionate cost amounting to Rs. 2270.75 lacs for command tank
and SPS constructed at Dwarka by DDA, the net amount of Rs. 1235.68 lac
is payable by DJB to DDA.
VC, DDA desired that DJB should reconcile this amount immediately, and
if this amount is agreed, the same shall be adjusted for the forthcoming
scheme of DDA in case of DJB's inability to pay to DDA due to financial
constraints.
Action-CE(DWK)-DJB
B.  DDA dues towards proportionate cost of Command Tanks and SPS
DDA officers informed that on account of proportionate cost of Command Tanks
and SPS constructed by DDA at Dwarka, DJB is to pay an amount of Rs. 2270.75 lacs
DJB had a reservation on the amount of the proportionate charge of Command Tanks
and SPS-I. It was decided during the meeting that the matter may be sorted-out by
arranging a meeting with CE(DWK) without any further delay.
Action-CE(DWK)-DJB
C.  Handing over of services of 146 colonies
The matter regarding the handing over of 146 colonies was also discussed during
the meeting. It was informed by  DJB officers that in certain areas due to the short
supply of water as in Sector-20 to 25, Rohini DJB will not be able to take over the water
supply services from DDA.
The details of the colonies for which the plans had already been submitted for
sewerage and water supply schemes. Due to the poor response shown by DJB in
taking over the services, even the joint inspections are yet to be carried out. In this
regard DJB officers stated that at some locations,  the DDA staff was not able to get the
pressure checked in line. List of colonies etc. shall be sent again alongwith names of
DDA officers to respective CEs of DJB.
Action-E.O.-II to EM
VC, DDA desired that a time bound programme for different activities involved in
for taking over these services shall be submitted within a week's time and the address
& telephone Nos. of the Division of DJB responsible to take over the services may also
be intimated, for smooth and early handing over of the services. Further VC, DDA
advised that the meeting at least at the level of Chief Engineers between the two
departments should be held monthly so that if any bottleneck or shortfall is observed
from any side, the same can be cleared during the meeting itself.
Action-All CEs/DDA-DJB
D.  Handing over of water supply system at Dwarka
It was informed to DJB officers that in spite of the directions of Hon'ble L.G., Secy.
(UD) and Parliament Committee, DJB has not yet started the process of taking over the
Water Supply System of Dwarka sub-city.

31
In this regard DJB officers informed that the copy of the approved scheme/completion
plan has not been submitted in some of the schemes. List of such schemes was not
available. VC, DDA directed to CE(DWK) that the necessary requirement should be
fulfilled within a weeks time and ensure that the joint inspection in all the colonies
should be completed within a time frame.
VC, DDA asked DJB officers to prepare a time table for joint inspection of the water
supply system of Dwarka sub-city as agreed by CEO/DJB with Secy(UD).
Action-CE(DWK)-DJB
To conclude VC, DDA informed that DDA is keen to sort out this matter of
infrastructure fund and proportionate cost of SPS-I and Command Tanks and ready to
make all the due payments if DJB gives us time bound programme for supply of water.
The meeting ended with a vote of thanks to the chair.
This issues with the approval of EM/DDA.
Sd/-
Director (Works)
Encl:-Annexure 'A'
Copy to:—
1. PS to VC for information
2. CEO, DJB.
3. EM, DDA.
4. FM, DJB.
5. Member (Sewerage), DJB.
6. Member (Water) , DJB.
7. CE(HQ, SEZ, SWZ, DWK, RZ, NZ, EZ, Elect), DDA.,
8. CAO, DDA.
9. E.O-II to EM, DDA.
Sd/-
Director (Works)

Sub: Comments on the remedial/Corrective Action Taken Note on 55th Report of
the Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on Chapter II of the
Comptroller and Auditor General's Audit Report No. 2 of 2006 for the year
ended March, 2005 regarding "Developlment of land by DDA".
S.No. & Comments of Audit on the Replies on the comments of Audit.
Para No. Remedial/Corrective
of 55th Action Taken Note on
Report of the 4th Report of PAC
PAC. (14th Lok Sabha).
12 3
Sl. No. 5, (1) Whether any institutional (1) Yes — Institutional
Para 101  monitoring      mechanism Mon itoring mechanism such
has   been   developed   to as execution of works and
ensure  due   coordination incurring expenditure there-
with   other civic  agencies against only after proper A/A
involved    in   removal   of & E/S, creation of infrastructure
hindrances? fac ilities only after ensuring that
the same is immediately usable
(2) Wheter any responsibility on the completion of work and to
fixed  where  there  is cost avoid undue prolongation of
escalation or delay due to contract because of hindrances
failure to supply drawings resulting in payment of
and designs to firm? Escalation under Clause 10 CC,
has been developed, and
guidelines in this regard have
been issued to all concerned for
strict compliance in future vide
Circular Nos. 609 and 611, dt.
25.10.2007 issued by Director
(Works), DDA (Annexures A
1,
B1, & C1).
(2) All the files of five cases, relating
to the works, have been sent of
Chief Vigilance Officer vide No.
FO to CE(DWK) 3(41)2005-06/
Part/3651, dt. 22-10-07
(Annexure-D
1) for fixing
responsibility on the erring
officers. The matter is still under
investigation by the Vigilance
Department.
32

33
Sl. No. 6, Please furnish a copy of reprot A copy of the report submitted by
Para 102 submitted by Central Technical Chief Technical Examiner, CVC & a
Examiner as well as by Vigilance letter from the Vigilance Cell, DDA
Cell of DDA in this regard. vide which the relevant paras of the
CTE Nos. 11.2.10 & 11.2.11 have
been dropped by the CVC are
enclosed as per Annexure-E
1 & F1
respectively.
Sl. No. 9, Is there any deterioration in the 1. No. deterioration in the structure
Para 105 structures        created?        Will has been observed as on date.
additional      expenditure      be 2. Likely additional expenditure to
required  as  and  when  under be incurred will be only on
ground        water        reservoirs routine works like cleaning of
are brought into use ? What are tank and making connection etc.
the arrangement for their safety at the time of commissioning of
 and upkeep? tank.
3 . Operational staff has been
deputed to safeguard electrical
machinery by EE (Elect.)
concerned.
Sl. No. 10 Whether    audit    of    79   units Yes— The Audit of 79 Units was
Para 106 targeted  for  audit  out  of  total targeted during the financial year
due   i.e.   150   auditable   units 2007-08. Out of 79 Units, audit of 77
completed? 150 auditable units. Units was conducted as against the
due total 150 auditable units.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
12 3

ANNEXURE  A1
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
[ENGINEER  MEMBER'S  SECTT.]
No. EMI(10)2007/CIR (PAC AUDIT PARAS) DDA/3913 October 25, 2007
CIRCULAR  No.  609
Sub: Creation of infrastructures only after ensuring that the same is immediately
usable on the completion of work.
DDA constructed two underground reservoirs of 3.5 MGD capacity each between
February, 1997 and February, 2000. However, these reserviors could not be
operationalized even after five years of their completion due to lack of water. Public
Accounts Committee (14
th Lok Sabha) observed that there was clear mismatch between
the actual the then requirement and the water being supplied by DJB. Hence, the
expenditure on construction of these structures without immediate prospect of their
utilization was not justified. The Committee expressed their serious displeasure over
the DDA's inability to link the construction of these underground reservoirs to the
actual requirements as well as the prospect of availability of water and consequent
failure to operationalize them, which was nothing but an indication of poor planning
and lack of co-ordination with concerned civic agencies on the part of DDA. Contention
of DDA that Construction of these structures take a period of three years period was
not accepted by P.A.C. despite the fact  that it was responsibility of DJE to supply bulk
water.
In this regard, it is pointed out that in future any infrastructure project is
conceived,phased requirement of various services should be worked out and all
concerned civic authorities such as BSES, NDPL, DJB etc. should be contacted. Firm
commitment should be obtained before creation of such infrastructural facilities by
DDA so that the scare resources are properly utilized. Only infrastructures which are
actually required and are immediately usable on completion of work should be created
so as to ensure that the expenditure incurred does not remain idle. These activities
should be cordinated by the CEs and problems, if any, should be brought out to the
notice of EM/VC, DDA for action needed, if any at higher level. Taking up of any
project without proper planning and assessment of ground realities which resulted in
non-utilization of assets so created would be viewed seriously.
This issues with the approval of EM, DDA.
Sd/-
[A.P. Singh]
Chief Engineer [HQ]
34

35
Copy to:—
1. All CEs (Civil/Elect.), DDA with 20 spapre copies for further distribution
amongst SEs and EEs, Jt. CAO/FO & CE (HQ), DDA.
2. CE(QC), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
3. CE (Design), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under
his control.
4. CVO, DDA with 16 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
5. CAO, DD.
6. Project Manager (Flyover), Gr.-I and II, DDA with 7 spare copies each for
circulation among EEs & FOs.
7. Director (System) for necessary action.
8. Director (Hort.), North & South, DDA with 10 spare copies each for circulation
among Jt./Dy. Directors.
9. Director (MM), DDA with 7 spare copies for circulation among EEs and FOs
under his control.
10. Director (works), DDA/Director (PR), DDA.
11. EO-I, II, III & EE (PPC), DDA.
12. DY , CAO (Plan), DDA.
13. Sr. R.O. (RTI), DDA.
14. Hindi Officer for Hindi version please.
15. Copy to File No. EM.8(2)98/All Zones/04/DDA/Pt.
Copy also forwarded to:—
1. PS TO VC, DDA for kind information of the letter.
2. PS TO EM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
3. PS TO FM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
Sd/-
Director [Works]

ANNEXURE  B1
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
[ENGINEER  MEMBER'S  SECTT.]
No. EMI(10)2007/CIR (PAC AUDIT PARAS) D.D.A/3916 October 25, 2007
CIRCULAR   No.  610
Sub: Award of work and incurring of Expenditure without A/A & E/S.
The Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on 'Development of Land by
DDA'
observed that the work has  taken up in anticipation of A/A & E/S and substantial
expenditure was incurred. They further observed that neither the Ministry of Urban
Development nor DDA had made efforts for circumscribing the circumstances under
which the works were taken on urgent basis and no justification is seen for awarding
such large number of works without obtaining prior approval and sanction.
A number of instructions have been issued in this regard from time to time that no
work should be undertaken or any liability/expenditure incurred thereon without proper
A/A & E/S of the competent authority. The latest instructions issued vide this office
O.M. No. dt. 20.1.06/ 23.1.06 may be reffered to.
It is enjoined upon all the field units that where the exigencies of the work demand
and the work is required to be taken up in anticipation of A/A & E/S, the nature of
urgency should be clearly brought out in the record and approval of the competent
authority i.e. VC, DDA should invariably be obtained. Where action for call of tenders
etc. is taken up in anticipation of A/A & E/S, simultaneously the preliminary/datailed
estimate should be processed for formal A/A & E/S in a time bound manner.
The above instructions may be strictly adhered by all  concerned. This issues with
the approval of EM, DDA.
Sd/-
[A.P. Singh]
Chief Engineer [HQ]
Copy to:—
1. All CEs (Civil/Elect.), DDA with 20 spare copies for further distribution amongst
SEs and EEs, Jt. CAO/FO & CE (HQ), DDA.
2. CE (QC), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
3. CE (Design), DDA  with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs
under his control.
36

37
4. CVO, DDA with 16 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
5. CAO, DDA.
6. Project Manager (Flyover), Gr.-I and II, DDA with 7 spare copies each for
circulation among EEs & FOs.
7. Director (System) for necessary action.
8. Director (Hort.), North & South, DDA with 10 spare copies each for circulation
among Jt./Dy. Directors.
9. Director (MM), DDA with 7 spare copies for circulation among EEs and FOs
under his control.
10. Director (works), DDA/Director (PR), DDA.
11. EO-I, II, III & EE (PPC), DDA.
12. DY , CAO (Plan), DDA.
13. Sr. R.O. (RTI), DDA.
14. Hindi Officer for Hindi version please.
15. Copy to File No. EM.8(2)98/All Zones/04/DDA/Pt.
Copy also forwarded to:—
1. PS TO VC, DDA for kind information of the letter.
2. PS TO EM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
3. PS TO FM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
Sd/-
Director [Works]

ANNEXURE  C1
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
[ENGINEER  MEMBER'S  SECTT.]
No. EMI(10) 2007/CIR (PAC AUDIT PARAS) DDA/3914 October 25, 2007
CIRCULAR  NO.  611
Sub: Undue Prongalation of Contract and payment of escalation under clause 10 CC.
The Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) made observations on
"development of land by DDA'' that in five cases of work relating to Dwarka Project,
DDA not only failed to ensure clear site at the time of award of works but also could not
remove the hindrances such as pipeline running below the site, electric duct, sewer
work in progress, shifting of electric poles and MTNL cables, non-availability of
drawings of bridge etc. This resulted in delay in execution of these works on the part
of the DDA by 10 to 38 months and avoidable cost escalation too. Scrutiny of these
cases revealed that much of the so-called avoidable hindrances, were manifestation of
lack of sound planning and institutionalised mechanism for close co-ordination with
concerned civic agencies and absence of a synchronized action plan for execution of
works in co-operation with other agencies in DDA. It was further observed that the
misuse of Clause 10 CC might not be ruled out where the contracts are extended for
unduly long period.
In this regard, it is to emphasize that as soon as any project is conceived, all such
obstacles such as MTNL/BSNL, DJB/MCD, NDPL, overhead/underground line should
be identified  and action should be taken in advance for their shifting etc. so as to
ensure to provide the site to the agency free from all such hindrances/obstacles.
Further, close co-ordination should be held by the NIT approving authority with
respective agencies and other counterparts within DDA; and work should not be
allowed  to be delayed on such issues.
Where the exigency demands to take up the work in anticipation of removal of such
obstacles, it will be responsibility of the Executive Engineer to pursue the matter with
relevant agencies and keep higher offices as well as NIT issuing authority informed of
such problem indicating the action required, if any, at their level. If the executing
agency is made responsible for removal of such services, it should be clearly brought
out in NIT.
Misuse of power by granting extension of time without levy of compensation and
allowing undue obenefit to the agency shall be viewed seriously.
The instructions shall be adhered strictly by all the concerned. This issues with the
approval of EM, DDA.
Sd/-
[A.P. Singh]
Chief Engineer [HQ]
38

39
Copy to:—
1. All CEs (Civil/Elect.), DDA with 20 spare copies for further distribution amongst
SEs and EEs, Jt. CAO/FO & CE (HQ), DDA.
2. CE (QC), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
3. CE (Design), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under
his control.
4. CVO, DDA with 16 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
5. CAO, DD.
6. Project Manager (Flyover), Gr.-1 and II, DDA with 7 spare copies each for
circulation among EEs and FOs.
7. Director (System) for necessary action.
8. Director (Hort.), North & South, DDA with 10 spare copies each for circulation
among Jt./Dy. Directors.
9. Director (MM), DDA with 7 spare copies for circulation among EEs and FOs
under his control.
10. Director (Works), DDA/Director (PR), DDA.
11. EO-I, II,II I & EE (PPC), DDA.
12. DY . CAO (Plan), DDA.
13. Sr. R.O (RTI), DDA.
14. Hindi Officer for Hindi version please.
15. Copy to File No. EM. 8(2)98/All Zones/04/DDA/Pt.
Copy also forwarded to:—
1. PS  to VC, DDA for kind information of the letter.
2. PS to EM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
3. PS to  FM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
Sd/-
Director [Works]

ANNEXURE  D1
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ENGINEER (DWARKA)
No. F.O. to CE(DWK.) 3/(41)2005-06/Pt./3651 Dat ed: 22.10.2007
To,
The Chief  Vigilance Office,
Vigilance Cell, DDA,
Vikas Sadan, INA, New Delhi.
Sub: Minutes of the meeting held in the chamber of V .C., DDA on 26.9.07
It is intimated that Performance Audit on Dev.of land by DDA was conducted  by
the Audit Party from the office of the A.G.(Audit) and the paras were included in the
55th report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha). A meeting was held in the chamber of the
Vice-Chairman, DDA on 26.9.07 to decide the modus operandi for preparing Action
Taken Notes on the observations/recommendations continued in the 55th report of
the Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on "Development of land by the
DDA." As decided in the meeting action in respect of para-5(i) for transfer of all the
records relating to these five works to the Vigilance Deptt. for investigation is to be
taken by this zone. Accordingly, following files are being forwarded herewith along
with a copy of minutes of the said meeting and copy of the observation/
recommendations of the PAC. Any other record whatsoever needed will be made
available as soon as the same is asked for. However, concerned EE/SEs are being
directed to send the relevant records to the Vigilance Branch.
1. FO. to CE(DWK.) 1 (733)C-13/DDA. (1 to 12/N & 1 to 416/C)
2. FO. to CE(DWK.) 1 (734)C-13/DDA. (P-1 to 10/N and 1 to 275/C)
3. FO. to CE(DWK.) 1 (735)C-13/DDA. (P-1 to 7/N and 1 to 124/C)
4. FO. to CE(DWK.) 1 (736)C-17/DDA. (P-1 to 7/N and 1 to 205/C)
5. FO. to CE(DWK.) 1 (796)C-13/DDA./2003-04, (P-1 to 151/C and 1 to 10/N)
Encl: As above.
Sd/-
(S.R. Solanki)
Chief Engineer (Dwarka), DDA
 N.O.O.:
Copy to:—
S.E., CC-2,13,17 & SE(P)-II, DDA with the request to transfer all the relevant records
in respect of recommendations in para-5 to the Vigilance Deptt. for investigation.
Sd/-
SE. (Dwarka), DD
40

Confidential
ANNEXURE  EI
No. 12-02-11-02.WT-99
Government of India
Central Vigilance Commission
(CTE's Orgn.)
Block 'A' GPO Complex, INA.
Satarkata Bhavan, New Delhi-23
The Chief Engineer(Dwarka)
Delhi Development Authority,
Vikas Minar,
New Delhi.
Sub: Strengthening of the existing 2 lane carriage way, constructing additional
4 lanes, service road, foot path, drainage, X-drainage work and fixing kerb
stone, constructing bridges, culverts etc. at Dwarka Project, New Delhi
Enclosed please find herewith copy of  I/E report on the above mentioned work.
Replies against each para may please be furnished to this commission within 60 days
of receipt of this letter.
Sd/-
Encl: as above. (V inayak Rai)
Technical Examiner
Copy with copy of report forwarded to:—
1. The Supdt. Engineer, Civil Circle 13, DDA. Mangla Puri, New Delhi for
information and necessary action.
2. The Ex-Engineer, Western Divn. 6, DDA. Mangla Puri, Dwarka, New Delhi-45
for information and necessary action.
Sd/-
(Vinayak Rai)
Technical Examiner
41

CONFIDENTIAL
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION
CHIEF  TECHNICAL  EXAMINER'S  ORGANISATION
A  REPORT  ON
THE  INTENSIVE  EXAMINATION  OF  WORK
By:
Shri Vinayak Rai
Technical Examiner
Central Vigilance Commission
'Satarkata Bhavan'
Block-A, GPO Complex, INA,
New Delhi- 110023

INTENSIVE  EXAMINATION  REPORT
Name of Organisation: Delhi Development Authority (DDA)
Name of work: S trengthening of existing 2 lane carriageway,
constructing additional 4 lanes, service road, foot path,
drainage, X-drainage work and fixing kerb stone,
constructing bridges, culvert etc. at Dwarka Project,
Phase-I, Group-I, New Delhi.
Location: Dwarka, Delhi.
Tendered amount: Rs. 29.91 crores.
Period of inspection: 26/11, 28/11, 29/11, 5/12 & 10/12/02
By
Shri Vinayak Rai,
Technical Examiner.
1.0 Particulars of Work
1.1 Name of work Strengthening of the existing 2 lane carriageway,
constructing additional 4 lanes, service road, foot path,
drainage, X-drain work and fixing kerb stone,
constructing bridges, culvert etc. at Dwarka Project,
Phase-I, Group-I.
Agreement No. 4/EE/WD-6/DDA/2001-2002
Name of contractor: M/s Unitech Ltd.
Estimated cost Rs. 29,52,75,171/-
Tendered cost Rs. 29,91,34,153/-
Date of start of work 13.2.2001
Due date of completion: 13.2.2002
Present Progress: 80% (approx).
1.2 Departmental Authorities
Zone Dwarka Zone
Circle Civil Circle-13/DDA
Division WD-10(since start up to 19.4.01)
WD-6 (4/01 till date)
Sub Division SD-IVWD-10 up to 19.4.01
SD-IV/WD-6 (4/01 till date)
SD-II/WD-6  -do-
43

44
1.3 Officials in Charge of work
Chief Engineer Shri Suresh Mehta (up to 30.11.01)
Shri  C. Banerjee (1.12.01 to 28.2.02)
Shri S.P. Rastogi (28.2.02 till date)
Supdtg. Engineer Shri N.C. Gupta (up to 8/02)
Shri Surinderjit Singh (8/02 till date)
Ex. Engineer Shri A.K. Sharma (up to 4/01)
Shri Lalit Mohan (4/01 till date)
Astt. Engineer Shri N.K. Prabhakar (up to 4/01)
Shri P. Keshwani (4/01 till date)
Shri M.L. Nigam (-do-)
Jr. Engineer S/Shri Yudhister Yadav (WD-10) up to 16.4.01
B.P. Sachdev (SD-IV) -do-
R.P. Singh 15.5.01 till date
R.P .S. Yadav from 16.4.01 to 6.8.02
R.G . Bhagel (SD-II) from 19.4.01 to 15.11.01
Mithlesh Kumar (19.4.01 till date)
S.K. Sharma (19/01 till date
Divl. Accountant Shri A.K. Gupta (WD-6) 19.4.01 till date
Shri Rajiv Kumar (up to 4/01)
Asstt. Surveyor of Works in Divn. Shri U.K. Chaukar
Surveyor of Works in Circle Shri S.K. Sharma
Surveyor of Works in SSW's Shri N.R. Gupta
Office
2.  Scope of work
The work comprises of strengthening of existing 2 lanes carriageway; constructing
additional 4 lanes, service roads, foot path, drainage works, fixing kerb stone and
c/o bridges and culverts. Main scope of work includes the following:
(a) C/o 60 mt. wide road including service road: 7420 mt. (approx.)
(b) C/o 45 mt. wide road including service road: 3820 mt. (approx.)
(c) C/o 1 bridge and 1 culvert
(d) Footpath
(e) Fixing of kerb stones etc.
3. Administrative Approval & Expenditure Sanction
3.1 Facts in Brief: A/A & E/S amounting to Rs. 206.92 crores as work outlays and
Rs. 23.15 crores as departmental charges (total Rs. 230.07 crores) was accorded in the
59th meeting held on 20.9.01 of EAC constituted by LG and same was circulated by EM

45
vide letter No. EM. 6(45)2000/Est./12893-916 dt. 5.11.01. The subject work is the part of
total sanction of Rs. 230.07 crores.
3.2 Observations
3.2.1 Details of total expenditure booked against this sanction be furnished.
4. Consultancy
4.1 Appointment & Payment
4.1.1 Facts in Brief: M/s CRRI  has been appointed arbitrarily as single offer basis
for consulting service for master plan roads in Dwarka at a total lump sum value of
Rs. 1.16 crores.
4.1.2 Observations
4.1.2.1 M/s CRRI has been appointed arbitrarily on single offer basis for a lump sum
amount of Rs. 1.16 crores without inviting open tenders and thus restricting competition.
Reason along with action taken/proposed by intimated. Para is referred to CE (Dwarka)
for his comments.
4.1.2.2 M/s CRRI has been appointed arbitrarily by VC, DDA. It may be clarified that
VC is competent to award the consultancy work of magnitude of Rs. 1.16 crores without
call of tenders. Supporting delegation of powers be also furnished. Para is referred to
CE (Dwarka).
4.1.2.3 It may be certified that CRRI had performed all the services as required as per
agreement between DDA & CRRI else action taken/proposed be intimated.
4.1.2.4 Detail of total payment made to CRRI till date along with detail of conveyance
charges paid, if any, be prepared as per Annexure 'A' attached and be submitted.
4.1.2.5 The stipulated completion period of agreement between DDA & CRR was
25.09.02 but work is not completed till the date of inspection. Position of sanction of
EOT by the competent authority be intimated.
4.1.2.5.1 Detail of any extra payment made to CRRI, if any, for the extended period be
also furnished along with approval of competent authority.
4.1.2.6 DDA is having in-house design cell/office. Reason for appointment of
M/s CRRI as a consultant for design be furnished.
4.1.2.6.1 DDA has deputed about 7 JEs, 2 AEs for day to day supervision of work.
Reason for entrusting supervision and quality control work to consultant even though
DDA has full-fledged unit for supervision resulting in infructuous expenditure be
furnished along with action proposed.
Paras 4.1.2.6 and 4.1.2.6.1 are referred to CE (Dwarka) to offer his comments.
5.  Detailed Estimate & Technical Sanction
5.1 Facts in Brief: Technical sanction to the detailed estimate amounting to
Rs. 30,41,33,426/- i/c 3% contingencies has been accorded by CE (Dwarka) Letter and

46
date of accord of technical sanction by CE (Dwarka) was not available on record.
Detailed estimate was prepared based on DSR 97 and on market rate for the items not
convered under DSR.
5.2 Observations
5.2.1 A statement of all the works which are being executed/had already been executed
through separate contract under A/A & E/S of Rs. 206 crores be prepared indicating
the name of work, estimated cost/tendered cost and accepting authority, and submitted
for further scrutiny. Comments on splitting of works be also furnished. Para is referred
to CE (Dwarka).
5.2.2 TS has been accorded by CE (Dwarka) but TS memo no. and date of accord of
TS has not been recorded. Reason for not recording date of TS be furnished. Para is
referred to CE (Dwarka).
6. Design & Drawing
6.1 Architectural & Structural: Structural design and drawings were provided by
M/s CRRI.
6.2 Observations
6.2.1 Structural design given by M/s CRRI has not been checked by DDA Engineers.
Reasons for dispensing with checking of structural design be furnished. Para is referred
to CE (Dwarka).
6.2.2 In the absence of checking of design of DDA, how the structural soundness
and economy has been ensured, be intimated. Para is referred to CE (Dwarka).
7. Tender Documents (draft tender document)
7.1 Facts in Brief: NIT amounting to Rs. 29,52,75,171/- has been approved by CE
(Dwarka).
7.2 Observations
7.2.1 Tenders were invited in anticipation of A/A & E/S. Reason for inviting tender
in anticipation of A/A & E/S along with approval of the competent authority be furnished.
8. Prequalification
8.1 Facts in brief: Applications for prequalification for (four different works)
C/o master plan roads in Dwarka were invited. 37 firms obtained the bid documents and
27 firms submitted their completed prequalification bids Eligibility criteria as per press
advertisement was as under:
"The agencies should have executed 3 number of road works i/c earth filling,
sub grade work, semi dense carpeting, bituminous work with heavy machinery
and equipment, each work of value not less than rupees twenty crores during
the last 5 years. The agencies should also have experience of execution of cross
drainage works and bridge work up to multiple span of minimum 30 M each
along with well sinking/piling work etc."

47
But as per prequalification document issued to various firms, the eligibility criteria
as mentioned above was altogether different than that published in newspaper. The
eligibility criteria prescribed in PQ document was as under:
The applicant shall meet the following minimum criteria:
(a) Average annual turnover (defined as billing for works in progress and
completed) over the last five years of 40% of value of contract/contracts
applied for.
(b) Successful experience as prime contractor in completing at least one contract
of highway (road and/or bridge works) Air Port contract of at least 70% of the
value of proposed contract within the last five years, this experience should
also include the following minimum quantities of work executed in any one
year.
Earth work in both excavation & embankment
(combined quantities) 46500 cum
Bituminous work (DBM/AC/BC) 54440 MT
The applications of all the 27 agencies were scrutinized and following 9 agencies
were finally prequalified with the approval of LG on 13.9.2000:
(a) M/s Bridge & Roof Co. (India) Ltd.
(b) M/s Oriental Structural Engineering Ltd.
(c) M/s Afcons Infrastructure Ltd.
(d) M/s L & T Ltd.
(e) M/s Hindustan Construction Ltd.
(f) M/s UP State Bridge Corporation Ltd.
(g) M/s Progressive Construction Ltd.
(h) M/s Som Dutt Builders
(i) M/s Unitech Ltd.
8.2 Observations
8.2.1 Draft prequalification document duly approved by competent authority was
not produced during inspection. Copy of same be furnished along with authority who
approved the PQ document.
8.2.2 Eligibility criteria for prequalification as per PQ document issued to various
firms was completely different than that published in newspaper. This discrepancy has
also not been pointed out during scrutiny of the applications. Para is referred to CVO
for scrutiny and fixing responsibility for the lapse.

48
8.2.3 Prequalification of agencies has been done on the basis of eligibility criteria
published in newspaper (as evident from CE's recommendation). Moreover
prequalification done is also not correct as per details below.
8.2.3.1 As per CE recommendations (copy enclosed), only four firms listed at
Sl. No. 1 to 4 in para 8.1 are fulfilling the criteria laid down by DDA and others i.e. firms at
Sl. No. 5 to 9 were not fulfilling the criteria for the various reasons recorded. As such
eligibility criteria was relaxed for 5 firms. If eligibility criteria has to be relaxed, then
corrigendum relaxing the criteria should have been issued and fresh applications for
prequalification should have been invited. No urgency for not re-inviting applications is
also put on record. Hence, lapse of relaxing PQ criteria in favour of particular firms without
re-inviting applications is established. Responsibility be fixed for the above lapse.
8.2.3.2 Work has been awarded to M/s Unitech Ltd. who was not fulfilling the
eligibility criteria. Thus undue benefit has been extended to M/s Unitech. Responsibility
be fixed for the lapse and action taken/proposed be intimated.
Paras 8.2.2, 8.2.3, 8.2.3.1 and 8.2.3.2 are referred to CVO for detailed scrutiny and
comments.
8.2.4 Prequalification of the agencies has been done for four work simultaneously
each costing, approximately Rs. 25 crores. Agencies were prequalified for all the four
contracts. As per PQ document "To qualify for more than one contract, the applicant
must demonstrate having experience and resources sufficient to meet the aggregate of
the qualification criteria for each contract."
But while prequalifying this aspect i.e. aggregate of qualification has completely been
ignored and agencies prequalifying for one contract have been allowed to participate in
all the four contracts. Reason along with action taken/proposed be initimated.
Para is referred to CVO for scrutiny and comments.
8.2.5 Director (Works) in his noting dt. 11.9.2000 has stated that M/s Unitech (14/27)
comes under category C and not under category E whereas CE(DWK), DA has stated
that M/s Unitect falls under category E. This has resulted in prequalification of
M/s Unitech. CVO to scrutinize that whether M/s Unitech falls under category "C" or
category "E" and furnish his comments.
9. Call of Tenders & Award of Work
9.1 Facts in Brief: Tenders were invited from the 9 prequalified firms. Seven agencies
purchased the tender document and 5 have submitted their tenders and comparative
position after opening was as under:—
S. Name of T endered Rebate Net tendered Position
No. contractor amount amount
12 3 4 5 6
1. M/s Unitech Ltd. Rs. 336400341/- 14.01% Rs. 297869653/- L-1
i.e. 0.88% above

49
2. M/s L & T Ltd. Rs. 333394674/- - Rs. 333394674/- L-2
3. M/s Oriental Rs. 351803195/- - Rs. 351803105/- L-3
Structural Engg. Ltd.
4. M/s Progressive Rs. 412468134/- 10.80% Rs. 367921576/- L-4
Constn. Ltd.
5. M/s UP State Rs. 381133610/- - Rs.381133610/- L-5
Bridge Co. Ltd.
From the above it is seen that M/s Unitech Ltd. is the 1st lowest tenderer with their
tendered amount of Rs. 2,97,869,653/- which is 0.88% above the estimated cost after
considering the effect of rebate of 14.01%. Agency had not quoted the rate of items of
800 mm dia pile. By considering the lowest justified rate for this item i.e. Rs. 1756.25, net
% above the estimated cost quoted by contractor increased from 0.88% above to
1.30% above. CE recommended to award the work to M/s Unitech @ 1.30% above the
estimated cost.
The WAB board accepted the recommendations of CE to award the work to
M/s Unitech Ltd. at their negotiated amount, which works out to 1.30% above estimated
cost.
Accordingly award letter was issued to M/s Unitech by EE(WD. 10) on 3.2.01.
9.2 Observations
9.2.1 Proof of acknowledgement i.e. receipt of EE letter dt. 21.9.2000 by the two
agencies i.e. M/s. Hindustan Construction Ltd. and M/s. Bridge & Roof who have not
purchased the tender documents, be submitted.
9.2.2 M/s. Unitech Ltd. has not quoted the rate for item No. 16(b) i.e. 800 mm dia pile.
Work has been awarded to them by considering the lowest justified rate i.e. Rs. 1756.25 for
this item. But tender should have been rejected as per clause 10 of PWD-6 i.e. "All tender
in which any of the prescribed condition are not fulfilled or incomplete in any respect are
liable to be rejected". Reason for not rejecting the tender of M/s. Unitech Ltd. along with
action taken/proposed be intimated. Para is referred to CE (Dwarka) for comments.
9.2.3 Prequalification of contractors was carried out for four similar works
simultaneously. However, it has been observed from the quarterly progress report
submitted by CE, Dwarka that the quoted amount for the four works is varying from
1.30% above the estimated cost to 11.72% above the estimated cost. Para is referred to
CVO to scrutinize these tenders regarding award of similar works at different rates and
furnish his comments.
10.0 Contract Document
10.1 Facts in Brief.  Contract agreement was executed on 5.2.01 between DDA and
M/s. Unitech Ltd.
12 3 4 5 6

50
10.2 Observations
10.2.1 The compliance of clause 36 of agreement in respect of employment of technical
staff be commented upon/intimated.
10.2.2  Copy of labour license in compliance to clause 19 of agreement was not
produced during inspection. Copy of same be submitted else action taken/proposed
be intimated.
10.2.3 The contractor was required to submit a copy of PERT chart as per para 43
and 76 of additional conditions of contract within 10 days of date of start of work.
Compliance of contract condition be intimated.
10.2.4 As per additional condition No. 61, following specified works were to be
carried out by specified person or manufacturer with the written approval of E-in-C.
(a) Bearing of bridges
(b) Kerb stones
(c) Interlocking pavement blocks for foot path
(d) SFRC covers
(e) Expansion joint in deck slab, RCC walls and RCC base slab.
(f) Chemical treatment on RCC walls and RCC base slab.
No written approval of any specialized firms was produced during inspection. Action
taken/proposed be intimated.
10.2.5 The contractor was required to set up a field laboratory as per clause 2 of
special condition. Laboratory should be manned by a qualified material engineer/civil
engineer. Comments on the compliance of same be furnished.
10.2.5.1 It may also be certified that M/s. Unitech Ltd. has provided 3 separate field
laboratory for each of package (M/s. Unitech Ltd. awarded 3 packages) else action
taken/proposed be intimated to CE(Dwarka).
10.2.6 As per clause 30 of additional condition of contract, contractor shall carry out
disc test on all RCC pipe lines. Compliance of the above condition be intimated.
10.2.7 As per clause 92 of additional conditions of contract, contractor would
construct a diversion channel for allowing unhindered flow of water in the Palam drain
during the construction period without any extra cost. The contractor has to make
diversion bunds, cofferdams or any other diversion system for the construction.
Compliance of above condition be intimated.
10.2.8 As per clause 110 of additional conditions of contract, contractor shall take
all necessary measures for the safety of traffic during construction and provide, erect
and maintain such barricades etc. Compliance of above condition be intimated.
10.2.9 As per clause 113 of additional conditions of contract, contractor will be
responsible to provide deep hand pump/tube well at site of work. Compliance of same
be intimated.

51
10.2.10 As per minutes of pre bid meeting on 11.10.2000, land for activities like work
shops, stores, labour camp etc. shall be provided by DDA @ 1 lac per acre per month.
However, no deduction for land rent has been made from the contractor's bill. Clarification
in this regard be furnished.
11.0 Payments to Contractor
11.1 Facts in Brief: 16th RA bill amounting to Rs. 22.90 crores (gross value of work
done) has been paid till the date of inspection.
11.2 Observations
11.2.1 Stipulated date of start of work was 13.2.01 and stipulated date of completion
was 12.2.02 with 12 months as period of completion. But the work was not completed and
still in progress during inspection i.e. on 10.12.02 and about 8% completed. Position of
sanction of EOT by the competent authority with/without liquidated damages be intimated.
11.2.2 List of AHR/ALR items were not produced during inspection. Copy of same
be furnished.
11.2.2.1 Copy of approval of AHR/ALR item statement, if any, be submitted along
with reason for increase/decrease in quantity.
11.2.3 Quantities of item No. 7(b), 11(a), 24, bridge and culvert item No. 1, 9, 13(a),
14(a) etc. have deviated abnormally than that specified in BOQ. Reason for deviation
along with approval of competent authority for the deviation be furnished.
11.2.4 Copy of escalation be given during inspection is without base indices. As
such all the 10 CC bills/escalation bill be scrutinized by SE in detail and financial
implication, if any, be intimated.
11.2.4.1 Copies of escalation bill is to be endorsed to SE & CE as per provision of
CPWD Manual V ol. II clause 33.8.8. The same has not been complied with. Reason for
omission along with action taken/proposed be intimated. Paras 11.2.4 and 11.2.4.1 are
referred to SE for his comments.
11.2.5 Fortnightly labour reports were not found attached with the bills. Action
proposed be intimated.
11.2.6 Rs. 50,000/-, Rs. 100,000/- Rs. 100,000/- and Rs. 300000/- have been withheld/
recovered from 6th, 8th, 11th and 12th RA Bill respectively. Reason for withholding
these amounts be intimated.
11.2.6.1 Final disposal of these with held amounts be intimated.
11.2.7 It was intimated during inspection that most of tests have been performed at
DDA lab. and testing charges for the test conducted at DDA lab. Have been borne by
DDA. But as per contract conditions, testing charges have to be borne by the contractor.
Action taken/proposed to recover the same be intimated along with amount recovered.
11.2.7.1 It may be certified that all other testing charges for the test conducted at
other than DDA lab. have been borne by contractor.

52
11.2.8 Actual weight of steel/reinforcement bar have not been checked and standard
weight have been allowed/paid. In the absence of same, how the standard weight have
been allowed, be intimated along with action taken/proposed.
11.2.9 Measurement was not recorded properly in the measurement book (e.g. MB
No. 020269 pages 27 to 30) location and side whether RHS or LHS has not been
recorded. Reason along with action taken/proposed be intimated.
11.2.10 As per clause 135 of addition conditions of contract, the following order of
precedence be followed:
(i) Nomenclature of item
(ii) Particular specification attached with the tender document
(iii) MOST Specifications (third revision 1995)
(iv) CPWD Specifications
Following items are not payable as per the above order of preference:
(a)  In item No. 11 of bituminous macadam, it has now here been mentioned that tack
coat/primer coat is separately payable as mentioned in item of B.C. and D.B.M. etc. No
particular specification for B.M. is attached with the tender documents. However,
MOST specification is applicable. As per sub-clause 504.3.2 and 504.3.3 of Bituminous
macadam in MOST Specification, primer coat and tack coat shall have to be applied.
Further, as per clause 504.8 of MOST Specification, contract unit rate for the works
shall be paid in full for carrying out all the required operations. Hence, no separate
payment for primer coat/tack coat is permissible. Similarly primer coat is not payable in
item No. 12 and primer/tack coat is not payable in item No.10. Hence, all the measurements
done for tack coat/primer coat be revised as per the above observation. Some of the
over payments are listed below.
(i) Primer coat payment amounting to Rs. 25.98 lacs under E.I. No. 1/1 be
recovered.
(ii) T ack coat payment made below BM amounting to 177690 x 5 = Rs. 8.88 lacs
(approx)
(iii) Other tack coat/primer coat payment as given in above observation be also
recovered and details be submitted.
11.2.11 As per clause 509.1.3.6 of MOST Specifications, seal cost shall be applied to
the premix carpet immediately after laying. But no seal coat was provided.
Action be taken for suitable recovery and details be submitted.
Paras 11.2.10 and 11.2.11 are referred to CE (Dwarka) to take immediate action for
ensuring recovery.
11.2.12 Similar action as in paras 11.2.10 and 11.2.11 be also taken for other road
projects. Para is referred to CE (DWK)

53
11.2.13 Twenty-nine extra items have been paid till the date of inspection but only
one item is sanctioned. Reason for not sanctioning other extra items be furnished.
11.2.13.1 SE to review/check in detail all the 29 extra items and offer his comments on
their admissibility and requirement.
11.2.14 Quantity of item No. 24 of BOQ has deviated abnormally (nine times).
Possibility of over measurement cannot be ruled out. SE to verify the measurement of
this item and furnish his comments.
11.2.14.1 CRRI had intimated that quantities shall not be deviated more than + 5%
when the estimate was prepared based on survey conducted by CRRI/DDA, how large
scale deviations in quantities have occurred, be intimated.
12.0 Records
12.1 Facts in Brief: Tender documents, files pertaining to this work and site record/
register were seen at the office of EE and site office.
12.2. Observations
12.2.1 Page numbering on files has not been done. In the absence of page numbering,
possibility of manipulation cannot be ruled out. Reason along with action taken/
proposed be intimated.
12.2.2 Cement Register
12.2.2.1 There were lot of cuttings and over writings  in the cement register. Cuttings
and over writings were not initialled. Action taken/proposed be intimated.
12.2.2.2 Cement register was not reviewed frequently by EE as per frequency laid
down in CPWD Manual. Reason along with action proposed be intimated.
12.2.3 On most of test results, the acceptability limits and whether test results meet
the provision of contract has not been mentioned. In the absence of same, how the
material has been treated as acceptable, be intimated.
12.2.4 Site Order Book: EE to certify that all the instructions recorded in the site
order book have been complied with else action proposed be intimated.
12.2.5 Hindrance Register
12.2.5.1 Hindrance recorded at Sl. 5 due to non availability of drawing for inter
section and T-junction—x-ing for all M.P. roads is still continuing from 13.2.01 i.e. for
more than 21 months. Action taken against M/s CRRI for such a long delay in submission
of drawing be intimated. Para is referred to SE.
12.2.5.2 Hindrance register is not reviewed by EE. Reason along with action taken/
proposed be intimated.
12.2.6 Inspection notes issued by higher officer i.e. SE & CE has not been carried
over in site order book. In the absence of same, how the instructions have been
conveyed to agency for compliance be intimated.

54
12.2.6.1 Position of pending paras of SE/CE inspection notes be intimated.
12.2.6.2 SE to certify that all the instructions issued by higher officers through
inspection notes have been complied with.
12.2.6.3 Inspection register has not been maintained. Reason along with action
taken/proposed be intimated.
Paras 12.2.6, 12.2.6.1, 12.2.6.2 and 12.2.6.3 are referred to SE.
12.2.7 Four  quality control inspections have been carried out. Last i.e. 4th inspection
was stated to be carried out in the month of Sept. but report is not received till date i.e.
10.12.02 (as intimated by EE and other staff). Copy of 4th inspection report of QC be
furnished.
12.2.7.1 Position of pending paras of QC inspection report be intimated.
12.2.7.2 Amount recovered on account of quality control inspection, be intimated.
12.2.7.3 Following samples were collected by QC during inspection.
Date of inspection Sample taken
13.3.02 Core of DBM & SDAC/
Test reports for the above sample be submitted.
12.2.8 AHR/ALR register has not been maintained. Reason along with action taken/
proposed be intimated.
12.2.9 Following samples failed (copy attached) to meet the contract provisions.
(i) Coarse sand 1 No.
(ii) Coarse sand 2 No.
Action taken/proposed be intimated.
12.2.10 28 days compressive strength of concrete were showing results less than
permissible limit of 340 kg/CM2 for M 30 grade concrete and less than the permissible
limit of 240 kg/CM2 For M20 grade concrete. Action proposed be intimated.
12.2.11 Most of tests results of inverted choke were failing in gradation test. But
action taken on these test results for not satisfying the prescribed criteria has not been
recorded. Action proposed be intimated.
12.2.12 A statement of mandatory test conducted and required to be conducted as
per contract provisions be prepared as per Annexure "A" attached and submitted
along with action taken/proposed for short fall in test, if any.
12.2.13 Refer SE letter dt. 16.11.01 (copy enclosed) vide which show cause notice
was issued for slow progress. Final action taken be intimated. Para is referred to SE.

55
13.0 Site Inspection
13.1 Facts in Brief: The work was inspected by Chief Technical Examiner on 5.12.02
along with Technical Examiner in the presence of Shri S.P. Rastogi, CE(Dwarka),
Shri Surinderjeet Singh, SE, Shri Lalit Mohan, EE,WD-6, AE, JE and contractor's
representative. The work was earlier inspected by Technical Examiner along with JTE
on 28.11.02 and 29.11.02.
13.2 Observations
13.2.1 Items were checked at random and observations made herein are deemed to
be applicable to all the similar items and location else where in the work. Entire work
may please be got examined keeping in view the observations made hereunder/and for
other defects and results along with action taken/proposed be intimated.
13.2.2 Sand filling was checked and found as 40 mm against 50 mm required under
the item of paver block (Road No. 201 chainage 1020, LHS service road, rear foot path).
13.2.3 Kerb stone fixed in position were not in one line.
(i) RD 1440, Road No. 201 LHS of service road
(ii) RD 3990, Road No. 201 median kerb stone
(iii) RD 6000 to 6100, Road No. 201 median kerb stone
(iv) RD 3300, Road No. 201 service road.
13.2.3.1 Edges of kerb stones fixed were damaged at places i.e. near bridge.
13.2.3.2 Joints between kerb stone not filled up properly with cement mortar i.e.
found hollow.
(i) RD 1440, Road No. 201 LHS of service road.
(ii) RD 490, Road No. 216 median kerb stone etc.
13.2.4 Paver block were depressed/not in level at many places i.e.
(i) RD 1440, Road No. 201 service road, foot path.
(ii) RD 3300, Road No. 201 LHS of service road.
(iii) RD 490, Road No. 216, between existing & service road.
(iv) RD 4525, Road No. 201 between new and service road etc.
13.2.4.1 Paver blocks were found to be damaged at lot of places (RD 3300, Road No.
201)
13.2.4.2 Level difference over drain were noticed in paver block at lot of places.
13.2.5 Man hole were coming above the road level (RD 3990, Road No. 201 LHS
service road and RD 3300 road No. 201, LHS service, road etc.)
13.2.6 Road in front of NSIT gate settled (RD 5800)
13.2.7 RCC 250 mm dia NP 2 pipe line was found to be damaged/broken between RD
4300 to 4900, Road No. 201.
13.2.8 Lot of repairs were noticed in RCC wall of culvert.

56
13.2.8.1 Bulging and  honey combing was also noticed.
13.2.9 Over size stone aggregates i.e. (WBM grade II) were observed in road
No. 219 at RD 1600 which was in progress.
13.2.10 WBM was not properly compacted i.e. lot of depressions were observed in
service roads in front of Jai Durga Society.
13.2.11 Toe wall was found to be broken/damaged near bridge.
13.2.12 RCC pipes were found to be broken near bridge (LHS)
13.2.12.1 Collar joint of RCC pipes were also loose i.e. not filled up with mortar
13.2.13 (i) Surface accuracy was checked and found to be 9 mm in service road,
Road No. 201 RD 1440 and 6 mm in new carriageway,
(ii) 5 mm in existing carriageway, road No. 216 RD 490,
(iii) Sudden jerks were noticed at following locations:
(a) In front of NSCIT (Road No. 201 from Uttam Nagar to Dwarka),
(b) At RD 6000 new carriageway, Road No. 201,
(c) RD 200 to 250, Road No. 219, new carriageway,
(d) Road No. 201, Rd 1800, existing road,
(e) Between RD 100-150, Road No. 224, existing road,
(f) Between RD 1380-1400, Road No. 202 before bridge,
Action proposed be intimated.
13.2.15 Storm water drain manholes were found opened in the foot path. This may
lead to an accident. EE to take remedial action immediately.
13.2.16 Aggregates were visible on bituminous surface (having lot of voids) at
various locations such as chainage 200-400 Road No. 201, which shows that either
mixing has not been properly or less bitumen content has been provided.
14.0 Samples
Following samples were taken in the presence of Shri Lalit Mohan, EE, WD. 6 AE, JE
and contractor's representative:
S. Description of material Location Test to be conducted
No.
1. Bituminous concrete RD 2910, Road 201 New C.W % of bitumen & gradation
2. DBM -do- -do-
3. BM -do- -do-
4. Bituminous concrete RD 1020, Road 201 New C.W -do-
5. DBM -do- -do-
6. BM -do- -do-
7. Bituminous concrete RD 270, Road 201 (ECW) -do-
8. RCC 250 NP2 pipe RD 1800 & 4525, Road 201 All tests as per I.S.

57
Above samples were sealed with commission seal and handed over to EE, WD.6 to
deliver them in NTH, Ghaziabad for testing.
Test results shall be intimated in due course of time.
Sd/-
(Vinayak Rai)
Technical Examiner

ANNEXURE F1
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
(VIGILANCE BRANCH)
No. F26(03)0.3/Vig/IV/347/5739 Dated 30.6.06
To
The Chief Engineer (Dwarka)
D.D.A., Mangla Puri,
New Delhi
Sub: CTE's Report regarding Master Plan Road in Group-I,  Phase-I,  Dwarka.
Ref:         (i)   Your office letter No. CE/DWK/13/(231) WD-6/2002/1503 dated 9.6.06.
(ii) This office letter No. F26(3)03/Vig./IV/113/5329 dated 19.6.06.
In continuation to this office letter cited above, it is to inform that Para
Nos. 11.2.10 & 11.2.11 have been dropped by CVCIT is for your information please.
Sd/-
Ex. Engineer (Vig. IV)
DDA
[Para 104 of 55th Report of (Vig. IV) PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (Status as on 10th September, 2009)
 DDA has informed that at present Delhi Jal Board (DJB) is supplying 3.0 MGD
water for Dwarka Zone against the present demand of 8.0 MGD per day. DDA has also
informed that sincere efforts are being made to get more water for full utilization of the
command tanks. In this connection, regular meetings are being held by DDA with the
officials of DJB.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
Observations/Recommendations
DDA constructed two underground water reservoirs of 3.75 MGD capacity each
between February 1997 and November 2000 in Rohini Phase III at a total cost of Rs.4.64
crore. However, these reservoirs could not be operationalized even after five years of
their completion due to the lack of water. The Committee note that as per project report
on development of Rohini sub-city, the water requirement of Rohini Phase III was
10 MGD by 2005-06 whereas the actual present requirement was 8 MGD, of which
only 0.30 MGD was being supplied by DJB and hence the rationale for incurring
58

expenditure on construction of these structures without immediate prospect of their
utilization could not be justified. The Committee are concerned to note that this mismatch
between infrastructure created and prospect of their immediate use has rendered and
expenditure of Rs. 4.64 crore idle for more than 5 years besides incurring maintenance
cost amounting to Rs. 2 lakh per annum as well as risk of deterioration in the structures
created. The Committee cannot but express their serious displeasure over the inability
of DDA in linking the construction of these underground water reservoirs to the actual
requirements as well as the prospect of availability of water and consequent failure to
operationalize them. The Committee regret to observe that this is nothing but an
indication of poor planning and lack of coordination with concerned civic agencies on
the part of DDA despite the fact that these works are supervised at the level of the
Vice-Chairman, DDA.
The Commitee, therefore, recommend that institutional mechanisms should be
strengthened to ensure adequate coordination at all stages with other civic planning
and public utility agencies which is vital for ensuring creation of public infrastructure
and facilities by DDA in consonance with the plans and projections of the connected
civic agencies so that scarce resources are properly utilized only on infrastructures
which are actually required and immediately usable on completion of the work, and
expenditure incurred does not remain idle.
[Para 105 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Instructions have been issued by DDA vide Circular Nos. 609 and 611 issued on
25.10.2007 (Copies attached as Annexures 'F' & 'G'). The matter has already been taken
up with Delhi Jal Board on this matter and copies of letters exchanged in this regard are
attached. (Annexures 'K' & 'L')
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
ANNEXURE  'F'
59

DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
[ENGINEER MEMBER'S SECTT.]
No. EM1(10)2007/cir(PAC Audit Paras)DDA/3913
October 25, 2007
CIRCULAR No.  609
Sub: Creation of infrastructures only after ensuring that the same is immediately
usable on the completion of work.
 DDA constructed two undergound reservoirs of 3.5MGD capacity each between
February, 1997 and February, 2000. However, these reservoirs could not be
operationalized even after five years of their completion due to lack of water. Public
Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) observed that there was clear mismatch between
the actual the then requirement and the water being supplied by DJB. Hence, the
expenditure on construction of these structures without immediate prospect of their
utilization was not justified. The Committee expressed their serious displeasure over
the DDA's inability to link the construction of these underground reservoirs to the
actual requirements as well as the prospect of availability of water and consequent
failure to operationalize them, which was nothing but an indication of poor planning
and lack of co-ordination with concerned civic agencies on the part of DDA. Contention
of DDA that construction of these structures take a period of three years period was
not accepted by P.A.C. despite the fact that it was responsibility of DJB to supply bulk
water.
In this regard, it is pointed out that in future any infrastructure project is conceived,
phased requirement of various services should be worked out and all concerned civic
authorities such as BSES, NDPL, DJB etc. should be contacted. Firm commitment
should be obtained before creation of such infrastructural facilities by DDA so that the
scarce resources are properly utilized. Only infrastructures which are actually required
and are immediately usable on completion of work should be created so as to ensure
that the expenditure incurred does not remain idle. These activities should be
co-ordinated by the CEs and problems, if any, should be brought out to the notice of
EM/VC, DDA for action needed, if any, at higher level. Taking up of any project
without proper planning and assessment of ground realities which resulted in non-
utilization of assets so created would be viewed seriously.
This issues with the approval of EM, DDA.
Sd/-
[A.P. Singh]
Chief Engineer [Hq]
60

61
Copy to:—
1. All CEs (Civil/Elect.), DDA with 20 spare copies for further distribution amongst
SEs and EEs, Jt. CAO/FO & CE (HQ), DDA.
2. CE (QC), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
3. CE (Design), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under
his control.
4. CVO, DDA with 16 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
5. CAO, DD.
6. Project Manager (Flyover), GR. I and II, DDA with 7 spare copies each for
circulation among EEs and FOs.
7. Director (System) for necessary action.
8. Director (Hort.) North & South, DDA with 10 spare copies each for circulation
among Jt./Dy. Directors.
9. Director (MM), DDA with 7 spare copies for circulation among EEs  and FOs
under his control.
10. Director (Works), DDA/Director (PR), DDA.
11. EO-I, II, III & EE (PPC), DDA.
12. Dy.CAO (Plan), DDA.
13. Sr. R.O. (RTI), DDA.
14. Hindi Officer for Hindi version please.
15. Copy to File No. EM.8(2) 98/All Zones/04/DDA/Pt.
Copy also forwarded to:—
1. PS to VC, DDA for kind information of the letter.
2. PS to EM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
3. PS to FM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
Sd/-
Director [Works]

ANNEXURE  'G'
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
[ENGINEER MEMBER'S SECTT.]
No. EMI (10) 2007/cir (PAC Audit Paras) DDA/3914 October 25, 2007
CIRCULAR No. 611
Sub: Undue Prongalation of Contract and Payment of Escalation Under
Clause 10 CC.
The Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) made observations on
"development of land by DDA" that in five cases of work relating to Dwarka Project,
DDA not only failed to ensure clear site at the time of award of works but also could not
remove the hindrances such as pipeline running below the site, electric duct, sewer
work in progress, shifting of electric poles and MTNL cables, non-availability of
drawings of bridge etc. This resulted in delay in execution of these works on the part
of the DDA by 10 to 38 months and avoidable cost escalation too. Scrutiny of these
cases revealed that much of the so-called avoidable hindrances, were manifestation of
lack of sound planning and institutionalised mechanism for close co-ordination with
concerned civic agencies and absence of a synchronized action plan for execution of
works in co-operation with other agencies in DDA. It was further observed that the
misuse of Clause 10 CC might not be ruled out where the contracts are extended for
unduly long period.
In this regard, it is to emphasize that as soon as any project is conceived, all such
obstacles  such as MTNL/BSNL, DJB/MCD, NDPL, overhead/underground line should
be identified and action should be taken in  advance for their shifting etc. so as to
ensure to provide the site to the agency free from all such hindrances/obstacles.
Further, close co-ordination should be held by the NIT approving authority with
respective agencies and other counterparts within DDA; and work should not be
allowed to be delayed  on such issues.
Where the exigency demands to take up the work in anticipation of removal of such
obstacles, it will be responsibility of the Executive Engineer to pursue the matter with
relevant agencies and keep higher offices as well as NIT issuing authority informed of
such problem indicating  the action  required, if any, at their level. If the executing
agency is made responsible for removal of such services, it should be clearly brought
out in NIT.
Misuse of power by granting extension of time without levy of compensation and
allowing undue benefit to the agency shall be viewed seriously.
62

63
The instructions shall be adhered strictly by all the concerned. This issues with the
approval of EM, DDA.
Sd/-
[A.P. Singh]
Chief Engineer [HQ]
Copy to:—
1. All CEs (Civil/Elect), DDA with 20 spare copies for further distribution amongst
SEs and EEs, Jt. CAO/FO & CE (HQ), DDA.
2. CE (QC), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
3. CE (Design), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under
his control.
4. CVO, DDA with 16 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
5. CAO, DD.
6. Project Manager (Flyover), GR.-I and II, DDA with 7 spare copies each for
circulation among EEs and FOs.
7. Director (System) for necessary action.
8. Director (Hort.) North & South, DDA with 10 spare copies each for circulation
among Jt./Dy. Directors.
9. Director (MM), DDA with 7 spare copies for circulation among EEs  and FOs
under his control.
10. Director (Works), DDA/Director (PR), DDA.
11. EO-I, II, III & EE (PPC), DDA.
12. Dy.CAO (Plan), DDA.
13. Sr. R.O. (RTI), DDA.
14. Hindi Officer for Hindi version please.
15. Copy to File No. EM.8(2) 98/All Zones/04/DDA/Pt.
Copy also forwarded to:—
1. PS to VC, DDA for kind information of the letter.
2. PS to EM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
3. PS to FM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
Sd/-
Director [Works]

ANNEXURE  'K'
D.O. No. Sr. PS/VC/DDA/07/94
Dated: June 25, 2007
This is with reference to your D.O. No. CEO/DJB/M (WS)/2007/600 dated 30.5.07. In
this regard, I wish to inform you that I invited DJB's officials a number of times during
the last one year for settlement of long pending issues but the response from your
department had been lukewarm. The officers who attended the meeting could not
follow up the decision taken, and also, sometimes were not fully conversant with the
subject matter.
The issue of handing over of services of 146 Group of colonies, 382 Group of
colonies of DJB, and also handing over of water supply and sewer lines at Dwarka are
not new. The Standing Committee of Parliament as well as Secretary (UD) had issued
directions to DJB for conducting joint inspection of services in a time bound manner.
DDA proposes to hand over services immediately after completion. The delay in
handing over of services affects the working of the DDA, as we are supposed to
concentrate on construction works only.
I would, therefore, like to take this opportunity to request you for issuing instructions
to your staff regarding handing over of above Group of colonies (142 and 382) besides
works of water and sewer lines of Dwarka Sub-City.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(Dinesh Rai)
Shri Arun Mathur,
Chief Executive Officer,
Delhi Jal Board,
Varunalaya Phase-II,
Karol Bagh,
New Delhi-110005.
64

ANNEXURE  'L'
DELHI  DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY
OFFICE OF CHIEF ENGINEER (DWARKA)
No. CE(Dwarka)/26(1)/07/WS/2623 Dated 31-7-07
To,
The Chief Engineer-V ,
Delhi Jal Board,
Govt. of NCT of Delhi,
Varunalaya Phase-II,
New Delhi.
Sub:     Handing over of water supply services of Dwarka to Delhi Jal Board.
It is brought to your kind notice that the water supply grid system including
construction of Command Tanks were already completed and these Command Tanks
including water supply grid system are operational. The water supply system was laid
as per the schemes of Delhi Jal Board.
DJB have been regularly requested to take over the Command Tanks alongwith
water supply grid system to give relief to the public.
The issue has also been discussed at the LG's level wherein it was decided that the
services shall be handed over/taken over within 3 months time. Now two months time
have already been passed but there is no progress.
Accordingly, it is again requested that the Command Tanks alongwith the water
supply grid system may be taken over by DJB and necessary directions may kindly be
issued to your officers to take over the Command Tanks alongwith water grids as
explained above on priority as the federation of the Dwarka Zone is representing at
various levels for the same.
Sd/-
(S.R. Solanki)
Chief Engineer (Dwarka)
Copy to:—
1. EM, DDA for kind information.
2. Engineer-in-Chief, DJB for kind information.
3. SE, CC-17, DDA to pursue the matter with counterpart for transfer of services to
Delhi Jal Board.
Sd/-
(S.R. Solanki)
Chief Engineer (Dwarka)S
65

66
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee regret to note that the internal audit cell of DDA headed by its
Member (Finance) had dismally failed to ensure timely audit of DDA's 197 auditable
units comprising 61 units at its headquarters and 136 units in field formations. Worse
still, the internal audit system prevalent in DDA has not been able to detect the
irregularities committed by its officials and no review has so far been conducted of any
of the developmental schemes being executed by the Authority during the last five
years. The Committee are perturbed to find that the Internal Inspection Manual of the
Authority did not specify the frequency or periodicity of the audit to be conducted by
the internal audit wing and it was left to the authority of the Member (Finance) to
approve the quantum and extent of audit applicable to various records. Audit appraisal
of the functioning of the internal audit wing of DDA with special reference to the
checks exercised in respect of the developmental schemes revealed that while the
coverage of units had steadily improved over the last four years i.e. 2002-03 to 2005-06,
the coverage was less than 30 per cent of the total number of auditable units. The
Committee are not inclined to accept DDA's argument that paucity of staff had led to
arrears in the internal audit of various units. The lack of staff is not a problem that has
cropped up all of a sudden. DDA ought to have anticipated the problem well in advance
and taken steps for deployment of adequate staff including filling up vacancies. The
Committee have been informed that steps are now being taken by DDA to strengthen
the internal audit system. These include preparation of annual Audit Plan, increasing
percentage of audit coverage by rationalizing available manpower and existing duration
for auditable units, completion of 100 per cent audit of units in a cycle of 3 to 4 years,
categorization of units, etc. The Committee consider that these steps were in fact long
overdue.
They recommend that every possible step should now be taken in full earnest by
DDA to overhaul its internal audit mechanism to the best level possible so that the
shortcomings as pointed out by the Audit such as non-specification of frequency or
periodicity of audit, procedures and necessary checks to be exercised by the Internal
Audit Parties and other possible shortcomings are given proper consideration and
included in the Internal Audit Manual currently under finalization. In this connection,
the Committee would also like to impress upon DDA to take full advantage of the
computerization and information technology in the internal auditing so as to ensure
faster and efficient disposal of work.
[Para 106 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
DDA has finalized its Draft Internal Audit Manual containing 34 chapters with the
objective of devising mechanism for Internal Quality Audit for all its 197 auditable
units. For vetting of Draft Manual, a Committee was constituted to go into its various
aspects for bringing out further improvement. Meanwhile, it has also been decided to
get the Manual vetted from some outside agency viz. Institute of Public Auditors of
India which has a team of retired personnel from Indian Audit & Accounts Department.
The proposal is under active consideration and the work is likely to be entrusted to
them shortly.

67
In order to clear the backlog of audit of auditable units DDA has strengthened its
Internal Audit System by deploying five Internal Audit Parties and also restructuring
the audit programme. The periodicity of audit of auditable units to be conducted by
the Internal Audit Wing has also been elaborately defined in the Internal Audit Manual.
This will not only increase the coverage of audit of more Auditable Units, but also will
reduce the arrears of Internal Audit to a sizable extent in the next couple of years.
During the year 2007-08 audit of total 150 auditable Units is due. Out of 150, audit of
79 Units is targeted to be completed by 31.3.2008, which will be 53% of the total
auditable Units of 150.
Regarding observation of the Committee that no review has so far been conducted
of any of the developmental schemes being executed by the Authority during the last
five years it is submitted that Internal Audit conducted in DDA is not subjective.
However, detailed audit of Divisions entrusted with execution of works is conducted.
During the course of Internal audit of these Divisions two major and two minor works,
and vouchers for two months in each Division are selected for detailed audit and
serious irregularities observed in execution of these works are brought to the notice of
respective Zonal Chief Engineers.
In addition, DDA has also engaged Birla Software Co. for the purpose of
computerization of Internal Audit Wing so as to ensure expeditious settlement and
disposal of Audit Paras raised by various Inspection Parties.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
[Para 106 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken (status as on 10th September, 2009)
DDA has informed that keeping in view of the recommendations of the PAC, a
Committee was constituted by DDA to vet and finalize the Internal Audit Manual. The
Internal Audit Manual has since been finalized and approved by the VC, DDA. The
same has also been released officially by DDA on 15th January, 2009.
As regards conducting of audit of auditable units of DDA, DDA has informed that
an Anual Audit plan is prepared every year based on risk analysis and periodicity etc.
so as to ensure full audit coverage in a cycle of three years. During the year 2007-08,
out of 150 auditable units, a target was fixed for completing audit of 79 auditable units
keeping in view the number  of Inspection Parties presently available with Internal
Audit Wing. During this year out of 79 auditable units, audit of 77 auditable units was
completed. During the year 2008-09 a target was fixed for completing audit of 80 auditable
units. The target was fully achieved with the completion of audit of 80 units.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish the Action Taken Notes in respect
of various recommendations made in this Report, within three months from the date of
presentation of the Report
[Para 107 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Information had to be obtained from DDA and thereafter Action Taken Note got
vetted from the AG (Audit) and then further observations of the AG(Audit) was complied
with. The whole process was time consuming and extension of time was sought. The
delay may kindly be condoned.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
68

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH  REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRED REITERATION
Observations/Recommendations
Section 2.1 of CPWD Works Manual, which is followed for execution of various
works in DDA stipulate that no expenditure should be incurred without prior administrative
approval and sanction of the competent authority and award or execution of works
should be based on technical sanction. The Committee are, however, perturbed to find
that despite this stipulation, an expenditure of Rs. 19.56 crore was incurred in 4 Master
Plan road related works such as strengthening of the existing two lanes carriageway,
construction of additional four lanes in Dwarka Project in February 2001 in anticipation
of administrative approval and expenditure sanction undermining the financial control.
While these works were awarded by deviating from the normal procedure ostensibly on
grounds of urgency, scrutiny of records, however, indicate that execution of these works
was held up due to unresolved funding issues with the Delhi Government. This amply
shows the necessity for adhering to prescribed procedure and the need for obtaining
proper approvals before commencement of the work. The Committee further note that
there were delays ranging from 10 months to over three years in completing these works
besides cost escalation. What is surprising to the Committee is the fact that as many as
30 major works have been taken up by DDA as a matter of routine by invoking the clause
of urgency over the last five years. The Committee deplore DDA for having to bypass
the normal procedure and award such a large number of works as ‘urgent issues’. Even
the connotation of the circumstances that are deemed 'urgent' as envisaged in Rule 17 of
DDA Budget and Account Rules which states that "Inevitable, which cannot be met by
re-appropriation, may be incurred with the previous approval of the Authority, and in
emergencies'. ‘under the orders of the Vice-Chairman, a report of which shall be made
to the Authority in its next meeting" is vague and not properly codified and has the
concomitant scope for its misuse of unrestricted manipulation. The Committee note that
neither the Ministry of Urban Development nor DDA had made efforts for circumscribing
the circumstances, under which the works are to be taken on urgent basis. The Committee
do not see any justification for awarding such a large number of works without obtaining
prior approval and sanction.
The Committee recommended that DDA should lay down a definite set of guidelines/
parameters whereunder a particular work can be taken up as an emergent case. The
cases that are deemed emergent should   be kept to the barest minumum possible and
efforts should be made to ensure that the works are executed after due process with
prior approval and sanction of the Authority.
[Para 97 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
69

70
Action Taken
A Circular No. 610 has been issued by DDA vide No. EM 1 (10)2007/Cir.(PAC) Audit
Paras/DDA/3916 dated 24.10.2007 wherein guidelines have been issued/reiterated for
taking up the work in anticipation of AA & ES (Administrative Approval and Expenditure
Sanction) on emergent  basis. A copy of this Circular is attached as Annexure 'A'.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

ANNEXURE-A
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
[ENGINEER MEMBER'S SECTT.]
No.: EM 1 (10)2007/Cir./(PAC) Audit Paras/DDA/3916 October, 2007
CIRCULAR No. 610
Sub: Award of work and incurring of expenditure without A/A & E/S.
The Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) on 'Development of Land by
DDA' observed that the work was taken up in anticipation of A/A & E/S and substantial
expenditure was incurred. They further observed that neither the Ministry of Urban
Development nor DDA had made efforts for circumscribing the circumstances under
which the works were taken on urgent basis and no justification is seen for awarding
such large number of works without obtaining prior approval and sanction.
A number of instructions have been issued in this regard from time to time that no
work should be undertaken or any liability/expenditure incurred thereon without proper
A/A & E/S of the competent authority. The latest instructions issued vide this office
O.M. No.dated 20/23-1-2006 may be referred to.
It is enjoined upon all the field units that where the exigencies of the work demand
and the work is required to be taken up in anticipation of A/A & E/S, the nature of
urgency should be clearly brought out in the record and approval of the competent
authority i.e. VC., DDA should invariably be obtained. Where action for call of tenders
etc. is taken up in anticipation of A/A & E/S, simultaneously the preliminary/detailed
estimate should be processed for formal A/A  & E/S in a time bound manner.
The above instructions may be strictly adhered by all concerned. This issues with
the approval of EM, DDA.
Sd/-
(A.P. Singh)
Chief Engineer (HQ)
Copy to:—
1. All CEs (Civil/Elect.), DDA with 20 spare copies for further distribution amongst
SEs and EEs, Jt. CAO/FO & CE (HQ), DDA.
2. CE (QC) , DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
3. CE (Design), DDA with 10 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under
his control.
71

72
4. CVO, DDA with 16 spare copies for circulation among SEs & EEs under his
control.
5. CAO, DDA.
6. Project Manager (Flyover), Gr.-I and II, DDA with 7 spare copies each for
circulation among EEs and FOs.
7. Director (System) for necessary action.
8. Director (Hort.), North & South, DDA with 10 spare copies each for  circulation
among Jt./Dy. Directors.
9. Director (MM), DDA with 7 spare copies for circulation among EEs and FOs
under his control.
10. Director (Works), DDA/Director (PR), DDA.
11. EO-I, II, III & EE (PPC), DDA.
12. Dy. CAO (Plan), DDA.
13. Sr. R.O. (RTI), DDA.
14. Hindi Officer for Hindi version please.
15. Copy to File No. EM 8(2) 98/All Zones/04/DDA/Pt.
Copy also forwarded to:—
1. PS to VC, DDA for kind information of the letter.
2. PS to EM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
3. PS to FM, DDA for kind information of the letter.
Sd/-
Director (Works)
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that DDA have constructed Master Plan roads in Dwarka
Project, Narela sub-city and Rohini sub-city and in trans-Yamuna areas  with its
funds although the construction of these roads comes under the purview of the
Public Works Department of Delhi Government.  In Dwarka project, these roads were
constructed in anticipation of Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction
on the grounds of urgency. Explaining the reasons for construction of these Master
Plan roads, by DDA, the Ministry have stated that despite several meetings by
Lieutenant Governor, Delhi with the Chief Secretary and the Secretary (PWD),
GNCTD, funds from PWD, Delhi were not coming up in the same pace as that of
progress of development work in Dwarka.  The then Lt. Governor, under constant
public pressure, decided that the Master Plan roads should be taken up by DDA on
urgent basis. It has further been stated that this was the first time in the history of
DDA that the Master Plan roads were taken up by DDA on the specific instructions
of the Lt. Governor. Subsequently, a policy decision was taken by the Lt. Governor
that the construction of Master Plan roads in DDA colonies would be a part  of the

73
sub-city development and the cost would be loaded to the overall development cost
recovered from the land/house allottees. Worse still, the roads were constructed in
some selected areas and without any agreement/understanding with the GNCTD
that the cost would subsequently be recovered from them. As a result, DDA had
failed to recover the money from the Delhi Government and decided that the cost of
these roads would be loaded on the overall development charges to be collected
from allottees, which is but regrettable. The  Committee have an apprehension that if
this practice is continued unchecked it will lead to a situation that might not be very
far away when the entire responsibility for building all the roads in Delhi (being
Master Plan roads) would legally be shifted on to DDA and the burden of cost would
unjustifiably be charged from the civic population.
The Committee are of the view that since construction of roads comes under the
jurisdiction of the Government of NCT of Delhi, it would be unjustifiable for DDA to
construct Master Plan roads in lieu of PWD, Delhi Government and pass the burden to
the allottees. The Committee are unhappy over the extant arrangement whereunder
DDA has taken upon itself the task of construction of Master Plan roads as a matter of
routine and pass on the burden on to the allottees. They desire that this situation
should be remedied forthwith. For this the DDA should hold consultations on this
matter with the GNCTD at the highest level so as to put an end to this practice. An
institutional coordination mechanism should be set up in DDA and GNCTD so that
funds for construction of Master Plan roads are allotted expeditiously by the GNCTD.
In exceptional cases where it is found difficult to allot funds for Master Plan roads by
GNCTD, DDA may construct Master Plan roads as a special case and in all such cases
the cost should be recovered from GNCTD at the earliest.
[Para 98 of 55th Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The matter was taken up by DDA with GNCTD for refund of expenditure already
incurred as well as future funding of MP Roads. But, PWD, GNCTD turned down the
request saying that the expenditure on development of MP roads is borne by the
allottees as DDA loads such expenditure  on them while working out the cost of the
projects. It is felt that this system should continue. Hon'ble LG has agreed with the
proposal submitted and decided that DDA should construct all Master Plan roads
including the  Master Plan roads having ROW of 30 mtr. and above in its development
area. The matter, therefore, stands closed and the expenditure incurred by DDA on
Master Plan roads has been/is being booked to the respective works/schemes. A  copy
of U.O. No. 14(15)08-RN/45/397 dated 7.1.2008 from Addl. Secretary to L.G. is enclosed
herewith for kind perusal. (Annexure 'J')
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

ANNEXURE  'J'
RAJ NIWAS
DELHI-110 054
The matter regarding construction of Master Plan Roads including roads having
ROW of 30 mtrs. and above had been put up by the Pr. Secretary (PWD), GNCTD
stating that all these roads should  be constructed by DDA in its Development Area.
This was endorsed by Minister of Urban Development and Chief Minister of Delhi.
Hon'ble Lt. Governor after going through the matter is pleased to agree with proposal
that DDA shall construct all Master Plan roads including the roads having ROW of
30 mtrs. and above in its Development Area. Copy of the extracts of the concerned file
is enclosed for ready reference.
V .C., DDA is requested to take appropriate action in the matter.
Sd/-
(A.K. Acharya)
Addl. Secretary to L.G.
V .C./DDA
U.O. No. 14(15)/08-RN/45/397
74

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
————
NEW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 V aisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
75

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 26TH APRIL, 2010
The Committee sat on Monday, the 26th April, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1650 hrs. in
Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Gopinath Munde  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Satpal Maharaj
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Yashwant Sinha
9. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
11. Shri N.K. Singh
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG Central (RC)
2. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
3. Ms. Usha Sankar — Director General (Autonomous Bodies)
4. Shri Gautham Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence
Services)
76

77
5. Shri P.K. Kataria — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central (RC)
6. Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central
(Economic & Services Ministries)
7. Shri R.G . Viswanathan — Pr. Director of Audit (Scientific
Departments)
8. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director of Audit (Air Force &
Navy)
9. Shri H.K. Dharmadhekari — Pr. Director (State Report Audit)
10. Shri Rajvir Singh — Accountant General (Audit) Delhi
11. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Pr. Director of Audit (Railways)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members of the  Committee and
the Audit Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then apprised the
Committee that out of the eleven draft Reports slated for consideration, eight have
been finalized by Sub-Committee V. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following
draft Reports for consideration and adoption:
*** *** ***
(x)  Draft Report on Action Taken by the Governmet on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty fifth Report (Fourteenth
Lok Sabha) on "Development of Land by Delhi Development Authority" (Ministry of
Urban Development).
*** *** ***
3. After some deliberations,  the Committee adopted the above mentioned draft
Reports with some modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports
in light of the suggestions made by the Members and the consequential changes
arising out of the factual verification by the Audit and present the same to Parliament.
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active participation
in the Committee's deliberations. He also thanked the PAC Secretariat and the Audit
Officers for the assistance rendered to the Committee in the examination of the subject
and finalization of the Reports.
5. The Members of the Committee thanked the Chairman for his guidance in the
smooth conduct of the meetings of the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX  II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of  Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations: 13
(ii) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by the
Government:
Paragraph Nos. 95, 96, 99, 100—106
Total: 10
Percentage: 76.93
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the reply of the Government:
Paragraph No. 107
Total: 1
Percentage: 7.69
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 97 and 98
Total: 2
Percentage: 15.38
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
—Nil—
78
MGIPMRND—2535LS(S-1)—24-09-2010.