PERFORMANCE OF CIVIL  A VIATION
IN INDIA
MINISTRY  OF  CIVIL  A VIATION
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2013-2014
NINETY-THIRD REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
93

NINETY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
PERFORMANCE OF CIVIL  A VIATION IN
INDIA
MINISTRY OF CIVIL  A VIATION
Presented to Lok Sabha on 6.2.2014
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 6.2.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 2014/ Magha, 1935 (Saka)

PAC No. 2020
Price: ` 200.00
© 2014  BY LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)........................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)........................... (v)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2011-12)........................... (vii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (ix)
REPORT
PART  I
CHAPTER  I Introductory .......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER  II Acquisition of  Aircraft by Erstwhile Air India Limited (AIL).... 3
CHAPTER   III Acquisition of Aircraft by erstwhile Indian Airlines
Limited (IAL)......................................................................... 38
CHAPTER  IV Merger of AIL and IAL into NACIL ...................................... 55
CHAPTER   V Liberalised policy towards Bilateral Agreements on
International Entitlements..................................................... 75
CHAPTER   VI Operational performance....................................................... 89
CHAPTER  VII Financial performance ........................................................... 104
CHAPTER   VIII Miscellaneous ....................................................................... 114
PART  II
Observations and Recommendations ................................... 119
ANNEXURES
I. Brief chronology of events related to the acquisition of aircraft
by the erstwhile AIL .............................................................. 141
II. Minutes of the meeting held on 2nd August, 2004, chaired by
the then Minister, Civil Aviation ............................................ 143
III. Letter from 43 member delegation of US Congress regarding
AlL's proposed aircraft acquisition forwarded by PMO to
MoCA ................................................................................... 145
IV . Clarifications regarding its traffic and market share assumptions
provided by Air India ............................................................ 151
V. A copy of the Restricted Letter Agreement 6-1166-DJG-776 on
the subject 'Liquidated Damages-Non-Excusable Delay' in the
Purchase Agreement Number 2998 between the Boeing
company and erstwhile Air India Limited relating to Boeing
Model 787-837 Aircraft.......................................................... 152

VI. Brief chronology of events related to the acquisition of aircraft
by the erstwhile IAL.............................................................. 154
VII. Expenditure incurred by Air India on maintenance/repair/
servicing of aircraft in foreign countries during last five
years ...................................................................................... 156
VIII. A copy of the presentation made by the Ministry of Civil
Aviation before the Prime Minister in March, 2006 on the issue
of the proposed merger of AIL and IAL ................................ 159
IX. The overall synergies realised as on 31 Dec., 2011 for Air India
to the tune of approximately  ` 1535 crore............................. 165
X. List of all completed, in progress and not initiated items
department-wise of Air India ................................................. 166
XI. Details regarding industry standards for aircraft utilization.... 174
XII. Details of the reasons for increase in loss of Air India from
2007-08 onwards.................................................................... 176
A
PPENDICS
I. Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2011-12) held on 11th January, 2012................... 179
II. Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2011-12) held on 19th January, 2012................... 181
III. Minutes of the Seventeenth Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2011-12) held on 22nd February, 2012................. 184
IV . Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2013-14) held on 30th January, 2014................... 187
PAGE
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambidurai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10 Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorla1Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
$14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
**18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
††20. Dr. V. Maitreyan
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Smt. Ambika Soni
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
$ Elected w.e.f. 14th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija V yas appointed as Minister of Housing, Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
** Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice  Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his
retirement as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
†† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister
of State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-13)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri  Anandrao Vithoba Adsu1
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Brij Kishor Lal Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
†11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija  Vyas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
† Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
† † Elected w.e.f.  6th December, 2012 vice  Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
28th October, 2012.
(v)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTE
(2011-12)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
6. Dr. Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
8. Shri Snajy Brij Kishorlal Nirupam
9. Shri Jagdambika Pal
10. Dr. Kavuru Sambasiva Rao
11. Shri Adhi Sankar
12. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Tariq Anwar
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri Naresh Gujral
19. Shri Prakash Javedekar
20. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
*21. Shri. J.D. Seelam
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
*  Elected w.e.f. 29th August 2011 vide the vacancy occurred vice Smt. Jayanti Natarajan appointed
Minister w.e.f. 12th July. 2011.
(vii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2013-14), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Ninety-third Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Performance of Civil Aviation in India ' based on C&AG Report No. 18 of 2011-12,
Union Government (Civil) relating to the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
2. The Report of  the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the
Table of the House on 8th September, 2011.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Air India (Al) and some Associations/Unions of Air India on
the subject at their sittings held on 11th January, 2012, 19th January, 2012 and
22nd February, 2012, respectively. As the examination of the subject could not be
completed, the Public Accounts Committee (2012-13) and the Public Accounts Committee
(2013-14) re-selected the subject for examination. The Committee considered and adopted
this Report at their sitting held on 30th January, 2014. Minutes of the Sittings form
Appendices to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committees for the valuable work
done by them.
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives  of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Air India and Indian Airlines Officers Association, Indian
Aircraft Technicians Association, Air India Aircraft Engineers Association and Airlines
Ground Instructors Association for tendering evidence before them and furnishing
the requisite information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the
subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General  of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
31 January, 2014 Chairman,
11 Magha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

REPORT
PART  I
CHAPTER  I
INTRODUCTORY
The scheduled air services in India began in October, 1932 under the Aviation
Department of Tata Sons Ltd., which was succeeded by Tata Airlines. This was
subsequently renamed in July, 1946 as Air India Ltd., and incorporated as Air India
International Ltd. in March, 1948. The nationalisation of Air India International Ltd.
took place with the passing of Air Corporations Act in 1953. As a result, two corporations
came into existence, namely Indian Airlines Corporation (as the national domestic
carrier) and Air India (as the international carrier). However, in 1994, the Air Corporations
Act was repealed, and Air India Ltd. (AIL) and Indian Airlines Ltd. (IAL) were
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956. The Government-owned airlines
dominated the Indian aviation industry till the mid- 1990's, when, as part of the Open
Sky Policy, the Government of India (Gol) ended the monopoly of AIL and IAL in air
transport services and allowed private operators to provide air transport services. The
scheme of amalgamation of Air India Ltd. and Indian Airlines Ltd. into National Aviation
Company of India Limited (NACIL) which was approved in August, 2007, was effective
from 1st April, 2007. Subsequently, in November, 2010, NACIL was renamed as Air
India Ltd. (Al). The administrative Ministry for the Government airline is the Ministry
of Civil Aviation (MoCA).
II. AUDIT REVIEW
1.2 This report is based on the C&AG Report No. 18 of  2011-12, Union
Government (Civil) on 'Performance of Civil Aviation in India' relating to the Ministry
of Civil Aviation. The Audit Report dealt with the Performance of Civil Aviation in India
which included NACIL (Air India Limited as known today), the Ministry of Civil Aviation
and the Bilateral Agreements concluded by Government of India with other Governments
on entitlements for international operations between India and other countries, as well
as permissions given to private Indian carriers to operate on international routes.
1.3The main objectives of the Performance Audit were to ascertain:—
• whether the acquisition of aircraft by the erstwhile Air India Ltd. (AIL) and
Indian Airlines Ltd. (IAL) was appropriately planned and effectively
implemented, with due regard to economy, efficiency and accepted norms
of financial propriety;
• whether the merger of AIL and IAL into NACIL was properly planned and
the effectiveness of merged operations of the two entities;
• the impact of the liberalised policy of the Government of India (GOl) from
2004-05 onwards on grant of air traffic rights to other countries through Air

2
Services Agreements (ASAs)/ "bilateral" agreements, and permitting Indian
private carriers to fly on international routes;
• the main reasons for the financial and operational performance of the pre-
merger airlines and the merged entity; and
• whether the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) exercised its oversight role
adequately and effectively.
1.4 The Public Accounts Committee (2011-12) selected the subject for detailed
examination and report. During the course of examination, the Committee obtained
necessary information from the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA). The representatives
of the MoCA, Air India (AI) and some Associations/Unions of Air India were called
before the Committee for deposition on the various issues that had arisen. The Committee
took the oral evidence of the following:—
(i) Representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation (Minutes of the Sitting form
Appendix-I) on 11.1.2012;
(ii) Representatives of NACIL (now renamed as Air India) (Minutes of the Sitting
form Appendix-II) on 19.1.2012; and
(iii) Representatives of Indian Airlines Officers Association, Indian Aircraft
Technicians Association, Air India Aircraft Engineers Association and Airlines
Ground Instructors Association (Minutes of the Sitting form Appendix-Ill) on
22.2.2012.
Based on the written and oral information obtained from the MoCA, the Committee
proceed with the examination of the subject in the succeeding paragraphs.
1.5 Meanwhile, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court, on 1st June, 2012, passed an order
on the petition of Centre for Public Interest Litigation (CPIL), filed by Shri Prashant
Bhushan and Shri Pranav Sachdeva, Advocates. The petitioner alleged deliberate and
misdirected decision of the Ministry of Civil Aviation driving Air India and Indian
Airlines into heavy losses to the tune of thousand of crores. The Hon'ble Delhi High
Court, while observing that it was the function of PAC to look into the financial
irregularities, ruled that since a responsible Committee like PAC was looking into the
matter, they were desisting from giving any directions but expected PAC to look into
the matter from all angles.

CHAPTER  II
ACQUISITION OF AIRCRAFT BY ERSTWHILE AIR INDIA LIMITED (AIL)
A. Overview
On 30 December, 2005, the erstwhile Air India Ltd. (AIL) signed purchase
agreements with Boeing and General Electric (GE) for supply of 50 Boeing aircrafts
(with GE engines) at an estimated project cost of  ` 33,197 crore:
• 8 B777-200LR ultra long range aircraft (ULR) with a seating capacity of 266;
• 15 B777-300 ER medium capacity long range aircraft (MCLR-A) with a seating
capacity of 380; and
• 27 B787-8 (popularly known as 'dreamliner') medium capacity long range
(MCLR-B) aircraft with seating capacity of 258.
In addition, Air India Charters Ltd. (AICL), a subsidiary of Air India which operated
low cost carriers under the 'Air India Express' brand, also signed purchase agreements
with Boeing and CFM for supply of 18 short range B737 aircraft with CFM engines at
an estimated project cost of ` 4,952 crore.
B. Chronology of Events
2.2. In 1996, the erstwhile AIL had its last fleet acquisition which involved
induction of two B747-400 aircraft. The table in (Annexure - I) gives a brief chronology
of events related to the current acquisition of aircraft by the erstwhile AIL.
2.3. According to the Ministry of Civil Aviation, it had undertaken the following
measures for evaluation of aircraft for new acquisition from 1993 onwards:
i. The evaluation of Medium Capacity Long Range (MCLR) aircraft started in
1993, when Ministry constituted an in-house Committee of Experts to identify
aircraft requirements for both Air India and Indian Airlines.
ii. Subsequently in the same year another in-house Committee was constituted to
evaluate the MCLR aircraft, which formed part of the fleet requirement for AI's
long range operations.
iii. In 1994, the evaluation of A340-300/B777-200/MD11 was recommended as these
aircrafts were available as the latest technology aircraft from the 3 different
manufacturers viz. Airbus, Boeing and Mac Donnel Douglas.
iv. In 1995 Al invited bids for 23 MCLR aircrafts viz. 10 firm+13 option.
v. Bids evaluated and Committee report was submitted in 1996. However, decision
was deferred in view of elections.
3

4
vi. Thereafter, this project did not progress in view of Government's plan on AI's
disinvestment.
vii. In 2002, the MCLR study recommenced after AI was taken off the disinvestment
list.
viii. A new Request for Proposal (RFP) floated for 17 MCLR aircraft viz. 10 firm + 7
option, in Dec. 2002.
ix. In 2003, the evaluations were undertaken and report was presented to the Board.
On 8 November, 2003, based on the various alternative scenarios evaluated in
the report of the TENC dated 7.11.2003 and the rankings accorded by Committee
based on Net Present Values (NPVs), the Board decided to recommend 10 long
range A340-300 aircraft on firm basis and 18 short range B737-800 aircraft.
x . Accordingly, the Board authorized Management to prepare and submit a Project
Report for acquisition of (10) A340-300 aircraft plus (18) B737-800 aircraft to
Ministry of Civil Aviation.
xi. In January, 2004, the Project Report for acquisition of (10) A340-300 and
(18) B737-800 aircraft was submitted.
xii. While a decision was yet to be taken in the matter, on 30th March, 2004, a
presentation was made to the Board on AI's medium term business strategy and
growth plan. This plan envisaged:
• Aggressive expansion of AI capacity and network in next 2-3 years through
induction of aircraft on dry lease.
• Establishment of separate new airline under AICL for low fare low cost
operations.
• Fleet rationalization (including phase out of older, uneconomic B747-200s
and B747-300 combis).
• Production upgradation and strategic cost management (through outsourcing
of non-core activities).
xiii. During March-August 2004, AI's medium term business strategy and growth
plan up to winter 2006-07 were developed further. Over the next few months,
through discussions within AI and in consultation with the Ministry of Civil
Aviation lead to approval of the following proposals by AI Board:
• Establishment of low fare low cost airline — AI Express (at the meeting of AI
Board of  29 May, 2004).
• Dry lease of (20) aircraft, (3) medium capacity ultra long range plus (17) medium
capacity long range aircraft during period from winter 2004-05 and winter
2006-07 (Board meeting 17 July, 2004).
xiv . During this period, AI's long term vision, mission and business strategy document
was also prepared. This document, inter alia, emphasized the need for AI to

5
focus on customer needs and satisfaction and to adopt a three pronged strategy
based on—
• capacity and network expansion,
• product improvement,
• operations improvement, and
• to progress further, its strategic relationship with Lufthansa and commercial
operation arrangement with other airlines.
xv . The proposal for acquisition of 28 aircraft submitted in January, 2004 represented
only the first phase of acquisition of aircraft by AI and the supplemental proposals
for the acquisition of additional aircraft were to be submitted in due course.
xvi. On 26th May, 2004, vide Office Order No. HQ/9-52/1156, the TENC Committee
had been directed to develop AI's fleet plan up to 2014. The candidate aircraft
types to be considered by AI were also identified.
xvii. On 2nd August, 2004, AI's proposal for acquisition of 10 A340- 300 plus 18
B737-800W aircraft was discussed at the meeting of Ministry of Civil Aviation
(Minutes of the meeting placed as Annexure - II ) in the context of above
developments and it was decided that AI should take a comprehensive view of
its fleet requirement for the next 15 years also keeping in mind:
• The non stop services to USA with ULR aircraft by competitor airlines in the
Gulf / South-East Asia and consequent need for a competitive product offering
with suitable aircraft by AI.
• The low cost low fare operations envisaged under AI Express with B737-800
aircraft.
• Induction of aircraft on dry lease to meet the interim capacity requirements of
AI and AI Express.
xviii. Accordingly, AI was asked to revisit its proposal for purchase of aircraft
(including additional new aircraft to be considered and submit a fresh proposal).
xix. On 13th September, 2004, the Board was advised that AI's TENC had been
directed to commence work on Al's long term fleet plan and following course of
action was being adopted:
• Revised fleet plan reflecting proposed pattern of operations and fleet
composition is being developed for the year 2012- 13 to cover operations on
existing routes under both AI and AI Express.
• After Board approves the proposed revised plan, the proposal for 18 B737-
800 would be reviewed to examine the work viability of the acquisition of
these aircraft for AI Express on a standalone basis.
• Offers would be invited for acquisition of aircraft by AI.

6
x x . In December, 2004, RFPs were issued inviting offers for —
• 8 Ultra Long Range (ULR) aircraft (5 Firm + 3 Option)
• 15 Medium Capacity Long Range-A (MCLR-A) aircraft (10 Firm + 5 Option)
• 27 Medium Capacity Long Range-B (MCLR-B) aircraft (20 Firm + 7 Option)
xxi. On 18th February, 2005, the report of the TENC based on gross price of aircraft
was submitted.
xxii. Subsequently, the report of the TENC was presented to the Board in its 106th
meeting held on 26th April, 2005.
xxiii. In this meeting, the Board approved the acquisition of 50 aircraft—
• 8B777-200LRs with GE90-110 engines
• 15 B777-300ERs with GE90-115 engines
• 27 B787-8s with GEnx-64 engines from Boeing by AI at an approximate net
project cost of  ` 30,700.62 crore, subject to Government approval.
xxiv. However, it was recognized that the actual project cost may vary based on
actual aircraft deliveries finalized which will in turn depend on the date on
which the project is approved by the Government and orders are placed as also
the actual economic invoices applicable at the time of aircraft delivery.
• Decided to recommend to the Ministry of Civil Aviation that copies of the
TENC report dated 18th February, 2005, the addendum dated 26th April,
2005 and the presentation made to the Board be sent to the Comptroller
and Auditor General India (CAG) and to the CVC.
• Authorized the Management to prepare and submit a project report for the
acquisition of the above 50 aircrafts to Government for approval.
xxv . In May 2005, the Project Report for acquisition of the 50 aircrafts was submitted.
xxvi. In November 2005, Report of the Price Negotiating Committee was submitted.
xxvii. On 30th December, 2005, Government approval was received and Purchase
agreement was signed.
C. Undue time taken for acquisition
2.4. According to Audit, the AI's aircraft acquisition process took an unduly
long time. Due to lack of timely acquisition, AIL had to induct 13 additional aircraft on
dry lease by January, 2004. AIL's proposal of December, 1996 for aircraft acquisition
was not cleared, and a fresh process for acquisition was initiated only in January, 2002.
The initial proposal was made in December, 1996 and examination continued till January,
2004. AIL's project report of January, 2004 proposed acquisition of 18 small capacity
short range aircraft (B737-800) and 10 medium capacity long range aircraft (A340-300)
with a positive Net Present Value (NPV) on stand-alone basis. However, by November,
2004, the AIL Board changed their fleet acquisition plan and submitted a revised
proposal for acquisition of 50 medium capacity long range ultra long range aircrafts
(in addition to 18 small capacity short range aircraft for AICL).

7
2.5. The sequence of events from January, 2004 to November, 2004 shows that
the erstwhile AIL reworked its earlier acquisition plan and expanded its requirement.
From the approval for the constitution of Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) by
the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), for final round of negotiation
with lowest bidder, to the, signing of purchase agreement, it took just 16 days.
Furthermore, the revised plan saw a dramatic increase in the number of aircraft to be
purchased in the period between January, 2004 and November, 2004.
2.6. When the Committee sought to know the reasons for the undue time that
was taken for acquisition, the Secretary, MoCA deposing before the Committee
stated:—
"Again recounting from 1996 till 2004, the company went through different
stages of phenomena. For example, the company was put on disinvestment
mode in 1999. There was also a process for bid, etc. From 1996 to 2001, it
remained in disinvestment mode. So, nothing could be done. That was one
impact. In 2001, the Cabinet decided that there would be no disinvestment.
Therefore, the Government immediately started the fleet acquisition plan which
was pending for the past 12 years. Thereafter, we have moved as fast as we
could have to provide the latest fleet to Air India because provisioning of
fleet is one of the most important tools to enable an airline to deploy capacity,
to capture market, to provide best services, to compete, etc.
When the Cabinet decided in 2004 to go ahead with the acquisition of fleet,
we completed the process within 18 months. Of course, there are questions
why we moved fast. Here, we are in a contradictory mode. On the one hand
I am saying that the whole aircraft acquisition . was delayed for 12 to 13 years
on account of variety of reasons that I mentioned, on the other hand the
Ministry has been commented upon why we hastened the process.
We are not aware of the optimum time in which the acquisition of aircraft
should take place. We are not aware of that."
 2.7. Explaining the undue time taken for acquisition, the MoCA vide its written
note submitted as under:—
"The comment of CAG with regard to an unduly delayed process of acquisition
is indeed true. We would also like to add that if the process of acquisition had
been gradual in both airlines Air India and Indian Airlines Corporation (IAC)
over the past years, the aged structure of the fleet would not have deteriorated
to the levels it had by 2003-04. Also, the financial requirements of a phased
induction would have been gradual over the years and not precipitated into
an operating crisis in 2004-05. However, instead revenues that could have
been channelized into a phased induction programme were utilized for
enhancing the emoluments structure within the airlines particularly that of
the Performance Linked Incentive (PLI).
The situation was thus at a passe/in both airlines and it was imperative of the
new Government to arrest further decline of the airlines. Also because a
recession hit the international market prior to 2004 caused by the 9/11 in US

8
and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) epidemic, the revenue levels
of the airlines worldwide were at their nadir and most airlines at this point
sought bail-outs from their respective Governments. This did not happen in
India, but did put the airline in a position that caused the previous Government
to put them on the disinvestment block. That process would not occur because
the parties interested in buying the airlines withdrew their offers."
Reflecting on the choices before the Government, the representative further
deposed:
The incoming Government then, thus had only two choices — either to close
the airlines or to prop them with a slew of measures that needed to be
implemented. Alongwith the sorry state of the airlines there was on the other
hand, an increase in demand for liberalization of the sector aided by the
inability of the airlines to expand their fleet to meet market requirements.
There was thus little choice but to invest in new equipment for both the
airlines if they were to run and address the medium and long term market
scenario. Therefore contradictory comments that the CAG Reports have made
over the inability of the airlines to serve the market as also those that suggest
hastening this acquisition process needs re-examination and broader
understanding, which we propose to do. In the report it must also be borne in
mind that the aviation sector is a completely market driven & dynamic
institution with the need for rapid decision making to address the ever
changing scenario. As a result it cannot be taken as a static set of
circumstances and within a limited perspective of some of the observations
made in the report.
It must also be kept in mind that there are long gestation periods in acquisition
proposals fructifying and unforeseen delays as we are now experiencing in
the Boeing 787 dreamliner. It might also be argued that the acquisition process
is avoidable and that enhancement of capacity can be achieved by leasing.
This also creates a new dependence on another set-up of market dynamics
that for leasing of aircraft."
2.8. Further, the MoCA, while furnishing the reasons for the revised proposal for
acquisition of 18+50 aircraft being processed with alarming haste as against the earlier
decision for acquisitiOn of 18+10 aircraft, has submitted as under:—
"i. In November 2001, the Board had approved Air India's proposal that pending
directions from the Government with regard to the disinvestment and infusion of
funds for aircraft acquisition, Air India should identify its requirement for
additional aircraft including the number of suitable generic aircraft types to be
acquired during the next 5 years. In the same proposal, Air India sought approval
to rationalize aircraft types in its fleet.
ii. The Board constituted an inter-departmental Committee of directors and
mandated them to identify the additional aircraft requirement for fleet
rationalization, modernization and expansion.

9
iii. As envisaged in the proposal, the need for adding capacity was mainly because
Air India's fleet was ageing and this resulted in low schedule reliability, inferior
passenger appeal and poor image. Air India's B747s were too large and Air India
was forced to offer low frequency services with circuitous routings as against
the competitor services which offered high frequency, direct point to point
services — which were preferred by high yield passengers. Additionally the
comfort and service levels in Air India's First and Executive Class were too
inferior as compared to the competition. Smaller and shrinking network required
immediate attention to avoid Air India getting marginalized with the onset of stiff
competition. Based on this, the internal Committee had recommended a strategy
which envisaged an aggressive capacity and fleet expansion at a rate higher
than the market growth, with modern and new technology aircraft. The Committee
further recommended rationalization of the fleet by reducing the number of types
in the aircraft fleet, induct smaller new aircraft types — one Long Range type for
long thin routes and one Short Range type for short haul routes.
iv. The market changes in the late 1990s and early 2000 demanded aircraft with
longer range and smaller capacity to cater to the fragmented markets which were
originating from interior parts of India. Interior airports had been opened up for
competition and competitor airlines were offering direct connectivity from, interior
airports to the long haul markets through their own hubs. Historically, Air India
was serving the interior Indian points by connecting them to one of the primary
hubs viz. BOM/DEL, with the high density B747 aircraft. However, with competition
growing in the interior points, the passenger choice began shifting away from
Air India, which was seen in lowering of market share.
v. Just after 2000 when Air India was taken off the disinvestment list, the Management
took stock of the market changes in the preceding years and a strategy for
growth was presented to the Board. Since aircraft induction exercise has a long
gestation period, Air India Board approved the leasing option for Air India to
induct capacity immediately till such time it is able to acquire its own aircraft.
vi. Initially, Air India limited the leasing to the B747 and A310 type of aircraft in view
of its in-house facilities and expertise available for this aircraft. Subsequently, in
view of Air India's aircraft evaluation exercise in which Air India had commenced
evaluation of new technology aircraft types, the A330/B777s aircraft were also
considered for leasing. In all, Air India has leased a total of 33 aircraft during the
period Dec .2000 to 2005/06. With this capacity, Air India was able to increase its
presence in its core markets viz. USA — (new routes to New York and increase in
capacity to Chicago), mount additional operations to the Gulf and S.E. Asia.
vii. Despite this capacity induction through the leasing method, Air India's capacity
and market share was steadily declining from almost 30% in 2004 to 21% in 2010.
It may be noted that the Indian air market size was 16 million in 2004 and grew at
a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 14% to 32.8 million in 2010. While
the leasing of aircraft helped Air India maintain its capacity share despite the
market growing in double digit figures, stiff competition on most of its core
routes had diluted yields because of excess capacity in these markets. This was

10
combined with unforeseen incidents like, the SARS in 2003, fall in S.E. Asian
economies in 2007, global recession in 2008 and the ongoing fuel price escalation.
All of these events, apart from the continuous impact of liberalisation had their
impact on the airline. For Air India since a part of its capacity in these years was
on lease, it was difficult to maintain profitability in view of lower revenue earnings.
viii. In view of the procedures that Air India is required to follow, the flexibility of
taking quicker decisions to respond to market changes reduces. However, with
induction of new aircraft, Air India has been able to return all the aircraft taken on
lease and also phase out some of its old/ageing fleet — and replace this capacity
with new aircraft. New aircraft induction has helped Air India to standardize its
product and also improve its product appeal. This is reflected in the results of
the recent few years, where, despite having a stagnant capacity share Air India
has been able to maintain a market share at a level slightly higher than its capacity
share. Air India's market share from the year 2005 onwards has always been
consistently higher than its capacity share, which has resulted in a positive
Market Performance Index (MPI). Between the years 2004 and 2010, the capacity
in the Indian Air Market grew at a CAGR of 14.3%, whereas Air India could grow
its capacity by only 7.6% CAGR viz.  at half the rate of the industry growth, this
reflected a proportionately lower growth in the passenger carriage where the
index grew by 12% in terms of its passenger carriage to/from India. Air India
could grow its passenger carriage by only 5.7%.
ix. The 50 Aircraft Project Report had envisaged that the initial deliveries of the new
aircraft would be towards replacing some of the old aircraft and lease returns. In
fact out of 50 aircraft, 27 units were meant for replacement of old/leased aircraft
and the balance 23 units were to provide for growth. Air India till date has
inducted 20 of the 50 new aircraft and has been able to phase out its old A310
aircraft and all of its leased capacity. As such, with this fleet, Air India has just
been able to maintain its capacity level on core routes. Some of the routes which
Air India had discontinued in 2008/09 during the period of global recession have
not been reinstated in view of the capacity shortage.
x . Additionally, Air India has not been able to correct its route/aircraft mismatch on
some of its important markets like, Singapore, Bangkok and Dubai, where narrow
body aircraft are being operated. This has affected Air India's product offering
as competitors are offering wide body aircraft on these routes and offering
seamless connectivity on their onward long haul markets through their hubs.
Wide body aircraft facilitates efficiency in baggage connections for transit flights.
xi. As of 2011, all the leased aircraft have been returned, except for the 2 A330s,
which will be returned next year. The aircraft on sale and lease back (SLB) still
continue to be in the fleet. New capacity induction of the balance 30 owned
aircraft has not taken place in view of the delay of the B787 aircraft. In effect,
only 40% of the new aircraft acquisition viz., 20 of 50 Long Range units has been
inducted.

11
xii. Despite this, Air India has since winter 2010, after DEL was offered as an integrated
terminal, has built its hub at Delhi and started hub operations through a network
of bank structure of domestic/international arrivals and departures, thereby
enabling connectivity to/from Delhi on most of Air India's international
operations. It will be noted that such a hub structure of operations requires the
airline to provide timely connections to connect the domestic airlines to the
domestic departure and vice versa. This structure tends to lower the aircraft
utilisation levels for the network carrier. However, Air India's experience of its
operation's from Delhi hub has been beneficial, Air India has been able to increase
its transfer connection to/from Delhi significantly viz, from nearly 300 passengers/
day in 2008/09 to more than 2000 passengers /day in 2010/11."
2.9. The Ministry also asserted that the change in the proposed aircraft acquisition
plan from 10 wide body to a fleet of 50 wide body aircraft has been a considered
decision within the Airlines based on the consultation and advice from the Ministry.
D. Increase in requirement from 10 + 18 aircraft to 50 + 18 aircraft in 2004
2.10. The erstwhile AIL's project report of January, 2004 proposed for acquisition
of 10 medium capacity long range aircraft (A340-300) and 18 small capacity short range
aircraft (B737- 800). However, by November, 2004, the AIL Board changed their fleet
acquisition plan and submitted a revised proposal for acquisition of 50 medium capacity
long range/ ultra long range aircraft, in addition to 18 small capacity short range aircraft
for AICL. This decision to enhance AIL's requirements after detailed analysis took just
four months (from August to November, 2004), after MoCA had advised AI on
2nd August, 2004 to "revisit" their proposal.
E. Chronology of events leading to change in aircraft requirements of AIL
Date Brief  Details of Event
12
30 October/ Letter from 43 member delegation of US Congress regarding AIL's proposed
3 November, aircraft acquisition forwarded by PMO to MoCA. (Annexure- III)
2003
27 January, PMO forwarded two letters from Boeing (a letter of 17 November, 2003 to
2004 Secretary, MoCA and a letter of 2 January, 2004 to PMO to MoCA,
wherein Boeing indicated that the economics of the acquisition project were
strongly dependent on the number of aircraft chosen, and that the technical
evaluation could be easily influenced with the change in assumptions on
number of aircraft.
19 February, In response to contentions made by Boeing in these letters, AIL intimated
2004 MoCA that:
• Equal opportunity had been given to both suppliers, and the number of
long range aircraft had been reduced from 17 to 10 as it was not
economically viable;
• The evaluation was undertaken in conformity with AIL's requirements.
The question of giving Boeing a revenue benefit of 7 additional seats

12
(reduced by them to provide the mid cabingalley) did not arise; also,
estimation of residual value after 17 years life of aircraft was fraught
with risk and the percentage discount offered by Boeing for 10 aircraft
was lower than that offered by Airbus; .
3 March, Director (S), MoCA intimated PMO that the in-house TENC had evaluated
2004 different aircraft types on the basis of identical ground rules, providing fair
opportunity to all bidders.
In addition to highlighting the issues raised by AIL to MoCA, he also stated
that AIL had invited offers for 10 firm and 7 optional long range aircraft.
Boeing  had the opportunity of bringing in scale economics into their offer.
After due consideration of economics, the AIL Board had recommended
acquisition of only 10 A340-300 aircraft as it felt that acquisition of 17 long
range aircraft  would not be economically viable.
29 June, Director (S), MoCA recorded on file that there had been some "important
2004 developments" as submitted by Secretary, MoCA to the Principal Secretary
to PMO that many international carriers were planning direct operations
to USA/Canada and the A340-300 aircraft was going out of production in
near future. Therefore, AIL needed to review its proposal and consider
suitable long range aircraft for its fleet. Further, it was understood that
"Minister, Civil Aviation (CA) also impressed upon AIL in a meeting at
Mumbai to examine the  feasibility of direct India-US/ Canada flights".
5 July, 2004 AS&FA (Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor), MoCA expressed
ignorance about the purported note of Secretary, MoCA and stated that:
• "I am not aware of the A-340-300 going out of production in the near
future, thus calling for a re-look at the choice. The fact that Air India
chose to invite offers for this type of aircraft and the Company decided
to quote for the same less than a year ago, leads one to think whether
Air India chose the right type of aircraft while inviting offers. If the
assumption that the aircraft is going out of production is true, Air India
is guilty of not having done their homework and the Airbus Company
is  guilty of unethical business practice in offering an aircraft that is
being  phased out. ...But it would be worthwhile to get clarifications on
these aspects from both Air India and Airbus Company".
• "Minister (CA) in a meeting at Mumbai impressed upon the need for
Air India to examine the possibility of non-stop India-US operations.
But he never suggested that the present fleet acquisition plan should be
dropped and only that option should be examined. Hence, it would not
be correct to presume that the new option that would be examined
would be 'in lieu of' the existing plan. It could be 'in addition' as well. Of
course, if Air India decides to go in for the option of non-stop India
America operations, this would call for a re-look at the present fleet
acquisition proposal".
Consequently, AS&FA suggested that a meeting (like the one Minister, CA
took in respect of IAL) would be in order, wherein the points of view of
both AIL. and MoCA could be considered, and a consensus arrived at on the
future course of action. .
12

13
August, 2004 In a meeting on 2 August, 2004 taken by the then Minister, Civil  Aviation
with Secretary, MoCA and CMD, AIL, it was decided that:
• Air India should revisit the proposal for purchase of aircraft and submit
a fresh, project proposal to the Government at the earliest, which could
include the revised requirements.
• Al could examine whether the proposal for purchase of short range
aircraft for the low cost airline is justified on a stand-alone basis and
could be de-linked from the purchase of other types of medium range
and long range aircraft for, Al. While doing so, AI should examine
whether  economics of  the proposal for acquisition would be favourable,
keeping  in view the low-cost and low fare operations envisaged through
a separate  company. If the proposal is found to be justified and viable,
Air India should revert to the Government at the  earliest.
• At this meeting of 2 August, 2004, the Chairman and Managing Director
(CMD), AlLwas of the view that although the present proposal  did
not fully cater to the requirement of AlL's fleet, the additional
requirement of aircraft could be projected separately through a
supplementary proposal after due evaluation. However, it was felt
that it may not be advisable or prudent to go through the pre-Public
Investment Board (PIB) and PIB exercise in two separate stages with
two different sets of proposals for such capital intensive projects. It
would be desirable to take a total and comprehensive view on the fleet
of AIL, keeping in mind its plan and growth for the next fifteen years or
so.
MoCA communicated the above mentioned decisions on 5 August, 2004 to
AIL and directed them to revisit the acquisition proposal and submit a fresh
proposal, which would include revised requirements in view of:
• New dimension in the competition on the India/USA route with the
introduction of non-stop flights through ultra long range aircraft by
competing airlines in South East Asia and the Gulf Region. Unless AIL
was able to match this product and connectivity by adding suitable
aircraft to its fleet (which was not a part of the present proposal), AlL's
competitiveness, load factors and revenues were likely to be severely
affected.
• AIL had decided (May, 2004) to launch a 'no frill' airline called 'Air
India Express' through a separate company (Air India Charters Limited)
to destinations in South East Asia and the Gulf, which would offer
lower fare to passengers.. Therefore, the current project proposal may
not have taken into account the economics of these types- of aircraft if
operated on low cost basis and with fares that would be 25 per cent
lower than existing fares.
October, 2004 CMD, AIL indicated to MoCA that during the AIL Board meeting of
13 September, 2004, some Board members indicated that in .view of MoCA's
advice, the fleet acquisition programme needed to be revisited in its entirety
(including examination of other aircraft types, apart from B737-800, for
small capacity short range aircraft). CMD, however, felt that the B737-800
project should be delinked and studied separately and was to be submitted
under the  banner of AICL.CMD sought MoCA's clarification in this regard.
12

14
MoCA sought clarification from CMD, AIL as to whether the B737-800
aircraft was selected after carrying out the required comparative evaluation
'on stand  alone basis. AIL confirmed the selection of B737- 800 aircraft
after comparative evaluation on stand-alone basis.
18 November, Director (S) noted that “strictly speaking, it is for the AI Board to take
view in the matter. As far as Ministry's advice is concerned, there is a
suggestion... that AI needs to take a total comprehensive view on its fleet,
keeping in mind its plans and growth for the next 15 years or so".
Consequently, a clarification was issued along these lines, with the approval
of Minister, Civil Aviation, to AIL.
24 November, AIL Board considered and approved a revised long term fleet plan for 50
aircraft. (two thirds on firm basis and one-third on option basis), apart from
18 aircraft for its subsidiary, AICL. Paras 13 and14 of the Extract from the
Minutes of this 103rd meeting of the Air India Board reads:
"13. Shri V aghul suggested that the changes that have taken place
in the aviation industry environment since the submission of the
earlier Project Report in January, 2004 which have necessitated the
proposed change in Air India's fleet requirements should be
elaborated in the Project Reports to be submitted to the Government.
14. The Board was of the view that the deliverirschedules for the
new aircraft should be dovetailed with the aircraft lease plan. At this
stage, the CMD mentioned that since the Ministry had assured Air
India that its aircraft acquisition proposals would be cleared
expeditiously i.e. by March, 2005, Air India should now dry lease
only the aircraft required by it during the period upto Summer 2006
and plan for new aircraft deliveries for its requirements from winter
2006/07 onwards. The Board then expressed the views that the
aircraft acquisition could also co-exist with the aircraft lease plan
and that further expansion of the capacity, fleet and network-over
and above the expansion envisaged in the revised fleet plan- could,
in fact, be considered".
This process of revision took only four months.
2.11. On being asked to furnish reasons for such sharp revision in the number of
aircraft, the MoCA submitted that Air India had not acquired/inducted new aircraft in
its fleet during 1996-2004. During this period, Air India had submitted Project Reports
for Acquisition of 2xB747-400s (in 1997-98) and 3xA310-300s (in 1996). Both these
projects were not approved. Air India had aircraft which were more than 20 years old
and it had a fleet of 33 aircraft with four different generic types. There was a need for
Air India to rationalize and standardize its aircraft types alongside phasing out the old
and aged fleet which was the cause for low passenger appeal and low dispatch reliability.
An internal committee of Air India had started the evaluation of a new aircraft type viz.
2004
2004
12

15
the MCLR aircraft way back in 1993. The committee had at that time, invited bids in
January1995 for 23 MCLR aircraft (10 firm + 13 on option). Subsequently, evaluations
were made for 17 aircraft (A340/B777) end finally a proposal for 10 A340 aircraft was
submitted to the Government based on its financial results. Pending acquisition of
new aircraft, after Air India was taken off the Government's disinvestment list in 2000,
the Air India Board approved an interim strategy of inducting aircraft on lease — for
expanding capacity and for beginning the process of rationalizing Air India's fleet. Air
India had inducted 13 aircraft on lease upto 2004. This enabled Air India to phase out
its old A300-B4 and some of B747-200 aircraft, which in turn helped in partial fleet
rationalization.
2.12. The Ministry further submitted that in 2004, when Air India submitted its
Project Report for 28 aircraft viz. 10xA340 + 18x8737, its total fleet size was 33 units of
which 20 were owned and 13 were on dry lease. This proposal had envisaged that 68%
of the new wide body induction would be towards replacement and the balance would
be towards growth. This induction as stated in the Project Report was to form the first
phase of acquisition of new aircraft by Air India, which would cover Air India's
requirement during the 10th Plan peripd viz. 2002-03 to 2006-07. 7 of the 10 A340
deliveries were scheduled in 2005-06 and 2006-07. The balance 3 units were scheduled
to be delivered in 2007-08.
The reasons that were submitted for revision of aircraft requirement were that:
(a) A 15 year comprehensive view of its fleet requirement rather than only 5/6 years.
A longer time-frame increased the growth requirements.
(b) Incorporate Air India's growth plans as reflected in the medium term business
strategy that was prepared in March, 2004, which entailed an expansion of Air
India's capacity through leasing of aircraft, establishment of a low fare-low cost
airline and fleet rationalization.
(c) All the leased aircraft and most of the owned aircraft were to be replaced. This
capacity replacement was included in the revised fleet requirements.
(d) The requirement for Ultra Long Range aircraft for India-USA operations was
included in the revised fleet requirements.
2.13. Further, on being asked to specify in no uncertain terms the authority
which initiated this revision of fleet acquisition plan, the MoCA responded:—
"The aircraft acquisition proposal of erstwhile Air India was discussed in the
Ministry of Civil Aviation on 2nd August, 2004 and in that meeting various
developments which had taken place were discussed. AI also informed that
its present proposal did not fully cater to the requirement of its fleet and the
additional requirements of aircraft could be projected separately through a
supplementary proposal after due evaluation. After due deliberations, it was
felt that it may not be advisable or prudent to go through the pre-PIB and PIB
exercise in two separate stages with two different sets of proposal for such
capital intensive projects and it would be desirable to take a total and
comprehensive view on the fleet of AI keeping in mind its plans and growth

16
for the next 15 years or so. Accordingly, it was decided that AI should revisit
the proposal for purchase of aircraft and submit a fresh project proposal to
the Government at the earliest, which could include the revised requirements.
Ministry of Civil Aviation, as such, did not direct AI to revise the requirement
of aircraft to any particular number. The requirement was revised after
evaluation of changed Civil Aviation scenario and the long term growth plans
of AI by the Techno Economic and Negotiating Committee (TENC) — an
internal committee of senior directors."
2.14. The Ministry while furnishing its response to the observations made in the
Audit Report had stated:—
"....the pressing debt structure that the airline finds itself is the cost of the
manner in which the investments needed to be made in the past, but did not,
and the observations regarding acquisition of 50 aircraft itself, when 30 of
them are not yet part of the fleet and have not even been paid for, is premature."
2.15. The Committee desired to know if AI had requested the Ministry to
strengthen its financial position due to increase in number of aircraft and to this the
Ministry replied as under:—
"In both its aircraft acquisition proposals submitted in January, 2004 for
28 aircraft and in May, .2005 for 50 aircraft, Air India had expressed the need
for infusion of additional funds into Air India for financing aircraft acquisition.
In the 2004 Project, Air India had referred to the 8th Report of the Disinvestment
Commission of August, 1998, which had recommended injection of `1000
crore as equity in Air India for financial restructuring — a need that was
highlighted even before Air India was put on the disinvestment list. It was
stated that such an infusion would strengthen Air India's balance sheet and
enable Air India to obtain aircraft financing on favourable terms.
In May 2005 Project Report, Air India had again referred to the need for this
equity infusion to support the aircraft acquisition. The Project Report had a
further reference to an earlier request made by Air India for infusion of -2500
crore as additional equity capital.
Though Air India had requested the Ministry towards infusion of 2500 crore
as equity to support the large number of aircraft acquisition, the same was,
however, never assumed in the financial evaluation due to uncertainty on the
issue of Initial Public Offering (IPO).
The Project Report proposed the acquisition to be financed using External
Commercial Borrowings (ECB) and internal resources and based on the fixed
interest rate of 5.5% which is based at then London Interbank Offered Rate
(LIBOR) of 3% p.a. and margin of 2.5%. The decision to fund it through debt
and internal resources was taken in view of the economics involved as AI
were able to secure US Exim financings for all its earlier aircraft at very
competitive rate of interest. Hence, AI requested the GoI to provide a sovereign
guarantee for arranging Exim financing for its acquisition of Boeing aircraft."

17
F. Flawed Assumptions underlying revised project report (50 long range aircraft)
2.16. According to Audit, many of the key assumptions such as increase in
capacity share, yield increases (at constant cost) underlying the revised project report
for acquisition of 50 long range aircraft (as against 10 long range aircraft envisaged
earlier) were flawed or unduly optimistic.
2.17. To the specific query of the Committee regarding the basis for making
assumptions such as increase in capacity share, yield increases at constant cost
underlying the revised project report for 50 long range aircraft, the MoCA replied as
under:—
"In the project report for acquisition of 50 Long Range aircraft, dated 14 May,
2005 details of market development and prospects were provided by AI. The
gist of these details is given below:
— Due to increased liberalization and globalization of Indian economy
and success of Indian IT industry, the outbound travel was growing
faster.
— Declaration of several Indian airports as international and• increased
operations by foreign airlines from interior points in India had fragmented
the market resulting in unwillingness of passengers from interior points
to travel over AI's Mumbai and Delhi-hubs.
— Many foreign airlines had started seeking and were being given huge
increases in capacity entitlements — far in excess of the genuine 3rd/
4th freedom markets resulting in their use of this excess capacity to
funnel traffic between India and USA/UK/Europe through their
respective hubs.
— Virtual open skies between UK, South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation (SAARC) / Association of Southeast Nations (ASEAN)
countries, US had increased the scale of competition and made the
Indian air market fiercely competitive.
— The Indian air market grew at an Average Annual Growth (AAG) rate of
6% during 1990-2000. In 2003, the market recovered from the September,
11, 2001 terror attacks and showed strong signs of recovery. The long
term traffic growth rate was assumed to be 7-8% which was not very
high as compared to the AAG achieved in the previous decade (6%).
— Capacity share of an airline is a primary determinant of its market share.
AI therefore had to increase its capacity deployment at a rate faster
than the traffic growth rate, in order to increase its capacity share and
therefore its market share.
— Private domestic carriers were aiming to fly overseas and had a brand
new fleet.

18
Induction of 50 aircraft would enable AI to expand capacity on international
routes at an AAG of 10.8%. This growth rate had factored the reduction in
capacity as an outcome of transfer of some of its Gulf and SE Asia routes to
AICL. Further the induction of aircraft was to take place over a period of time
i.e. from 2007 uptil beginning of 2012. The last induction had taken place in
1992-93 and the aircraft were nearly 14-15 years old. The new generation fleet
was mainly to replace the 747s and the A 310s which were not considered fuel
efficient.
In terms of Available Seat Kilometres (ASKMs), the capacity was expected to
grow at an AAG of 14.5% - because of increased proportion of operations on
long haul routes."
2.18. On the issue of assumptions for yield increase, the Ministry made the
following submission:—
"AI's route strategy was to focus on its core markets of USA, UK and Gulf,
including non-stop services between India and USA with ultra long range
aircraft. As far as possible, operate high frequency, direct, point-to-point
services with standardized - arrivals/departures, increased network
connectivity through scissor operations over London, Frankfurt, Paris,
Hong Kong and Singapore.
It was envisaged that the above route strategy would enable an increase in
yields. The increase in the outbound market and increase in volumes in
different market segments like Visiting Friends and Relatives (VFR) tourist,
leisure and business traffic segments additionally encouraged AI's
assumptions of increasing yields. Foreign airlines operating to India with
brand new aircraft and offering seamless transfers and connectivity were
demanding higher yields. This further encouraged AI to make an assumption
of higher yields in its evaluation.
As per the TENC Note, a one-time yield increase of 5 per cent in all classes
was assumed to take into account the effect of product improvement resulting
from the deployment of new generation aircraft. A further one-time yield
increase of 10 per cent in all classes was assumed for non-stop services to
USA with B777-200LR aircraft to take into account the benefit of reduced
elapsed travel time due to non-stop service.
The TENC Report incorporated assumptions developed by the Committee
consisting of the heads of Commercial, Materials Management, Finance,
Engineering, Engine Overhaul, Operations and Planning Departments at that
stage. The Committee was aware that international airlines were generating
higher revenues."
2.19. When asked whether these assumptions were flawed or unduly optimistic,
the MoCA submitted:—
“......... the assumptions made appeared feasible, based on market information
on  revenues of international carriers.

19
In retrospect, it may be seen that some of these assumptions are adversely
impacted by the global recession and steep hike in fuel prices which had an
impact on the profitability of the project IATA airlines reported huge losses in
2008 and 2009 due to the global economic slowdown and recession in the
aviation industry."
2.20. The Committee were also apprised that in the revised fleet plan of AI there
were projections that increase in capacity share would automatically lead to an increase
in AIL's market share and one-time yield increase, at constant costs of 5% on all
classes.
2.21. With regard to the above context, the Committee desired to know the basis
for such projections. The Ministry, in its written note, submitted as under:—
"An increase in capacity share does lead to an increase in the market share
for an airline. However, Air India's market share had been gradually declining
due to factors such as old aircraft, increase of capacity by competing airlines,
worldwide recession, etc.
Air India's revenues and yields were lower than the industry level in view of
its product offering which involved a small and an ageing fleet and a mismatch
of its route and aircraft mix. It was therefore assumed that with new and
modern aircraft, Air India's yields would come close to the industry levels.
The TENC committee felt that 5% increase was a reasonable estimate and
could be achievable by Air India."
2.22. When the Committee sought details about year-wise actual performance of
AIL in terms of market share, yield and costs vis-a-vis the assumptions, the Ministry
furnished the actual yield for the wide body aircraft and the market share from 2005-06
onwards which is given in the table below:—
Y ear Yield for Wide Air India's Market
body Share(AI /IA)
(`/Passenger
Kilometre)
2005-06 2.79 26.5
2006-07 2.75 24.7
2007-08 2.85 21.9
2008-09 2.99 16.3
2009-10 2.57 16.1
2010-11 3.06 14.5
G . Concerns of other stakeholders
2.23. Audit Report had highlighted that at the pre-Public Investment Board (PIB)
stage, various concerns regarding the assumptions made for enhancement of capacity
were expressed by the representatives of the Planning Commission and Department of
Expenditure (DoE).

20
At the pre-PIB Meeting (August 2005), the representatives of the Planning
Commission and Department of Expenditure (DoE) had expressed several concerns:
Concerns of Planning Considering the past trends, the assumptions made by
AIL regarding traffic projections were risky and the
upgradation appeared to be very ambitious, as statistics
of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) did
not suggest the kind of growth assumed in the Project
Report. The Project Report assumed substantial increase
in long haul traffic and the proposed increase in market
share from 19 per cent to 30 per cent would only be
possible, if 10 to 12 per cent rate of growth was achieved.
It was not clear how the policies of the Government
relating to this sector would fuel such growth.
Internal rate of return with fuel cost at current prices
was only 6.2 per cent. This was tantamount to skating
on thin ice, especially when traffic growth was not
guaranteed.
Concerns of Department of The assumption  that enhancement of capacity would
Expenditure necessarily lead to higher market share may not be
tenable beyond a point. Consequently, a purely supply
side response would run into huge demand side risks.
The high traffic growth projections, therefore, needed
careful consideration since project viability was highly
sensitive to reduction in traffic yield.
Audit pointed out that citing shortage of time, the pre-PIB meeting
(August 2005) could not discuss the response of AIL on the above concerns. MoCA
decided to directly include the response of AIL on these observations in the draft note
for the PIB meeting (October 2005). AIL had responded to the concerns of DoE by
stating that market share could be increased by increasing capacity.
Audit further pointed out that despite the concerns expressed by the Planning
Commission and the DoE at the pre-PIB stage (August 2005), the PIB finally approved
the purchase of 50 aircraft (35 on firm basis and 15 on option basis) for AIL at a
price•not exceeding 33,197 crore (besides 18 aircraft for AICL at ` 4,952 crore). The
decision for exercising the option for 15 aircraft was to be taken by the board of AIL
depending on market situation. Further, MoCA was directed by PIB to evaluate AI's
cost structure and productivity and fix benchmarks for achieving reduction in cost and
enhancing productivity. DoE also observed, in December, 2005, that the steps proposed
to be taken for cost reduction and enhancing productivity in AIL may be clearly
indicated by MoCA in the final CCEA note. However, MoCA simply indicated in the
CCEA note that a Committee would be set up by the Ministry to evaluate the cost
structure and productivity.
Commission

21
2.24. The observations of Planning Commission, DoE and the Department of
Economic Affairs, as expressed in the meeting of PIB held on 13.10.2005, read as follows:—
"Planning Commission .
The following observations, were made by Principal Adviser, Project Appraisal
and Management Division (PAMD), Planning Commission:—
(i) Since Air-India is a commercial undertaking, it is best to leave major commercial
decisions to them while the balance sheet of AI shows that there had been
marginal profits for the last three years, for large investments over a long period,
the balance sheet should be stronger, especially since AI is seeking Govt.
guarantee for the loan.
(ii) Since Debt Service Coverage Ratio is below one, it should be explained how air
India will service the debt.
(iii) Looking at past trends, the assumptions regarding traffic projections are risky
and the upgradation appears to be very ambitious. Directorate General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA) statistics do not suggest the kind of growth that is being
assumed in the project. The project assumes substantial increase in tong haul
traffic and the proposed increase in market share from 19% to 30% will only be
possible if 10 to 12% rate of growth is achieved. It is not clear how the policies of
Government relating to this sector would fuel such growth.
(iv) Air India's target of increasing its market share to 30.8% by 2012-13 may be its
corporate priority. However, from Government investment point of view, this is
not a Plan priority. Planning Commission would be keener to see growth of
public-private investment in the civil aviation sector as a whole.
(v) Internal Rate of Return with fuel cost at current prices is only 6.2%. This is
tantamount to skating on very thin ice, especially when traffic growth is not
guaranteed.
(vi) In order to mitigate the traffic risk, it would be useful to consider acquisition of
35 aircraft on firm basis and 15 aircraft on optional basis, and also consider a mix
of lease and outright purchase.
Department of Economic Affairs
The following observations were made by Jt. Director, DEA:—
(i) As far as acquisition of aircraft is concerned, DEA supports the proposal 'in
principle', keeping in view the evolving civil aviation scenario, and the need to
plan for some over capacity in infrastructure sectors.
(ii) There is need for a clear road map for development of the air transportation
sector as a priority infrastructure sector with a level playing field for both public
and private operators.
(iii) W ith respect to financing with GoI guarantee, a preferred option may be to
encourage financing arrangements not involving government guarantee.

22
(iv) W ith an investment plan of such high order, it would be imperative for the
Government to lay down productivity norms and benchmarks based on global
best practices.
Department of Expenditure (Plan Finance Division)
The following observations were made by Joint Secretary, PF.II:—
(i) The assumption that enhancement of capacity would necessarily lead to higher
market share may not be tenable beyond a point. Consequently, a purely supply
side response will run into huge demand side risks. The high traffic growth
projection therefore need careful consideration since project viability is highly
sensitive to reduction in traffic yield.
(ii) W ith Air India's plan for an IPO, the weighted average cost of capital would be
higher and the project would become riskier.
(iii) Debt service coverage ratio of the project for 50 aircraft is below one on a stand
alone basis. The capacity of Air India to service the debt is a crucial issue,
especially since Govt. guarantee is being sought.
(iv) On balance, Plan Finance division would support purchase of 35 aircraft with an
option for 15 aircraft. It also needs to be decided as to when and how the option,
would be exercised.
(v) With respect to Air India Charters, data for the last five years indicates that AI
has been losing money on the Gulf & S.E. Asia routes even though capacity has
gone up. In this backdrop, there appears to be little cause for comfort about the
performance of AICL in this segment.
(vi) Low cost operations are crucial for the success of AICL. However, the assumption
that the salaries of the pilots and cabin crew would be one tenth of the
corresponding staff in AI does not seem to be reasonable.
(vii) Operating Cost per available ton KM is ` 11.58 for AI and ` 17.30 for AICL. This
requires explanation.
(viii) The debt service coverage ratio for AICL needs to be determined on a stand
alone basis.’’
2.25 To the query of the Committee whether these concerns of Planning
Commission and Department of Expenditure were suitably addressed by AIL, the
MoCA in its reply stated as under:—
"The Memorandum for Public Investment Board pertaining to the acquisition
of aircraft was submitted in August, 2005. This memorandum included
comments/clarifications raised by Ministry of Civil Aviation, Deptt. of
Expenditure, Planning Commission and the Integrated Finance Division of
the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
The pre-PIB meeting was held on 31st August, 2005 and the PIB approval was
received in October, 2005.

23
With respect to the queries pertaining to traffic projections and enhancement
of capacity leading to a higher market share, Air India had provided detailed
clarifications regarding its traffic and market share assumptions
(Annexure - IV)."
H.  Negotiation Process
2.26 A multiplicity of negotiating procedures was adopted with regard to the
acquisition process:
• With the 'in-principle' approval of MoCA, CMD, AIL constituted a Price
Negotiation Committee (PNC) in June, 2005 to hold price negotiations with the
concerned airframe/engine manufacturer to negotiate the terms and conditions
to be incorporated in the purchase agreement, without any commitment to the
manufacturer fill the receipt of GoI approval for the acquisition project.
• According to Audit, the appointment of a price negotiating committee even
before the pre-PIB meeting (let alone PIB approval) was surprising. The only
possible explanation could be "expediting" the acquisition process. However,
no such haste was shown till the aircraft requirements were revised upwards
from 10 long range aircraft to 50 long range aircraft.
• In August, 2005, MoCA constituted an Overseeing Committee to oversee the
process of price negotiations. The negotiations held between August, 2005 and
November, 2005 resulted in reduction of ` 539 crore in the net project cost of
50 aircraft.
• After consideration of the proposal, CCEA approved constitution of an
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM) for "one final round of negotiations"
with the manufacturers to finalise the transaction; this was based on a letter by
the Minister, Civil Aviation to the Prime Minister on the lines of the EGoM set up
earlier in respect of the IAL acquisition. These negotiations were held on
24 December, 2005.
2.27 The composition of the various significant Committees/Agencies formed
during the process of aircraft acquisition by erstwhile Air India is tabled below:—
Committee/Agency Date of Composition
Constitution
12 3
Techno Economic and November, Shri V .K. Mehra, Director-Engineering
Negotiation Committee 2002 (Engine Overhaul)
(TENC) Shri S.V. Punhani, Director-Finance
Shri Babu Peter, Director-Engineering
Capt. M.K. Hathi, Director-Operations
Shri V . Srikrishnan, Director-Materials
Management
Shri S. Lalwani, Director-Planning &
International Relations

24
Price Negotiation 16 June, 2005 Shri V .K. Mehra, Director-
Committee (PNC) Engineering (Engine Overhaul)
Shri S.V. Punhani, Director-Finance
Shri Babu Peter, Director-Engineering
Capt. M.K. Hathi, Director-Operations
Shri V . Srikrishnan, Director-Materials
Management
Shri S. Lalwani, Director-Planning &
International Relations
Overseeing Committee 18 August, Shri C.G. Somiah, Former C&AG — one
2005 man Committee
Empowered Group of 15 December, Shri P. Chidambaram — Minister of Finance,
Ministers (EGOM) 2005 Shri H.R. Bhardwaj — Minister of Law &
Justice, Shri Oscar Fernandes— Minister of
State (Independent Charge) of the Ministry
of Statistics & Programme Implementation,
Minister of State (Independent Charge) of
the Ministry of  Y outh Affairs & Sports
and Minister of State (Independent
Charge) of  the Ministry of Overseas Indian
Affairs, Shri Praful Patel — Minister of State
(Independent Charge) of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation.
2.28 Audit was of the view that it was normal and necessary to make an assessment
through commercial intelligence gathered globally, to assess a reasonable or threshold
price based on comparable prices paid by other buyers and other factors. However, no
benchmarks for the cost of the aircraft were set (either for the AIL acquisition or for the
IAL acquisition) before negotiations were initiated with the manufacturers at various
levels.
2.29 While furnishing the Ministry's response to Audit observations on the
issue of gathering commercial inteligence in order to arrive at the threshold price it was
stated:—
"Every attempt is made by any buyer to collect commercial intelligence globally
to determine the threshold price. Benchmarks are always established in a
negotiation and therefore this conclusion that there were not any, is not
correct. As we will see later every attempt was made. However, to obviate and
to make the process completely transparent and accountable, the Ministry
requested the PMO to constitute an Oversight Committee to further negotiate
and oversee the details of the procurement process. This is also rare
phenomenon in the Government”.
12 3

25
2.30 To the query of the Committee regarding the steps taken by the Ministry to
arrive at a benchmark price, the reply submitted was:—
‘‘No separate benchmark price was set up for the negotiation process as no
industry standards are available for benchmarking the price of civil aircraft.
However, the negotiations were conducted by a Committee comprising senior
members of Air India under the guidance of an Oversight Committee formed
by the Ministry of Civil Aviation under the Chairmanship of Sh. C.G. Somaiah.
The final round of negotiations was conducted by an Empowered Group of
Ministers to obtain the best possible terms from the manufacturers."
2.31 When the Committee desired to know the reasons for MoCA being unable
to ascertain a reasonable or threshold price based on comparable prices paid by other
buyers and other factors especially for an acquisition of this nature, it was submitted
as under:—
‘‘The reasons, for not being able to ascertain the comparable purchase price
by other airlines are given below.
Confidentiality
The commercial terms of the sale/purchase of aircraft is always covered with
confidentiality clauses just as the confidentiality clauses in Air India's
purchase agreements with Boeing and other manufacturers. This makes such
data of other customers inaccessible to us by any legal means.
Air India had evaluated the aircraft as per the directions laid down by the
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Central Vigilance Commission.
In line with the above directives, sealed bids were invited from the competing
parties by a Request For Proposal and it was stated therein that:
'You are requested to submit your best terms at this stage itself since the
company's policy does not permit evaluation of offers submitted after the
date of bid submission specified herein.'
Thus all the competing manufacturers were asked to submit their best terms
at the beginning itself in the financial bid. After the financial evaluation was
completed, the negotiations were held only with the L1 bidder - in line with
the CVC's directions.
In view of the foregoing, it was not possible for Air India to obtain the
commercial terms of sale to other buyers.
Benchmarking
It was not possible to benchmark against any previous acquisition since the
type of the aircraft and volume was different. No industry standards are
available for benchmarking the price of civil aircraft. Therefore no separate
benchmark price was set up for the negotiation process. However, the
negotiations were conducted by a Committee comprising senior members of
Air India under the guidance of an Oversight Committee formed by the Ministry

26
of Civil Aviation led by none other than the former CAG Mr. C. G. Somaiah.
The final round of negotiation was conducted by an Empowered Group of
Ministers to obtain the best possible terms from the manufacturers.
After securing the approval of the Board for the acquisition, the Project
Report along with the Board's decision was sent to CAG as well as CVC for
their comments through the Ministry of Civil Aviation so as to ensure
transparency before placing the order on Boeing. However, Ministry/AI was
not benefited by the advice of GAG and CVC in this regard.
However, a letter.agreement was signed with Boeing which stated that the
Boeing confirms that the general terms and conditions ( including but not
limited to prices, financing conditions, guarantees and warrantees) granted
to the AI are not less favourable when compared in its entirety and not
individually than those contracted with any purchaser airline having its main
base in the region, being a competitor to AI at the time of signing the purchase
agreement."
2.32 Audit scrutiny revealed that AIL and AICL signed the purchase agreement
with Boeing and GE/CFM on the same day i.e. 30th December, 2005 when MoCA
conveyed approval of GoI to AIL for acquisition of 68 aircraft on firm basis (50 aircraft
for AIL with GE engines and 18 aircraft with CFM engines for its subsidiary, AICL, on
the basis of the terms and conditions negotiated by the EGoM), involving cash
concessions and special financing concessions estimated at ` 1848.07 crore. To this
Audit observation, the Ministry had responded that since the price offers were valid
only upto 31st December, 2005, the purchase Agreements were signed on 30th December,
2005.
2.33 The Committee asked whether AIL had considered to seek an extension of
time from the manufacturers as no approval was received from the Government even
upto last week of December, 2005 and the Boeing offer was to expire on 31st December,
2005. To this, the Ministry informed the Committee that as the Government approval
was received on 30
th  December, 2005, the question of seeking extension of time did not
arise. It was further informed that the concerned departmental representatives from
Finance, Engineering and Planning including legal advisors had held protracted
discussions with Boeing to finalize the terms of the purchase agreement and the same
were kept ready to be signed once the Government approval was received. Further it
was added that the purchase agreement was signed on 30th December, 2005 only after
the receipt of the Government's approval.
I. Reconfiguration of Seats in November, 2005
2.34 Audit scrutiny also revealed that during the negotiation process, the
configuration of seats was revised in November, 2005 (a post-bid change):—
• The proposed configuration of seats on the B777-200LR and B777-300ER was
discussed at a meeting with the then Minister, Civil Aviation on 12 November,
2005. It was decided that "in the context of the fiercely competitive aviation
scenario, AIL should provide the best possible product in terms of seat comfort,
•

27
in-flight entertainment systems and other passenger amenities on the new aircraft”.
Accordingly, the seating capacities of the B777-200LR and B777-300ER aircraft
were reduced by 28 seats and 38 seats respectively.
• It was also noted that the then Commercial Director, AIL had confirmed that in
the Executive Class, AIL should be able to achieve a further yield increase of
5 per cent on both aircraft, provided that "there is no substantial increase in
competitive pressures and all other aspects of the AI product offering meet
prevailing global standards."
• The revised seat configurations were finalised and intimated by AIL to Boeing,
and were only subsequently submitted for the AIL Board's information (not
approval). Even the GoI EGoM was not informed (as per documents made
available to Audit) of this change in seat configuration.
As regards projected increase in revenue, the preliminary analysis for the seat
changes based on the methodology adopted in the Project Report indicated significant
reduction in estimated passenger revenue and overall revenues, and the higher revenues
were projected only by assuming additional 5 per cent yield increase in the Executive
class.
2.35 On being asked to furnish the details of this reconfiguration i.e., the post-
bid changes in the seat configuration that was revised in November, 2005, the MoCA
submitted:—
"The seat reconfiguration was decided only after the tender process got over
and the L-1 was selected based on report submitted by techno-economic
committee comprising of heads of Departments of the concerned departments
of Air India and approved by AI Board. The revised seat-configuration did
not adversely impact the profitability estimated in the project report. As a
matter of fact, the profitability showed marginal improvement as a result of
the reconfiguration. To clarify further, the selection process involved
pre-defined like-with-like comparison of competing aircraft. Hence, further
improvements were only made with respect to the already selected product
i.e., Boeing aircraft in this case. Comparing all the aircraft under the new seat
standards would not have changed the selection as the difference in the
operating economics between the competing aircraft would continue to be
maintained...........
As desired, the seat configuration of the competitor Airbus fleet was estimated
using the actual seating standards that were chosen for the Boeing fleet. The
comparative data is briefly discussed hereunder.
ULR — The total seat count of 777-200LR reduced by 28 — with 4 less in
F/C, 7 more in B/C and 31 less in E/Y classes respectively.
The total seat count of A340-500 reduced by 28 — with no change in F/C,
4 more in B/C and 32 less in E/Y classes respectively.

28
MCLR-A — The total seat count of 777-300ER reduced by 38 — with 2 less in
F/C, 12 more in B/C and 48 less in E/Y classes respectively.
The total seat count of A340-600 reduced by 45 — with no change in F/C,
12 more in B/C and 57 less in E/Y classes respectively.
MCLR-B—The total seat count of 787-8 reduced by 2 — with 6 less in B/C
and 4 more in E/Y classes respectively.
The total seat count of A330-200 reduced by 6 — with 6 less in B/C and no
change in E/Y classes respectively.
As can be seen, the reduction in seat count is similar or relatively worse in
case of Airbus fleet when the changes made in the Boeing fleet are applied to
the Airbus aircraft. This would have no change or adverse change in the
relative profitability of Airbus aircraft."
2.36 The Ministry failed to furnish to the Committee, reasons for the erstwhile
AIL not seeking approval of Government for seat reconfiguration. However, in response
to an Audit enquiry regarding the same, AI had stated (August 2010) that two Joint
Secretaries of MoCA were on the AIL Board and, therefore, only issues requiring
approval of GoI were referred to the latter.
2.37 On being enquired whether the seat reconfiguration had an impact on the
transparency of the negotiation process and the terms and conditions of the contracts
with the supplier, the MoCA replied:—
"It may kindly be noted that Boeing does not manufacture aircraft seats and
the airlines are given a choice to select its seat vendor from among the approved
panel of Boeing. Hence, the seat reconfiguration could not have been factored
into the negotiation process or that would have an impact on the negotiations.
The negotiation process focused on lowering the cost of acquisition of the
aircraft and obtaining other terms of the sale. The seat reconfiguration was
taken up to offer improved passenger amenities in the premium classes, such
as horizontal flat beds in the Executive Class as compared to the inclined flat
beds that were originally planned. At that time, it was seen that most of the
premium airlines were offering horizontal flat beds and Air India had to offer
a similar product to compete with such premium airlines."
2.38 While deposing before the Committee, the Strategic Business Unit (SBU)
Head (MRO-Airframe), AI claimed:—
"Basically, the reduction in seat count is very similar or relatively worse in the
case of the competitor. So, we have seen all that. Basically, the seats came
down because of the flat seat requirement in the business class. Looking
back, we feel it is a right decision which we have taken because in business
class, everybody is having flat seat. Our occupancy in business class is quite
good, especially on the US route. For a 16-hour-flight, there is a need for
having a flat seat."
2.39 When the Committee desired to know the assumption for further yield
increase during the negotiation process, the MoCA replied that assumption of yield
had no connection with the negotiation process.

29
2.40 To a specific query as to whether the changes in seat configuration were
suggested by the concerned airline or the Ministry, the MoCA replied:—
".... the decision to change the interior configuration of the aircraft was taken
at the airline level. In this regard, it may be noted that the seating configuration
in the Business class of the aircraft were based on the seat pitch of 60 inches
at the time of evaluation as well as submission of the project report in May,
2005. However, as the delivery of the aircraft were to begin in mid 2007 and
beyond, it was felt that, in the context of emerging fiercely competitive aviation
scenario the configuration of the new aircraft should be reviewed in order to
ensure that Air India offers the best possible product in terms of seat comfort,
in-flight entertainment system and other passenger amenities on the aircraft.
In this direction, a decision was taken to configure the aircraft with fully
horizontal lie-flat seats at 74-76 inches pitch in the executive class."
J. Option for 15 Aircraft Dispensed with
2.41 Audit has highlighted that till EGoM's recommendation, the fleet acquisition
for AIL was premised on only 35 aircraft on firm basis, with 15 aircraft on option basis.
The PIB specifically recommended acquisition of 35 aircraft on firm basis, and
15 aircraft on optional basis, with the decision for exercising the option for 15 aircraft
to be taken by the AIL Board depending on the market situation. This approach was
also specifically recommended by both the Planning Commission and the Department
of Expenditure at the pre-PIB stage. Furthermore, it was also highlighted specifically
by the AS&FA, MoCA during the PIB meeting.
2.42 Responding to the Audit observations regarding the requirement of number
of aircraft the Ministry had replied:—
"...proposal of AIL and Ministry was only for 35 aircraft as against the then
existing 42 obsolescent fleet 15 aircraft were to be considered as an option if
required in the future. However, the EGoM opted for the full number because
of the concession it would be attracting from the supplier as has been
quantified by Audit itself in its report besides the 30% offsets for Boeing and
40% from Airbus which is not quantified by Audit in this report. The expansion
plan also needed to figure the dynamic environment. It occurred at a time
when there were non-stop services beginning to the US continent. Also it
was in the background of the proposal to start a low cost airline to cater to
routes in the Gulf and South-East Asia for a different clientele of the country.
The LCC concept itself was a recent phenomenon worldwide and can be
validated by the success of such carriers in our country. This would not have
found many takers in 2004. In both proposals the airlines chose to propose its
numbers. Ministry of Civil Aviation has no role in the choice of numbers and
types of aircraft. It relied entirely on the assessment of the Airline."

30
2.43 On being asked to furnish the reasons for placing a firm order for all
50 aircraft, thus defying the recommendations of the PIB, Planning Commission and
Department of Expenditure (DoE), the Ministry submitted as under:—
"As explained in reply to the CAG, this was evaluated in the Project Report
and only then did DoE officials recommend the proposal for acquisition of
35 aircraft on firm basis and 15 on option basis to the PIB. We would like to
reiterate that this assessment of growth were made by the airline and as
mentioned in the Project Report, 27 of the 50 proposed aircraft were to only
maintain the existing capacity and 8 were intended to cater to the growth
factor with 15 kept as an option for future growth. The point still remains that
it was not possible for the airline to even retain the market share without
acquisition of new aircraft. It must be borne in mind that AI had 42 aircraft
even in 2002- 03. Even today, in the context of the Turnaround Plan, the airline
has projected a near doubling of its size — an addition of 135 aircraft to the
existing complement to cater to its required share of the market.
In view of cumulative factors mentioned above the EGoM chose to place firm
orders of 50 aircraft on account of discounts made available by Boeing
Company as also the other investments to be made by the Boeing Company
in India. Audit itself has valued these at ` 1800 crore approx. It does not
include the value derived from the 30% of the said investment in offsets as
also the $175 million investment by Boeing in MRO plus that invested in
other training facilities. The EGoM successfully obtained 30% offsets in their
negotiations. All of these form part of the assets invested as a result of this
project. These also need to be evaluated and form part of the calculation. It
must also not be overlooked that the project evaluations were scrutinized by
the Planning Commission and PIB and also the monetary value of the benefit
derived out of capping of escalation by the EGoM."
K. Financing of Acquisition
2.44 The Committee were informed that due to delays of 117 to 331 days in
providing GoI guarantee, AIL and AICL had to avail bridge loans as a stop-gap
arrangement to make necessary pre-delivery payments. Since these bridge loans carried
a higher rate of interest than that envisaged, AIL and AICL paid additional interest of
` 199.37 crore and ` 21.34 crore respectively.
2.45 Clarifying that there was no direct role of GoI in financing this acquisition,
the Secretary, MoCA deposing,before the Committee stated that :—
"The second point that I wanted to clarify was that directly there was no
financing from the Government. The company came to us only for Government
guarantee because Government guarantee provides, certain level of comforts
to the bankers. So, the Government did not have any direct financing role in
this. They only came to us for Government guarantee and we provided it."
2.46  On the aspect of financing of acquisition of new fleet, Director (Finance),
Air India in his deposition before the Committee added as under:—
"Traditionally, Air India has not received much equity at all in the past. Air
India's equity prior to the merger was hardly ` 153 crore, though we have

31
been expanding from our own resources. We have not received any support
from the Government in equity form at all. In this case, it was a massive
expansion spreading over nearly ten years. Before the merger, we had nearly
34 or 35 aircraft fleet. We today have only 20. We still have not been able to
replace it from aircraft to aircraft. The Government said that the equity was
not possible.  A Kelkar Committee was also set up at that time in order to look
at both the organization so as to infuse equity in the company because we
have never asked for equity and the Government also, because of so many
priorities, could not bring in equity into the company. So, all financing in the
past up to 2005 were mainly done due to internal resources. Whatever we
used to generate we used to repay the aircraft loans and there was no
budgetary support to  Air India. Only after that when we acquired this particular
aircraft, the Government agreed to give a Government of India Guarantee. In
fact, we had asked for some equity in our project of about ` 2000 crore. But
the Government said that since we are giving you a guarantee, you should
raise it at a very reasonable cost. That is the reason why and fortunately for
us, the US Export-Import Bank (Exim) Bank agreed to give a guarantee and the
Government of India gave a counter guarantee and we were able to raise it at
a very low cost. The interest cost was very low. Why we have got into this
debt trap is mainly because of this fact."
2.47 When specifically asked about this aspect of delay in providing GoI
guarantee which cost the company ` 220 crore, the Director (Finance), AI, further
deposed as:—
"As far as your question on the delay in the Government of India guarantee
is concerned, what happens is when the aircraft are ready, we have to acquire
the aircraft. We have to raise a bridge loan. So, this bridge loan comes to us at
a higher cost - LIBOR plus 400 basis points or something whereas the US
Ex-IM loan comes at a very low cost - LIBOR plus 24 or 40 or 50 basis points.
So, there is a huge differential cost. It is below 100 basis points. So, we follow
up with the Government frequently in saying that it has to give the guarantee
on time. If the guarantee is available with the delivery of the aircraft, then, the
guarantee can be substituted and Ex-IM financing can be taken. We can avail
of this facility at a very cheap cost. But, during the first phase of acquisition,
there was a delay in the giving of the Government of India guarantee. It may
be due to the fact that the headroom was not available to the Budget. The
Government of India has also the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management (FRBM) Budget which is equal to 0.5 per cent of the GDP. More
than that, they cannot give the guarantee. Though we had told the Government
that these aircraft would be coming during that particular period of time, yet
the Government did not have the Budget to give. There was a delay. Because
of the delay, we had to pay a higher interest to these institutions. As and
when the guarantee was available, we substituted and refinanced the entire
loan at a lower cost. That is the reason why we had to pay ` 199 crore
additionally."

32
2.48  Asked to state categorically if any analysis was carried out by AI management
regarding the delay in providing GoI guarantee and Al's lack of foresight in this regard,
the MoCA in its written note submitted as under:—
"In December, 2005, Air India (AI) signed a Purchase Agreement with Boeing
for purchase of 50 aircraft. The GoI had committed to provide guarantee for
acquisition of 50 aircraft. AI received Exim Bank's Final Commitment to finance
the first 7 aircraft and 2 spare engines in September, 2006 and Preliminary
Commitment to finance the balance aircraft.
As per terms at which Exim agreed to support the financing, GoI guarantee in
favour of Exim Bank was one of the conditions. AI wrote to Ministry of Civil
Aviation in September, 2006 requesting MCA to approach Ministry of Finance
for the GoI guarantee. V arious meetings were held between officials of MoCA/
MoF/AI explaining the Exim guarantee lease structure. After approval of the
MoF, documents (running into more than 100 pages) were submitted to MoCA
which in turn forwarded the same to Ministry of Law and Justice for vetting.
On receipt of clearance from Ministry of Law and Justice, the guarantee was
issued by MoCA October, 2007.
In the meantime, delivery of the aircraft as per scheduled delivery dates
started from July, 2007 and AI had no option but to take delivery of the aircraft
as per the contracted delivery dates using interim financing arranged through
various Banks. Exim financing counter guaranteed by GoI is the cheapest
source of funds available since the guarantee of Exim Bank is equivalent to
US Government which is rated as "AAA" in the financial markets.
As Exim financing could not be concluded by the time of delivery of these
aircraft, AI took delivery of these aircrafts using Bridge financing. After receipt
of GoI guarantee in October, 2007, AI expeditiously concluded the "Exim
financing and drew down from the Exim facility and repaid the Bridge facility."
L. Delayed delivery of aircraft
2.49 As per the information furnished by the Ministry (dated 3.9.2013), against
the 50 aircraft to be delivered, only 28 aircraft (8 B777-200LR, 12 3777-300ER and 8
B787-8 aircraft) have been delivered so far; delivery of the remaining 3 B777- 300ER
aircraft was deferred at the instance of AI in 2009. The Committee have now been
informed that the remaining 22 aircraft (3 B777-300ER and 19 B787-8) have been scheduled
to be delivered by December, 2016. As regards compensation for delayed deliveries,
MoCA stated (February 2011) that after negotiations, Boeing had agreed for
compensation, which worked out to nearly $ 500 million and that the matter was further
being discussed with Boeing.
2.50 On the issue of current fleet strength of AI, the Director (Finance ), AI
deposed before the Committee as under:—
"This 18 aircraft is for the 737 for the low cost. As far as the wide body aircraft
is concerned, we ordered 50 aircraft at that particular point of time. Till now
only 20 aircraft have come because there is a delay. Three aircraft of 737 have

33
been deferred at the instance of the Air India to 2014 because we thought that
let us first utilise this fleet to the maximum extent. So, we have told the Boeing
to defer their aircraft.
Now, the 787 aircraft has not yet come in. So, the 787 aircraft will start coming
sometime in March of this year (2012). It is proposed that when the
787 aircraft comes in, we would have a re-look. It is a fuel- efficient aircraft.
Airport operators like ANA are already using it. They say it is 20 per cent more
fuel efficient than its competitors. When this aircraft comes, then, we will have
a re-look at all the routes in which the aircraft have to operate because these are
some of the routes which are making losses which can be substituted with the
787 aircraft. About those aircraft which are rendered surplus as a result of it, we
may think of leasing them out or giving back so that we will trim the fleet size
according to these things. So, the idea is that the ,787 aircraft induction will be
implemented. Whichever aircraft we feel is going to be rendered surplus on the
routes in which we are losing, we can give back those aircraft."
2.51 As per the information furnished by the Ministry, AI, as of September, 2013,
acquired 8x B777-200 LR and 12 x B777-300 ER aircraft. Explaining the reasons for
deferring the delivery of 3 B777-300 ER aircraft the MoCA stated that:—
"Air India has deferred the last 3xB777-300ER aircraft. These aircraft were to
have been delivered in 2010-11 and 2011-12. After the onset of the economic
recession in late 2008, traffic was on the decline and many airlines were
adopting the strategy of reducing capacity and operations to reduce the
impact of recession. Air India had undertaken restructuring of its existing
operations including reduction of operations in an attempt to curtail losses.
Additionally, the Board directed Air India Management to explore the
possibility of deferment/cancellation, of new aircraft induction to reduce the
burden of loan repayments. The proposal for deferment of the B777s was
made at Air India's Board meeting held in June, 2009, based on a  Board's
directive to evaluate the cost of deferment, vis-a-vis the cost of taking delivery
of the aircraft. While the Board directed that Air India should cancel or defer
the deliveries of the last 6xB777-300ER aircraft, Air India was in a position to
defer the delivery of the last 3 aircraft since the other 3 aircrafts were already
in production and deferment of the same was not possible. The revised delivery
dates for the last 3 aircraft proposed by Boeing are now scheduled for
2014-15."
2.52 Deposing before the Committee on the issue of deferring the delivery of
3 B777-300 ER aircraft, SBU Head MRO (Airframe) submitted that:—
"The market did change. We started feeling the burden of interest and all that.
We thought that it is the right time not to have more debt on us; let us
postpone getting those three aircraft; let us get more 787 aircraft before we
can take these three aircraft."
The witness further added:
"Because of the delay in the 787 delivery, we thought that let us get the right
aircraft for the medium-haul routes; let us not have the three aircraft coming

34
in and adding to our burden. We have considered this that let us not have it
at that point of time."
2.53 To a specific query of the Committee regarding compensation for delayed
delivery of the aircraft, the MoCA stated as under:—
"As per the purchase agreement, the B787 were to be delivered from September,
2008. There has been a delay in delivery of these aircraft by more than three
years.
As far as the subject of B787 delay compensation is concerned, the purchase
agreement includes terms for compensation up to a maximum of 180 days:
However, due to the considerably longer delay, discussions with Boeing
have been in progress to enhance the level of compensation beyond that is
provided for in the Purchase Agreement. In March, 2011, Boeing has submitted
a proposal for settlement of B787 delay compensation. The same was put up
to the Board for their consideration and the Board has constituted an
Overseeing Committee to look into the matter. The compensation package
from Boeing is in advanced stage of negotiation.
As such, the delay does not amount to a breach of contract as the terms for
delay compensation including an option for termination of the  contract, on
account of delay beyond 180 days, are included in the Purchase Agreement."
2.54 A copy of the Restricted Letter Agreement 6-1166-DJG-776 on the subject
'Liquidated Damages-Non-Excusable Delay' in the Purchase Agreement Number 2998
between the Boeing company and erstwhile Air India Limited relating to Boeing Model
787-837 Aircraft is attached as (Annexure -V).  As per Clause 1 of this Restricted Letter
Agreement, the amount of liquidated damages to be paid by Boeing for each day of
Non-Excusable Delay in delivery of aircraft was to be calculated according to an
approved formula on the basis of the data in the most recent AVMARK publication at
the time customer received notice of a non- excusable delay from Boeing. The formula
that was to be applied was:
AVMARK average for the newest and oldest lease rates (for the model aircraft)
30days
and this was rate per day.
2.55 With reference to this clause of the Purchase Agreement the Committee
sought details of the formula chalked out for calculating liquidated damages to be paid
by Boeing for each day of Non-Excusable Delay in delivery of aircraft. According to
the Ministry A VMARK is a monthly international Aviation publication that provides
details about the prevalent lease rates for old and new models of different aircraft
types operating in the global aviation market. The lease rates were based on reported
transactions and on A VMARK's experience in consulting, appraisal and fleet evaluation.
As per the agreement, Boeing was liable to pay Customer liquidated damages for each
day of Non-Excusable Delay (collectively the Non-Excusable Delay Payment period)
at a rate to be determined as per the liquidated damages formula. The A VMARK
average for the newest and oldest lease rates for the model of aircraft being delayed

35
would be divided by 30 days to determine the rate per day. In no, event the amount
paid would exceed an aggregate sum of 180 days of the rate per day. The A VMARK
publication was subject to subscription. Hence, during the beginning of the delay
compensation estimation in late 2008, Air India had used date from a similar publication
‘Aircraft Fleet & Network Management' which also tabulated the lease rates of various
types of aircraft. As B787 lease rates were not available at that time, the lease rates of
a comparable aircraft viz A330-200 was used.
Dry Lease rate of oldest aircraft = USD 0.590 million per month.
Dry Lease rate of newest aircraft = USD 0.880 million per month.
The Average lease rate was USD 0.735 Million per month or approximately USD
25,000 per day. As the B787 was a more modern aircraft than the A330-200 it was
envisaged that a higher lease rate to the tune of USD 30,000 per day would be realized
for the B787 aircraft. Thus for an average daily lease rate of USD 30,000 per day, the
compensation payable was USD 30,000 multiplied by 180 days and would work out to
USD 145.8 million (i.e. 27 multiplied by 5.4).
The definition of the term Excusable Delay, as submitted by the Ministry, was
any delay in scheduled delivery month of aircraft caused by the term (i) Acts of God;
(ii) War or armed hostilities; (iii) Government acts or priorities; (iv) Fire floods or
earthquakes; (v) Strikes or labour trouble causing cessation, slowdown or interruption
of work; (vi) Inability, after due diligence, to produce materials, systems, accessories,
equipments or parts: (vii) Inability, after due diligence, to obtain type certification; and
(viii) any other cause beyond Boeing's control and not occurred by Boeing's fault or
negligence. Whereas, delay in delivery of any aircraft beyond the last day of the
delivery month (Scheduled delivery) as per the purchase agreement by any cause that
is not covered under the definition of Excusable Delay  was termed as Non-Excusable
delay.
2.56 The Ministry further clarified that based on the definition of Non-excusable
delay, the delay in the delivery of dreamliner aircraft by Boeing was in the category of
Non-excusable Delay'. When asked to intimate the number of dreamliner aircraft that
were delivered by Boeing to Air India, the Ministry failed to furnish the said information.
2.57 Furthermore, when the Committee called for the latest factual position
regarding dreamliners being grounded since January 2013, on the directions of US
Aviation regulator following ,battery-file problems, as highlighted in various media
reports, the Ministry submitted its response to the Committee as:—
"Air India had grounded all of its 6 B787 aircraft since 17.01.2013 following a
directive of DGCA that was based on Federal Aviation Administration (FAA),
USA, Emergency Airworthiness Directive (EAD) dated 16.01.2013 which
required all B787 operators to temporarily ground the aircraft, subsequent to
fire incident reported on aircraft operated by JAL (Japan Airlines Ltd.) and
ANA (AI Nippon Airways) caused by malfunctioning of Lithium-ion battery.
Investigations by US NTSB (National Transportation Safety Board) in
coordination with Boeing and concerned regulatory authorities were initiated
to establish the root cause of problems and to develop a mitigation plan.

36
A modification plan was submitted to FAA for approval which included
modifications to the affected components of the aircraft such as battery,
battery charger, etc. FAA approval to the modification plan (Service Bulletin)
was received on 26 April, 2013.
In order to restore B787 aircraft back to service, Boeing AOG team had arrived
in Mumbai-Engineering facility and commenced work on the first aircraft on
30th April, 2013, to accomplish the Boeing Alert SB. The task has been
accomplished and all six aircraft were positioned at Delhi."
2.58 On being asked if there were any in-built clauses to safeguard the interests
of the Airlines in the event of technical problems arising after the delivery of aircraft, as
was seen in the instant case, the Ministry replied:—
"In the contractual agreement, Boeing warrants that, at the time of delivery all
Boeing products will be free from defects in materials, process of manufacture
and workmanship, including the workmanship utilized to install suppliers
products, engines, etc. The agreement also warrants that all Boeing products
will be free from defects in design, including selection of materials and process
of manufacture in view of the state of the art at the time of design. In case of
B787 aircraft such warranty is applicable for a period of 48 months after
delivery.
As per Clause 7.3 of the Warranty, Boeing will reimburse Customer's reasonable
costs of Direct Materials and Direct Labour by credit memorandum (excluding
labour hours expended for overhaul) at Customer's Warranty Labour Rate to
correct defective Boeing products.
As per clause 7.3.5, Boeing will reimburse Customer's freight charges
associated with a Correction of a defect on a Boeing product performed by its
Authorized Agent or a third party contractor."
2.59 When queried if the Ministry sought any compensation from Boeing for
losses incurred by Air India due to grounding of dreamliner aircraft, the Ministry
stated as under:—
"In line with standard warranty terms offered by all the manufacturers, there
is a clause in the Warranty which specifics that Boeing will not be liable for
any consequential or other damages due loss of use, revenue or profit due
any fault in the aircraft.
However, it may be pertinent to mention that at the time of agreement, the
situation of grounding of the entire fleet of newly inducted dreamliners and
that too for a prolonged period was not foreseen or taken into account. This
matter, therefore, needs to be dealt with separately outside the purview of the
Purchase Agreement/Warranty. Accordingly, the matter of compensation for
losses suffered by Air India on account of the grounding has been taken up
with Boeing.

37
A three member Committee comprising heads of Engineering, Finance and
Commercial has also been constituted by the Board. during its 52nd Board
meeting held on 7th May, 2013, to negotiate on the matter of compensation to
be provided by Boeing on account of the prolonged grounding of these
aircraft and consequent damages suffered by Air India."

 CHAPTER   III
ACQUISITION OF AIRCRAFT BY ERSTWHILE INDIAN AIRLINES LIMITED
(IAL)
A. Overview
In February, 2006, the erstwhile Indian Airlines Limited (IAL) signed purchase
agreements with Airbus/CFM for supply of 43 Airbus aircraft (with CFM engines) at an
estimated cost of ` 8399.60 crore:—
• 19 A319 air craft (seating capacity of 122);
• 4 A320 aircraft (seating capacity of 140); and
• 20 A321 aircraft (seating capacity of 172).
B. Chronology of events
3.2 The last fleet expansion of IAL was completed in 1994, with the induction of
30 A320 aircraft over the period 1989-94. A chronology of events related to the acquisition
of aircraft by the erstwhile IAL is given in (Annexure-VI).
3.3 Deposing before the Committee, SBU Head — MRO (Engine & Components)
gave a brief background on IAL's acquisition process as:—
"The last acquisition made by us, prior to merger, was in 1989-90 for 31 aircraft
A320 type. 19 of them were taken in 1989-90 period and the remaining 12 are
taken in 1993-94 period. By the turn of the century, these aircraft were becoming
older. The earlier ones were already about 12 years old. New technology was
coming into the picture. It was more passenger friendly with better cabin
ambiences and in flight entertainment system. Also, from the point of view of
avionics development which had taken place, aircraft are also becoming more
and more fuel efficient. It was time to acquire the newer fleet, because of the
growth that was occurring on the commercial 'side. So, it was time to acquire
more number of fleet.
... the Government had set up Dr. Vijay Kelkar Committee which had mentioned
that in case we do not induct aircraft, then our market share will reduce from
almost 100 per cent to 11 per cent. This report was considered by the
Government in 1995 and in May, 1999, with the plan of giving equity of about
325 crore to the erstwhile Indian Airlines, it was decided that acquisition of
aircraft should be carried out to capture and retain its market share. So, the
Indian Airlines carried out the necessary studies. In February, 2000, the Board
approved the methodology and parameters. The offers were invited from the
manufacturers. But at that point of time, the disinvestment issue started with
the Indian Airlines.
38

39
Later on, after the study we were given a go ahead that at least we can call for
the Request For Proposal (RFP) that may request for proposals from the
manufacturers in December, 2001 for the acquisition of the aircraft as a study.
In March, 2002, our in-house Committee analysed the offers and submitted
its recommendation of 43 aircraft A320 type to the Board."
C. Undue time taken for acquisition
3.4 The IAL's aircraft acquisition process took almost ten years from October,
1996 (when an inhouse aircraft evaluation Committee was constituted) to February,
2006 (when the purchase agreements were finally signed with Airbus and CFM).
3.5 Asked to comment on the unduly long time taken for the IAL's aircraft
acquisition process, the MoCA submitted as under:—
"The 43 aircraft project was first submitted to the Ministry on 19th April,
2002. It was considered in two meetings of pre-PIB on 25th April, 2003 and
12th June, 2003. Thereafter, in discussions with the MoCA on 12th July, 2004,
in connection with widebody aircraft requirements of IA, the Ministry advised
that IA should consider its impact on the 43 aircraft acquisition before it is
processed further. IAL considered all such aspects and re-submitted the
proposal which was duly considered by the Ministry on merits and processed
it further."
D. Flawed underlying assumptions
3.6 Audit pointed out that the Net Present Values (NPVs) of fund flows of all the
considered sets of aircraft (including the L-1combination of Airbus aircraft) were all
negative, even assuming constant cost and revenue yield at 2001-02 levels. In March,
2002, IAL had projected an increase of 6 per cent in domestic fares in the first year
(2003-04), with further annual increases of 2 per cent for four years (2004-05 to 2007-08)
evidently to make the negative NPV Positive.
3.7 When qurried by the Committee, the Ministry failed to provide details of
actual increase in domestic fares worked out to be for the period 2003 to 2008 and its
difference from the increase projected by IAL. 05 to 2007-08), levidently to make the
negative NPV positive.
3.8 According to Audit, in practice, IAL was obviously unable to achieve such
dramatic increases in yield at constant costs:—
• Besides dramatic increases in fuel and staff costs, the actual increase during
2007-08  on 10 domestic routes test checked by Audit was only due to fuel
surcharge and not due to any increase in the basic fare.
• The percentage of cost to revenue increased from 99 per cent in 2004-05 to
152 per cent in 2009-10.
• During the period from 2006-07 (when aircraft delivery commenced) to 2009-10,
the total revenue declined by 25 per cent from ` 7,196 crore to ` 5,372 crore. In
fact, when IAL increased the basic fare in 2008-09 by 21 per cent, Passenger
Load Factor (PLF) dropped by 8.65 per cent and revenue declined from
` 7,196 crore to ` 5,564 crore.

40
3.9 On being asked whether the NPV of all sets of aircraft were accurately
projected, the MoCA submitted as under:—
"The Airbus acquisition project study initially was based on the then prevailing
yields in September, 2001 on IC network i.e. ` 4.23/Revenue Passenger.
Kilometers (RPK) for Domestic sectors and ` 4.10/RPK for International
Sectors. At the said yields NPV at 8% discount factor p.a. was coming negative
for all the sets (different combinations of aircraft under consideration).
Therefore a fare increase on domestic sectors at 6% effective 2003-04 and
thereafter 2% every year till 2007-08 i.e. year of final induction was assumed
as the same was considered reasonable. After factoring in the fare increase,
the IRR of the project was worked out to be 9% on a stand-alone basis. The
first aircraft-(A319) was inducted in October, 2006. The second and subsequent
aircraft inducted from June, 2007 and onwards till April, 2010."
- The actual yields on IC network were as given below:
Financial Year per RPK
2006-07 4.10
2007-08 3.75
2008-09 4.41
2009-10 4.41
2010-11 (Prov.) 4.42
2011-12 (April-September, 2011) 5.02’’
3.10 As regards the actual increase in revenue yield since the acquisition of the
aircraft, the MoCA submitted as under:—
In the Project Report for 43xA,320 family aircraft prepared in April, 2002, the
passenger revenue yield was based on September 2001 actual achieved yield
viz. ` 4.23 per RPK for domestic operations and ` 4.10 for international
operations.
The actual achieved yield year wise from 2005-06 is given below and it will be
noted that except for the year 2007-08, the yield has been close to the Project
Report assumption.
Y ear Yield `/Revenue Passenger
Kilometers for Narrow body
aircraft
2005-08 4.36
2006-07 4.13
2007-08 3.75
2008-09 4.41
2009-10 4.14
2010-11 4.18

41
3.11 Further asked to state whether the achievements supported the projected
cash flows, the MoCA responded:—
"It may be stated that the assumptions in the project report were based on the
competition, market conditions, past and expected traffic growth, expected
induction of capacity by competitors, etc. The actual achievements may
therefore vary from the assumptions in the project study. It may also be
indicated that when the aircraft were evaluated the share of the Low Cost
Carrier (LCC) market in India was below 10%. This has now grown to nearly
70% as of date resulting in dilution of yields of the full service carriers like
Al."
3.12 In a subsequent written submission, MoCA elaborated on the emergence of
Low Cost Carriers (LCC) and their position vis-a-vis Full Service Carriers (FSC):—
"Low Cost Carriers (LCC) and Full service carriers have been in existence
over the past few decades in USA and Europe / UK. Low cost carriers came
into existence in Asia/India during the last decade. With the advent of low
cost carriers in different markets across the globe, Full Service carriers (FSC)
and LCC have been co-existing: each serving the distinct needs of different
segments of air travellers.
While LCC have focused on offering no frill services at low fares for point to
point travel on all economy aircraft with dense seating from/to secondary
airports, FSC have relied on attracting traffic through wider connectivity
through busy hub airports, offering dual class on more comfortably configured
aircraft even in the economy class, with additional product features such as
frequent flier programmes, through check-in, code shares, airport lounges,
in-flight entertainment, etc. LCC have generally built their competitive strategy
around the following typical practices, which yielded significant reduction in
operating costs over FSC:
• Higher aircraft utilisation through shorter turnaround times, enabled by
unique cabin services culture & limited on board services and extended
window of operations.
• Denser seating in a single class configuration, the typical seat pitch is in the
range of 29 inches against 30-32 inches adopted by FSC in the economy
class.
• Operations from secondary airports with lower user charges & holding times.
• Distribution strategies aimed at cutting sales agency commissions & GDS
costs.
• No frill services.
• Earning ancillary revenues as well as charging for services that are offered
complimentary as part of the full service product."
3.13 The Ministry further stated that the Indian LCCs had not been in a position
to adopt all the competitive strategies mentioned above because there were no
secondary airports in the vicinity of major hub airports in India, relatively limited

42
Internet penetration, pre-dominant share of corporate traffic and concomitant
expectations regarding service levels, congestion at metro airports leading to long
holding times and slot restrictions which directly impact aircraft utilization. Hence,
admittedly, the competition between LCC and FSC in India has been perhaps more
intense than elsewhere.
3.14 Apprising the Committee of the measures taken to improve the co-existence
of LCC and FSC in the country, the Ministry stated that:—
"In order to address this situation, the FSC competitors of AI in India have
launched their own LCC either as a distinct brand — example Jet Airways /
JetLite inventory holding out inventory as 9W and S2 respectively; or carved
out some of the capacity within the same brand to operate on the LCC model—
example Jet Airways (Jet Konnect inventory commonly held out as 9W &
King Fisher/King Fisher Red inventory commonly held out as IT.
AI too has planned to convert 14 of its old A 320 aircraft currently in two class
configuration having 20 business and 125 economy class seats into all
economy planes having 168 economy class seats in all which would help in
reducing the cost per seat by about 15% so that AI would be better equipped
to match the low fares offered by the LCC and thereby capture a larger share
of this segment.
With regard to the strategies adopted by AI and other Indian FSC to counter
the competition from LCC it may be stated that all these airlines have strategized
to increase aircraft utilisation through extended window of operations and
reduced ground times through more efficient airport systems, strong hub
operations, expanded Frequent Flyer Programme (FFP), greater focus on web
sales and rationalisation of In flight meals."
E. Concerns within MoCA and other appraising agencies
3.15 Audit examination highlighted that concerns regarding potential difficulties
of IAL in successfully funding the acquisition process with a positive NPV had been
raised within MoCA, but were ignored. The then AS&FA, MoCA, clearly noted his
serious reservations at the PIB Meeting (November 2004) on the acquisition proposal:—
• The basic study for induction of aircraft was done in the late 1990's, and
subsequent increase in the capacity by the private operators had increased the
competition significantly, thereby undermining the basis of the study.
• In the airline industry, it was a standard practice to keep a few options, which
may or may not be exercised.
• While there could be an increase in the international and domestic traffic, the
share of IAL in such traffic may not be of the same order, leaving the aircraft sub
optimally utilised.
• Both direct and indirect operating costs of IAL were phenomenally high. Unless
efforts were taken to reduce cost, all revenue and cost calculations would go
awry, thus, undermining the entire exercise of acquisition.

43
Subsequently, in March, 2005, he reiterated that "As regards the financial viability
of the acquisition, it appears... that in all probability, this project is not going to be
financially viable. The project has assumed Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) rate of 2001,
whereas the present rate is much higher, if we take into account the present A TF rate,
there will be much less returns as compared to those reflected in the Cabinet Note."
AS&FA's note also made two other important points:—
• There were only two major players — Airbus and Boeing, but negotiations with
only L-1 were permissible— under CVC guidelines (hence not much concession
could be obtained from Airbus); hence, there was a need to evolve new procedures
with limited players in the field, so that maximum benefit could be obtained for
Government;
• It was difficult to obtain information regarding sale of aircraft to other airlines in
India due to confidential contractual arrangements, and hence, it was desirable
to strengthen economic intelligence by GoI.
3.16 In this context, the Committee wanted to know the specific attempts made
by MoCA/IAL to address the concerns of the appraising agencies. MoCA in its reply
stated:—
"As per records available, for the 43 Aircraft Project Report, 2 pre-PIB meetings
were held in April, and June, 2003 respectively. The final PIE meeting was
scheduled for Jan. 2004 but was subsequently held in Nov., 2004. All the
queries raised by the agencies mentioned in the questions viz. AS&FA, MoCA,
Planning Commission and DoE were addressed in the document submitted
for the final PIB meeting".
3.17 The Committee further sought reasons for not reconsidering the acquisition
proposal given the fact that there were concerns raised from many quarters i.e. the
Planning Commission, the Department of Expenditure and within the Ministry itself. In
reply, the MoCA stated as under:—
"The 43 aircraft project was first submitted to the Ministry on 19th April,
2002. It was considered in two meetings of pre-FIB on 25th April, 2003 and
12th June, 2003. Thereafter, in discussions with the MoCA on 12th July, 2004,
in connection with widebody aircraft requirements of IA, the Ministry advised
that IA should consider its impact on the 43 aircraft acquisition before it is
processed further. The impact of widebody aircraft was considered in the
following view points:—
(a) Need to consider induction of A-321 — which had 172 seats, comparable
to widebody medium/long range aircraft—and review the consequential
requirements of revised nos. of A319 and A320, if a widebody aircraft is
leased-in by IC.
(b) The analysis of alternate fleet solutions for existing bids in the light of
above course of action, if adopted.

44
The in-house evaluation committee examined in detail and concluded that no
useful purpose will be served to de nova examine the fleet replacement project,
as widebody aircraft induction plan is for medium to long range international
operations and does not in any way obviate the requirement of 43 aircraft out
of which 70% is for replacement capacity. The requirement of widebody aircraft
as proposed to be met by induction of leased capacity only on a standalone
basis. Thus, Ministry did send the proposal back to IAL with the advise to
analyse and consider the impact of the acquisition of 43 aircraft. IAL considered
all such aspects and re-submitted the proposal which was duly considered
by the Ministry on merits and processed it further."
3.18 The Planning Commission and the DoE raised concerns on several key and
critical issues at different stages (initial stage, pre-PIB meetings, and PIB meetings) but
finally concurred with the acquisition proposal at the time of the submission of the
CCEA note. The main concerns of the Planning Commission at different points of time
are summarized below:—
• In the pre-PIB meetings, IAL clarified that the increase in capacity would be
around 30 per cent, and 70 per cent of the capacity was towards replacement.
The Planning Commission’s representative indicated that new accretion to
capacity had to be viewed with great circumspection, and suggested that IAL
should consider purchasing only 28 aircraft at this stage, and the rest in
Phase-II, after reviewing the situation, depending on the growth of traffic.
• The aircraft requirement, at least for international routes, could be reduced, as it
would be appropriate for IAL and AIL to chalk out a common strategy for their
international operations, as they were competing with each other along with
other international airlines on some international routes. Further, although IAL
was envisaging expansion of international operations to increase its market
share, private airlines were also being permitted to operate to neighbouring
countries.
• The company was incurring losses in the last three years, and it was necessary
to evolve a suitable strategy for funding the proposal to avoid time and cost
overrun. Further, operating more aircraft to compete with the private sector
might lead to further deterioration of IAL's financial position.
The main concerns of the Department of Expenditure (DoE) at different stages
are summarised below:
• It would be prudent to go in for some options, rather than placing orders for all
43 aircraft on a firm basis, as the projected fare hikes and load factors on
international sectors might not materialize in the competitive market scenario.
• The acquisition project had negative NPV at constant price for all combinations.
Further, the project envisaged 6 per cent increase in fares during the first year of
induction, and 2 per cent p.a. thereafter for four years. Since these projections
were made in March, 2002 and fares upwardly revised since then, further hikes
might not be possible in the present market scenario. The financial bids were

45
around 3 years old and it was likely that during that period the prices may have
softened. Therefore, a question might arise why fresh bids should not be invited.
• The pressure of competition was much more intense on international sectors
than in the domestic sector, with more bilateral rights being granted in these
sectors and the possibility of other domestic scheduled operators being granted
international rights. Consequently, the projections of load factors on international
sectors may not materialize in the long run.
• The financing pattern i.e. the mix of rupee and foreign exchange debt, need for
Government guarantee, etc. would also have to be considered.
3.19 In the PIB meeting of November 2004, MoCA and IAL justified the projections
in the Project Report on the following grounds:—
• Adoption of 8 per cent Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was appropriate, as the
earlier rate of 12 per cent was a very old historical figure when the interest rates
were very high.
• Fare increase may not be really difficult in the present scenario.
• The capacity addition was justifiable, as the market was growing at a rate of
7.8 per cent p.a. over the 2000-01 level, and the annual growth projection of
5 per cent in the 10
th Plan was on a conservative side.
• Market share of IAL would be directly related to its capacity share.
• The proposal to permit domestic carriers to fly on domestic and international
routes had been duly considered.
3.20 As per Audit, despite an increase in fleet strength from 67 aircraft
(March, 2005) to 97 aircraft (March, 2009), IAL's market share declined precipitously
from 37 per cent in 2004-05 to 16.9 per cent in 2008-09, and only increased marginally to
17.7 per cent in 2009-10.
3.21 In the light of the above and the fact that the increase in fleet had not
resulted in any dramatic improvement in commercial performance of IAL, the Committee
asked the Ministry to furnish the reasons for making flawed assumptions in the project
for aircraft acquisition. The Ministry in its reply submitted as:—
"Erstwhile Indian Airlines had a fleet size of 68 aircrafts in FY 2005, from which
11 old B737-200s were being operated under the Alliance Air code for regional
operations. Indian Airlines was also operating international services to the
Gulf, S.E Asia and SAARC countries and more than 
      rd of the capacity
 was deployed on these international services. Erstwhile IC's market share
was 37.1% in the year 2004-05, with competition from three other domestic
airlines. Over the next 5 years period up to 2010-11, three more domestic
airlines commenced operations, thereby increasing the capacity and
competition in the domestic market. The other airlines steadily increased their
capacity share at the expense of IC, since IC was not able to match equivalent
1
3

46
capacity induction, to retain its capacity share at the level of 2005-06 which
was 32%. In airline industry, the thumb rule of higher capacity share leading
to higher market share reflected in IC's decline in the market share, in view of
its inability to retain its share of capacity — with seven other airlines
competing on mostly the same routes. The new airlines also operated Airbus
aircraft which resulted in poaching of licensed employees like pilots and
engineers. Combined with this problem, erstwhile Indian Airlines had also
started the process of return of the leased aircraft, consequent to new aircraft
induction.
The table below gives year-wise capacity and market share of erstwhile IC
and the present Air India's domestic operations:
—
Y ear Air India's Air India's
Capacity Share Market Share
(%) (%)
2004-05 (erstwhile IC) 41.8 37.1
2005-06 (erstwhile IC) 32.1 28.2
2006-07 22.8 20.3
2007-08 18.7 17.9
2008-09 17.2 16.9
2009-10 17.2 17.9
2010-11 16.8 17.1
From the Project Report submitted by erstwhile Indian Airlines, it is seen that
traffic trends for the period 1993-94 up to 2000-01 were examined and future
projections for growth were based on the recommendations of the
Government's Working Group on the Civil Aviation for the 10th Plan period.
From the Project Report, it is seen that projections and market growth estimates,
up to the year 2007-08 were considered. The average annual growth rate
assumed in the Project Report for the domestic market was 5% and for the
international market was 6%. The actual growth experienced was in the range
of 12% to 44% during the period 2005-06 to 2010-11, except in the year
2008-09, which experienced a decline in the market due to recession.
The assumption for seat factors in the Project Report for the various set
codes were in the range of a minimum of 60% and a maximum of 67%. The
actual seat factors experienced in the domestic operations from the year
2005-06 are also above 60%, except for 2008-09 which was the year of recession.
It can be concluded from the data above that the assumptions of yield and
load factors were not flawed since the actuals are close to/or higher than the
assumptions. However, a quantum increase in the competition led to dilution
of traffic for Air India and an increase in the input costs contributed to the
decline in profitabilities.

47
As detailed in the Project Report, the year-wise fleet size envisaged from
2003-04 to 2007-08 was 62 increasing to 73 in 2007-08. With new aircraft
induction, erstwhile IC had phased out its old aircraft. 18 leased A320 aircraft
have already been returned to the respective lessors. Five A319 and two
A330 aircraft on lease are in operation and due for return in the year 2014.’’
3.22 To a pointed query of the Committee with regard to the erstwhile IAL
management not revisiting the aircraft acquisition proposal, the MoCA replied that the
43 aircrafts proposal submitted by erstwhile Indian Airlines (IC) was discussed in the
Ministry. Further, from the Minutes of the Meeting held on 12th July, 2004 it was
evident that the Project Report for 43 aircrafts was already submitted to the PIB for
consideration and Indian Airlines was asked to review its fleet plan in the context of its
present operations and future plans. While Indian Airlines kept its 43 aircrafts
requirement unchanged, the file records had a reference to a sensitivity analysis
undertaken by the in-house evaluation committee to evaluate options for removing
A321 which had a seating comparable to a widebody seating and replacing it with
either A319 or A320. This evaluation was undertaken in view of IC's future plans of
increasing its international operations which would requrre widebody aircraft which
would have a seating of close to 200 seats. However, the final recommendations of the
airline were to keep the 43 aircraft proposal unchanged and evaluate the option of
inducting widebody aircraft on lease.
F. Negotiation Process
3.23 Audit scrutiny revealed that despite the PIB's decision that MoCA decide
the benchmark for further negotiations with the L-1 bidders, no such benchmarks were
set by MoCA before negotiations.
3.24 When the Committee sought to know the reasons for not setting up a
benchmark for further negotiations with the L-1 bidders, it was submitted by the
MoCA that no separate benchmark price was set up for the negotiation process as no
industry standards were available for benchmarking the price of civil aircraft. However,
the negotiation's were conducted by a committee comprising senior members of Air
India under the guidance of an Oversight Committee formed by the Ministry of Civil
Aviation under the Chairmanship of Sh. C.G . Somaiah and the final round of negotiations
was conducted by an Empowered Group of Ministers to obtain the best possible terms
from the manufacturers.
G. Manufacturer commitments for MRO/ Training Centre not fulfilled
3.25 The EGoM minutes for the IAL aircraft acquisition from Airbus reflected the
following commitments:—
• A training centre would be established by Airbus in India at an approximate
investment of US$ 75 million.
• A warehouse for spares would be established in India (cost not quantified in
monetary terms as it depended on the types of spares stock-out).

48
• Even though Airbus was not the leading company, it would assist the creation of
MRO facilities in India in association with promoters. The estimated investment
was of the order of US$ 100 million.
3.26 In Audit's view, the commitments made by Airbus regarding creation of
MRO and training facilities were quite open-ended:—
• Unlike the other clauses, there was no mention of a timeframe by which such
facilities will be created.
• The wording committed by Airbus Industries was "... agreed to make or facilitate
the following investments". It was not clear who or what combination of promoters
(Airbus and/ or other entities) would together make up the required investment.
• In respect of the MRO, the wording "facilitate creation of MRO facilities in India
in association with the promoters" did not give any indication of a binding
commitment.
• There was no mention anywhere that the training and MRO facilities would be
exclusive for IAL's use or would be meant for all users of Airbus aircraft (public
and private) in India and nearby.
3.27 Audit further brought out that the commitments obtained from Boeing in
respect of the AIL aircraft acquisition, as reflected in Chairman, EGoM's note to the
PM, were similar (without exact costs, timeframes etc.):—
• Boeing would provide training simulators costing upto US$ 75 million.
• Boeing would invest upto US$ 100 million for creation of MRO facilities for
Boeing aircraft in India.
• Boeing would invest US$ 10 million in training and other civil aviation
requirements.
The directions of the EGoMs were communicated to both IAL and AIL. While
these commitments were included in AIL's purchase agreements, these commitments
were, however, not included in IAL's purchase agreements.
3.28 On being asked to state the reasons for the commitments like creation of
MRO, training facilities, warehouse facilities for aircraft spares, etc. not being included
in the purchase agreements in respect of the IAL fleet acquisition, the MoCA has
replied as:—
The Letter Agreement no. 4 to the Purchase Agreement dated 20th February,
2006 describes various Cooperation Projects to be established in India by /
with the assistance of Airbus such as Maintenance, Repairs and Overhaul
(MRO), Pilots training facilities and a dedicated Spares Centre for Airbus
aircraft. As per Letter Agreement No. 4,
The Airbus recognizes the importance of the civil aviation market in India and
to facilitate the growth of this market, will together with its partners, will
establish Pilot training facilities in India. Airbus would work in cooperation
with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to study and select the location for such
facilities.

49
Airbus will also establish a dedicated spares centre for India. The locations
for such facilities will be decided, based on the needs of All Airbus customers
in India.
Airbus confirms that it is already engaged in serious discussions in relation
to the above cooperation projects including with various MRO providers
and that it will continue to provide its full support and cooperate in good faith
for timely introduction of such facilities.
As such, no firm commitment was made by Airbus for direct investment in
above cooperation projects. Therefore, factually Airbus commitments are by
way of 'Cooperation Projects' as per Letter Agreement No. 4 to the Purchase
Agreement.
It is understood that Airbus either on its own or along with its partner(s)/
affiliate(s) have already established a dedicpted Spares centres for Airbus
aircraft in Navi Mumbai and Pilots training facilities for Airbus aircraft in
Bengaluru.
It may also be stated that Letter Agreements to the Purchase Agreement
constitute, an integral part of the Purchase Agreement and governed by all
the provisions of the Purchase Agreement."
3.29 When asked to elaborate on the progress made towards setting up of the
MRO and warehouse facilities, the MoCA submitted as under:—
"As per the letter agreement No.4 to the Aircraft Purchase Agreement dated
20th February, 2006 , Airbus conveyed that they, along with their partners /
affiliates would assist in creation of MRO facilities in India, but as such, they
made no firm commitment for direct investment in MRO facilities in India.
Therefore, factually Airbus commitments are by way of "Cooperation Projects"
as per Letter Agreement No. 4 to the Purchase Agreement.
The matter was taken up by AI with the Airbus and EADS (European
Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, the parent Company of Airbus)
during the meeting held in January, 2008 Airbus in their letters dated 22nd
January, 2008 sent to AI, had mentioned their obligation and endeavours to
support the establishment of an MRO venture between Air India and EADS
and its Indian affiliates. There was no mention of any financial commitment in
the letter.
A Business Plan on MRO V enture was jointly prepared by Air India and
EADS. The Business Plan was broadly acceptable to EADS but the valuations
proposed by AI were not acceptable to them. EADS appointed PWC (Price
Waterhouse Coopers) as the independent valuer in consultation with
Air India.
PWC report was not acceptable to Air India due to the undervaluation of AI's
contributions, to the MRO compared to what is as indicated in the business
plan.

50
EADS advised that asset valuation report prepared by PWC should not be
revisited in view of the high cost and time consuming process. EADS
requested Air India to suggest some alternate ways.
AI conveyed that it is working on hiving off its MRO activity as a separate
Company (AIESL), a wholly owned subsidiary of Air India. Air India
suggested that Airbus could contribute in the development and expansion of
AIESL MRO facilities for Airbus including ATR aircraft as Support / Investment
Project. Air India has not yet received response from EADS/Airbus in this
regard."
3.30 When the Committee sought factual position with regard to an article
published in the daily 'Hindustan Times' dated 16.3.2013 wherein it had been reported
that 'CBI registered an FIR, against Airbus Industries of France and seven former and
serving officials of Indian Airlines— now merged with Air India—for failing to properly
implement a concession clause built into a ` 9000 crore agreement for acquiring
43 aircrafts in 2006', the Ministry submitted that the Mininistry had received
PE-DAI-A-0001 dated 14.1.2010 registered by CBI against 'unknown officials of Ministry
of Civil Aviation and others' on 15.1.2010. But this Ministry has not received copy of
any FIR, registered by CBI against Airbus Industries of France and seven former and
serving officials of Indian Airlines, as published in the daily Hindustan Times dated
16th March, 2013.
3.31 In response to another query of the Committee regarding meeting the costs
for these facilities, the MoCA stated that Air India had developed and was running its
MRO facilities, which were fully equipped and active facilities covering all aspects of
an Airline MRO viz. Airframe, Engines and Components for the last several decades for
maintenance of its aircraft. However, statedly, there was no direct Airbus participation
in its MRO currently.
3.32 The Committee were also apprised that M/s Boeing was committed to set up
an MRO facility in India in Joint V enture as a part of the agreement for purchasing 68
aircrafts from M/s Boeing for Air India and Air India Express. As per the understanding
with Boeing and Air India, Boeing would construct the Hangar facility and hand over
the same to Air India. Boeing had short listed Nagpur for setting up the MRO and L&T
was approved as Design & Build contractor. 45% of civil construction was completed
and target date for completion of the MRO facility was July, 2013. However to a
specific query of the Committee whether any study was conducted for establishing
MRO at Nagpur by Air India, the reply of the Ministry has been negative.
3.33 On being asked whether Nagpur had any aviation infrastructure for setting
up the MRO there or AI would have to start from scratch to build this MRO, the
Ministry responded as under:—
"MIHAN—Multi-modal International Cargo Hub and Airport at Nagpur  is
one of the biggest economical development projects currently  underway in
India. Maharashtra Government formed a special purpose entity in the name
of Maharashtra Airport Development Company (MADC) for development of
MIHAN. Singapore Changi Airport has been selected as the consultants for

51
the project. Indian Air Force (IAF) is also going to come up with its own Gajraj
project along side MIHAN. Boeing proposed to set up the MRO at SEZ area
near Nagpur Airport".
3.34 When the Committee sought details regarding MRO facilities set up till date
in the country and the ones which required upgradation, the Ministry submitted as
under:—
‘‘As far as Air India is concerned, Air India (narrow body) has four major
bases for MRO activity for its captive workload at Delhi; Mumbai; Hyderabad
and Kolkata. Air India also has JEOC (Jet Engine Overhaul Complex) at Delhi
and Mumbai. Third party workload is also undertaken at these MRO facilities.
Air India (wide body) has a MRO facility at Old Airport, Mumbai. This MRO
facility presently has the capability to carry out all the maintenance checks of
B777, B747-400 and A310 aircraft and engines 7 APUs fitted on these aircraft.
This also has the capability to carry out the maintenance, overhaul & repair
of the components and accessories fitted on B747-400 and A310 aircraft. In
addition, this facility is being •upgraded in a phased manner to carry out
maintenance, overhaul and repair of components and accessories fitted on
B777 & B737 aircraft and at present, has the capability to carry out maintenance,
overhaul & repair of some of B777 & B737 components & accessories.
Besides above, 14 other MRO have been set up in the country. Upgradation
of these MROs is taken up/driven by the commercial considerations and the
customer need."
3.35 When queried if the Air India MRO Infrastructure and facilities were being
utilized fully, the Ministry submitted:—
"Delhi is designated as the main base for all A320 type aircraft, Mumbai for
A321 and Kolkata for A319 aircraft. Hyderabad base is handling the spillover
work of A320 aircraft.
Air India has developed and is running its MRO facilities for the last several
decades for maintenance of its aircraft. These are fully equipped with active
facilities covering all aspects of an Airline MRO, viz., Airframe Engines and
Components.
Services of these MROs over a period have been utilized to the extent required
by Private airlines like, Jet Airways, Indigo, Spice Jet, Go Air, Kingfisher and
erstwhile Deccan Airways besides other Government organizations like IAF,
etc.
The MRO facility of Air India wide body group is fully utilized by undertaking
the maintenance, overhaul and repair jobs of Air India and Air India Express
aircraft. In addition to the above, jobs from outside parties are also undertaken
whenever slots are available, so as to avoid any hindrance to own aircraft
jobs."

52
3.36 Submitting data regarding the number and type of aircraft of Air India and
Air India Express which utilized the hangar facility for last five years, it was stated as
under:—
Y ear Type of aircraft
B747-300 B747-400 A310 B777 B737-800
(AI Express)
2007 2 9 18 10 17
2008 2 8 15 14 20
2009 - 6 12 21 25
2010 - 6 10 21 25
2011 - 5 4 20 21
2012 till date - 5 - 20 21
The Ministry also stated that all the MRO except MAS GMR Aero Technic Ltd.
(MGMT), Hyderabad and M/s Cochin International Aviation Services Limited, Cochin
(CIASL) are being utilized fully.
3.37 On being asked to furnish data regarding expenditure incurred by Air India/
erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines on maintenance/repair/servicing of their aircraft
in foreign countries during the last 5 years and the reasons therefor when MROs were
available within the country, the Ministry submitted as under:—
"The MRO facilities of Air India are equipped with infrastructure and manpower
for carrying out maintenance checks of the aircraft in Air India's fleet
in-house.
However, Air India has been leasing aircraft for its operations which are sent
abroad for redelivery/major maintenance checks since the lease agreements
stipulate that these checks can be accomplished only at a Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA)/ European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) approved
MRO facilities and Air India MRO facilities are not FAA/EASA approved.
The expenditure incurred by Air India on maintenance/repair/servicing of
aircraft in foreign countries during last five years is attached at
(Annexure-VII)".
H. Synergy between AIL and IAL network not considered during acquisition process
3.38 MoCA had commissioned in 2004, a study by A T Kearney to suggest
measures for achieving better operational integration between AIL and IAL. The study
had recommended freeing up of capacity by leveraging the AIL and IAL networks for
international short haul markets and consolidation of frequencies on overlap routes
and redeployment of freed up capacity on under serviced routes. The acquisition
process for Air India was taking place from December, 1996 till 2005. Around the same
time, Indian Airlines (1996 to 2006) was also going in for the acquisition process.

53
3.39 In this backdrop, the Committee sought to know the reasons for carrying
out such an expensive fleet acquisition process independently by pre-merger airlines.
In its submission, the Ministry stated that Air India and Indian Airlines were managed
separately and were operating in two different market segments and hence the fleet
acquisition process was carried out separately in each airline. Further, it was stated
that AT Kearney was given the exercise to suggest measures for achieving operational
integration between AIL & IAL but at that point of time the merger of the two companies
was not under consideration.
I. Risks of Debt Funded Acquisition
3.40 Audit in its Report has brought out that even as of 2005-06 (when the
decision on acquisition of 50+43 aircraft by AIL and IAL was taken), the debt-equity
ratios of AIL was very high at 4.6:1 and negative in case of IAL. The fleet acquisition
cost for both AIL and IAL was to be funded entirely through debt except for a marginal
equity infusion of Rs. 325 crore in respect of IAL. With additional borrowings of
Rs. 32,274 crore and Rs. 8,335 crore towards acquisition of aircraft by AIL and IAL, the
debt equity ratio of both AIL and IAL would be further adversely affected (as against
prudent project financing ratios of upto 4:1).
3.41 When the Committee sought the views of the Ministry on this issue, the
Director (Finance), AI deposed:—
‘‘The financing is a very important point because the Air India did not have
equity. It has to borrow. So, for the borrowings everybody asked for a good
debt-equity ratio, which we did not have at all. So, we cannot borrow also
beyond a particular limit. So, those points were kept in mind at that time when
we went in for a modicum fleet. So, when we were asked to revisit, the
Government assurance was there that we will give a guarantee for the loans
that you acquire and all. So, that is the reason why we went in for the plan,
taking into consideration the competitors."
3.42 On being queried as to whether AI management ever considered that given
the poor financial health of the Airlines at the time of acquisition, such massive
acquisition would further contribute to financial woes of the Airlines, the Ministry
replied that the 10 MCLR (A340) acquisition proposal was submitted as its financial
risk was lower than the 17 MCLR proposal. Even after the TENC developed the
50 widebody aircraft plan, the Committee agreed to de-risk the proposal by taking 15 of
the 50 aircraft on options. 8 of the 23 B777s were to be on option. Orders for all
50 aircraft were placed on firm basis after approval of the Government. While the
proposal had a financial risk and involved assumptions of increase in yield and load
factors, the project was described as justified in terms of traffic growth and the need to
increase Air India's market share.
3.43 When asked to justify the proposition of such a huge acquisition
 (AIL purchased 50 Boeing aircraft at a cost of Rs. 33,197 crore) financed mainly out of
borrowings that led AIL to such a precarious financial position, the Ministry stated:—
"The acquisition of aircraft was proposed to be financed using External
Commercial Borrowings (ECB) and Internal Resources. The Project Report

54
had assumed that the funding of the entire acquisition would be through an
ECB at a fixed interest rate of 5.5% which is based on then LIBOR of 3% p.a.
and margin of 2.5%. The same was proposed as all earlier aircraft financings
were funded by AI through debt supported by GoI Guarantee. 'The Government
had given its in-principle approval to provide GoI guarantee for the acquisition
of 50 Boeing aircraft as this would help AI to secure Exim financings at
competitive rates of interest.
The Project Report had also requested the Government to consider infusing
of funds as equity to support its aircraft acquisition but fleet induction
financing had largely been through debt as the same is economically more
viable under guarantee support issued by GoI."
3.44 In the course of oral evidence of the representatives of the MoCA, the
Committee pinpointedly stated the fact that the sovereign guarantee given by
Government of India for the acquisition of aircraft meant that if AI was unable to pay
the debt, the Government would pay it. To this, the Secretary, MoCA responded as
under:—
"When Air India came back to us with the proposal of their aircraft acquisition,
it went through all the established procedures of the Government. It went
through techno-economic feasibility study stage. It went through PIB. It
went through Price Negotiation Committee. On top of it, there was one
oversight committee. It went to the Cabinet. It went to the Empowered Group
of Ministers. So, all established procedures of the Government were followed
in acquisition of aircraft."

CHAPTER   IV
MERGER OF  AIL  AND IAL INTO NACIL
Audit has pointed out that the initial reference to the merger of AIL and IAL in
the records of MoCA is a noting of 16th March, 2006 that the Minister, Civil Aviation
had desired a concept paper on the integration/merger of AIL and IAL; AIL had sent a
concept paper prepared by the consultants, A T Kearney. This concept paper of 2004
(which highlighted the potential for value, creation through collaboration on fleet and
network between IAL and AIL) was referred to in the December, 2004 note on
liberalisation of bilateral agreements, but was re-considered only after completion of
independent fleet acquisitions by both airlines.
4.2 Subsequently, a presentation was made on 22nd March, 2006 before the
Prime Minister on the issue of the proposed merger of AIL and IAL. According to the
file notings scrutinised by Audit:—
• In the presentation, it was highlighted that in the light of the global trend towards
consolidation in the airlines industry, it had become incumbent for the two
national carriers to work towards merger, as the merged entity would not only be
able to compete effectively in the market but would also find greater acceptability
amongst the global alliances. It was emphasised that given the overall
developments in the civil aviation sector internationally as well as in the domestic
sector, nothing short of merger would be an effective way to compete effectively
in the market.
• During the discussions held after the presentation, apprehensions were expressed
with regard to the HR problems arising due to merger. However, it was felt that it
would be in the overall interest of both AIL and IAL to sort out these issues and
work towards merger under the guidance of MoCA.
• During, the discussions, it was, inter-alia, suggested that the MoCA may examine
the possibility of certain interim measures like formation of a holding company
of both AIL and IAL preceding their full merger.
• After detailed deliberations, 'in principle' approval was given for working towards
the merger of AIL and IAL and to bring up a Cabinet note with full details at a
later date in this regard.
4.3 When the Committee sought a copy of the above presentation made by the
Ministry of Civil Aviation before the Prime Minister in March, 2006 on the issue of  the
proposed merger of AIL and IAL, the Ministry initially had failed to provide a copy of
the same stating that it was not traceable with Air India.
4.4 To the further queries of the Committee regarding (a) details about other
significant files/documents that were found to be not traceable, if any, either with the
55

56
Ministry or Air India, and (b) details of the system put in place to ensure that such
incidents do not recur, the Ministry submitted that ‘all records and files in AI Section,
Ministry of Civil Aviation are maintained properly and no significant file/document
have been found not traceable. AI has also not informed of loss of any such file'.
Alongwith this communication dated 10.4.2013, the Ministry forwarded a copy of the
presentation made by the Ministry of Civil Aviation before the Prime Minister in March,
2006 on the issue of the proposed merger of AIL and IAL (Annexure VIII). It was also
submitted that ‘It has been informed by Air India that there are no other supporting
documents to indicate that this was the presentation Made before the Hon'ble Prime
Minister, except for the date i.e. March 22, 2006 and an initial on the first page which
appears to be that of the then CMD, Shri V. Thulasidas'.
4.5 On the ‘in principle’ approval for working towards merger of AIL and IAL, the
following course of action was approved:—
/circle6Since AIL had taken the lead in making the presentation, they would be asked to
engage a consultant, in consultation with IAL, to advise on the merger process,
for which a draft Terms of Reference (ToR) was also prepared;
/circle6Working Group's for Commercial, Finance/ Accounts, Engineering/ Operations
and HR involving officials of both AIL and IAL would be constituted.
4.6. The National Aviation Company of India Limited (NACIL), now Air India,
was formed with the legal merger of erstwhile AIL & IAL, with the appointed date of
merger as 1st April, 2007. All assets, liabilities and obligations of both the companies
were undertaken by the new, company.
A. Initiation of Merger—Objectives and Envisaged Benefits
4.7 In July, 2006, Joint Committee of Boards of AIL and IAL in Merger (constituted
by GoI) selected Accenture India Pvt. Ltd. as a consultant to advise on the merger.
4.8  Explaining the procedure that was followed to appoint the consultant for the
merger, the Director (Finance), Air India, deposing before the Committee during evidence
stated as under:—
“Accenture was appointed as merger consultant. There was a proper bidding
process wherein people had applied. Then, there was the technical qualification
and financial bids were also there. So, based upon the persons who had
technically qualified, their financial bids were opened. Based on that,
Accenture was appointed. It was appointed in three phases. One is about
preparing a business case for merger, why merger was required. The second
is if merger was required and the Government was satisfied with that, then,
proceed to the Cabinet for approval. The third is if the Cabinet approved it,
then the third stage was post-merger. That means, they will hand-hold us for
some time. So, it was divided into three phases. The fee also was divided into
three phases. Supposing a business case for merger did not, impress the
Government, then, there was no point in going to the second stage. So, that
was done in the first stage. There was a Cabinet Paper that was prepared for
the merger. That was the second stage. The Cabinet approved it on 2nd of

57
March, 2007 for the merger. Then, post-merger was the third stage. So, once
the Government had approved the merger, then only post-merger activities
were carried out. There were a lot of post-merger activities for integration and
all that. It was done by Accenture in a hand-held thing.”
4.9 While examining the issue of merger, the Committee sought to know the
history and the background that had led to merger. The SBU Head (MRO— Airframe),
Air India deposing before the Committee submitted as under :—
“There was a historical disadvantage. The Air India and Indian Airlines had a
lot of overlapping routes. That was one thing on which we were competing
with each other, whereas we were not in a position to compete with the
market. That was one of the main things that we were competing with each
other on many routes.”
He further added:
“Basically, we were planning to have integrated international and domestic
opprations. That is one of the main reasons basically to fight the competition.
We will have a very strong network and our fleet will be one of the largest in
this part of the globe. We thought that we should be working together rather
than competing with each other and giving the advantage to our competitors
outside the country. That is one of the main reasons for looking at the merger.”
4.10 The SBU Head-MRO (E&C), Al, elaborating on the background of the
process and reasons for merger deposed as:—
“I may give just a little bit of background as to why the merger was looked
into and it was considered to be appropriate at that point of time. Primarily,
there were four issues according to us. One was that the competitiveness in
the aviation field was increasing both at the domestic side because a lot of
private operators had come by that time and even the low cost carriers had
come in. The market share of each of the entities mainly the erstwhile Indian
Airlines was also reducing. On the global front, Air India, as it is, was facing
a lot of competition from other international carriers because the aviation
market in India was growing.
The other point was that both the airlines were operating at that point of time
with older type of aircraft and they were in the expansion mode and the
acquisition of aircraft was required and the processes were going on. This
required integration of various requirements. Similarly, there were certain
overlapping routes from the scheduling point of view which were being
operated by erstwhile Indian Airlines, as well as Air India at that point of time
and also the subsidiaries.
Seventy per cent of the global traffic was being routed through various
alliances in the world and in order to take leadership role in aviation, it was
necessary that we should also become a partner to some of the alliances and
take proper market share as well as provide services to the people. With this
background, the merger was to provide us the competitiveness, economy of

58
scale, the resource consolidation and the optimal use of both the aircraft
equipment, ground handling side as well as the manpower. As two different
entities, many of the processes were of repetitive nature like reservation
system, the engineering side and the ground handling side. So, by combining
them and integrating them, this would have given a much better use of the
resources available within the two airlines.
With this aspect, the MRO side of the two airlines as well as the ground
handling side of the two airlines, even they would be made separate entities
to provide services to the main airline as an integrated entity. With the merger
and the integrated company there will be seamless travel; there will be better
scheduling of the aircraft; there will be better product provided to the public;
there will be unified booking system; there will be common purchases on the
various commodities mainly the fuel, the insurances and also on the other
fronts of aircraft spares and other things.”
4.11 On the issue of benefits.of merger, the witness added as under:—
“With the merger, the benefits have started accruing to the airline that we are
becoming a more compact organisation. Lot of duplications have been avoided
in the organisation. We, as erstwhile Indian Airlines, inducted 43 Airbus
A-320 family aircraft and the erstwhile Air India had also inducted 20 aircraft
of Boeing 777 type. Some of the facilities, which were to be set up on the
engineering side, were common and we decided that no duplication of the
facilities will be carried out and we will utilise or synchronize each other's
facilities and there will be no spending of money on that.
Similarly, on the procurement of fuel and also on the insurance side, lot of
money has been saved. We have carried out the fuel efficiency gap analysis
and the analysis of operating practices, which have also resulted in good
saving. So, overall, about Rs. 1530 crore has been saved because of the
commonality and common integration with the merger.
This has also resulted, from our commercial point of view, in the seamless
travel from the interior of the country to the outside world and vice-versa. So,
these are the benefits that have come with the merger. We hope that the
benefits as we progress, however, will multiply and accrue better and we will
become a better organisation after resolution of certain HR issues which are
with the company and for which Dharmadhikari Committee is looking into
those aspects.”
4.12 When asked to furnish chronology of the process of merger of Air India and
Indian Airlines, the Ministry submitted as under:—
“Air India, which operates on international routes and Indian Airlines with its
domestic network have a significant potential for achieving synergy. It is,
therefore, felt that the integration of Air India and Indian Airlines could lead
to developing seamless connectivity network of regional operations, short to
medium haul trunk operations, long haul operations, which will lead to improved

59
product through increased network coverage. Their merger could also provide
substantial synergy for procurement, sales and distribution besides affording
an opportunity for financial restructuring/ strengthening by leaving common
assets.
Accordingly, a presentation was made by the Ministry of Civil Aviation before
the Prime Minister in March,2006 when an 'in-principle' view was taken that
the merger of the two airlines would be in their best interest.
Air India was advised to appoint a Consultant/Advisor in consultation with
Indian Airlines to advise on the merger process. Accordingly, Air India Board,
at its 114th Meeting held at Mumbai on 4 May, 2006 decided to appoint a
Consultant/advisor in consultation with Indian Airlines by inviting Expression
of Interest (EOI) from various consultancy/accounting firms who had expertise
on the subject through a tender in order to advise on the merger process. The
Board also constituted a committee on Merger comprising CMDs of both
AI & IC, Shri N. Vaghul, Chairman, ICICI Bank and independent Director on
the Board of AI, the representatives of MoCA and Finance Directors of both
AI & IC to select a suitable consultant and oversee the process of merger.
The First Meeting of the Merger Committee was held on 16 June, 2006 in
Mumbai to consider the EoIs received from the consultants and thereafter
they were requested to make a presentation to the Committee in the
2nd Meeting of the Committee on 26/27 June, 2006. Based on the EOI's received
and the presentations made by them, three consultants were shortlisted.
The draft Terms of Reference and Evaluation Criteria for technical & Financial
bids were finalized by the Committee at its 3rd Meeting held on 14 July, 2005
and forwarded to the shortlisted bidders. The three shortlisted parties
submitted their Technical & Financial bids on 21 July, 2006.
At its 4th Meeting held at Delhi on 24 July, 2006, the Committee evaluated the
bids submitted by the parties. After evaluation the Committee selected
M/s. Accenture India Pvt. Ltd for appointment as consultant to advise on the
Merger. The Air India Board in its 116th meeting held on 29 July, 2006 had
approved the selection of M/s. Accenture as consultant to advise on the
merger process.
MoCA vide its order dated 31 August, 2006 constituted a Core Group to
monitor the progress and to coordinate with the consultants at the top level.
Four Working groups were also constituted by the Ministry comprising of
representatives of MoCA, Directors of both Air India & Indian Airlines and
Nominees of the consultant to coordinate on the major issues. It was decided
that the Core Groups & Working Groups should meet at least once in a month
to review the progress in the merger process. In addition, the core group of
Personnel appointed to assist the consultants & working group should meet
on day-to-day basis in order to achieve the smooth functioning of the entire
merger process.

60
The entire merger process was broadly divided into three parts:
(i) Pre-Cabinet Approval Tasks.
(ii) Post-Cabinet Approval Tasks including legal merger.
(iii) Post Merger Tasks.
The first phase of work i.e Pre-Cabinet Approval Tasks focused mainly on
developing the high level blueprint for the proposed merger in view of the
declining market share of both Air India and Indian Airlines, significant increase
in competitive activity, financial/operating metrics of both the airlines, their
overlapping roles and the trend globally of flag carriers having integrated
international and domestic footprint.
MoCA vide letter dated 2 March, 2007 informed that Union Cabinet had
approved the proposal to merge the two airlines after a series of presentations,
by M/s. Accenture to the Government at different levels and after having
presented the business case for merger, the business integration blueprint
and the entity structuring option. Prior to the Cabinet approval, the proposal
was approved by a Group of Ministers who had, in turn, referred it to a
Committee of Secretaries to vet the various issues involved in the merger.
On 05.4.2007, the Ministry of Civil Aviation set up an Interim Governance
Mechanism to ensure that the management decisions in AI & IC were taken in
consultation with each other to achieve optimum synergies in all areas of
airline management in the run up to the merger.
With the Cabinet approval, the Phase II commenced which comprised of
integration design, selection of CMD, selection of Integration Champion,
creation of common Board of Directors, selection of Functional Directors/
Executive Directors for the merged entity etc.
In the third phase, M/s. Accenture listed out the following tasks to be
accomplished.
• Selection of leadership team (CMD, Heads of various functions).
• Finalisation of organization structures by CMD in consultation with
heads of functions.
• Implementation of integration initiatives identified in Phase-2 led by
heads of various function.
• Tracking and monitoring of implementation at various levels (CMD,
Board, MoCA etc).”
4.13 Responding to the observation made by Audit that they were unable to
ascertain the detailed justification for, or the background to the 'in-principle' approval

61
of GoI for 'working towards the merger' of AIL and IAL, the MoCA furnished the
following detailed justifications for merger:—
(i) Fierce competition and deteriorating market performance posed serious threat to
the survival of AI & IAL on a stand alone basis.
(ii) Declining market share of both AI & IA.
(iii) Significant increase in competitive activity eroded historical advantage of both
carriers since international carriers increased their frequency into , India and
simultaneously there was increase in the number of private domestic carriers
and some of them becoming international.
(iv) Financial/Operating matrix of both entities lagged behind competition.
(v) AI & IA had increasingly overlapping role.
(vi) Globally flag carriers have integrated international and domestic footprint.
(vii) The merger of AI & IA alongwith a comprehensive transformation program was
imperative to improve competitiveness in the following form:—
(viii) Combined fleet strength of AI & IA will be —
- largest in India.
- comparable to others in Asia like SQ, Malaysian & Emirates.
- improve world ranking in terms of fleet size.
(ix) Integrated domestic and international footprint will.
- enhance customer proposition.
- facilitate entry into one of the global airline alliances.
(x) Merger will also enable optimal utilization of resources by fully leveraging
existing assets, capabilities & infrastructure planned fleet expansion.
(xi) Merger also provided an opportunity to significantly enhance networth by
revaluing the assets.
4.14 When the Committee further asked the Ministry whether the merger was
properly planned and effectively implemented, the Ministry in its written submission,
explained its position as under :—
“Before the legal merger of the 2 erstwhile Airlines in August, 2007, the merger
blueprint was formulated by 11 working groups (as per list below) comprising
of members from both the airlines from the respective departments:—
• Commercial
• Human Resources
• Operations
• Finance
• Information Technology
• Procurement

62
• Engineering & MRO
• Low Cost Carrier
• Ground Handling
• Cargo
• Administration
Members of the above working groups detailed out the plan for integration of
individual departments. In addition to the working groups, an Integration
Cell was formed comprising of members of both airlines to monitor and drive
the integration process.
Post the legal merger, an integrated organization structure was put in place
and directors were slotted to head various departments/functions with
harmonized responsibility across the operations of two erstwhile airlines.
Implementation of integration plans was driven by respective departments
and department heads with periodic review and monitoring by CMD and
MoCA.”
The Ministry further added:
We had seen good progress on the following integration initiatives:
• Progressive integration of network/ schedules;
• Progressive cross-utilisation of aircraft fleet;
• Leveraging scale for joint procurement (fuel, insurance etc.);
• Completion of PSS project (with the implementation of the system in
February, 2011, there is now a single code for the airline); and
• Harmonisation of booking offices/ facilities.”
4.15 When asked if the merger had increased the effectiveness of the two entities,
the Ministry replied that merger resulted in cost synergies in areas such as fuel
contracts, insurance, procurement etc. Merger had also resulted in revenue synergies
on account of Network integration which helped in providing seamless connectivity
to customers across domestic/ international locations, as well as implementation of
common pricing etc. The Ministry further stated that the synergy benefits over a
period of 3 years have resulted in savings of  `1000 crore including the benefits
accruing under the Fuel Efficiency Gap Analysis. Overlapping routes had been removed
and a good hub and spoke system was established between different cities in India
over Delhi hub.
4.16 With regard to the merger process taking place according to the Consultant's
report, the Ministry submitted:—
“M/s. Accenture has pointed out that this merger process was successful in
operational areas. However, there was a delay in implementing the single
code reservation system due to finalization of tender and other subsequent

63
processes. Human resources integration took a long time and the
Dharmadhikari Committee, which was set up for studying the seniority and
other pay structure, level mapping, etc. has submitted the report to the
Government on 31.1.2012. Apart from this, there are certain rules and regulations
viz. Service rules and regulations, Passage regulation, Medical facilities etc.
which are yet to be integrated.’’
B. Lack of adequate validation of financial case for merger
4.17 According to Audit, the main focus of the process leading upto the
implementation of the merger was on consideration of alternative options for merger,
stamp duty and tax implications, creation of top level posts for accommodating existing
incumbents etc. However, it was found that the financial case for the merger was not
adequately validated, prior to the merger.
4.18 Regarding the above Audit observation, the Ministry explained that the
details of the financial gains from the merger due to synergies were anticipated and
formed part of the Consultant's report. That some of them had not materialized was due
to several other factors that were prevalent.
4.19 To a specific query of the Committee regarding the cost incurred for
actualizing the merger, the MoCA submitted that the payment made to M/s. Accenture
who were appointed as Advisor for merger of Air India and Indian Airlines was
` 15.41 crore.
C. Huge Delays in Actualisation of Merger/Integration
4.20 Although the merger of AIL and IAL was officially notified in 2007, there
were huge delays in actualization of the merger/operational integration. On enquiring
about the timeframe fixed by MoCA for completion of the merger process and the
mechanism formulated regarding the same, the Ministry stated:—
“Initially, complete merger process was supposed to be completed within
36 months from August, 2007 i.e. the date of merger. However, subsequent
factors i.e. migration to a Passenger Service System (PSS), single code,
IT integration, bogged down HR integration owing to legacy union agreements,
integration of various cadres on Department of Public Enterprises (DPE)
guidelines, acceptable level mappings etc. has delayed the merger process.
However, steps to integrate the operation of the merged airline were initiated
immediately following the merger in August, 2007 and good progress is
achieved in integration of network schedules, cross utilization of fleet, joint
procurement for fuel, joint fleet insurance, deriving benefits of the synergy
completion of single code operation. Air India has set up an inter-departmental
committee to monitor and facilitate the integration progress. Similarly, several
working groups were set up at lower levels to implement the merger and
integration. Ministry has constituted a committee of experts under the
Chairmanship of Justice (Retired) D. M. Dharmadhikari to go into the HR
issues including contentious issues w.r.t. PLI, level mapping and cadre
re-structuring.”

64
4.21 Entailing the reasons for constituting the Committee headed by Justice
Dharmadhikari, the Ministry made the following submissions:—
“To resolve the disparities relating to the HR issues like level mapping,
compensation, harmonization etc. for all employees including pilots, the
Government of India vide its Notification No. AV . 18016/03/2011-AI dated
11th May, 2011 has appointed an independent committee of external experts
headed by a retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India, Justice (retd.)
D.M. Dharmadhikari. The other members include Prof. R. Dholakia from IIM,
Ahmedabad, Shri Rajeshwar Dayal, Retired Director, Department of Public
Enterprises and Shri Syed Nasir Ali, Director in the Civil Aviation Ministry.
The terms of reference of the Committee are as follows:
(a) To examine the principles of integration across various cadres and
 determination of level and seniority;
(b) To examine the principles of pay/wage rationalization and
restructuring between all the employees of the erstwhile airlines;
(c) To examine and suggest harmonized working conditions of various
categories of employees of erstwhile airlines depending upon the
requirements;
(d) To examine the above (a), (b) and (c) in the light of the cost neutrality
principle;
(e) To examine the principles governing the structure of pensionary
schemes, death-cum-retirement gratuities and other terminal benefits
having financial implication;
(f) To examine and make recommendations with respect to the general
principle parameters of the different Productivity Linked Incentive
schemes and bring them in line with airline practices; and
(g) Any other matters that would be referred to the Committee.
The Expert Committee has met the registered Unions/Associations which
have made their submissions to them irrespective of whether they fall in the
category of recognized unions or not. The Committee has also met other
agencies like DGCA, DPE etc. and the Management and the Government of
India.
The Report of the Committee has been submitted on 31st January, 2012 to the
Government.”
4.22 It was further submitted by the Ministry that it has constituted a 3-member
Committee consisting of officers from Department of Public Enterprises, Ministry of
Civil  Aviation and an independent expert to examine the recommendations of Justice
Dharmadhikari Committee and formulate a time-line for its implementation.
4.23 When the Committee sought a copy of the Dharmadhikari Report, the
Ministry replied (on 4.6.2012), that the same would be provided once it is approved for

65
acceptance by the Government. However, when asked to apprise the Committee of the
Ministry's action on this Report (as of March, 2013), the MoCA failed to do so.
4.24 When specifically asked to elaborate the reasons for not achieving complete
integration of the two entities, the Ministry submitted that:—
“Subsequent to the merger, all efforts have been made for harmonization of
the HR issues. Management and the employees and the unions have been
engaged in dialogue to finalize and formulate various policies to address
these issues. The HR Sub-Committee of the Board of Directors had been
formed to address all merger related issues. A process of dialogue with the
Unions by the Management including meetings of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation with the Unions also took place. A consensus was arrived that an
independent committee of experts headed by a retired Judge of the High
Court/Supreme Court outside the organization could impartially examine all
the issues engaging the management, employees and the unions.
In a Company of such large dimensions there are several constraints in
implementing the merger process. The area of integration of manpower and
the solution to the HR issues is a major task and involves a high integration
cost. The delay in harmonizing is due to the critical financial condition being
faced by the company and also the high cost of integrating the manpower on
issues like level mapping, compensation harmonization, etc. for all employees
including pilots. In the 2009-10 CoPU disposition, Secretary, Civil Aviation
had said that all HR related matters were presently put in a kind of pause
mode till the company comes out of the Financial crisis. Besides that
integration of manpower and harmonization of seniority may also lead to
certain industrial relations issues which in the present financial status the
Company is not in a position to absorb. Hence, the integration process is
being taken up in steps gradually.
Ministry of Civil Aviation is constantly monitoring process of merger and a
meeting in this regard has been held by the Secy., MoCA. Regular follow up
on integration issues is held with various departments on an ongoing basis.”
4.25 Further, when asked if the problematic factors were taken into account while
dealing with merger which could have otherwise affected adversely the timely
integration of AIL and IAL, the Ministry replied:—
“Issues likely to take time were related to HR targets for integration. These
were although anticipated and planned for, yet the process was time consuming
due to several HR issues in both the erstwhile airlines.”
4.26 When specifically asked about the areas in which the integration has been
completely actualized, the Committee have been apprised by the MoCA as under:—
“Merger of Indian Airlines and Air India is an ongoing activity. There are
areas where synergies are being availed on an ongoing basis. The actual
merger of both the companies for every, aspect is yet to be completed but
many areas have been completed or under process. The merger has been

66
completed in many identified areas and the major milestones are being
achieved albeit slowly due to the precarious financial position of the company.
The merger benefits like economies of scale, network and savings are being
achieved. The overall synergies realised as on 31st December, 2011 for the
company are approximately ` 1535 crore (Annexure - IX).
The major milestone of a Single Air Operating Permit (AOP) has been achieved
and issued by DGCA. The cut over to the new Passenger Service System has
also been completed and the Company has migrated to a Unicode system.
Integration of both the companies have also been completed in many areas
like Finalization of CMD, Board of Directors, organization structure for Air
India (then NACIL), selection of leadership team — Functional Directors,
Executive Directors. In regard to Functional Director and Executive Director
levels, Organisational Structure have been finalized however compensation
harmonization is yet to.be harmonised. Further, General Manager and
Dy. General Manager level Organisational Structure have been finalized in
respect of majority of the departments. Other areas completed are for Material
Management—Integrated Policy, Financial Synergies/quick wins in
Insurance, Fuel procurement—ATF, banks & fund Management, common
Accounting policies, legal & tax issues, Passenger Service System (PSS),
delegation of Administrative and Financial Powers, etc. The booking offices
at the domestic stations where separate offices existed for both the erstwhile
organizations have been integrated to handle both domestic and international
bookings in one premises. In regard to the international stations like Singapore,
Bangkok, Dubai, Dhaka and Colombo, where commonality of stations existed,
the same have been integrated. Engineering facilities are also being utilized in
an integrated manner.
At the time of merger 226 critical activities had been identified and targeted
for completion. Out of these 161 of the identified areas have since been
completed. 58 items are in progress and 7 not initiated.
Performance T otal Completed In- Not
dependency progress initiated
Operational Integration 123 97 21 5
Contingent on 38 30 6 2
management decisions
Contingent on IT 35 24 11 0
readiness
Contingent on HR 30 10 20 0
Integration decisions
Total 226 161 58 7

67
The list of all completed, in progress and not initiated items department-wise is
placed at (Annexure-X).”
D. Delays in implementing Single Code Passenger Reservation System
4.27 Prior to the merger, the two airlines were using separate reservation systems
(UNYSIS system by AIL and IBM system by IAL) with separate airline codes (IC for
Indian Airlines flights and AI for Air India flights). Hence, an important aspect in the
merger was the integration of the reservation systems of the erstwhile AIL and IAL to
help the merged entity to operate all its flights on a single code and provide smooth
travel for passengers on all domestic and international routes.
4.28 The Committee were informed by the MoCA that although single code
passenger reservation system was scheduled to be achieved by 1st April, 2008,
IA & AI finally managed to migrate to single code passenger reservation system w.e.f.
27th February, 2011. The delay was attributed to re-tender as one of the parties who
was not selected had gone to CVC and it took considerable time.
4.29 Enumerating the accrued benefits of implementation of single code passenger
reservation system, the Ministry stated: —
“The travel trade has expressed their satisfaction at being able to sell one
code for a through itinerary. With two separate codes — AI and IC, there was
a limitation on the number of airlines IC could interline with due to system
constraints. Now with one code, unlike the 35 carriers IC which could interline
within the past, for the domestic network, AI can now interline with 90 interline
carriers and more can be added. This means that all foreign carriers operating
to India now have a choice of selling domestic sectors on AI along with the
other domestic carriers.
Global Distribution System (GDS) connectivity has improved substantially
and bookings are not being lost, particularly from Online Travel Agencies
(portals). The System response speed has improved to match industry
standards.
The single reservation system has given the customer the benefit of buying
tickets through one Website unlike in the past when the customer had to click
for domestic separately and international separately.
Inventory management has also become more effective with one code,
especially for through journeys to interior points in India by rationalising the
booking classes.”
E. Harmonization of Human Resources
4.30 According to Audit, the HR Integration below the level of DGM, representing
98 per cent of the staff had still not taken place, The Committee sought to know the
latest status on,the integration and the reasons for the delay in this vital aspect of the
merger. The Ministry, in its response, reiterated its reply stating that several constraints
were being faced in implementing the merger process owing to the large dimensions of
AI. Integration of manpower and solving of the HR issues was delayed due to financial

68
crisis faced by AI and complicated industrial relations issues. The Ministry further
stated that all efforts were being made for harmonization of the HR issues.
4.31 However, in a candid admission before the Committee on the issue of HR
integration consequent to merger, one of the witnesses stated as under:—
“At present, since five years of the merger, they have integrated the reservation
system. But, as on date, even on the field, practically, the erstwhile Indian
Airlines personnel are working separately; the erstwhile Air India personnel
are working separately.”
4.32 The witness further tendered before the Committee, that the MoCA in 2007
had held meetings with the Employee Associations/Unions of the two airlines but only
to announce the decision of the merger and not to discuss the key issues.
4.33 The letter No. JAC/EGoM/01/2007 dated 8th February, 2007 of Joint Action
Committee of Unions/Associations/Guilds of Air India Limited addressed to Shri Pranab
Mukherjee, the then Minister of External Affairs and Convenor, EGoM, reads as
follows:—
“As you are kindly aware, the Honourable Minister of Civil Aviation met all
the unions of Air India on 17th January, 2007 in Delhi on the directions of the
EGoM. This was apparently to apprise the representatives of the two oldest
aviation companies viz. Air India and Indian Airlines, on the proposed merger.
The above meeting was convened at a short notice of 24 hours, which made
it virtually impractical and impossible to prepare and submit our concerns in
detail and in all fairness we should have been given at least 15 days time for
the said meeting. The entire exercise was laced in the most cosmetic manner
while summarily brushing aside the most important element, the human factor
and the lives and livelihood of almost 33000 families together......”
4.34 In the light of the above, when the Committee asked the Ministry whether it
had held any consultations with the Unions/Associations when the Government wanted
to merge the two Airlines and whether any of the Unions/Associations had expressed
any reservations or apprehensions about the merger, the Ministry in its response
stated:—
“The process of merger of Indian Airlines Ltd. and Air India Ltd. had the
participation of the Unions/Associations of both the erstwhile airlines and
communication was maintained with them through letters as well as meetings.
Chairman and Managing Director of Indian Airlines on 27.10.2006 issued a
letter to all employees of Indian Airlines on merger of Air India and Indian
Airlines.
Hon'ble Minister of Civil Aviation met the representatives of all the Unions/
Associations of IAL on 17.01.2007 at Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, New Delhi.
Minister of Civil Aviation met representatives of newly elected Central body
of Air Corporations Employees Union (ACEU) on 7.02.2007.

69
Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation also met the representatives of
newly elected Central body of ACEU on 20.02.2007.
On 27.02.2007 a meeting was also taken by the Minister of State for Civil
Aviation with the ACEU on issues related to the proposed merger.
On 02.03.2007, Joint Secretary, MoCA sent a letter to all the employees below
General Managers. In the letter it was, inter-alia, mentioned that the merger
of two airlines would be completed in phased manner over the next two years.
Further to keep the merger process as smooth as possible, manpower of both
airlines would be Integrated gradually in a calibrated approach.
Again, on 07.03.2007 the Hon'ble Minister of Civil Aviation held a meeting
with the representatives of Unions/Associations of Indian Airlines on merger.
On 15.06.2007 CMD,  Air India sent a letter to all employees of Indian Airlines
on his appointment as the Chairman and Managing Director of the merged
Airline and formation of the new company called National Aviation Company
of India Limited. He informed inter-alia that a communication channel will be
established to receive feedback and Inputs during the merger process and all
suggestions & inputs were welcome.
CMD of Air India along with CMD Indian Airlines also met the representatives
of all Unions/Associations both of IA and AI on 18.7.2007 along with the
consultants to keep them abreast of the developments and to have an,
interactive session with them.
It may therefore be seen that Unions/Associations were being kept adequately
briefed in the merger process. Besides the Scheme of Amalgamation has
addressed most of the issues raised by the Unions/Associations.”
4.35 In subsequent submissions made to the Committee, the Ministry stated that
a 3-tier grievance redressal machinery was formed to address the employee grievances.
Communications on the progress of merger were also being issued from time to time by
the CMD/MoCA. The concerns of the Unions and Associations were also heard and
addressed by the Ministry of Corporate Affairs during the hearing on the petition on
Merger and the same formed part of the Order on Merger issued by the Ministry.
4.36 During the course of examination the Committee was given to understand
that Captains and Commanders of the pre-merger entities had different licenses i.e
IA pilots had Airbus license and AI pilots had Boeing license. Drawing the attention of
the Ministry to this fact, the Committee questioned the so called merger of the two
entities. In reply, the Ministry affirming the fact pointed out by the Committee further
stated that:—
“This is a regulatory requirement of DGCA and pilots are licensed in this
manner internationally. Captains and First Officers are authorised to operate
the type of aircraft for which they have been endorsed in the license.
Incidentally, erstwhile NACIL-I fleet consisted of Airbus types of aircraft and
erstwhile NACIL—A consisted of Boeing & Airbus (A310) aircraft.

70
In view of the merged entity now functioning as Air India Ltd. issues pertaining
to integration, cross fleet training, etc. are under discussions. However, pilots will
always remain specific to the aircraft/aircraft family.”
F. Membership of Star Alliance
4.37 In a dynamic and growing passenger air transportation industry, the pooling
of the resources of multiple carriers in the form of airline alliances is considered to be
of critical importance for several reasons:—
• It helps to bring together networks, lounge access, check-inservices, ticketing,
‘move under one roof ’ projects and a host of other services to improve the travel
experience for the customer and efficiencies for the airlines.
• It also reduces the costs of individual airlines from economies of scale.
Consequently, one of the targeted objectives of the merger included easy entry
into one of the three global airline alliances.
4.38 Audit scrutiny revealed that even after four years of merger, AI was yet to
join the Star Alliance network, a leading global airline alliance established to offer
customers convenient worldwide reach and a smoother travel experience, After paying
an entry fee advance of • 5 million in June, 2008, NACIL's entry into the Star Alliance
was intended to take place in March, 2009. The balance of • 5 million was required to be
paid at the time of entry into the alliance. Out of the pre-requisites for joining the
alliance (Minimum Joining Requirements — MJR), the most important requirement
was a passenger reservation system with a single code for both the erstwhile airlines,
which did not take place until February, 2011. Since Star GmbH ( Gesellschaft mit
beschrankter Hafung, German for 'company with limited liability’) was not ready to
extend the timeline for payment of balance 50 per cent joining fees beyond 30 June,
2010, AIL paid the balance entry fee of • 5 million in 12 equal instalments from
January, 2010 to December, 2010.
4.39 The Ministry replied (August, 2011) to Audit that the delay in joining Star
Alliance was on account of large number of Minimum Joining Requirements and the
time consuming process involved, and this was likely to be fulfilled by 31 July, 2011.
The Ministry further informed that Air India had met 90 per cent of the requirements of
the MJRs. Thus, as far as the Government was concerned, Air India was all set to join
the Star Alliance. The Ministry also clarified that they had received no formal
communication about Air India having been denied entry into the Star Alliance and
had, in fact, also learnt about this from the news reports in the press. The Ministry also
stated that the decision of Star Alliance to exclude AI would not have any major impact
on AI's operations.
4.40 When asked about the latest position regarding the prospect of AI's
membership in Star Alliance, the MoCA, submitted as under :—
“As per the extended timeline agreed between Air India and Star Alliance, AI
was required to comply with all the 87 Minimum Joining Requirements (MJRs)
by 31 July, 2011. AI was on track to comply with all the requirements and join
Star Alliance by 31 July, 2011.

71
However, in the interim, Star had requested the Indian Government to give a
prior written confirmation that it shall grant approval to Jet Airways to join
Star if and when it applies. Star had also advised AI that if it does not receive
such a written decision from the Government of India, AI's joining may not be
approved by the Star carriers, which were required to vote unanimously in
favour of AI stating that AI has complied with all the joining requirements
and the obligation to support entry of a 2nd carrier as agreed under the
Agreement signed with Star Alliance in December, 2007.
Meanwhile, Star had advised AI to keep the activities related to the joining
date (such as application of Star Alliance logo on AI aircraft, installation of
Star signages at the airports, etc.) on hold till such time a decision was taken
in favour of AI and an agreement reached on the joining date.
AI had complied with all the joining requirements (other than those which
required a decision on the joining date) by 29 July, 2011 and has received a
written confirmation of the same from the concerned official in Star Alliance.
However, on 01 August, 2011, AI was informed by Star that AI has not met the
joining conditions in full and, therefore, AI's membership has been put on
hold. When details were sought about the specific requirements not being
met by AI, the response received was not specific. It appears that the apparent
reason for AI being put on hold to join Star may have been the perceived lack
of support from AI for entry of 2nd Indian carrier into Star Alliance
The prospect of AI joining Star are currently being discussed at the highest
level in AI and the Ministry of Civil Aviation.”
4.41 Further, when asked to state the implication for AI on not joining Star
Alliance, the MoCA stated:—
"If AI is not able to join Star Alliance even after the efforts being made at the
highest level, the benefits envisaged from joining the Alliance would not
accrue to AI. The main benefits envisaged from joining an Alliance were as
follows:
(i) Enhanced Frequent flyer Programme (FFP) participation
Participation in FFP co-operation is mandatory for joining Star Alliance.
Joining  Star would have ensured that AI has FFP agreements with 28 Star
members,  as against 2 airlines with whom it currently has FFP agreements.
(ii) Enhanced code share network
While code share agreements are not mandatory for joining Star, generally,
all  Star carriers develop code share arrangements with a majority of other
Star carriers. This would have given AI an enhanced reach through
secondary network.
(iii) Enhanced Brand image
Joining Star was expected to benefit AI due to the Brand image associated
with Star Alliance.”

72
4.42 Apprising the Committee regarding the alternative actions undertaken by
the Ministry to achieve the benefits which were expected from joining star Alliance,
the MoCA stated:—
“AI has, however, targeted conclusion of commercial co-operations
(code share, FFP, enhanced Safety Performance Analysis System, etc.) with a
number of foreign airlines. Since AI may still join Star, it has been decided that
initially such commercial co-operations would be entered into with Star carriers
and "non-aligned" carriers since members of competing alliances may be
wary of entering into arrangements with AI as it is still seeking to join Star.
On the Branding front, it may be noted that in the last couple of years, AI has
taken major initiatives (particularly on the IT front) to enable AI offer
competitive product/service level to its passengers. In addition, it has been
decided that without waiting to join Star, AI would implement the
functionalities (which a Star carrier is required to offer to its/other Star carriers'
premium passengers) to its own and also code share partner's premium
passengers.
The above efforts should enable AI to achieve many of the benefits of joining
Star.”
4.43 According to the information furnished by the Ministry, Star Alliance was
paid Euro 10 million as entry fee. To a specific concern of the Committee regarding
refund of the money paid to Star Alliance, the MoCA replied:—
“There is no provision of refund in the agreement signed with Air India. The
agreement was signed by Air India in good faith, and this situation of the
Chief Executive Board refusing us was not foreseen.
However, AI had raised the issue of refund of joining fees during a meeting
with Star on 18 July, 2011 and the Star CEO had orally advised that the joining
fees could be returned after deducting the expenses incurred by the Star
carriers.
At the same time it is to be stated that Air India's membership thus far, has
been put on hold, and not refused.”
The Ministry failed to apprise the Committee of the latest status (as of  March 2013)
regarding Air India's entry into Star Alliance Network.
G. Accounting System
4.44 According to Audit, even after four years of merger, the erstwhile AIL and
IAL had separate accounting package. A common integrated Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) had still not been implemented and AI kicked off the project work only
in January, 2011.

73
4.45 In this context, the Committee sought to know the timeframe by which a
common integrated ERP for the AI would be implemented. The Ministry replied as
under:—
“The corporate SAP ERP system in Air India and subsidiary companies of AI
was signed off for implementation with IBM and SAP in January, 2011 after
approval of the Board. The ERP project is scheduled for phase-wise
implementation over a 18-24 months time frame. It will cover the Finance,
Procurement and HR processes within the department and across the
organisation. It will also integrate with various other IT applications under
implementation in the operating departments.
The 1st phase is implemented/completed and the 2nd phase is scheduled for
'Go-live' in June, 2012 - followed by the 3rd Phase in November, 2012.”
4.46 Asked to putforth the constraints in implementation of an integrated ERP,
the MoCA submitted:—
“The constraints observed are non availability of full time dedicated staff
with required domain knowledge/skill set for the ERP Project from the deptts./
module owners due to need for such staff for their own core functionalities.
The lack of a well augmented team on a continuous basis is adversely
impacting project timelines - given that work processes design and solution
configuration for the merged entity with varied process and disparate systems
is taking considerable time to conclude.”
4.47 When the Committee desired to know about the steps being taken/taken by
the MoCA to overcome the constraints encountered in  implementing a common
integrated ERP for Air India, the Ministry failed to respond.
H. Synergy benefits not quantifiable
4.48 Audit pointed out that the original estimates of synergy benefit (` 820 crore)
were refined during the detailed design work by the Consultant (Accenture), and the
annualised estimates of revised synergy benefits projected were ` 996 crore. As against
this, the actual accruals were to the tune of ` 503 crore till December, 2008 (as claimed
by Accenture in a presentation made in April, 2009) Subsequently, the  AIL Management
responded to Audit by stating that the quantification of subsequent synergy benefits
was practically difficult on standalone basis because the benefits of network integration
were the cumulative effect of many factors.
4.49 In the light of the above, when the Committee wanted to know the reasons
for the inability of the AIL Management to quantify these benefits when the consultant
itself estimated it to the tune of 503 crore, the MoCA replied:—
“Merger of Indian airlines and Air India is an ongoing activity. There are
areas where synergies are being availed on an ongoing basis. The actual
merger of both the companies for every aspect is yet to be completed but
many areas have been completed or under process. The merger has been
completed in many identified areas and the major milestones are being

74
achieved albeit slowly due to the precarious financial position of the company.
The merger benefits like economies of scale, network and savings are being
achieved. The overall synergies realised as on 31 Dec., 2011 for the company
are approximately ` 1535 crore (Annexure - IX).”

CHAPTER  V
LIBERALISED  POLICY  TOWARDS  BILATERAL  AGREEMENTS  ON
INTERNATIONAL  ENTITLEMENTS
Traffic rights for operation of international air services are specified through
bilateral Air Service Agreements (ASAs, also referred to as "bilateral agreements" or
simply "bilateral"). These ASAs or bilateral agreements are concluded bilaterally, usually
on the basis of reciprocity and fair/equal opportunity, and provided the legal framework
for scheduled air services between two countries. Under these ASAs, traffic rights and
capacity entitlements are exchanged between the countries on the basis of market
requirements. The ASAs clearly specify the "entitlements" of the designated airline(S)
of both countries in terms of frequency of operations, number of seats, points of call
etc. Concept of "open skies policy", permits unrestricted air services between countries
with minimal Government intervention.
5.2 In Civil Aviation arena, the concept of 'Open Sky Policy', permitting
unrestricted air services between countries with minimal Government intervention,
has become prevalent in recent times. Upto 2000, bilateral entitlements to/ from India
were in line with end-to-end traffic projections based on 3rd and 4th freedom traffic —
i.e. carrying passengers from the home country to another country and vice- versa.
Foreign carriers were restricted only to major airports in India. During 2003- 04, bilateral
entitlements were liberalized and foreign airlines were permitted to operate to interior
points in India i.e. beyond the major airports.
5.3. In a Cabinet note moved by MoCA in December, 2004 for 'Utilisation of
Traffic Rights on International Routes' it was submitted that while bilateral air traffic
rights on international routes between India and other countries were decided on the
basis of reciprocity, the actual utilisation of available rights on international sectors
was highly imbalanced. While Indian entitlements had remained grossly underutilised,
there was a problem of inadequate capacity on most international routes from India,
with passengers finding it difficult to obtain seats for nearly six months of the year.
The Ministries of External Affairs, Tourism and Commerce, as well as trade, industry
and tourism bodies felt the need to liberalise international air services so that seats
were available to/from India all through the year. Acknowledging the problem of serious
capacity constraints on international routes during several months of the year, the
MoCA had adopted a ‘limited open sky policy’ to cater to peak season requirements
(which had expanded substantially from 2003-04 onwards), permitting designated
airlines to operate unlimited number of services to their respective points of call for
three to six months in a year.
5.4 From 2004-05 onwards, there was substantial liberalization by the Government
regarding the policy on bilateral agreements on entitlements for international operations
between India and other countries as well as in allowing private Indian airlines to
75

76
operate on international routes. The envisaged benefits of liberalized policy were that
(a) passengers would have greater choice for international travel, (b) India's utilisation
of traffic rights on international routes would improve, (c) Tariffs on international
routes were likely to become more reasonable and affordable, and (d) AI and IA would
both gain by synergising their operations, Audit opined that while the liberalized
policy towards bilateral entitlements benefited the Indian traveller considerably in
terms of choices and lower tariffs, the timing of the liberalization (given the timing of
AIL/IAL aircraft acquisition, upgraded Indian airport with  infrastructure with hub-
spoke capabilities etc.) did not provide a level playing field to the country's flag carrier.
5.5 On being queried whether the liberalized policy towards bilateral entitlements
provided a level playing field to Al, the MoCA submitted the following:—
“Bilateral entitlements were liberalised in 2003. In November, 2003, Cabinet
had decided to consider additional traffic rights to ASEAN countries.
5th freedom rights were given to SAARC countries. Scheduled Indian private
airlines allowed to operate to all SAARC countries against unutilised
entitlements. In order to protect the interests of the Air India and provide a
level playing field in the liberalised policy environment following measures
have been taken :—
• In September, 2004, the Ministry was directed by the Cabinet to address
issues relating to building up of the capacity both in the public and
private sector for providing air services between India and other
countries and optimum utilisation of such capacity. In December, 2004
a decision was taken to reserve traffic rights for Air India and Indian
Airlines for operation to the Gulf countries of UAE, Qatar, Oman, Bahrain,
Kuwait and Saudi Arabia until 31.12.2009.
• Due consideration was given to the operational plan of the national
carriers before allocating routes to other eligible schedule carriers. It
was ensured that Air India had a first right of refusal for allocation of
traffic rights.
• Cabinet had decided in December, 2004 wherein private Indian carriers
with 5 years domestic experience and minimum 20 aircraft were allowed
to fly international against Indian entitlements. While doing this, the
Government reserved the Gulf sector exclusively for Air India for the
next 3 years i.e., until December, 2007 and further had commercialised
agreements (approx. ` 400 crore annually) which Air India had entered
into with international carriers in lieu of their inability to fly to some of
the countries, and for which they are being compensated for capacity
mismatch which continued till December, 2009.
• The Cabinet also directed the Ministry to seek multiple designation
and enhance entitlement for other private carriers who would require
these for their long-term growth plan.

77
Thus, Air India exercised the first right of refusal over every other Indian
carrier and this has been the general principle. Whenever any reservation has
been expressed by Air India, it was taken into account particularly if they had
future interest in operating in that region. However, if reservations are
expressed on routes AI did not intend to utilise, it is not possible to hold back
the request of other Indian carriers since that would inconvenience the
travelling public and their needs.
The Government is the sole owner of the bilateral rights. Most and above all,
it is the Indian public whose demand not only have to be catered for, but
allowed freedom of choice. This also allows them the benefit of lower fares.
Audit itself concedes this point. Since 2009, the number of bilaterals which
enhanced rights have been minimal and this, well before the position paper
that emanated from the Indian airlines. The only bilaterals that have been
pursued since 2009 are those in which Indian airlines had perceived their
interest. It must also be appreciated that while negotiating bilaterals, there are
many other stake holders; who demand greater enhancement especially
representatives of Trade and Commerce, Tourism and Airport operators
themselves. Today all modernised airports in the country cater to traffic far
less than their capacity and are in grave danger of continuing to be in debt for
want of adequate clientele and thereby revenue. The Ministry of Civil Aviation
has to cater to the interest of all stakeholders and not just one section. Above
all is the Indian citizen.
Under the liberalised policy, the number of seats exchanged in bilateral
increased as indicated in the report. However in aggregate terms, this was in
line with the increases in total carriage over the period.”
5.6 Audit pointed out that the 6th freedom traffic from/to India was largely
captured by Emirates, Jazeera Airlines, Qatar Airways, Thai Airways, Singapore Airlines,
Lufthansa, British Airways, Cathay Pacific, Continental, Northwest etc. The 6th freedom
carriage by the foreign carriers to their total carriage from/ to India ranged from 40 to 79
per cent (Gulf carriers), 39 to 76 per cent (South East Asia carriers), 61 to 87 per cent
(European carriers) and 2 to 34 per cent (North American carriers).
5.7 Negating the inference drawn by Audit that entitlements given to foreign
carriers enabled them to carry 6th freedom traffic which otherwise would have been
carried by Air India and other Indian carriers, the MoCA has further stated that:—
“If Indian carriers could have operated on these routes utilising these rights
available, they definitely would have. A point that needs to be cleared once
again in perspective is that there are over 190 countries in the world and (all)
carriers flying from India go to only 47 countries, i.e. those which are connected
by flights operating on an origin and  destination basis from India i.e. using
3rd and 4th freedom traffic. The remaining countries are connected by carriers
who operate to such countries and who therefore make use of 3rd and 4th
freedom entitlements given by the Indian side and likewise also by the
countries of ultimate destination. It is not possible for Indian carriers  to

78
connect to all destinations. There is thus inevitability about usage of
6th freedom traffic, although it is an entitlement that is never conceded in a
bilateral.”
A. Sixth Freedom Traffic
5.8 International commercial aviation traffic rights are usually expressed as
'freedoms of the air', which constitute a set of commercial aviation rights granting a
country's airline the privilege to enter and land in another country's airspace. The
convention officially recognises five freedoms. 6th freedom, the right to fly from a
foreign country to another foreign country while stopping in one's own country, has
gained considerable importance in today's scenario. For example, the 6th freedom
traffic of Emirates involves flying passengers from India through Dubai (its home State)
to UK/ USA. Many international airlines especially those operating from city States/
small states (e.g. Emirates/ Dubai; Qatar Airways/ Qatar; Cathay Pacific/ Hong Kong;
Singapore Airlines/ Singapore) earn a large portion of their passenger traffic revenues
from 6th freedom traffic.
5.9 The massive expansion of bilateral entitlements in respect of several countries
(notably in the Gulf, South East Asia and Europe) has facilitated several foreign airlines
(predominantly Emirates) in tapping the vast Indian market and funneling such traffic
over their hubs ( e.g. Dubai) to various destinations in the USA, UK, Europe and
elsewhere through 6th freedom traffic. As per Audit, although the bilateral agreements
do not explicitly provide for exercise of 6th freedom rights, the entitlements exchanged
are vastly in excess of genuine flying requirements between the two countries and
implicitly allow mega-airlines with giant hubs to exploit 6th freedom traffic.
5.10 On being asked to explain in detail, the MoCA stated :—
“The process began with the opening up of domestic markets to private
Indian carriers in 1993-94. Similar aspirational change as well as the need of
the Indian Diaspora living overseas and further growth caused by the
integration of the Indian economy with the global economy dictated a positive
move in this regard. India was one of the poorest performers in this regard
worldwide despite having magnificent tourist assets, that themselves spelt
the need for expansion of the International aviation market. The process
indeed began in 2002 with the liberalisation of the skies for SAARC and
ASEAN regions besides having near unlimited open skies for 6 months of the
year during the winter months. It began to be necessary to free and
institutionalise the bilateral requirements with countries of economic and
geopolitical importance to India. This is a process that had been bottled for
decades and was in crying need for reform.
Expansion of the aviation sector, both domestic and international, increased
the opportunity for trade, further employment (caused by expansion in the
sector) tourism opportunities and the pressing need of the Indian Diaspora
living outside India, predominantly in Gulf, South East Asia, Europe and US.
This diaspora themselves contributed significantly to the Indian economy
by way of huge remittances which have now touched $ 55 billion annually,

79
incidentally the highest for any country worldwide. Not providing an
opportunity for travel was being unfair to fellow citizens. Moreover, it must
be borne in mind that the Delhi- Mumbai-centric approach to travel in and out
of the country, whether for Indian/international travellers was unfair to all
other geographical regions within the country specially States like Kerala,
Punjab, etc. Constant pressure has been exerted by all sections of trade,
representatives of the people and the Ministry of Tourism in its several reports
which compelled the Government to take a fresh holistic look at the solutions
required to quench this requirement.
The Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted, in December, 2004, a note to the
Cabinet outlining these objectives and reinforced by the comprehensive study
of this aspect by the Naresh Chandra Committee set up by the previous
Government in 2003. The Committee, among other recommendations, expressed
the dire necessity to liberalise the sector in order that it no longer constitutes a
hindrance to the growth and progress of the country. In the Indian geographic
context, unlike other transportation sectors, it is only the aviation sector that
contributes its transportation link with the rest of the globe.
CAG has also commented about the timing of this process and stated that the
process should have been more gradual to allow time for Air India to have
acquired the aircraft and be able to grow. In this light, we would like to
emphasize, that the process only began after widespread consultations that
led to the Cabinet policy decision in December, 2004 wherein private carriers
with 5 years domestic experience and minimum 20 aircraft were allowed to fly
internationally against Indian entitlements. While doing this, the Government
reserved the Gulf sector exclusively for Air India for the next 3 years i.e. until
December, 2007 and further had commercial agreements (approx.  ` 400 crore
annually) which Air India had entered into with international carriers in lieu
of their inability to fly to some of the countries, and for which they were being
compensated for capacity mismatch which continued till December, 2009.
These two initiatives Were expressly to address the concerns of Air India
moving out from a protected environment to a competitive scenario, as is
predominant elsewhere. The Cabinet also directed the Ministry of Civil Aviation
to seek multiple designation and enhanced entitlements for other private
carriers who would require these for their long term growth plan. As facts
bear out, over this period, the liberalisation process enabled the country to
enhance bilateral  rights at a similar growth trajectory as the number of
Indians travelling overseas.
In spite of all these efforts made by the Government and the carriers, direct
connectivity with India could only be established with less than 50 countries of
the 190 odd countries in the world. Travelling to these perforce have to be
carried by carriers that connect India to these countries through principal hubs
and by airlines that have the ability and capacity to operate on such routes.”

80
 5.11 Claiming that sixth freedom traffic is an inevitability and it is a phenomenon
that is prevalent worldwide and followed the diktat of market requirement, the Ministry
added:—
“Being undefined and invisible, no country concedes sixth freedom to another
in a brlateral negotiation. Sixth freedom traffic is dictated by market forces
and passenger preference. For example the IT industry, South India centric,
could not be integrated with their clientele in the US to Silicon V alley, etc.,
without sixth freedom traffic e.g. Bangalore being, connected to San Francisco
which neither US nor Indian carriers serve end to end. Similarly, the African
continent would not be connected to India without sixth freedom over the
Gulf.”
5.12 Enumerating the reasons for Indian carriers’ inability to fully utilize the
opportunities provided by sixth freedom traffic, the MoCA stated :—
“Indian carriers are no exception to this phenomenon and have over several
decades been utilising Sixth Freedom opportunities although at a relatively
smaller quantity that was restricted by the size of our carriers. The country
even now has with all its airlines combined, less than 50 aircraft flying overseas.
This nowhere matches the demand for travel overseas to and from India.
Carriers are now poised for growth of sixth freedom traffic with the
commencement of several major airports which have begun to work as
international gateways. The Government assists and indeed coordinates this
process to assist our airlines towards this objective. At T3 hub in DIAL about
11000 daily passengers are transiting with utilisation of sixth freedom rights
by Indian carriers. This number Will grow if we allow our carrier to fly to new
destinations in SE Asia and Europe and 6th freedom enable east to west and
vice versa at T3 hub in Delhi now and at Mumbai later in 2012.
Unforeseen delays in the delivery of 27 Boeing 787 have also further delayed
Air India's ability to channelize sixth freedom traffic. The downturn of the
World 'Economy in 2008 coupled with massive oil price hikes reaching $ 145/-
a barrel in fact further restricted all Indian Airlines in their ability to expand at
planned rates.”
B. Bilateral Policy
5.13 The Committee desired to know if the MoCA had made any assessment
regarding the liberalized policy towards bilateral entitlements. In this regard, the Ministry
submitted that a detailed policy was being drawn up and the same would be submitted
to the Committee once it was completed.
5.14 When asked about the Civil Aviation policy that had been adopted by the
Government of India, the MoCA has replied as under :—
“The Naresh Chandra Committee made several recommendations for the
aviation sectors most of which are implemented. The draft civil aviation policy
drawn up at that time was not pursued. Now in 2011, Ministry of Civil Aviation
has decided to formulate National Civil Aviation Policy and consultation is
going on.

81
To have a sustainable orderly growth of the aviation sector, the Ministry has
felt the need to spell out a long term Civil Aviation Policy addressing various
issues related to the sector. Accordingly on 22.12.2011, a Committee has been
constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Civil Aviation to formulate
a Civil Aviation Policy to address the long term issues of the sector and
provide a road map for development. First meeting of the Committee
constituted to formulate the Civil Aviation Policy was held on 26.12.2011
under the Chairmanship of Secretary. A follow up meeting of the Committee
was held on 27.1.2012 under the Chairmanship of Shri G. Asok Kumar,
Joint Secretary.
As per decision taken in these meetings, a consultation paper has been
placed on the website of the Ministry inviting comments from all stakeholders
by 20.2.2012.”
The latest position (as of March 2013) of the Civil Aviation Policy being formulated
by the Ministry was not furnished by the MoCA to the Committee.
5.15 On being asked if there .existed any possibility of rollback of excess
entitlements granted beyond genuine traffic requirements, the Ministry's submission
has been as under :—
“Any roll back of excess bilaterals or freezing bilateral entitlements has to be
decided mutually and cannot be a unilateral action since this principle is
enshrined in the Air Services Agreements. India has never had an occasion to
ral back bilateral or freeze bilateral. In fact this is, unless there is adequate
reason, a diplomatic embarrassment. Earnings of Air India and the erstwhile
Indian Airlines are not only dependent upon the fact that the Government
concludes bilateral ASAs with countries, but several other factors.
The allocation of traffic rights to an applicant airline depends on the availability
of such rights under the respective bilateral air services agreement In case
the available traffic rights are not sufficient to cover the requirements reflected
in all the applications, the allocation of traffic rights to various eligible applicants
shall be in the ratio of Available Seat Kilometres (ASKMs) deployed by the
applicants on domestic scheduled air transport services during the last five
years. For this purpose, the ASKM deployment of schedule carriers in domestic
sector is determined twice in a year on 1st January, and on 1st July, Traffic -
entitlements decided on the basis of ASKM deployment shall be rounded off
to the nearest whole number and allocated to the applicant. The grant of
traffic rights essentially requires the approval of the Ministry.
Though demands of a sector are usually conveyed by airlines in the
inter-ministerial meetings, requests for talks are sent to the Ministry through
letter. Once traffic rights are granted, the airlines have to fulfil the procedures
for allocation of traffic rights.
The traffic rights are allocated for a schedule i.e. summer or winter schedule
of a particular year. Generally the traffic rights that are allocated for a schedule

82
shall be utilized during the same schedule. Failure to do so shall render the
applicant ineligible for allocation of these rights for the next two years.
Schedule carriers are not permitted to reduce ASKM deployment in domestic
sector once rights are allocated on international routes.
Entitlements given to Scheduled carriers may be reviewed in the event any of
them reduces domestic operations after obtaining traffic rights on international
routes.
The Government may at its discretion permit or deny allocation of rights
keeping in view the preparedness of the airlines, viability of operations and
over all interests of the civil aviation sector.
Sixth Freedom of the Air—the right or privilege, in respect of scheduled
international air services, of transporting, via the home State of the carrier,
traffic moving between two other States (also known as a Sixth Freedom
Right). The so-called Sixth Freedom of the Air, unlike the first five freedoms,
is not incorporated- as such into any widely recognized air service agreements
such as the "Five Freedoms Agreement.”
5.16 On being asked to state in unambiguous terms, if AI suffered due to lack of
empathy of the MoCA towards the plight of National Carriers, the Ministry replied in
negative. It stated that the role of MoCA was to work towards the goal of the
development of the civil aviation sector and due consideration was always given to
the operational plans of Air India before allocating traffic rights to Indian carriers.
5.17 Audit had brought out that as a consequence of the liberalised bilateral
rights extended by MoCA, the private Indian carriers significantly ramped up their
operations, and were granted permission to operate on international routes and the
share of private Indian carriers increased substantially vis-a-vis the National Carriers.
5.18 Asked to specify the impact of open sky policy on the revenues of official
carriers, the MoCA replied:—
“While there is no methodology for exact quantification of the impact of open
sky policy on Air India, the financial impact of liberalization of entitlements
has been significant. However, losses would have been caused by multiple
factors and liberalization has been one of them.”
C. India-Dubai Sector
5.19 Audit Report highlighted that the utilization of enhanced capacity entitlements
by the carriers of the Gulf region (especially Dubai) was almost invariably higher than
that of the Indian Carriers (for example, Dubai carrier's utilization being 98.5% and
Indian carriers' utilization being 45.90%). According to Audit, a significant reason for
this was 6th freedom traffic from India routed through these foreign countries to other
destinations and not merely point-to-point traffic.
5.20 As per Audit, as an illustrative case of the liberalization of bilateral entitlements,
the sequence of events relating to the Dubai sector, covering the period from

83
May, 2007 to March, 2010, (when the seat capacity was increased from 18,400 seats/
week to 54,200 seats/week and points of call in India were increased from 10 to 14),
highlighted the one-sided nature of benefits to Emirates/Dubai (through enhancement
of entitlements and additional points of call in India).
5.21 The MoCA further clarified as under :—
“Dubai is the largest market till 3rd and 4th freedom basis. UAE is home to
more than 1.5 million Indian Nationals who work there besides another
2-3 million in other Gulf/Arab countries. Indian Carriers notably Air India fly
the maximum flights from the most number of our cities to Dubai. The bilateral
entitlements have gone up significantly in the last few years albeit stepped
up annually due to the huge traffic potential. It is not only the working class/
labour class but a large number of business travellers, both ways and also
significant number of Indians who travel for tourism since it is nearer, cheaper
and also fulfils the aspirational change to travel overseas on holidays. This is
also true of Thailand/Malaysia and Singapore. While 6 freedom will certainly
be used by their carrier it must be borne in mind that some destinations are
probably only serviced by their network in terms of choice of time and the
frequency they offer. The entire West Asia, African Continent and many
Central and East European countries are very well connected by their carrier.
This should be looked upon as an advantage for the Indian traveller as well
as people within to visit India on business or for tourism.
Indian Carriers while of course presently using substantial seats (with a huge
demand pending approval by Government for Indian private carriers which
will be allotted of course subject to right of first refusal by air India) have the
added advantage of using 5th freedom which means Air India and other
carriers can carry traffic from Dubai to beyond, a right their carriers cannot
enjoy flying to India and going beyond. In fact, this aspect has not been
covered or appreciated by audit where Indian Carriers have got added
advantage over Gulf  Carriers.......
That our ability to extract unrestricted 5th freedom to any destination
ex-Dubai (that is being able to carry originating traffic from Dubai or transiting
from India to any part of the world and to the extent of our full 3rd and 4th
freedom entitlement) is something which audit has completely ignored nor
appreciated. Such 5th freedom is not available to carriers of Dubai. For example,
Emirates, Etihad, Qatar, Thai, Malaysia, Singapore all airlines are operating to
India in a 3 to 5 hour radius operate wide body Boeing 777 or Airbus
330 aircraft. It would be pertinent to note that Air India does use the B777
wide body aircraft on some flights to Dubai. Moreover, the Airbus 321 of Air
India which it operates to Dubai is a 180 seater aircraft with a good business
class & in flight entertainment also, which can fly from Dubai to many other
countries like Jordan, Syria, Egypt, Libya to name just a few. By that argument
why can Air India or others not operate for example Mumbai-Dubai and
beyond say to Europe or USA? There is no restriction in our bilateral, whereas
their carriers are restricted from doing so beyond India.”

84
5.22 Audit further brought out that Air India repeatedly protested on the lack of
reciprocity and the funnelling of 6th freedom traffic by Emirates through Dubai from
interior locations in India. In September 2006, PMO had forwarded two letters to MoCA
from Shri Abani Roy and Shri Ajay Chakraborty, MPs. Shri Roy's letter referred to the
policy under which the Gulf region had been reserved for PSU airlines for three years,
and, as per the assurance given by the Hon'ble Minister (CA), this needed to be
increased to 5 years. The file notings indicated that "in the draft civil aviation policy...,
on Gulf routes, reservation of all traffic rights for AIL and IAL is. proposed to be
extended from 3 yrs to 5 yrs. There is no proposal to review. these provisions", and
suggested informing the PMO appropriately. However, the subsequent notings
indicated that "OSD to MCA has conveyed that reply to PMO need not go." In fact,
the reservation for AIL/ IAL continued only for 3 years i.e. till December, 2007. Clearly,
the Gulf sector was AIL/ IAL's most profitable international segment before the
liberalised policy on bilateral entitlements. AIL repeatedly expressed strong reservations
to MoCA against the proposals/requests from Gulf countries for increase in seat
entitlements as well as additional points of call at interior locations in India. This was
on the grounds that the existing capacity was well in excess of "genuine"/point-to-
point traffic (i.e. 3rd/ 4th freedom traffic) and that these proposed increases largely
reflected 6th freedom traffic, which would adversely affect AlL's performance not only
on the Gulf sector, but also other sectors like UK/USA Europe. Despite AI's .reservations,
MoCA went ahead with massive increases in entitlements from 2004-05 onwards.
5.23 On being asked to substantiate the MoCA's approval for massive increase
in entitlements from 2004-05 onwards inspite of repeated reservations of AIL against
the proposals/requests from Gulf Countries for increase in seat entitlements as well as
additional points of call at interior locations in India, the Ministry replied as:—
“Although, Air India expressed reservations, there was a considerable
increase in the demand for opening up the Gulf routes, once the 3 years
moratorium and protection of the Gulf routes for Air India was over. There.
were demands from other Indian Airlines also which  needed to be catered to.
Accordingly, entitlements were stepped up, at the request of Indian carriers
for the Gulf routes in a graded manner.”
5.24 To the query of the Committee regarding reciprocity in the facilities extended
by India to Dubai, the Ministry's response was as follows:—
“India has fifth freedom rights beyond Dubai while India has not conceded
fifth freedom rights for Dubai, UAE. This is an advantage for our side.
Unfortunately, the fifth freedom given to India is without any restriction but
the Indian carriers have not been able to take this to their advantage for want
of fleet. Furthermore, the Gulf sector was completely reserved for the national
carrier until the 31st December, 2008 and thus Air India had the first mover
advantage for this region. Further the sector was opened up gradually in the
interest of enhancing operations of Air India.”
5.25 According to Audit, change of gauge facility at Dubai International Airport,
which would have given an opportunity for Indian carriers to funnel traffic in smaller

85
capacity aircraft from interior Indian locations and take them onward to UK/USA/
Europe and other destinations in larger capacity aircraft was not adequately pursued,
nor linked to grant of additional benefit. To this, the Ministry submitted as under:—
“..........about the issue of change of gauge in Dubai, it must be noted that the
Government suo moto has tried to get this in the agreement without any such
demand coming from any of our carriers. Change of gauge is relatively new
concept in the international air services system. India is a signatory to only
one ASA containing this provision — with the USA, signed in 2005. Excepting
US which was an open sky agreement India has not signed any such agreement
with any other country. This we have obtained specifically from Dubai. This
has been asked by India keeping an eye on the future. It has no relevance
presently with the operations or financial performance of the airlines the
subject matter of the• present audit. Let any airline pursue this requirement
and it can be certainly addressed with the Dubai Government. It is therefore
surprising that this finds mention in this Audit report. It has no relevance to
AlL's performance.
The moot point is that no airline in the world will have a change of gauge in a
3 hour flying radius. This means that they have to set up a huge infrastructure
like Mumbai or Delhi in Dubai, complete with Engineering hangars, base
staff, base pilots, cabin crew etc. This entails enormous cost and moreover,
where are the extra planes with Air India to position them there? Besides does
India grant them similar reciprocal change of gauge facility? The answer is
'NO' .”
5.26 Asked to state whether grant of change of gauge facility at Dubai International
Airport was still being pursued by AI, the MoCA replied:—
“During the last talks with Dubai in 2008, India had proposed that a change of
gauge article should be incorporated in the air services agreement. This would
provide benefit to the Indian carriers which would allow smaller aircraft feeding
into Dubai to serve beyond points with much larger aircraft at Dubai. While
accepting in principle, till date Dubai has not accepted implementation of this
Article. The Indian Government has reminded the UAE authorities periodically
but because no Indian Carrier has shown an inclination, it has not been
pressed for immediately.”
D. Joint Position Paper on Bilateral Rights
5.27 Audit examination revealed that in February, 2011, the representatives of Jet
Airways, Kingfisher Airlines and Air India had presented a joint position paper on the
bilateral rights exchanged in the recent past for the Confederation of Indian Industry's
National Committee on Civil Aviation. This paper highlighted that access to a large
number of points in India coupled with capacity entitlements to foreign carriers proved
detrimental to the condition of the Indian carriers.
5.28 When the Committee sought MoCA's response on this joint position paper,

86
the Ministry submitted that though AI was a party to this paper, this fact was not in the
knowledge of the Ministry. The Ministry added:—
“The Joint Position paper on bilateral rights was not shared with MoCA.
Therefore, the data which has been provided in it cannot be verified in the
Ministry. In any event, verification of data on sixth freedom traffic is not
possible since such rights are barely ever granted.”
E. MoCA's Monitoring of Performance of  AIL, IAL and AI through MoUs
5.29 The annual MoU between the administrative Ministry of the GoI and the
management of the Central Public Sector Enterprise (CPSE) is intended to be a
performance monitoring tool for evaluating the performance of the CPSE at the end of
the year with reference to the targets fixed at the beginning of the year. MoU evaluation
of CPSE in done only once in a year based on audited annual accounts of the concerned
CPSE.
5.30 Audit review brought out that the MoUs signed between the erstwhile IAL
and AIL and MoCA were flawed. The non-financial parameters included in the MoU
included minor or insignificant parameters or gave undue weightage to such parameters,
at the cost of critical traffic and operating parameters in the airline industry (such as
those being monitored by Directorate General of Civil Aviation). This skewed the MoU
ratings of IAL and AIL unduly to present a rosy picture of performance.
5.31 When the Committee sought to know the latest position on the MoU for
evaluating the AI with reference to the targets set at the beginning of the year and the
parameters taken into account, the MoCA submitted as under:—
“The MoU for the year 2011-12 has been finalised by the Ministry in
consultation with the AI has already been sent to the Department of Public
Enterprises (DPE) on 29th September, 2011 which is based on the original
Turnaround Plan prepared by SBI Caps, consultants appointed by Air India,
for the preparation of Financial Restructuring Plan (FRP). The detail parameters
in the MoU for 2011-12 have the standard static financial parameters prescribed
by DPE and specific and dynamic parameters.
The composite score for the MoU for 2010-11 has also been forwarded to
DPE on 29th September, 2011 based on the provisional results for 2010-11.
Air India has a composite score of 3.93 which is equivalent to "Fair". It may
be pertinent to mention that the following factors which are beyond the
control of Air India affected the financial performance in 2010-11.
• Global recession which led to decrease in demand resulting in reduction
in Passenger revenues.
• Increase in fuel prices resulting in increased fuel cost to the extent of
approximately ` 950 crore.
• Increase in interest on Working Capital by around ` 425 crore mainly
due to increase in borrowing rates and working capital limits.

87
• Increase in Provision for Gratuity by around ` 200 crore in view of the
amendment of the Gratuity act raising the ceiling from ` 3.50 lakh to
` 10 lakh.”
The Ministry further added that the scope of the financial specific and dynamic
parameters has been widened by the Ministry of Civil Aviation to enable a proper
review of the Undertaking.
5.32 The Composite score is an index of the performance of the CPSE which is
calculated as the aggregate of all the weighted score of the actual achievements
vis-a-vis the targets set out on a 5-point scale. The list of composite score of AI
(pre/post merger) from 2005-06 to 2009-10 as furnished by the MoCA is given below:—
Y ear Remark
2005-06 Draft MoU submitted to DPE on 23rd Jan, 2006 for erstwhile
Air India. Composite Score not finalized
2006-07 Revised Draft MoU submitted to DPE on 14th Dec., 2006 for erstwhile
Air India
2007-08 MoU signed with DPE on 18 April, 2007. It contained only one line
that merger of Air India and Indian Airlines in to the new company
shall be completed in 2007-08.
The merger was completed in the year and National Aviation
Company of India Ltd. was formed in 2007-08.
2008-09 MoU signed and submitted to DPE on 16th April, 2009.
Composite Score not finalised.
2009-10 Draft MoU submitted to MoCA in September, 2010- MoU not
signed Composite Score not finalized.
2010-11 MoU not signed.
F. Grant of Undue Facilities
5.33 Audit pointed out that in March, 2010, at a time when NACIL was going
through a major financial crisis, MoCA issued an order, whereby the facility for
upgradation of ticket for self and immediate family for travel to the highest class
available by Air India/ Indian Airlines, subject to availability of seats, was extended to
all former Secretaries of the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
5.34 When asked about this, the Ministry responded that it had constituted
Justice Dharmadhikari Committee and one of the terms of reference of this Committee
was to look into the facilities to retired employees. The committee had submitted its
report on 31st January, 2012 and it was stated to be under consideration of the Ministry.
5.35 However, in a subsequent submission of the Ministry, it has been stated
that since the facility of upgradation of seat was subject to availability of seats in the

88
higher class, there was no loss of revenue. It was further stated that the seats in an
aircraft/flight were a perishable commodity which were wasted once the aircraft took
off and no revenue was generated.

CHAPTER   VI
OPERATIONAL  PERFORMANCE
A. Key Operational/Revenue Parameters
The details of key performance indicators of AI (including erstwhile Indian
Airlines) during the period 2005-06 to 2010-11, as furnished by the Ministry are given
below:—
Financial Passengers Passenger Revenue A vailable Passenger Revenue/ A/c
Year (Million) Revenue Passenger Seat Load Revenue Utili-
(` Cr) Kilometres (Million) Factor Passenger zation
(Million) % Kilometres p.a.
(Million)
2005-06 12.30 10397 31403 47274 66.4 3.31 3723
2006-07 12.96 10242 31483 47869 65.8 3.25 3732
2007-08 13.21 9954 30890 48393 63.8 3.22 3593
2008-09 10.36 9267 25950 43591 59.5 3.57 3468
2009-10 11.75 9150 28965 44723 64.8 3.16 3511
2010-11 13.11 10238 31130 44511 69.9 3.29 3726
6.2 Audit scrutiny revealed a significant deterioration in operational performance
on most parameters such as passenger/cargo revenues, Available Seat Kilometres
(ASKM), Available Tonne Kilometres (ATKM), Revenue Passenger Kilometres (RPKM),
passenger revenue per RPKM and Passenger Load Factor (PLF) for the two airlines
(pre/post merger) between 2005-06 and 2009-10.
6.3 On being asked to explain reasons for decline in key operational and revenue
markers of the National Carrier, the MoCA responded:—
“Prior to the merger, erstwhile AI and IA had developed their route networks
independent of each others' goals. Consequently, there was little synergy in
the two airlines' networks. While AI lacked the right resources to develop a
cost-efficient feeder network for its long-haul routes, IC suffered from
insufficient sales support of its domestic flights from foreign markets where
AI held sway. On the India — Gulf and India — South- East Asia markets, two
airlines had operations on the same routes as the other which gave rise to
unhealthy/undesirable competition between the two airlines in these markets.
The competition between the two airlines resulted in lower yields, revenues
& profitability to both the airlines. Further AI was serving these routes with
wide body aircraft which produced inferior economics on these relatively
short-haul routes.
89

90
During this period AI's fleet including that of erstwhile Indian Airlines has
undergone several changes by way of return of leased aircraft, phase out of
old aircraft and induction of new aircraft.
The number of wide body aircraft available for scheduled operations has
declined from about 31 aircraft in 2005-06 to about 22 aircraft in 2010-11, This
has been one of the main reasons for the decline in the Available Seat
Kilometres (ASK) during the period in question.
The other principal reasons for the decline in the ASK and the revenues are as
detailed below:—
• Al had consciously downsized its long haul operations to reduce losses
in an environment of rising cost of fuel and challenges faced in increasing
yields in an increasingly competitive market.
• The financial years 2008-09 and 2009-10 were particularly difficult ones
not just for Air India but for the aviation industry globally where most
airlines had to resort to capacity cutbacks and yield sacrifices. From
around the middle of FY 2010-11, cabin crew constraints on the narrow
body fleet also compelled AI to reduce the utilization of its A320 family
fleet.
• Post merger, the operations of erstwhile Indian Airlines, Air India and
Air India Express had to be rationalized to avoid wasteful competition
in order to improve the bottom line of the merged entity and its
subsidiary. The main actions taken in this connection are:
• Replacement of erstwhile AI's wide body aircraft services with the
narrow body aircraft from the erstwhile Indian Airlines fleet on short
medium haul services within India and on the regional international
to improve profitability.
• The hiving off of considerable operations of erstwhile Air India on
the India-Gulf/SE Asia routes to AI Express to improve profitability
• Withdrawal of positioning legs on International flights where the
cost of operating the positioning sector was disproportionately high
as compared to the revenues earned from the sector has also
contributed to reduction in ASK.”
6.4 While, claiming that improvements were registered in certain key operational
and revenue parameters, the Ministry submitted as under:—
“Though the ASK's have reduced by 6%, the PLF achieved by AI has been
gradually increasing over the past 3 years as may be seen from the details
given below:
2009-10 64.8%
2010-11 69.1%

91
Apr.-Dec. 2010 66.7%
Apr.-Dec. 2011 68.3%
It may also be mentioned that AI has achieved higher passenger revenues to
the extent of  `  1088 cr. in 2010-11 compared to 2009-10. Even during
Apr.-Dec. 2011, Al's passenger revenues and yields have been higher by
` 503 cr. as compared to that achieved during the same period in 2010 in spite
of the adverse impact of the pilots' strike on the AI's operations/revenues.
The details are given below:—
Period Passenger Change over Y ield/RPK
Revenue previous year ( `)
(` Cr.)
Apr. 09-Mar. 1 0 9150 3.10
Apr .10-Mar. 11 10238 11.9% 3.37
Apr.-Dec. 10 7941 3.41
Apr.-Dec. 11 8444 6.3 % 3.60
Also, the various strategic actions taken by AI in recent years such as phase
out of old aircraft, implementation of the new common Passenger Service
System, rationalisation of routes, establishment of operational hub at Delhi,
etc. have resulted in gradual improvement in the operating results of AI's
services in terms of revenue deficit over cash costs of operations:
F Y Revenue deficit over cash costs
` cr.
2007-08 - 885
2008-09 - 2739
2009-10 -1114
2010-11 -864
B. Unsatisfactory performance vis-a-vis other competitors
6.5 Audit scrutiny has revealed that the performance of IAL vis-a-vis  its
competitors on various parameters (PLF, domestic market share, Passenger Revenue/
RPKM) was consistently poor. IAL's On-time Performance — a critical parameter of
service — was dismally low, compared to both full service carriers (Kingfisher and Jet
Airways) and low cost carriers (JetLite, Indigo, Go Air).
6.6 Asked to state categorically if AI was constrained in any respect to match the
performance levels achieved by other airlines, the MoCA attributed AI lagging behind
the private players to the following factors:—
• Poor image due to adverse publicity in various media.

92
• Disruptions to services due to Industrial Relations (IR) issues.
• Inadequate and ageing work force at customer contact points.
• Liquidity crunch and resultant shortages of essential aircraft spares and
consequently relatively inferior performance against schedules.
• Delay in the induction of B 787 — as this aircraft having capacity of 256 seats is
more ideally suited to demand on many international sectors on which AI is
forced to deploy aircraft having much higher capacity.
• Delay in implementation of new Passenger Service System and Automated
Revenue Management System across the network.
• Non-participation in Star Alliance as planned.
However, the MoCA also claimed that there had been improvement in AI's
performance in terms of PLF, yields and profitability to the extent that the airline was in
a position to control its costs.
6.7 Regarding standard utilization of aircraft, flying hours for a pilot and aircraft
to employee ratio in civil aviation industry as well as Air India's position in comparison
with these standard parameters, the Ministry submitted as under:—
“Aircraft Utilisation:
The aircraft utilization mainly depends upon the commercial schedule and the
maintenance check requirements.
The aircraft utilization in block hours during the year 2011-12 for the aircraft in
Air India's fleet is as under:
Aircraft type Daily utilization
B747-400 6.12
B777-200LR 12.31
777-300ER 13.23
A320 8.6
A319 8.9
A321 10
A330 9.6
Note : The utilization of B747-400 aircraft is deliberately kept low due to high
cost of operation.
The details regarding industry standards for aircraft utilization is attached at
(Annexure - Xl).

93
Flying hours for a Pilot:
The average flying hours per month for the last 12 months for a Pilot for a
B747-400 aircraft is 40 hrs. and that of B777-800 is 69 hrs. As regards Airbus
fleet, the average flying hrs. per month for the last 12 months for P1
(Commander) is 61 hrs. and 55 hrs. for P2 (Co-pilot). However, as per DGCA,
a Pilot can fly up to 1000 hrs. per annum.
Aircraft to employee ratio:
The aircraft to employee ratio in Air India and that in some of the leading
Indian and foreign airlines on 31.12.2011 were as under:
Name of T otal No. of T otal No. of Aircraft/
Airlines Aircraft Employees Employee
Ratio
Air India 115 27274 1:237
Jet Airways 97 13177 1:136
Lufthansa 297 116353 1:417
British Airway's 234 41494 1:177
The Company, is in the process to hive off its MRO and Ground handling
SBU into subsidiaries and thereby bringing down the total number of
employees to 11874 and the aircraft to employee ratio to 1:103 which would be
comparable to other international airlines.”
C. Route Profitability Analysis
6.8 Audit scrutiny also revealed that with regard to the erstwhile AIL, during the
period between 2005-06 and 2009-10 most routes (North America, UK, SE Asia etc.)
were incurring losses, and only the Gulf/ Middle East and Far East Asia routes were
making profits till 2005-06. However, by 2009-10, all routes were loss-making. Of  these,
the single largest loss-making route was the India/ USA route.
6.9 The Committee sought to know whether the MoCA had analyzed the reasons
for low route profitability. In response, the MoCA in a written submission stated:
“Low route profitability is on a variety of reasons. Apart from historical reasons
such as lack of alliances, inadequate frequent flyer programme, few code
shares only and connectivity, delayed deployment of PSS, the increased
competition exposed Air India to greater competition despite all efforts to
give the airline adequate measures of protection.
• The higher yields achieved in 2008-09 was due to higher fuel surcharges
applied during that year to partially account for the unprecedented
increase in ATF costs.
• The increase in yields in North America routes in 2010-11 is due to
introduction of more non-stop services replacing one halt service to
North America via Frankfurt.

94
• The continuous decline in the yields achieved on the Gulf routes
coupled with decline in PLF during the period resulted in even the Gulf
services turning cash negative.
• The steep decline in the yields achieved on the Europe/UK sectors in
09-10 may be attributed to additional capacity on these routes deployed
by AI's competitors.”
6.10 Audit examination of route economics for the period 2005-06 to 2009-10
relating to erstwhile IAL revealed that out of total 742 Services (500 Domestic and 242
International), 63% were not meeting cash costs, 25% were meeting cash costs but not
total costs, and only 12% were meeting total cost of operations. In response to Audit
observation, AI Management stated (February, 2011) that during the period under
review, access to the Indian market for foreign carriers had increased manifold on the
one hand while Indian carriers were given unrestricted rights to increase domestic
capacities besides entry into the international markets. Consequently, Indian carriers
commenced operations on the very same international routes which were/are served
by the Company.
6.11 However, the Ministry (in August, 2011) termed the claim of AI Management
that unrestricted right was being provided to Indian carriers to increase domestic
capacities as incorrect. Further, the MoCA made the following submission to the
Committee:—
“The domestic carriers, including AI, operate under the Route Dispersal Guidelines
and airlines are free to operate on any route. Operations on a particular route are
decided by airlines keeping in view the commercial viability and availability of
resources.”
D. Quality of Service
6.12. Indian Market Research Bureau survey (commissioned by Air India) of
customer perception of AI and other airlines such as Kingfisher, Jet Airways, Singapore
Airlines, Lufthansa and British Airways revealed that in the international arena, the
fliers were demanding more than the basic facilities with overall travelling experience
and comforts and that the Air India brand was no longer preferred as it was not meeting
the above standards. The study further revealed that the services of 'Air India' were
not oriented towards customer satisfaction, the personnel had an indifferent "sarkari"
attitude and brand Air India was kept as a substitute airline to travel.
6.13 In the light of the above, the Committee enquired about the mechanism that
was evolved by AI to ascertain the level of customer satisfaction with regard to various
services provided by AI. The MoCA submitted as:
‘‘The following steps have been taken/being taken for improvement in
Customer Services Department—
• Inflight announcement after take-off and prior to landing has been
introduced for filling in of Passenger Feedback Forms.
• Inflight announcement for Web Sale and Sky Bazaar Sale has been
introduced and modality of operation of Sky Bazaar is under review to
make it more passenger friendly.

95
• A separate cell has been set up for entertaining and evaluating
suggestions/feedback to be obtained directly from cabin crew to bring
rationalization/improvement in services.
• A project has been taken in hand to bring a change in uniform pattern
and design to provide variety on board.
• Action has been initiated to procure adequate quantity of Hindi
newspapers and magazines.
• Hold-over of Inflight Entertainment contents on wide body aircraft
used to be NIL which has been increased to a Library of Contents
available on-board offering wider choice.  At present 152 movies/other
programmes of different classifications are available for viewing.
• Inflight content updaticn on narrow body aircraft has been reduced
from monthly to fortnightly.
• Mood lighting has been done in the wide body aircraft intended to
uplift passenger experience and the feedback indicates that it elevates
passenger experience and provides clean and posh look of cabins.
• Cabin boarding music has been changed to lndo-West Fusion having
a rich sound to be played at boarding, taxing, landing and arrival taxing
at audible level and the feedback indicates that combined with mood
lighting it has a mind altering and calming effect on passengers.
• Efforts are being made to upgrade cabin management by having neat
and tidy cabins, clean and hygienic toilets, controlled temperature to
have positive effect on passengers.
• Call Centre Services : upgradation/under upgradation.
- FFP Cell — Implemented with effect from 26 Feb., 2011 offering
membership, redemption and related services — functional.
- French Toll Free — Seat assignment/Excess Baggage related offers
for Indian origin passenger travelling ex-France has been
implemented.
- Tele Check-in for AI International Sectors being finalized.
- Dial-a-Ticket (DAT) for AI International Sectors with payment
collection through Domestic and International credit cards — work
in progress.
- Feedback Cell — Accessible through a Toll Free No. for handling
customer feedback and complaints — work in progress; committee
to negotiate being constituted.
- Web, Chat & SMS Pull — work in progress.”

96
E. Leased Aircraft could not be returned
6.14 Audit report highlighted that although the acquisition project involved
return of all leased aircraft, as of March, 2010, IAL and its subsidiary Airline Allied
Services Ltd. (AASL), had 37 leased aircraft. Of these 37 aircraft, 11 aircraft were very
small capacity aircraft and 8 aircraft were sold and leased back, evidently as a means of
funds generation (in view of the AI's critical financial position). Of the remaining
aircraft, eight A320 aircraft had been obtained on an operating lease from a lessor
(M/s. AerCap) in Netherlands between March, 2003 and March, 2005. Six of these
aircraft were to be returned between March, 2008 and October, 2009, after completing
the extended lease period.
As per the lease agreements, the leased aircraft were to be sent to a mutually
acceptable MRO facility for completion of stipulated aircraft checks before return to
the lessor. Three of these aircraft were withdrawn from commercial operations by IAL
and sent to a Jordan based MRO between February and July, 2008. However, the lessor
refused to accept the return of the aircraft, by raising disputes on their physical condition
and documentation and raised claims of huge settlement amounts.
Finally, one aircraft was returned to the lessor in May, 2009 after a 'buy-out
package' (viz, payment of compensation to the lessor by IAL, in exchange for waiving
all liabilities associated with the aircraft "redelivery conditions") of $ 2.7 million.
6.15 When asked to furnish the details of this case, the Ministry's submission
was as under :—
“As per the lease agreements pertaining to three A320 aircraft belonging to
Netherland/Ireland based lessor were sent with their approval to a Jordan
based aircraft maintenance organisation for accomplishment of lease return
major checks.
• The lessor sought huge compensation for the shortfall in the physical
condition and documentation meeting the redelivery/return conditions
of the first aircraft. The compensation was negotiated considerably
downwards in respect of the first aircraft by a Negotiating Committee
constituted by CMD as per the decision of the Board. After completion
and inspection of the next two aircraft, the lessor sought even higher
compensations which were disputed by IAL(AI). The excessive and
highly unreasonable buy-out amounts, being extremely
disproportionate to meet return conditions, clearly indicated the
intention of AerCap (a leading aircraft lessor) to avoid or delay redelivery
of aircraft to the extent possible. That the lessor's intention was malafide
is borne by the fact that it expected the return of about 17 years old
aircraft in near brand new condition by listing even minor ignorable
issues thereby even questioning the capability of its own recommended
MRO.
• The Board was apprised on the status of these two aircraft. The Board
decided that in respect of these aircraft, for which lease had expired and

97
were awaiting redelivery at Jordan Aircraft Maintenance Limited—
JorAMCo, the company should immediately stop payments to the lessor.
• The lessor served the notices of default for the non-payments of the
lease rentals of these aircraft, which were duly responded with the
replies drafted by erstwhile Indian Airlines' Indian Legal Advisor. The
lessor then filed a suit against Air India in the Delhi High Court for
recovery of due amounts and even for winding up of the company.
• Meanwhile, protracted negotiations were being done by the Negotiating
Committee with the lessor. The parties however, could not arrive at a
mutually acceptable settlement. Therefore, it was decided to appoint
an independent neutral Technical Expert, as per the provisions of Lease
Agreement, to inspect the aircraft and documents and decided the
quantum of compensation.
• While the court case in the Delhi High Court, as stated above was
going on, the lessor simultaneously filed suits in the courts at Amsterdam
and Paris, who passed orders for freezing Air India's accounts without
even seeking Air India submission on the issue.
• This was brought to the notice of the Board, which decided that a
Global Negotiation settlement for lease return of AerCap's aircraft be
arrived at through our lawyers. Accordingly, a Global Settlement
Agreement was executed between Negotiating Committee comprising
of erstwhile Indian Airlines and AerCap with the involvement of erstwhile
Indian Airlines' Indian & foreign Legal Advisers for all the aircraft
belonging to this lessor. In the Global Settlement, it was agreed that the
independent Technical Expert, who had already been appointed for the
purpose, should determine the settlement amount in respect of these
two aircraft.
• In its final report, the Technical Expert scaled down the buy-out amounts
in respect of EYB & EYC.
• Aircraft EYB & EYC were returned to the lessor after inspections by
the Technical Expert and carrying out the maintenance tasks, which
had become due by that time.”
6.16 The Committee further sought details of expenditure incurred by the erstwhile
IAL for returning these two contentious leased aircraft to the lessor including that of
forming the Negotiating Committee, appointing the technical expert etc. However,
MoCA failed to furnish details sought for.
6.17 On being asked to state in no uncertain terms whether this situation could
have been averted, the MoCA stated as under:—
‘‘The Lease Agreements were executed after proper vetting by and with the
involvement of foreign legal adviser and were based on international practices.
The experience has indicated that these agreements are heavily loaded in

98
favour of lessor and leave room for manipulation by them if their intentions
are malafide. The experience gained in the above process shall be put to use
in executing future leases by incorporating more clarity on various clauses
and preparing ourselves to meet the expectations of the lessor.”
F. Passenger Load Factor (PLF) in First Class and Business Class
6.18 Audit has pointed out that the Passenger Load Factor (PLF) of AIL on
international operations declined from 73.3 per cent in 2003-04 to 61.1 per cent in
2009-10. By contrast, the PLF of Jet Airways increased from 19.4 per cent in 2003- 04 to
80.4 per cent in 2009-10.
6.19 Asked to enumerate the reasons for Al's display of poor PLF, vis-a-vis its
competitors, the MCA replied:—
‘‘The lower PLF on the AI system may be attributed to the following factors:
• Poor image due to adverse publicity in various media.
• Disruptions to services due to IR issues.
• Lack of presence in the domestic low-cost market with suitable product
variant.
• Inadequate and ageing work force at customer contact points.
• Liquidity crunch and resultant shortages of essential aircraft spares
and consequently relatively inferior performance against schedules.
• Delay in the induction of B 787 — as this aircraft having capacity of
256 seats is more ideally suited to demand on many international sectors
on which AI is forced to deploy aircraft having much higher capacity.
• Delay in implementation of new PSS and Automated Revenue
Management System across the network.
• Non-participation in Star Alliance as planned.
However, the PLF achieved by AI has been gradually increasing over
the past 3 years.”
6.20 The aircraft operated by AIL on the international routes normally had a
configuration of Economy, Business/Executive and First Class, of which Business/
Executive and First Class represent high yielding business. There was a substantial
decrease in the PLF of AIL flights in First class from 14.4 per cent (2004-05) to 12 per
cent (2009-10) and in Business/ Executive class from 31.0 per cent (2004-05) to 27.73 per
cent (2009-10).
6.21 Enumerating the special schemes to improve the PLF on First and Business/
Executive Segment, the MoCA submitted that AI offered a number of schemes for
promotion of Executive Class product on the domestic network. These included Get
Up Front Offer, Upgrade through Option Town, Super Saver Offers, Platinum Pass and
Companion Free Scheme. Other stated measures were entering into a number of

99
Corporate Deals by offering discounts/incentives on volumes, promotional fares offered
based on seasonality to augment loads, upgrading offers for passengers to sample
their product at a price so that they could convert to regular First/business class
passengers, incentivise agents so that Air India captured the market share of First and
Business Class traffic.
G . Publicity and Sales Promotion
6.22 As against the industry norms of 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent, the percentage
of publicity and sales promotion expenditure to the revenue earned for Air India ranged
between 0.22 per cent and 0.46 per cent whereas in respect of private airlines, the
percentage ranged between 0.75 per cent and 3.99 per cent. Further, expenditure on
publicity and sales promotion by Air India decreased from ` 7 70.15 crore in 2007-08 to
` 29.12 crore in 2009-10.
6.23 When asked to justify this low expenditure on advertising by AI in the
present context of aggressive marketing adopted by its competitors, the Ministry
replied that in 2009-10 it was felt that due to the severe cash crunch being faced by the
company, expenditure towards publicity and sales promotion was to be kept to the
bare minimum. However, in 2011-12, the company embarked upon major advertising
campaigns in the various media channels like Television, Print, Radio and Hoardings,
AI's official website and online channels and tying up with major events. The Ministry
added that in contrast to ` 460.80 lakh spent on Advertising & Sales Promotion during
period April — December,  2010, a sum of ` 860.70 lakh was spent on Advertising &
Sales Promotion, during April—December, 2011, thus showing increased expenditure
of 86.7% under this head.
H. Negligible Sales from Website
6.24 Audit examination had brought out that during 2007-08, AI revamped and
changed its website to make it user friendly, but the percentage of web sales to total
sales was poor. An integrated website was achieved in February, 2010 but the web
sales increased marginally to 2.63 per cent of total sales in 2009-10.
6.25 Elaborating the efforts made to improve the web sales, the MoCA submitted
to the Committee:—
“As regards comments on improved website, for enhancing customer
satisfaction and for improving sales through website, effective
September, 2011, new webmaster and core team was designated with the
objective of making the website as customer friendly and making it as a
marketing tool to enhance direct sales thereby reducing distribution costs
and other costs related to bookings through other channels i.e. agents,
portals, booking Offices etc.
Initiatives taken so far:
• The travel/ticketing rules and regulations related to customers are being
updated on real time basis (which has become an ongoing process
now) to enhance customer satisfaction.

100
• Constant development & modification of Website & Web page contents
as per market and commercial requirement (which has become an
ongoing process) which in turn enhances customer satisfaction.
• To make it comprehensive platform and single window for all e- business
activities and major source of revenue for AI.
• To enhance the speed and processing time the website has been
migrated to NIC platform (Government of India) effective January, 2012
which in turn enhances customer satisfaction.
• The refund processing time has been reduced to couple of days to
restore customer confidence.
• The helpdesk response time (to respond to customer queries) has been
reduced to 24 hours by augmenting the entire set-up to tune it to
market requirement.
• A short term web based scheme has been launched effective
January, 2012 to encourage customers for web based bookings/ticketing.
• Aggressively using website as e-marketing tool for advertising
promotional schemes, destinations, new flights, schedule, fares etc.
These initiatives have helped Air India to restore confidence of e- customers,
change the focus of website i.e. customer related and above all increase
direct sales i.e. web sales.
At present the percentage of web sales is approximately 10% of the total
passenger sales on network basis now.
In order to enhance the direct sales (web sales) further, some of the major
initiatives under process or in the near future are:
• To make our site truly global and globally accessible site with regional
foreign languages option.
• To make it interactive and user friendly.
• To make it as major channel of revenue generation, competitive and at
par with other booking portals.
• Use as an effective platform to reduce unsold inventory levels in the
long run to develop website as interactive tool for customers,
prospective business clients, global networking, Press releases/
information tool about our products, features etc, Blog writing, linking
& development, Platform to patronise and bring people closer who
matter for our business on global basis, as international tool for
marketing, sales, publicity and promotion etc., platform for developing
business, partnerships and associations, platform for co-promotional,
co-branding activities, launches etc. and Developing data base for
promotional activities.

101
• To link website to other social media networking sites for getting
increased traffic with objective of enhancing sales, constructive
publicity and brand building.
• To develop website as tool for electronic media publicity for AI to
reduce costs.
• To develop ancillary revenues for Air India by extending options like
travel insurance, visa processing, in-bound tourism etc for its
customers.”
6.26 When asked if any efforts were being made by MoCA/AI to minimize the
commission paid to external agencies for sale of tickets and hence reduce the loss of
revenue, the Ministry submitted as under:—
“AI is in a competitive market both for domestic and international sales.
Majority of the sales happens through the Travel Agents, and they get the
standard normal commission on sales from all Airlines. In order to reduce the
distribution cost/commission costs, Air India is promoting sales through its
own website. On such sales, there is no commission cost or distribution cost.
Currently, there two promotional schemes, introduced by AI,  (i) Click & Save,
and (ii) Get Lucky are going on to increase the sale through AI website.
When migrating to a single code in February, 2011, a detailed exercise was
undertaken to rationalise the commission amounts paid to travel agencies
worldwide. As a general rule, commission levels were reduced to fall in line
with each country's national carrier.
In India, Air India pays commission to agents at the same level as the other
two full service carriers so as to be competitive in the market.”
I. Code Share Utilisation
6.27. The term 'code share arrangement' means selling of the seats on a flight by
a different (operating) airline by a marketing airline through a different code. Audit
observed that during 2009-10 the code share seat utilisation was only 43.48 per cent.
However, by increasing the code share utilisation to 70 per cent, AIL could earn an
additional ` 60 crore per annum.
6.28.  When the Committee desired to know whether MoCA explored the avenues
offered by code share utilisation in generation of revenue for AI, the Ministry responded
as under:—
“Air India is working at developing code shares with premier airlines. We
have developed code shares with 12 airlines. However, some of the premier
airlines, notably United/Continental, Air Canada and ANA in Star, have not
responded to our requests and have been postponing developing code share
co-operation with us.”
6.29 When the Committee sought to know the reasons for certain premier airlines
not responding to requests of MoCA for developing code share co-operation, the
Ministry failed to apprise the Committee.

102
J. Hiring of Aircraft
6.30 Audit examination revealed that during the period 2006-10, AIL returned 24
lease aircraft but entered into a fresh lease for 17 aircraft mainly to retain market share
and to bridge the capacity gap. However, AIL made operational losses on the leased
aircraft for the period 2006-07 to 2009-10; while the total revenue earned on leased
aircraft operations was ` 7 9,882 crore, expenditure incurred was ` 14,786.26 crore,
resulting in an operational loss of ` 4,886.13 crore. The percentage of losses on leasing
operations to total operational losses of AIL during 2006-10 ranged between 24.59 per
cent and 64.99 per cent.
6.31 Audit had reviewed eleven lease aircraft proposals, out of which five were
executed prior to 2006-07 and six during 2006-10 and observed that in respect of seven
proposals, leasing had been justified with negative returns for 'maintaining market
presence' or slot utilisation at foreign airports.
6.32 Asked to enumerate the attempts being made to reduce lease capacity of AI,
the MoCA submitted:—
“As far as attempts made to reduce the lease capacity of AI is concerned, all
the aircraft taken on lease by Air India Wide-body group were returned to the
Lessors after the expiry of their lease term. In the erstwhile IAL, 18 leased
A320 aircraft have already been returned to the respective lessors. Five A319
and two A330 aircraft on lease are in operation and due for return in the year
2014. There are eight Sale and Lease back A320 aircraft whose leases come to
an end during the period 2013-15.”
K. Cargo Carriage
6.33 Audit in its review has brought out that Cargo carriage by AIL was on a
declining trend over the years vis-a-vis its competitors. AIL had converted four
passenger aircraft (including two leased aircraft) into freighter aircraft at a cost of
` 168.30 crore for its own dedicated freighter operations on the Paris, Frankfurt, Far
East and South Asian routes. The freighters were inducted between June, 2007 and
December, 2008, but cargo freighter operations were suspended in September, 2009,
since AIL incurred a loss of  ` 270.62 crore on these operations. In fact, as of April,
2010, AIL continued to incur lease charges of approximately ` 2.27 crore p.m. on the
leased freighter aircraft, despite no cargo operations from October, 2009 onwards.
6.34 In this context, the Committee sought explanation regarding the losses
incurred by AI in cargo operations. The MoCA responded that:—
“Two A310 aircraft were inducted for freighter operation in mid 2007. In
February, 2008, the fuel prices globally started escalating and peaked in
August, 2008. As fuel constitutes 53% of cash cost, this led to an increase in
cost of operations thereby making the route unprofitable. This was followed
by a global economic slowdown from September, 2008 severely affecting
export and import trade worldwide.

103
In January, 2009, two more aircraft were inducted. It may be noted that all four
aircraft were not utilized simultaneously because each one had to undergo
periodic maintenance checks.
Despite the high cost of operation and the above-mentioned limitations, AI
Cargo continued to strive to enhance uplifts and utilization and achieved
steady load factors of 78% ex India and 72% into India. However, due to the
market environment the corresponding revenues were not forthcoming.
The freighters were withdrawn in September, 2009 due to losses, and deployed
effective 15 October, 2009 for DOP operations as there was a shortage of crew
for the 8737 operation and AI had a contract with the DOP which continued
till 31st March, 2010 when contract with DOP expired. Subsequently,
Management decisions were taken to lease/sell out the aircraft, as the aircraft
were very old and difficult to maintain.
The major reasons for losses suffered by AIL in line cargo operations are:
- Decline in the air cargo market due to economic downturn.
- Decrease in AI capacity share due to considerable capacity induction
by competitors. Air India capacity has remained stagnant.
- Withdrawal of capacity from Los Angeles and Combi aircraft capacity
from Tokyo.
- Withdrawal of capacity from Seoul/Nairobi/Birmingham and reduction
of flights into/ex Hong Kong.
- Equipment replaced in the Gulf region from A310 (WB) to B737/A320
with limited belly capacity.”
When asked to furnish reasons for inducting two more freighter aircraft in January,
2009 even though its cargo carriage suffered losses due to economic slowdown from
September, 2008, the Ministry failed to do so.
6.35 Further, asked to specify the steps being taken by the MoCA to improve
cargo profitability, the MoCA stated:—
“Air India continues to do aggressive marketing to achieve higher utilization
of the cargo capacities. Action to improve yields and revenue has been taken
by offering market driven rates and incentivizing the cargo agents. The
strategy has resulted in increase of revenue year on year.”

CHAPTER  VII
FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE
Audit Report had pointed out that the overall financial position of IAL/ AIL and
the merged entity was abysmally poor during the period from 2004-05 to 2009-10. Even
in 2004-05/ 2005-06 (when the aircraft acquisition was still under way), the financial
position of the airlines was not very promising. This deteriorated drastically post-
merger (2007-08 onwards).
7.2 When the Committee sought details regarding the changes in profitability of
the Airlines, it has been submitted as under:—
“The National Aviation Company of India Limited (NACIL), now Air India,
was formed with the legal merger of erstwhile Air India Ltd. & Indian Airlines
Ltd. effective 1st April, 2007. All assets, liabilities and obligations of both the
companies were undertaken by the new company.
The company has been facing severe liquidity crunch due to various factors
like operational losses and its financial and operating performance has been
affected in the recent years due to a number of internal and external factors.
The company has experienced delayed payments to the lenders, creditors
and its employees. However, the company with the support from the
Government is committed to the complete revival by putting in place a Turn
Around Plan (TAP)/Financial Restructuring Plan (FRP). Various initiatives
have been taken by the management for improving the operational performance
of the company and implementing FRP which contains sufficient equity
infusion from the Government as well as additional capacity building by way
of acquisition of new fleet of aircraft —Boeing 787.
The global recession which started in 2007-08 led to deterioration in the
aviation environment adversely impacting Air India. The global recession
and slowing down of the economy led to cut throat competition whereby
both the passenger carriages and the passenger revenue yields experienced
steep decline. Additionlally, the prices of Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) also
showed a consistently upward trend whereby crude oil prices peaked in July
2008. Barring 2009-10 (when the prices declined) the ATF prices adversely
impacted the bottom line of the company during the period 2007 to 2011.
Apart from the above, the financials of the company were also affected due to
increase in interest costs on enhanced borrowings for both aircraft acquisition
as well as working capital requirements (due to the committed plans to acquire
43 Airbus and 50 Boeing aircraft, finalized prior to merger). The depreciation
on new aircraft as well as increase in wages for wage agreements (committed
prior to merger) and enhancement of Gratuity Limits from ` 3.5 lakhs to
` 10 lakhs also contributed to the losses of the company.
104

105
The above resulted in the total accumulated loss of ` 20,192. 03 crore during
the last four years as per the details given hereunder:—
Y ear Net Loss After Tax ( `  in crores)
2007-08 : ` 2226.16
2008-09 : `  5548.26
2009-10 : ` 5552.44
2010-11 : ` 6865.17
Total    ` 20192.03’’
The details of the reasons for increase in loss from 2007-08 onwards are given in
Annexure - XII.
7.3 Further, the MoCA indicated the debt-equity ratio of AI as under :—
Y ear Debt/Equity Ratio
2007-08 55 : 1
2008-09 101 : 1
2009-10 21 : 1
2010-11 9 : 1
Equity is equal to the Paid up capital of the company.
7.4 To a pointed query of the Committee as to whether the merged airline was
heading towards a debt trap, the Ministry replied:—
“The company is finding it difficult to meet its daily working capital
requirements. Banks have stopped lending to Air India any further. Therefore,
the overdue amounts are rising. The company had prepared a Turnaround
Plan which included a financial restructuring plan. As per the plan the
Government would be required to infuse equity to the extent of  ` 30,231 crore
in the next ten years out of which ` 6750 crore is in the form of upfront Equity
in 2011-12. If the Financial Restructuring Plan is approved and the equity
infusion takes place as envisaged then the company would be able to meet its
obligations towards interest and repayment of loans.”
7.5 In his deposition before the Committee, the Secretary, MoCA stated:—
“.................. when the Indian Airlines and Air India made procurement of
aircraft, it was another financial burden on the company and as a result of
which the cost further increased and the revenues were not keeping pace
with it so that the gap between the operating cost and the revenue kept on
widening.”
A. Increase in Working Capital
7.6 As of July, 2010, AI had availed an overall amount of  ` 19,207 crore as Working

106
Capital loan, of which  `  18,162 crore was utilised as working capital, and `  1,045 crore
was utilised for aircraft acquisition payments. The main items on which the working
capital loans were utilised as of June, 2010 were fuel (` 5,639 crore), aircraft repairs and
refurbishment (`  4,058 crore), interest/repayment of old aircraft loans (`  3,732 crore),
leasing (`  1,416 crore) and wages (` 1,348 crore).
7.7 As per the information furnished by the Ministry as on 31st December, 2011,
total outstanding working capital loan of AI was `  22,663 crore (including payment
towards aircraft project loan `  884 crore). Outstandings to various vendors/authorities,
interest on working capital loan, salary/ PLI/allowances including payment of fuel bills
to Oil marketing companies were approximately `  5900 crore.
7.8 The Committee sought to know if NACIL/AIL Board had ever considered
that an enormous increase in working capital loan limits without a corresponding
increase in operational revenue would cause major liquidity problem. To this, the
MoCA explained as under :—
“Yes, the Board, of Air India Ltd. and NACIL did address the issues of liquidity
problems and ways and means to service the huge debt. The Board increased
the borrowing limits only because of the fact that Air India was experiencing
severe liquidity issues and needed the funds to pay the normal Working
Capital requirements. The approvals granted were always in small tranches to
meet the immediate requirements.
It may be noted that the Equity base of Air India was very small at ` 145 crore
only. The company had therefore made an initial proposal for additional equity
in October, 2008 requesting for an infusion of Equity capital of  ` 1231 crore
and a soft loan of  ` 2750 crore.
The above proposal was revised taking into consideration the future capital
requirement, fall in yields and decline in Market Share. In consultation with
Accenture and SBI Caps a revised requirement of Equity and soft loan was
submitted in July, 2009 to the Committee of Secretaries requesting for Equity
support of  ` 10,000 crore and Interest free loan/deep discount bond of
` 10,000 crore. The above proposal was discussed in the GoM meetings.
Since then the Government has infused equity of  ` 3200 crore in the last three
years.
The Board has always been kept informed of the progress of the Turnaround
Plan and the approvals granted for raising the working capital limits were
primarily to help the company meet its day to day requirements.”
B. Real-time Revenue Management Systems
7.9 According to Audit Report, the use of PROS, an Automated Revenue
Management System (ARMS) was discontinued from February, 2011, after the introduction
of the new single code reservation system, which required integration of PROS with the
new reservation system: The use of PROS was restored for international flights only
from June, 2011; for domestic flights, the use of ARMS has not yet been implemented
due to lack of adequate training of the revenue management team at Delhi.

107
7.10 On being asked to furnish the details of implementation of ARMS by AI, the
MoCA replied:—
“ARMS has been fully implemented with the new SITA Reservations,
Inventory and Departure Control System effective 1st Nov. 2011 on
international routes.Over 95% of all International flights are on PROS system.
Charter flights like Haj operations are not put on PROS solution, as well as 2
flights with overlapping sectors, and 4 six-sector flights as ARMS cannot
optimise them.
Following the training of Revenue Management personnel at Delhi, PROS
was introduced in a progressive manner on domestic flights from October,
2011. As at present, PROS has been implemented on all single-sector domestic
flights on metro sector, operating between Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Bangalore,
Hyderabad and Chennai. These flights account about half of the domestic
system revenues.”
C. Productivity Linked Incentive (PLI)
7.11 Audit's contention has been that Productivity Linked Incentive (PLI) paid
to AI officials amounted to rewarding employees for less than average achievement,
since the base levels for incentive payment were set lower than the average performance
achieved prior to intrcduction of the PLI scheme. During 2004-10, huge amounts
continued to be paid as PLI to different categories of staff without appropriate linkage
to operational and financial performance, at a time when the airline(s) could hardly
afford such payments.
7.12 In the light of the above, the Committee sought to know the steps taken by
the MoCA to minimize the huge expenses in respect of PLI paid to officials. In its
submission, the MoCA has replied:—
“The employees are paid Performance Linked Incentive (PL1) only on fulfilment
of the predefined operational and performance parameters. The Ministry has
time and again advised the management of AI & IA to adhere to DPE guidelines
while formulating their wage/incentive structure. The Ministry has included
in the terms of reference for Justice Dharmadhikari Committee issues related
to PLI.
Further, the MoCA has added that :
There is disparity between the terms and conditions of salary, PLI and Flying
Related Allowances since the employees of Air India Ltd., including Pilots are
paid salary, PLI and Flying Related Allowances in terms of the Settlement/
Agreements/Understandings signed with the respective Union/Associations/
Guild of erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines.”
7.13 To a concern of the Committee regarding huge remuneration paid to AI
Staff, the Executive Director (IR), AI deposing before the Committee stated:—
“When the Open Sky Policy had started, we, as the national carrier, suffered
a loss because a lot of our experienced manpower was poached upon and

108
taken by the other Carriers, offering very high remuneration to them. At that
time, •we had approached the Government and we were given a direction that
in case you have to pay anything, it has to be linked to their performance and
productivity and when we entered into the settlements at that point of time, it
was an effort not only to match what the market was paying at that time but
also to gain, higher productivity in return, which we did. Our utilisation of
aircraft had gone as low as 1100 hours per aircraft and after introducing this,
we increased the utilisation which is today nearly 4,000 hours, per aircraft.
We were also able to generate a lot of revenue. This money had come out of
all the revenue and savings we had done. 1 can say that when we did the last
revision also, we were competitive with what the market was paying for
equivalent people, but the enhancements were given only in the form of PLI
so that if you had increased productivity under those parameters, you were
paid and if the parameters were not fulfilled, the pay-out under the parameter
did not accrue to the employee. This was the basic rationale of why PLI
agreements were initiated way back in 1996. The pay-out that is there today
for pilots and engineers is comparable to the other carriers in domestic sector.”
7.14 As regards the huge percentage of expenditure on HR, the Director (Finance),
Air India, deposed as under :—
“...as far as the percentage of expenditure on human resources is concerned,
it is agreed that Air India has a very high staff cost as compared to the other
airlines in India. The Jet Airways is between 12 to 13 per cent and Kingfisher
is less than that. Ours is 25 per cent. It is agreed because there are certain
reasons for that. Mainly the reason is that a lot of activities are performed in-
house which Jet Airways get it done through outside agencies, like ground
handling activities. We have a huge force and we are also taking up for other
airlines.”
7.15 Statistics regarding aircraft to employee ratio in Air India and that in some of
the leading Indian and foreign Airlines as on 31.12.2011 that was submitted to the
Committee is as under:—
Name of Airlines T otal No. of Aircraft Total No. of Aircraft/Employee
Employees Ratio
Air India 115 27274 1:237
Jet Airways 97 13177 1:136
Lufthansa 297 116365 1:417
British Airways 234 41494 1:177
It was further submitted that the Company is in the process to hive off its MRO
and Ground handling SBU into subsidiaries and thereby bringing down the total
number of employees to 11874 and the aircraft to employee ratio to 1:103 which would
be comparable to other international airlines.

109
7.16 On the issue of high employee to aircraft ratio in Al, a witness deposing
before the Committee expressed his views as:—
“In the Press, it has been always highlighted that Air India as a whole has got
a very high employee to aircraft ratio. Private airlines or foreign airlines like
Singapore or British Airways have been shown in the paper that their employee
to aircraft ratio is very low. But in those airlines like Singapore Air Traffic
Control, ground handling is a separate company. Engineering in Singapore is
a separate company and Airline is a separate company. So, when they show
in the paper that employee and aircraft ratio is low, they are talking about the
airline employees only.
But here we are a total entity. So, naturally the aircraft to employee ratio will
be more. So, if that is shown and projected that is the main criteria behind this
loss, it is absolutely wrong because this is no where projected that this is
totally an in-house service; catering is in-house service; engineering is in-
house service; ground handling is in-house; and security is in-house.”
D. Turn Around Plan(s)
7.17 From August 2009 onwards, multiple versions of a Turn Around Plan for
Air India have been presented. Deloitte had furnished a report on "Review of Turn
Around Plan" in February 2011, after considering four financial scenarios proposed by
AI. Some of the salient projections/assumptions underlying the review report are as
follows:
• Increase in Al's domestic market share from 17% to 21% (with PLF of 75% and
80% in full service and LCC operations respectively), assuming a growth in
domestic market of 22% p.a. (against the overall market growth rate of
12-13%).
• Growth of AI's market share by 15% p.a. (against market growth of 8-9%),  with
targeted PLFs of 71 to 80%.
• Yields from wide-body aircraft growing at 5% p.a. to stabilise at  ` 3.55/RPKM
and from narrow-body aircraft at 3% p.a. to stabilise at ` 4-5.55/RPKM.
• Staff cost to decrease from `  0.92/ASKM in 2010-11 and 0.32/ ASKM in 2014-15.
7.18 Regarding the Turn Around Plan for AI, the Committee have been apprised
by the Ministry as under:
“The Turnaround Plan (TAP) was prepared by Air India with the help of SBI
Caps who were advisors on the Restructuring Plan in June, 2010. The TAP
included an Operational Turnaround and a Financial Restructuring, The TAP
was required to be vetted by an independent Aviation Consultant as per the
requirement of the lenders before they could consider any restructuring of
the working capital loans.
As such M/s. Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India Pvt. Ltd. (Deloitte) who are
independent Aviation Consultants were appointed to review the turnaround
plan of Air India.

110
Deloitte submitted their report in February, 2011 which was then discussed
with the lenders in April, 2011. The lenders appointed a Steering Committee
from amongst its members to study the Turnaround Plan along with the
comments of Deloitte. Based on the inputs of the lenders, the Turnaround
Plan was revised and Deloitte gave their report on the revised Turnaround
Plan in June, 2011, The Revised TAP was presented to the Group of Ministers
in June, 2011, who appointed a Group of Officers mainly from the Ministry of
Finance to study the TAP.
The Group of Officers had several meetings with Air India, SBI Caps and
Deloitte and reviewed various Scenarios of the TAP. The Group of Officers
submitted the report to GoM in September, 2011 suggesting that the Moderated
Growth Scenario VII is the most suited. The Group of Ministers accepted the
above report in the meeting on October 28, 2011 and requested that regulatory
forbearance of the Reserve Bank of India be obtained. Reserve Bank of India
has given its approval and dispensations that were sought by the lenders
and has asked the lenders to complete the Financial Restructuring by 20th
March, 2012. The plan is awaiting approval by the various lenders and their
respective Boards.
As per the approved plan the Government would be infusing equity of
` 30,231 crore in the next ten years including an upfront Equity infusion of
` 6750 crore in 2011-12.”
However, the Ministry failed to provide details of latest position of this TAP and
various lenders involved therein.
7.19  Highlighting the features of this Turn Around Plan, the Ministry submitted
as under:—
“Air India has appointed SBI CAPS as its financial consultant to chalk out a
recovery plan for Air India. In consultation with SBI CAPS Air India has
drawn out a Turn Around Plan/FRP, the highlights of which are as under:—
(a) Conversion of short term working capital of `11000 crore into long
terms loans of 11% of 15 years duration and conversion of ` 7500 crore
into cumulative redeemable preference shares or an alternate debt
instrument.
(b) Achievement of on-time punctuality of 93% by 2015.
(c) Increase in Passenger Load Factor going upto 73% by 2015 and 75%
by 2020.
(d) Up-front equity infusion by Government. upto ` 6750 crore in FY . 2012
and equity for covering cash deficit upto 2021 — `   4552 crore and
equity equal to guaranteed loans till FY 2021 of  ` 18,929 crore
aggregating to ` 302.31 crore over 10 years i.e. up to FY 2021.
(e) Increase in aircraft utilization.

111
(f) Hiving of non-core areas in  ground handling and MRO to subsidiary
companies.
(g) Monetization of assets.
(h) Introduction of VRS scheme amongst employees.
(i) Rationalization of routes.
(j) Implementation of relevant IT system for ticket, network planning, crew
scheduling, operation efficiency, SABRE (Integrated Operation Control
Centre), etc.
(k) Grounding of ageing fleet.
(l) Corrective steps to bring down cash losses on day to day basis.
(m) Improvement in customer oriented services as envisaged by TAP.
In  the  event  the  above  parameters  are  achieved,  the  company  is  likely  to   turn
EBITDA positive by 2013, cash positive by 2018 and Profit after Tax by 2020.”
7.20 Elaborating on its plan of further fleet expansion, the Ministry stated as
under:—
“The Group of Officers in their report submitted in October, 2011 to the GoM
have recommended that induction of aircraft to be only based of route
planning and economics and to be reviewed after 2014-15.”
7.21 On some salient features of the TAP, the Director (Finance), AI during
evidence deposed as:—
“What is being planned as a part of the turnaround plan and the FRP also, the
entire ground handling and engineering is being hived off into two separate
units, namely Ground Handling Unit and Engineering Unit. A number of staff
will be transferred to these units. Now they will have new performance
indicators in these units, that is, new performance indices.
Further, the witness added:—
....there will be two separate companies. One is for Maintenance Repair and
Overhaul (MRO) and another is for ground handling. These will be authorized
in order to undertake ground handling activities at all the Airports. Now
Government's new policy of ground handling is coming whereby Air India's
subsidiary company or joint venture can only handle ground handling at the
airports.”
7.22 In a subsequent written submission, the Ministry furnished details regarding
hiving off ground handling and engineering into two separate units as part of the Turn
Around Plan.
“MRO
MRO is not a core activity of an airline business. It is a worldwide practice to
have MRO as a separate and independent company to achieve better efficiency

112
and productivity. Many airlines in the world such as Lufthansa, Singapore
airlines, British Airways, Air France, Air Lanka, Malaysian Airlines have hived
off their MRO activity into separate companies.
Air India Engineering Service Ltd. (AIESL) was formed as a wholly owned
subsidiary company of erstwhile air India Limited on 11th March, 2004. The
Cabinet has recently accorded its approval to operationalise it. It is mandated
to render Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul services to aviation industry
including to Air India.
Operationalisation of AIESL is also a part of the turn-around-plan (TAP).
The Air India Management met various Unions/Associations on different
Occasions in this regard. Unions/Associations sought clarifications on various
issues which were explained to them alongwith the advantages which will
accrue to the MRO company (AIESL) once it is operationalised as an
independent Company, such as increase in productivity and operational
independence thereby getting third party business.
Ground Handling
M/s. A.T. Kearney & Co. (appointed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation)
recommended in 2002 to hive off Ground Handling activities in Air India and
Indian Airlines. Thus, Air India Air Transport Services Ltd. (AIATSL) was
formed by Air India in July, 2003 as a wholly owned subsidiary of Air India,
with  ` 100 crore as authorized capital with an investment of ` 10 crore as paid
up capital (current paid up capital  ` 5 lakh).
AIATSL was formed primarily to :
(i) Hive off the Ground Handling Activities
(ii) Lower the employee wage-cost platform
(iii) Contract manpower for GH, Security and other functions, directly
as well as through 3rd party agencies.
As per the new GH Policy issued in September, 2010, by Government of India,
subsidiary company of the National Airline i.e. Air India Ltd. or its Joint
V enture is authorized to undertake Ground Handling services to its .own
flights and flights of its customer airlines. The Cabinet has recently accorded
its approval to operationalise AIATSL.
In this regard, 10 years Business Plan has been developed, which is included
in the TAP. It is estimated that the profit will be consistent from the 1st year
itself. An investment of ` 972 crore is envisaged over 10 years. Estimated
Profits after tax for the year 2020-21 will be ` 142 crore.
AIATSL will function as Ground Handling SBU with about 12,000 staff
including permanent, casuals and contract employees, for handling AI and
3rd party Airlines activities at all Indian Airports excluding those airports
where AISATS Joint Venture is functional i.e. Bangalore, Hyderabad, Delhi,
Mangalore and Trivandrum.

113
Preliminary discussions were held with various Unions of erstwhile companies
and they were informed that the service conditions, pay & perks of AI
permanent employees will be secured.
Manpower
The Company proposes to transfer/depute around 15,400 employees (MRO-
7400 and GH — 8000, excluding contractual and outsourced employees) to
AIESL and AIATSL. This measure will rationalize its staff cost, which currently
forms around 21% of the operating cost. Presently, the company is in the
process of finalizing the modalities for transfer of the concerned employees
to these subsidiaries".
7.23. The SBU, Head MRO (Engine & Components), AI with regard to the revival
strategy of AI deposing before the Committee during evidence submitted as:—
“Regarding the revival strategy of Air India as an integrated integrity, the
Company has put up a turn around plan and a financial restructuring plan to
the Government after lot of deliberation and discussion. This plan looks into
the matter with respect to the market growth, with respect to the seat factor,
with respect to the yields that at what rate we should grow, at what rate we
should acquire aircraft not only in the integrated integrity but also in the
subsidiary company like Alliance Air and Air India Express. This financial
restructuring plan looks into as to how to restructure the debt and also to
obtain equity for acquisition of the large number of aircraft.”
7.24. The Executive Director (Headquarters), AI added :—
“...we have presented a financial restructuring plan to the group of officers
set up by the Government. It has gone to the Group of Ministers in December.
That plan is presently under consideration. In terms of the plan we have
asked for an upfront equity infusion of  ` 6750 crore, plus we have asked for
infusion of equity to fund cash deficit of  ` 4552 crore, plus we have asked the
Government to take over the burden of all principal repayments and all interest
payments on account of fleet acquisition. So, the total equity support we
have sought from the Government is of  ` 30,231 crore.”

CHAPTER  VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
A.  AI-SATS
During the course of the examination of the subject, the Committee were informed
about the joint venture between the then NACIL (now Air India) and Singapore Airport
Terminal Services (SATS) for ground handling at Bangalore, Hyderabad, Delhi and
Mangalore.
8.2. When asked to furnish the details of this Joint venture of AI-SATS and the
reasons for the same, the MoCA submitted the following:
"The then National Aviation Corporation of India Ltd.  (NACIL), now Air
India Ltd., had entered into a Joint Venture Agreement with Singapore Airport
Terminal Services (SATS) for Ground Handling at Bangalore International
Airport and Rajiv Gandhi International Airport at Hyderabad.
From the various selection criteria stipulated by BIAL for awarding Ground
Handling at the new Bangalore International Airport, one of the criteria was
for which the weightage was 25%, 'International experience and network of
Ground Handling services to best international standards and competitive
prices at airports similar to the size and set up of the new Bangalbre
International Airport'.
With regard to the above selection criteria, the then NACIL decided to enter
into a Joint V enture with an international experienced Ground Handling Agent.
Out of the Foreign Handling Agents shortlisted by BIAL, only Swissport and
SATS had submitted the tender as independent unit, whereas other global
players had joined hands with Indian partners. M/s. Swissport had declined
the offer for a Joint Venture partnership with NACIL for Cargo and hence
there was no other independent international operator other than SATS
shortlisted by BIAL. As such, it was felt appropriate to join hands with SATS
for submission of tender for Ground Handling at BIAL.
At Hyderabad, a pre-requisite to qualify in the tender procedure was to form
a consortium with third party ground handling service provider or the ground
handling subsidiary of a foreign airline or parent company of an airline offering
ground handling service.
GHIAL had shortlisted 10 International Ground Handling Agencies apart
from Air India and Indian Airlines operating through Hyderabad Airport, to
whom the RFP (Request for Proposal) were issued. Out of these 10 parties,
only M/s. SATS from Singapore and M/s. DNATA from Dubai had shown
interest to Join NACIL as JV Partner. Security Clearance for SATS and DNATA
114

115
was asked for, from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Government of India, on
the direction of AI Board. MoCA communicated to CMD, Air India that
Security clearance has been accorded by Government for AI/IC to have
M/s SATS as the JV Partner.
Selection process of Joint Venture Partner for Metro Airports was initiated on
receipt of information from Ministry of Civil Aviation that the Cabinet
Committee on Security has approved the new ground handling policy in
which subsidiaries/Joint Venture of AI & IA have been permitted to undertake
ground handling activities at Indian airports. The Civil Aviation Policy vide
SI. No.3/2010 dated 2nd June, 2010 para 2 (A) (i), (ii) & (iii) stipulates that
Subsidiary Company of NACIL or its Joint V enture is eligible to undertake
Ground Handling Services at all Metro Airports in addition to the Handling
Agencies appointed by Airport Operator through competitive bidding and
by Airport Operator themselves or their Joint V enture.
In view of all the above facts, the then NACIL after getting concurrence from
MoCA entered into a Joint Venture with SATS, at BLR, HYD and Delhi.
NACIL in its 16th Board Meeting held on 17th December, 2008 conveyed its
approval for formation of one omnibus JV Company with SATS for carrying
out Ground Handling/Cargo Handling activities at various airports. Approval
for formation of Joint Venture was also conveyed by the Ministry of Civil
Aviation on 16th March, 2009.”
8.3. Further elaborating on the joint venture of AI-SATS, the Ministry stated as
under:
"AI-SATS joint venture is 50-50 equity partnership between AI and AI-SATS
which initially operated as an Association of Persons (AoP) and incorporated
on 20th April, 2010 into a company by the name of Air India SATS Airport
Services Private Limited. The business was transferred from AoP to the new
company incorporated w.e.f. 1st August, 2010.
As per the tender document issued by the Bangalore International Airport
Ltd. and Hyderabad International Airports Ltd. only a firm which has
international experience could carry out ground handling activity at the
Greenfield airport. Air India did not have any international experience and
therefore had to tie up with SATS who were shortlisted after evaluation so
that they could carry out the activity of Ground Handling at Bangalore and
Hyderabad. Air India on its own has not qualified to handle ground handling
activities at Bangalore and Hyderabad and if we had not tied up with a JV
partner, we would have lost the business to other foreign competitors who
were authorized to do ground handling at these airports.
Al-SATS Joint V enture commenced its operations at Bangalore eff. 23rd
May, 2008 at Hyderabad eff. 23rd March. 2008 at Delhi eff. 3rd Septernber,
2010, at Managlore eff. 1st October, 2010 and presently operationalisation at
Thiruvananthapuram Airport is under process. AI -SATS is providing Ground
Handling for Air India flights and its client airlines' flights at these airports.”

116
8.4. Asked to specify how the profits were being shared between AI and SATS,
the Ministry stated that the profits were being shared in the capital ratio of 50:50 after
tax on declaration of dividends.
8.5. On being asked to furnish details for the last three years (2009-2012) regarding
the profits earned by the Joint V enture and the amount AI got as its share, the MoCA
replied that since AI-SATS had to invest in capital equipment and running the business,
till date i.e. as on 08.05.2012, no profits had been distributed by way of dividends
amongst both the partners,
8.6. When the Committee sought details of investment made by SATS in the
form of cash investment on ground handling equipment and human resources, the
MoCA submitted as under :
"The initial investment made by AI and SATS was ` 33.39 crore totalling
` 66.78 Crore in the Association of Persons (AoP) which now stands at
` 87.23 crore as on 31st March, 2011. The share capital of Air India SATS
Airport Services Private Limited is 80839950 shares of ` 10 each issued at a
premium of  ` 0.79 per share totaling `  872263051 owned 50:50 by Air India
Ltd. and SATS Ltd.
Since AI had a ban on recruitment, no manpower could be recruited on the
pay roll of Air India in non-operational areas. AI-SATS joint venture was
therefore formed to carry on ground handling business at the new greenfield
airports like Hyderabad and Bangalore. Otherwise this business would have
been lost to competitors like Menezes and other ground handling agencies
who had foreign collaborations and had set up business at all the airports.
The Ground Handling equipment at Hyderabad/Bangalore/Delhi is owned by
Air India and leased to AI-SATS at a rental fee. Wherever Air India provides
services to AI-SATS, the same is billed to the joint venture company.
SATS brought its own manpower of six officials from Singapore to India to
man the important locations.
SATS have stated that they would bring in additional share capital once Air
India's equipment at Delhi is valued. The valuer is in the process of submitting,
his report and after acceptance of the valuation, SATS has agreed to bring in
an equivalent amount in the form of equity share capital contribution.”
The Ministry failed to apprise the Committee whether evaluation of Air India's
equipment at Delhi has been completed.
8.7. When queried if the MoCA/AI faced any opposition when AI entered into
an agreement with SATS to set up the joint venture, the Ministry replied as under :
"The Air Corporations Employees Union (ACEU) and the Air India Employees
Guild (AIEG) had formed a 'CIVIL A VIATION JOINT ACTION FRONT' (CAJAF)
to fight "the retrograde Civil Aviation Policies of Government of India including
the Ground Handling/MRO Policy. The front opposed-the Ground Handling
policy of the Govt. of India in granting permission to foreign Ground Handling

117
companies in the guise of Joint venture and demanded that it should be
immediately revoked and NACIL should be given the required priority to provide
ground handling services at all Indian airports and assistance for running an
economical, reliable and efficient airlines. They stated that lucrative business
of Ground Handling was being handed over to the joint Venture and the Unions/
Associations saw no benefit for NACIL or the Govt. of India. On 08 12.2008,
CAJAF held a National Convention at Delhi which was attended by the
representatives of the Civil Aviation Joint Action Front, Central trade Unions
and some other Unions/Associations of erstwhile Indian Airlines and Air India.
The CAJAF withdrew its agitation programme after the decision of the Ministry
of Civil Aviation to defer the new Ground Handling Policy at that time. The new
Ground Handling Policy is presently sub-judice.”
8.8. Further, the Committee sought information regarding ground handling policy
in vogue in Air India and the latest position of ground handling policy as the matter
was stated to be sub-judice the Ministry failed to respond.
8.9. When asked to state whether detailed financial implications were worked
out before going in for and after the joint venture of AI-SATS, the MoCA submitted
the following:
"As a result of Ground Handling policy of Government of India, Air India had
to go in for a joint venture at airports since, as per the ground handling policy,
a subsidiary of Air India or its joint venture partner, the airport operator or
ground handling agency selected by airport operator would only be allowed
to do ground handling business at all the airports in India. As a result of
ground handling policy, Air India floated a tender in 2007 to select a global
partner who has international expertise and experience in this area of activity.
SATS were selected pursuant to this process and a JV company was formed
with SATS after obtaining the Cabinet approval.
Since ground handling constituted a non-core activity, an earlier Consultant
report had suggested outsourcing of the ground handling business to a
subsidiary company or strategic partner to be brought in for doing the business.”
8.10. During the evidence, a witness tendered his views on financial aspect of
AI-SATS before the Committee as under :
"Financially, we were earning around ` 350 crore per annum by handling all
other airlines plus our own airlines that we were handling. It is an in-house
cost. Since AI-SATS  is handling our flights, we have to pay them a charge. It
is not only that. Again, if there is a profit in the revenue of AI-SAT, only then
50 per cent will come into our books and 50 per cent will be borne by them.”
8.11. Taking this aspect into consideration, the Committee desired to know if
AI-SATS was to be paid even for handling the flights of AI. The MoCA responded as
under:
"It is true that AI- SATS has to be paid for handling the flights of Air India.
With the depletion of the manpower strength at Hyderabad and Bangalore, it

118
was not possible to handle the Air India flights on its own and Air India had
deployed additional manpower either on its own pay roll or through subsidiary
company to handle its flights and foreign airline flights. Recruitment was
frozen in Air India especially in non-operational areas since 1996. Air India
therefore had to hire manpower resources through Air India Air Transport
Services Ltd. (AIATSL) at various airports in order to handle the flights of the
foreign airlines which was an additional cost to Air India. With the takeover
of the ground handling activity by AI-SATS, this additional manpower in
AIAT SL were taken over by AI-SATS on their pay roll.”
8.12. The Committee further sought comparative statistics of what AI had spent
for handling its flights prior to the joint venture with SATS and after AI-SATS was
formed. To this, the Ministry made the following submission:
"It is not possible to compare the costs prior to the JV that is 2005- 06/
2006-07/2007:08 and after the JV as prior to JV Air India (NB) was not charging
anything for handling its own flights as same was done in-house and as was
earning revenue from handling other carriers & wide body flights before
merger.
After the JV that is 2008-09, 2009-10 & 2010-11 AI is paying for handling of AI
flights to the JV Company and the revenue which was earned from handling
foreign airlines goes to the JV Company. The handling rates given by AI to
the JV company for handling Air India flights is at actual costs incurred by
the JV company towards the handling of AI flights and is much less as
compared to rates charged by them to international operators.
Al is also billing the JV company for the staff costs on AI pay roll working for
the JV , lease cost for equipment given to JV at HYD & BLR & will receive 50%
share of the dividend that the JV declares in future after taxes.
The economies of scale for the AI-SATS JV will be fully realized only when
the Ground Handling Policy is implemented whereby AI/SATS JV can handle
domestic flights of all private airlines operating at the airport.”

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Introductory
The Committee note that the C&AG Report [No. 18 of 2011-12, Union
Government (Civil)] on 'Performance Audit of Civil Aviation in India', highlights
issues concerning acquisition of aircraft by the erstwhile Air India Limited (AIL) and
Indian Airlines Limited (IAL), merger of AIL and IAL into National Aviation Company
of India Limited (NACIL), impact of the liberalized policy of the Government from
2004-05 onwards on grant of air traffic rights to other countries through bilateral
entitlements, beleaguered financial and operational performance of the pre-merger
airlines and the merged entity and the oversight role of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
(MoCA). The Committee also note that the Delhi High Court while disposing of a
Writ Petition on the report of C&AG on the Performance Audit of Civil Aviation in
India observed that since a responsible committee like the PAC was looking into the
matter, no specific direction ‘can be given to PAC to accomplish the task in a time
bound manner'. The Committee examined the representatives of the MoCA, erstwhile
Air India and Indian Airlines and representatives of Trade Unions and scores of
documents and papers obtained from the Ministry. The result of their examination is
contained in the succeeding paragraphs. The Committee observe that the Air India
Limited (AIL) had last inducted two B747-400 aircraft in its fleet in 1996. Its proposal
of December 1996 for acquisition of 3 A310-300 aircraft had not been cleared by
Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA). To overcome its desperate need to acquire new
aircraft and due to delay in acquisition, AIL had to induct 13 additional aircraft on dry
lease by January 2004. When the proposal of December 1996 by AIL for aircraft
acquisition was yet to be cleared, a fresh process for acquisition was initiated as late
as January 2002. In January 2004, AIL submitted project report for acquisition of 28
aircraft (10 A340-300 + 18 B737-800) to MoCA. On 2nd August 2004, in a meeting
chaired by the then Minister, Civil Aviation it was decided that Air India should revisit
the proposal for purchase of aircraft and submit a fresh project proposal to the
Government at the earliest. The Government directive was communicated vide
Ministry's letter dated 5th August, 2004 and the Board of Directors of Air India in its
101st Meeting held on 13th September, 2004 decided that the fleet plan could be
revisited in its entirety. The AIL Board, or 24th November, 2004, approved a revised
plan for acquisition of 50 aircraft for AIL apart from 18 aircraft for its subsidiary Air
India Charters Limited (AICL) (from August to November, 2004). Taking note of the
fact that the acquisition process for 28 aircraft (10 A340-300 + 18 B737-800) was
inordinately delayed, a purchase agreement was signed speedily for acquisition of 68
aircraft (8 B777-200 + 15 B777-300 + 27 B787-8 + 18 B737) in December, 2005.
The representative of the Ministry of Civil Aviation testified that in 2001, the Cabinet
decided there would be no disinvestment, the Government immediately started the
fleet acquisition plan policy for over 12 years. The representative further submitted
119

120
that both the airlines were at a passe and it was imperative of the new Government to
arrest further decline of the airlines and the new "Government had only two choices
— either to close the airlines or to prop them with a slew of measures that needed to
be implemented". The representative also submitted that the aviation sector is
completely market driven and dynamic and needs rapid decision making to address
the ever changing scenario. In view of the policy decisions of the Government first to
keep AI on disinvestment mode and later removal from the disinvestment list, the
Committee refrain comments on a matter of Governmental policy. Asked to explain
the delay in one case and seemingly extraordinary haste in another case, the Ministry
submitted that the proposal for acquisition of aircraft could not fructify in the first
case due to approaching general elections to the Lok Sabha in 1996 and subsequently
due to Government's plan on AI's disinvestment and the proposal was revived in 2002
when AI was taken off the disinvestment list.
Letter of Congressional Caucus
2. The chronology of events leading to change in aircraft requirement of Air
India Limited (AIL) reveals that a letter dated 22 October, 2003 signed by 43 members
of the US Congress pressing for purchase of aircraft by AIL from Boeing Corporation
was received by Prime Minister's Office (PMO) which was forwarded to MoCA in
November 2003. They further wrote that 'Air India is looking to expand its fleet of
commercial aircraft and that based on price, value and schedule, the Boeing company
has worked hard with Air India Management and technical experts to develop an
excellent 777 and 737 package'. They referred to the American airline industry
which was struggling as a result of the terrorist related events of 11th September,
2001. The letter further added that 'Air India's acquisition of Boeing aircraft will
serve as a great demonstration of strengthened commercial relations between India
and the United States. Therefore, we encourage you to give Boeing's proposal the
utmost consideration'. The letter also made it amply clear that a successful contract
with Air India would ease out their country's unemployment concerns which were at
the highest levels in a decade. On 27th January 2004, PM0 also forwarded two letters
from Boeing (a letter of 17th November, 2003 to Secretary, MoCA and a letter of
2nd January, 2004 to PMO) to MoCA wherein Boeing had indicated that the economics
of the acquisition project were strongly dependent on the number of aircraft chosen
and that the technical evaluation could be easily influenced with the change in
assumptions on number of aircraft to be purchased. In response to the contentions
made by Boeing in these letters, AIL intimated MoCA that equal opportunity had been
given to both suppliers and the number of long range aircraft had been reduced from
17 to 10 as it was not economically viable. AIL had made it clear that the question of
giving Boeing a revenue benefit of 7 additional seats did not arise and also estimation
of residual value after  17 years life of aircraft was fraught with risk. Further, AIL
had stated that the percentage discount offered by Boeing for 10 aircraft was lower
than that offered by Airbus. Furthermore, Director (S), MoCA in his letter dated 3rd
March, 2004 intimated PM0 that the in-house Techno-Economic Negotiating
Committee (TENC) had evaluated different aircraft types on the basis of identical
ground rules and had provided fair opportunity-to all bidders. Highlighting the issues
raised by AIL to MoCA, Director (S), MoCA stated that the AIL Board had recommended
acquisition of only 10 aircraft of A340-300 variant as it was felt that acquisition of 17

121
long range aircraft would not be economically viable. The Committee note that despite
the above reservations and concerns raised regarding the number of aircraft that
were to be procured, the Government, as  approved by the EGoM, went ahead with the
deal without having a long term  perspective. This is unfortunate to say the least.
Assurance to Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) not fulfilled
3. As regards the number of aircraft to be acquired, the Committee find that Air
India Limited (AIL) Board had considered and approved on 24th November, 2004, a
revised long term fleet plan for 50 aircrafts. Out of this, two- thirds were on firm
basis and one-third on option basis. In addition to this, 18 aircraft for Air India
Charters Limited (AICL) were also approved. However, when the transaction was
finalized on 30th December, 2005, Government of India approved acquisition of 68
aircraft on firm basis. this included 50 aircraft for AIL with General Electric (GE)
engines and 18 aircraft with CFM engines for its subsidiary AICL, on the basis of the
terms and conditions negotiated by the Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM). All
along it is seen that the proposal for acquisition was premised on 35 aircraft on firm
basis and 15 aircraft on option basis. Further, at the pre-Public Investment Board
(PIB) meeting held in August 2005, the representatives of the Planning Commission
and Department of Expenditure (DoE) had expressed serious concerns regarding the
Project Report. The Planning Commission was of the view that 'the assumptions
made by AIL regarding traffic projections were risky and the upgradation appeared to
be very ambitious, as statistics of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA)
did not suggest the kind of growth assumed in the Project Report'. Department of
Expenditure had expressed the view that 'the assumption that enhancement of capacity
would necessarily lead to higher market share may not be tenable beyond a point' and
cautioned that 'Consequently, a purely supply side response would run into huge
demand side risks'. It is surprising to note that the response of AIL to clearly
articulated concerns of the Planning Commission and Department of Expenditure
were not discussed at the pre-PIB meeting owing to the reported shortage of time and
to the concerns of Department of Expenditure, AIL responded by stating that market
share could be increased by increasing capacity. Despite these concerns, the PIB
finally approved the purchase of 50 aircraft (35 on firm basis and 15 on option basis)
for AIL at a price not exceeding  ` 33,197 crore besides 18 aircraft for AICL at
` 4,952 crore. Further, the decision for exercising the option for 15 aircraft was to be
taken by the board of AIL depending on the market situation. An EGoM was constituted
for 'one final round of neaotiations' with the manufacturers to finalise the transaction
and this was based on a letter by the Minister, Civil Aviation to the Prime Minister on
the lines of the EGoM set up earlier in respect of the IAL acquisition. The negotiations
were held on 24th December, 2005 and the Chairman, EGoM submitted a note to the
Prime Minister on the conclusions arrived at and concessions obtained by the EGoM
based on its discussions with Boeing and GE. The Prime Minister's Office (PMO) on
30th December, 2005 enclosing the note of the Chairman, EGoM to Secretary, Ministry
of Civil Aviation indicated that Prime Minister had seen the note and directed MoCA
to inform the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) about the finalized
transaction. The Committee note that the CCEA was apprised of the matter on
12th January, 2006, the MoCA conveyed approval of GoI to AIL for acquisition of 68
aircraft on firm basis on 30th December, 2005 when the PMO dispatched the said

122
note conveying the advice of the PM to inform the CCEA. Further, when DoE asked
MoCA to clearly indicate in the final CCEA note the steps that were proposed to be
taken for cost reduction and enhance  productivity in AIL, the MoCA indicated in the
CCEA note that a Committee  would be set up by the Ministry to evaluate the cost
structure and  productivity. The MoCA need to explain whether such a Committee was
setup and if so, what action was taken on its recommendations.
Advice of stakeholders overlooked
4. Taking note of the serious concerns of the stakeholders, the Committee find
that in the Public Investment Board (PIB) meeting held on 13th October, 2005, the
representative of the Planning Commission had categorically stated that, in order to
mitigate the traffic risk, it would be useful to consider acquisition of 35 aircraft on
firm basis and 15 aircraft on optional basis and also consider a mix of lease and
outright purchase. The representative of Department of Expenditure had observed
'Plan Finance division would support purchase of 35 aircraft with an option for 15
aircraft. It also needs to be decided as to when and how the option, would be exercised'.
When the Committee demanded the reasons for placing a firm order for all 50 aircraft
ignoring the recommendations of the PIB, Planning Commission and Department of
Expenditure, the Ministry submitted that 27 of 50 proposed aircraft were to only
maintain the existing capacity, 8 were intended to cater to the growth factor and rest
15 were to be kept as an option for future growth. Thus, by the Ministry's own
submission, the requirement was of 35 aircraft even after factoring in the needs
arising out of growth. As originally envisaged, the 15 aircraft ought to have been kept
on option basis. The second reason advanced is that 'the EGoM chose to place firm
order of 50 aircraft on account of discounts made available by Boeing Company as
also the other investments to be made by the Boeing Company in India'. The Committee
refrain from making comment on the wisdom of EGoM but would  like to be apprised
of the discounts made on such bulk purchase orders and  the investments made by the
Boeing Company in India as assured.
Delivery/deferment of aircraft
5. Asked to explain why Air India (Al) deferred the acquisition of the last
3xB777—300 ER aircraft which were to be delivered in 2010-11 and 2011-12, the
submission of the Ministry was that with the onset of economic recession in late
2008, traffic was on the decline and many airlines were adopting the strategy of
reducing capacity and operations to reduce the impact of recession. It was claimed
that Air India had undertaken restructuring of its existing operations including
reduction of operations to curtail losses. In addition, the Board had directed AI
management to explore the possibility of deferment/cancellation of new aircraft
induction to reduce the burden of loan repayments. The proposal to defer B777s was
made at AI's Board meeting held in June 2009 based on a Board's directive to evaluate
the cost of deferment vis-a-vis the cost of taking delivery of the aircraft. Though the
Board had directed that Air India should cancel or defer the deliveries of the last
6xB777 — 300 ER aircraft, AI was in a position to defer the delivery of only the last
3 aircraft as the other 3 aircraft were already in production and deferment of the
same was not possible. The Committee deplore that when  the purchase agreement
was concluded in December 2005, a desperate need  for 50 aircraft was made out and

123
in the next few years there  had to be deferment in the delivery of aircraft to reduce the
burden of loan repayments.  While taking note of the submission of the representatives
of the MoCA that the aviation sector is completely market driven and dynamic, the
Committees however, feel that the payment capacity of Air India for such a large fleet
was not anticipated.
Debt Funding
6. The Committee note that the entire acquisition (for both AIL & IAL) was to be
funded through debt, to be repaid through revenue generation except for a relatively
small equity infusion of  ` 325 crore for IAL. Even when the decision on acquisition
of 50 + 43 aircraft by AIL & IAL respectively was taken, the debt-equity ratio of AIL
was very high at 4.6:1 and negative in case of IAL. The Planning Commission in the
meeting of Public Investment Board (PIB) held on 13.10.2005 had prudently observed
that 'since Air India is a commercial undertaking, it is best to leave major commercial
decisions to them while the balance sheet of AI shows that there had been marginal
profits for the last three years, for large investments over a long period, the balance
sheet should be stronger, especially since AI is seeking Government guarantee for
the loan'. Noting Debt Service Coverage Ratio being below one, AI was asked to
explain how it would service the debt. The view of the Department of Economic Affairs
(DEA) was that 'with regard to financing with Gol guarantee, a preferred option may
be to encourage financing, arrangements not involving Government guarantee'.
Department of Expenditure (Plan Finance Division) had clearly stated that 'Debt
Service Coverage Ratio of the project for 50 aircraft is below one on a stand-alone
basis. The capacity of AI to service the debt is a crucial issue, especially since
Government guarantee is being sought'. When the Committee sought clarification
about the role of Gol in financing the acquisition, the representative of the Ministry
stated that the Company approached the Ministry only for Government guarantee
because the Government guarantee provided certain level of comforts to the bankers
and clarified that Government did not have any direct financing role. Further, the
Ministry also added that the decision to fund through debt was taken in view of the
economics involved as AI were able to secure US Exim financings for all its earlier
aircraft at a very competitive rate of interest. Hence, AI had requested the GoI to
provide a sovereign guarantee for arranging Exim financing for its acquisition of
Boeing aircraft. The Committee observe that a Company (Boeing) was given business
out of the money borrowed from an American  Bank (Exim Bank) and to this the GoI
had stood as a guarantor against the advice of Ministry of Finance that 'a preferred
option may be to encourage financing arrangements not involving Government
guarantee'. The Committee would like to be apprised of the ground for such an
arrangement.
Avoidable Interest Burden
7. Further, the Committee are deeply distressed to note that due to the delay in
providing Gol guarantee, the Air India Limited (AIL) and Air India Charters Limited
(AICL) had to pay additional interest to the extent of  ` 199.37 crore and  ` 21.34
crore respectively, a huge burden wholly avoidable. Due to delays in providing GoI
guarantee, AIL & AICL had to avail bridge loans as a stop-gap arrangement to make
necessary pre-delivery payments. Since the bridge loans carried a higher rate of

124
interest, AIL & AICL had to pay additional interest. The Committee find that the
request of AI to MoCA to approach Ministry of Finance (MoF) for Government
guarantee was made in September 2006 and it fructified only in October 2007.
According to the Ministry, the reasons for the delay was that headroom was not
available to the Budget as the Financial Responsibility Budget Management (FRBM)
Budget was equal to 0.5 percent of the GDP and the Government could not afford to
give guarantee for more than that. Though the Ministry claimed that they had informed
the Ministry of Finance about the time of delivery of the aircraft, they did not have the
Budget to make payments. Surprisingly, the speed and synergy, with  which the
purchase agreement was concluded with Boeing, was lacking while executing the
agreement, more so when the financial implications were evident causing a wholly
avoidable loss of  ` 220.71 crore to the public exchequer on account of additional
interest burden alone.
Defective assumptions
8. The Committee note that in the Project Report dated le 14th May, 2005 for
acquisition of 50 Long Range aircraft, it was assumed that the outbound travel was
growing faster due to increased liberalisation and globalization of Indian economy
and success of Indian IT industry. Many of the foreign airlines were given huge
increase in capacity entitlements far in excess of the genuine 3rd./4th  market
freedom resulting in their use of this excess capacity to funnel traffic between India
and USA/UK/Europe through their respective hubs. The Open Sky Policy had made
the Indian air market fiercely competitive. It was assumed in this Project Report that
the long term traffic growth rate would be 7-8% and this was not very high when
compared to the Average Annual Growth (AAG) rate which was 6% in the previous
decade. Further, the capacity share of an airline was a primary determinant of its
market share and AI had to increase its capacity deployment at a rate faster than the
traffic growth rate in order to increase its capacity share and therefore its market
share. The other reason was that the private domestic carriers were aiming to fly
overseas and they had a brand new fleet. The Project Report had envisaged that
induction of 50 aircraft would enable AI to expand capacity on international routes at
an AAG of 10.8%. This growth rate had factored the reduction in capacity as an
outcome of transfer of some of its Gulf and South-East Asia routes to AICL. In addition,
the assumption of the capacity (in terms of Available Seat Kilometers) to grow at an
AAG of 14.5% was because of increased proportions of operations on long haul
routes. The assumptions for yield increase was based on Al's route strategy which
was to focus on its core markets of USA, UK & Gulf, including non-stop services
between India & USA with Ultra Long Range aircraft. It was envisaged that the above
route strategy would enable an increase in yields. The Committee however feel that
many of the key assumptions underlying the revised Project Report for acquisition of
50 long range aircraft were unduly optimistic. The assumption that increase in
capacity share would automatically lead to an increase in AIL's market share (projected
increase from 19% to 30% by 2012-13) was not adequately validated. The concerns
of the Planning Commission with regard to the assumptions made by AIL regarding
traffic projections were that they were risky and the upgradation appeared to be very
ambitious considering the past trends. 'Further, the statistics of the Directorate
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) did not suggest the kind of growth that was assumed

125
in the Project Report. Notably, the Planning Commission had opined that it would
tantamount to skating on thin ice since traffic growth was not guaranteed and internal
rate of return with fuel cost at the prices prevalent then was only 6.2%. The
Department of Expenditure had also stated that a purely supply side response would
run into demand side risks and the high traffic growth projections needed careful
consideration since project viability was highly sensitive to reduction in traffic yield.
The Committee would like to know whether reservations of all the stakeholders were
placed before the EGoM.
Lack of benchmarking and commercial intelligence
9. The Committee find that there were multiplicity of negotiating procedures
that were adopted. These included constituting a Price Negotiation Committee in
June, 2005 to hold price negotiations with the concerned airframe/engine
manufacturer, an Overseeing Committee constituted in August, 2005 to oversee the
process of price negotiations and constitution of an Empowered Group of Ministers
for 'one final round of negotiations' with the manufacturers to finalise the transaction.
In order to negotiate the prices of aircraft, it was normal and necessary to make an
assessment through commercial intelligence gathered globally to assess a reasonable
or threshold price based on comparable prices paid by other buyers and other
concomitant factors. Surprisingly, no benchmarks for the cost of the aircraft were
set (either for the AIL acquisition or for the IAL acquisition) before negotiations were
initiated with the manufacturers at various levels. When asked to furnish reasons
for the same, the Ministry submitted mutually contradictory views to the Committee
and to the Audit. Allaying the fears of Audit on the issue of arriving at the threshold
price, the Ministry stated that 'every attempt is made by any buyer to collect commercial
intelligence globally to determine the threshold price. Benchmarks are always
established in a negotiation and this conclusion that there were not any is not correct'.
In sharp contrast, the submission of the Ministry to the Committee was 'No separate
benchmark price was set up for the negotiation process as no industry standards are
available for benchmarking the price of civil aircraft'. Taking note of, the explanation
submitted by the MoCA, the  Committee wish to stress that any such future purchases
should be made after due assessment of commercial intelligence and the global air
traffic scenario to arrive at a correct price.
Irregular post-bid seat re-configuration
10. The Committee find that during negotiation process, the configuration  of
seats was revised in November 2005. The seating capacity of the B777- 200LR and
B777-300ER were reduced by 28 seats and 38 seats respectively. This was the result
of the discussion held on 12th November, 2005 on the proposed configuration of seats
on the B777-200LR and B777-300ER in a high level ministerial meeting. Further,
after finalizing the revised seat configurations and intimating the same to Boeing by
AIL, the matter was sent for the AIL Board's information only. The Gol/EGoM was not
informed of this change in seat configuration. On being asked that the seat
re-configuration could have had an impact on the transparency of the negotiation
process and terms and conditions of the contracts with the supplier, the Ministry
stated that Boeing did not manufacture aircraft seats and the Airlines were given a
choice to select its seat vendor from amongst the approved panel of Boeing. Such a

126
change in the seat configuration during the negotiation process was irregular as it
was a post-bid change and clearly affected the transparency of the negotiation process.
The assumption of further yield increase also could not be relied upon totally in view
of the observation of the then Commercial Director, AIL who had stated that 'in the
Executive Class, AIL should be able to achieve a further yield increase of 5 per cent on
both aircraft, provided that there is no substantial increase in competitive pressures
and all other aspects of the AI product offering to meet prevailing global standards'.
The Committee are of the considered view that techno-economic decisions need to be
taken only at the Airlines level and certainly not at the behest or level of the Ministry.
The Committee also note that the Project Report had projected increase in revenue
only by assuming additional 5% yield increase in the Executive Class. On the contrary,
the preliminary analysis of the seat changes based on the methodology adopted in the
Project Report indicated significant reduction in estimated passenger revenue and
overall revenues contrary to the claim by the Ministry that re-configuration of seats
would increase the revenue. The Committee are therefore of the considered view that
post bid  seat re-configuration was irregular and the Government should evaluate the
financial implications and report to the Committee within three months of presentation
of this Report. Further, the Committee recommend that strong measures be taken so
that such irregularities do not recur.
Liquidated damages for delayed delivery
11. The Committee note that against the 50 aircraft to be delivered by
October 2011 as per contract, only 28 aircraft (8 B777-200LR, 12 B777-300ER and
8 B787-8) have been delivered as of September 2013. Delivery of 3 B777- 300 ER
aircraft was deferred at the instance of AI in 2009. The delivery of all the 27 B787-
800ER i.e. dreamliner aircraft, was scheduled between September 2008 and October 2011.
The Committee have been apprised that the remaining 22 aircraft (3 B777-300ER
and 19 B787-8) have now been scheduled for delivery by December, 2016. When
specifically asked about the compensation for delayed delivery of the aircraft, the
Ministry stated that as per the purchase agreement, the B787 were to be delivered
from September 2008. The Committee are pained to note that the purchase contract
was loaded against the buyer i.e. AI since despite the delay of more than three years in
the delivery of these aircraft the purchase agreement provides for compensation only
upto a maximum of 180 days. The amount of liquidated damages was to be calculated
according to an approved formula on the basis of the data in the most recent A VMARK
publication at the time customer received notice of a non-excusable delay from Boeing.
This amount was not to exceed an aggregate sum of 180 days per aircraft. When
asked about the liquidated damages, the Committee were apprised that for an average
daily lease rate of USD 30,000 per day, the maximum compensation payable will be
USD 30,000 multiplied by 180 days and will work out to USD 5.4 million per aircraft.
The Committee therefore recommend that immediate steps be initiated for claiming
liquidated damages as per the contract and action  should be taken to safeguard the
interest of the Airline in terms of the contract and to avoid such a dereliction of duty
in future.

127
Compensation for grounding of dreamliner
12. The Committee note that, as of March, 2013 out of the 27 dreamliner
aircraft that were to be received, only 6 were delivered to AI and all 6 of them had to be
grounded following directives of US Federal Aviation Administration which were
issued after the two, incidents that took pIace involving lithium ion batteries in the
dreamliners. On being enquired, the Ministry conceded that Air India had grounded
all of its 6 B787 aircraft since 17.01.2013 following a directive of DGCA that was
based on Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), USA, Emergency Airworthiness
Directive (EAD) dated 16.01.2013 which required all B787 operators to temporarily
ground the aircraft, subsequent to fire incident reported on aircraft operated by JAL
(Japan Airlines Ltd.) and ANA (AI Nippon Airways) caused by malfunctioning of
Lithium-ion battery. It was further submitted that in order to restore B787 aircraft
back to service, Boeing AOG team had arrived in Mumbai-Engineering facility and
commenced work on the first aircraft on 30th April 2013, to accomplish the Boeing
Alert SB. The task had been accomplished and all six aircraft were positioned at
Delhi. As regards any compensation from Boeing for losses incurred by Air India
due to grounding of the aircraft, the Committee were informed that a three-member
committee comprising heads of Engineering, Finance and Commercial had been
constituted by the Board, during its 52nd Board meeting held on 7th May 2013, to
negotiate on the matter of compensation to be provided by Boeing on account of the
prolonged grounding of these aircraft and consequent damages suffered by Air India.
The Ministry, responding to the question if there were any in-built clauses to safeguard
the interests of the Airlines in the event of technical problems arising after the
delivery of the aircraft, as seen in the instant case, stated that, the contractual
agreement with Boeing warrants that, at the time of delivery all Boeing products will
be free from defects in materials, process of manufacture and workmanship, including
the workmanship utilized to install suppliers products, engines, etc. The agreement
also warrants that all Boeing products will be free from defects in design, including
selection of materials and process of manufacture in view of the state-of-the-art at the
time of design. In case of B787 aircraft such warranty is applicable for a period of
48 months after delivery. As per Clause 7.3 of the Warranty, Boeing will reimburse
Customer's reasonable costs of Direct Materials and Direct Labour by credit
memorandum (excluding labour hours expended for overhaul) at Customer's Warranty
Labour Rate to correct defective Boeing products. As per clause 7.3.5, Boeing will
reimburse Customer's freight charges associated with a correction of a defect on a
Boeing product performed by its Authorized Agent or a third party Contractor. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken to safeguard the interest of
the Airlines in terms of the contract after the defects were noticed.
Faulty assumptions about market share and fleet strength
13. The Committee, while examining the acquisition of aircraft by erstwhile
Indian Airlines Ltd. (IAL) were apprised that in February 2006, erstwhile IAL had
signed purchase agreements with Airbus/CFM for supply of 43 Airbus aircraft (with
CFM engines) at an estimated cost of  ` 3399.60 crore. In March 2002, IAL had
projected an increase of 6% in domestic fares in the first year (2003-04) and further
increase of 2% per annum for 4 years (2004-05 to 2007- 08) in order to make the
negative Net Present Value (NPV) positive. This assumption of dramatic increase in

128
yield at constant costs (i.e. while assuming costs-fuel, staff interest and other costs,
etc. to be constant throughout the project life) appears to have been critical to projecting
an optimistic picture of positive project cash flows on NPV basis which in turn was
required for the approval of the acquisition project. In reality, IAL could not achieve
constant revenues at constant costs, let alone increased yields at constant costs.
When specifically asked if the achievements supported the projections that were
then made to project positive cash flows, the Ministry responded by stating that the
actual achievements may vary from the assumptions in the project study. It was also
submitted that when the aircraft were evaluated, the share of the Low Cost Carrier
market in India was below 10% and it had grown to nearly 70% resulting in dilution
of yields of the Full Service Carriers like AI. The statistics regarding the increase in
fleet strength and its bearing on IAL's market share did not support the Ministry's
view that increase in fleet strength would increase IAL's market share. Evidently, the
assumption that increase in fleet strength could bring commensurate increase in
IAL's market share of traffic, was wholly unrealistic and based on specious claims
which were challenged within the Government. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the IAL's market share of traffic after the induction of new aircraft month-wise
beginning from the induction of first aircraft.
Setting up of MIRO
14. While examining the manufacturer's commitments for aircraft acquisition,
the Committee observe that the Airbus had proposed to establish a training centre at
an approximate investment of US $75 million and a warehouse, and inspite of Airbus
not being the leading company it would assist the creation of Maintenance, Repair
and Overhaul (MRO) facilities with an investment of US $100 million. It is noteworthy
that, the commitment regarding creation of MR0 and training facilities was open-
ended as there was no timeframe laid for the creation of such facilities. Further, there
was no mention that the training and MRO facilities would be exclusive for IAL's use
or it was meant to be for all users of Airbus aircraft (public and private) in India and
nearby. With regard to AIL aircraft acquisition, similar commitments were obtained
from Boeing. The only difference was that these commitments were included in AlL's
purchase agreements but did not figure in IAL's purchase agreements. On being
asked to furnish reasons for the same, the Ministry replied that no firm commitment
was made by Airbus for direct investment in the Cooperation Projects i.e.
establishment of MRO, Pilots training facilities and dedicated spares centre for
Airbus aircraft. The Ministry claimed that `The Letter Agreement no. 4 to the Purchase
Agreement dated 20th February, 2006 described various Co-operation Projects' and
`factually Airbus commitments are by way of Co-operation Projects as per Letter
Agreement no. 4 to the Purchase Agreement'. Further, it was added that Letter
Agreements to the Purchase Agreement constituted an integral part of the Purchase
Agreement and governed by all the provisions of the Purchase Agreement. When the
Committee enquired about the progress made in setting up of the Maintenance, Repair
and Overhaul (MRO) and warehouse facilities, the Ministry submitted that Airbus in
their letter dated 22nd January, 2008 sent to AI had mentioned their obligation and
endeavoured to support the establishment of an MRO venture between AI and EADS
(European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, the parent Company of Airbus)
and its Indian affiliates. It was submitted that there was no mention of any financial

129
commitment in the letter. To the AI's suggestion that Airbus could contribute in the
development and expansion of Air India Engineering Service Ltd. (AIESL, which was
wholly a subsidiary of AI formed as a result of hiving off its MRO activity as a separate
company), the response from EADS/Airbus was awaited. On the prevalent situation
with regard to running the MRO facilities, the Committee were apprised that there
was no direct Airbus participation. About the commitment of Boeing with regard to
MRO, it was stated that Nagpur had been shortlisted and the work had begun. The
target date for completion was July 2013. To a specific query of the Committee
whether any study had been conducted by AI for establishing MRO at Nagpur, the
Ministry's reply was in the negative. When asked if Nagpur had any aviation
infrastructure for setting up the MRO there or AI had to start from scratch to build
this MRO, the Ministry's reply was that MRO was being set up at Special Economic
Zone (SEZ) area near Nagpur Airport. The reply is far. from tenable and the Ministry
need to explain the rationale for choosing  Nagpur as the location for MRO and the
actual progress of the project and the  time by which the project would be commissioned.
Expenditure on aircraft maintenance in foreign countries
15. Enquired about the MRO infrastructure and facilities of Air India, the
Committee were apprised that AI had developed, and was running its MRO facilities
for the last several decades for maintenance of its aircraft. The Ministry also submitted
that jobs from outside parties were also undertaken whenever slots were available.
When specifically asked to furnish reasons for incurring expenditure on maintenance/
repair/servicing of the aircraft in foreign countries inspite of in-house facilities, the
Ministry submitted that though MRO facilities of AI are equipped with infrastructure
and manpower for carrying out maintenance checks of the aircraft in Al's fleet in-
house, AI had been leasing aircraft for its operations which were sent abroad for
redelivery/major maintenance checks since the lease agreements stipulated that
these checks could be accomplished at Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)/
European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) approved MRO facilities and AI MRO
facilities were not FAA/EASA approved. The Committee are perplexed to note that
during the last 5 years, AI incurred whopping expenditure to the tune of USD
22,568,214.98 on maintenance/repair/servicing of aircraft alone in foreign countries.
This is clearly indicative of the fact that the lease agreements were one-sided and
favoured the lessor at a huge cost to the nation. The Ministry therefore need to
explain to the Committee as to what measures it undertook to ensure that the lease
agreements were unbiased,  wholly unavoidable and that the nation's interests were
well-safeguarded.
Faulty assumptions about merger
16. The Committee were apprised that taking note of the global trend towards
consolidation in the airline industry, the MoCA considered it imperative that the two
National Carriers are merged as the merged entity would not only be able to compete
effectively in the market but also find greater acceptability amongst the global
alliances. A consultant was appointed for preparing a business case for merger and
paid a fee of ` 15.41 crore. The Cabinet approved the proposal for merger on 1st
March, 2007. To a specific query of the Committee, the Ministry submitted that there
were four reasons for the merger. Firstly, since the competitiveness in the aviation

130
field was increasing, AI on the global front was facing a lot of competition. Secondly,
both the airlines were operating with older type of aircraft and processes were going
on for expansion and acquisition of aircraft. This required integration of various
requirements. Thirdly, there wiere certain overlapping routes from the scheduling
point of view which were operated by erstwhile IA, AI as well as the subsidiaries.
Lastly, since 70% of global traffic was being routed through various alliances in the
world and in order to take leadership in the aviation, it was necessary to become a
partner  to some of the alliances. The merger was to provide competitiveness, economy
of scale, resource consolidation and the optimal use of both the aircraft equipment,
ground handling side as well as the manpower. When asked if the merger was effective,
the Ministry submitted that there had been good progress regarding integration of
network/schedules, cross-utilisation of aircraft fleet, leveraging scale for joint
procurement (fuel, insurance, etc.) and harmonization of booking offices/facilities.
However, disparities relating to HR issues were yet to be resolved. On the question of
lack of adequate validation of financial case for merger, the Ministry submitted that
the details of the financial gains from the merger due to synergies were anticipated
and formed part of the consultant's report but admitted that some of them had not
materialized due to several other prevalent factors. The Committee would like to be
apprised of these 'several other 'prevalent factors' responsible for non-materialisation
of the objective of merger, the revenue earned, the losses and debt incurred by  AI
year-wise post merger upto 2012-13.
Action on Dharmadhikari Committee Report
17. The Committee observe that although the merger of AIL and IAL was to be
completed within 36 months from August 2007, there were huge delays regarding
the same. When asked whether MoCA was able to complete the merger within the
stipulated time-frame and manner, the Ministry responded that migration to a
Passenger Service System, single code, IT integration, bogged down HR integration
owing to legacy union agreements, integration of various cadres on Department of
Public Enterprises guidelines and acceptable level mappings had, admittedly, delayed
the merger process. Notably, AI had setup an inter-departmental Committee to monitor
and facilitate the integration process. Several working groups were also set up at
lower levels to implement the merger and integration. Ministry also constituted a
Committee of experts under the Chairmanship of Justice (retired) D.M.
Dharmadhikari to go into the HR issues including contentious issues with regard to
Performance Linked Incentive (PLI), level mapping and cadre re-structuring. The
Dharmadhikari Committee had submitted its report on 31st January, 2012 to the
Government. When asked to supply a copy of the Report, the Ministry submitted that
it was under the consideration of the Government. The Committee would like to be
apprised on the  recommendations and observations of the Dharmadhikari Committee
and the  implementational status thereof.
Status of merger/integration
18. When the Committee sought to know the areas in which the integration had
been actualized, the Ministry stated that merger of Indian Airlines and Air India is an
ongoing activity and concluded that the actual merger of both the companies for every

131
aspect was yet to be completed. Further, the Ministry also clarified that the major
milestones were being achieved albeit slowly due to the precarious financial position
of the company. Notably, at the time of merger, 226 critical activities had been identified
and targeted for completion. Out of these, 161 were completed, 58 were in progress
and 7 were not initiated at all. Amongst the ones that were not initiated at all, 5
pertained to operational integration and two were contingent on management
decisions. Regarding the delays in implementing Single Code Passenger Reservation
System, the Committee were informed that although Single Code Passenger
Reservation System was scheduled to be achieved by 1st April, 2008, IA and AI managed
to migrate to Single Code Passenger Reservation System with effect from
27th February, 2011. Delay was attributed to 're-tendering' as one of the parties who
had not been selected had approached CVC and it had taken considerable time. The
Ministry conceded that complete integration of the two entities had not been achieved
with regard to  MR Management and that there were several constraints in
implementing the merger process owing to the large dimensions of AI and the financial
crisis faced by AI. In another candid submission before the Committee, a witness
deposed that 'even on the field, practically, the erstwhile IA personnel are working
separately; the erstwhile AI personnel are working separately'. HR integration below
the level of DGM had not taken place and this had significantly affected the completion
of merger. The Committee are dismayed that the crucial aspect of the merger has
still not been achieved and therefore urge the Ministry to secure complete merger
and consolidation in the interest of harmonious relations inter-se between the various
stream of employees and the efficient functioning of Al.
Apprehensions of Employees' Associations/Unions
19. On the role of Employees' Associations/ Unions with regard to merger, the
Committee were apprised that MoCA in 2007 had held a meeting with the Employee’s
Association/Unions of the two airlines and it was only to announce the decision of the
merger and not to discuss the key issues. In a letter dated 8th February, 2007 of Joint
Action Committee of Unions/Associations/Guilds of AIL addressed to the Convenor,
Empowered Group of Ministers (EGoM), it was stated that the then Minister of Civil
Aviation met all the Unions of AI on 17th January, 2007 in Delhi on the directions of
the EGoM and it was apparently to apprise the representatives of the two oldest aviation
companies on the proposed merger. According to the Union, the meeting was convened
at a short notice of 24 hours, which made it virtually impractical and impossible to
prepare and submit their concerns in detail. To a specific query of the Committee as
to whether the Ministry  had held any consultations with the Unions/Associations
about merger, the Ministry submitted that the Unions/Associations had been kept
adequately briefed about the merger process and the scheme of amalgamation had
addressed most of the issues raised by them. This apart, the Committee were apprised
that captains and commanders of the pre-merger entities had different licenses and
when the Ministry was asked about this, it was stated that it was a regulatory
requirement of DGCA and pilots were licensed in this manner internationally. It was
further submitted that 'in view of the merged entity now functioning as AIL, issues
pertaining to integration, cross fleet training, etc. are under discussions. However,
pilots will always remain specific to the aircraft/aircraft family'. The Committee
therefore urge the Ministry to ensure that HR integration is achieved without further
delay so that the organization  functions smoothly and efficiently.

132
Joining the Star Alliance
20. The Committee observed that AI was yet to join the Star Alliance network
which was a global airline alliance established to offer customers convenient worldwide
reach and a smoother travel experience. Asked to give reasons for joining the alliance,
the Committee were informed that the benefits envisaged from joining the Alliance
were (i) Enhanced Frequent Flyer Programme (FFP) participation, (ii) Enhanced
Code share network, and (iii) Enhanced Brand image. They were further apprised
that after paying an entry fee advance of • 5 million in June 2008, AlL's (then NACIL)
entry into the Star Alliance was intended to take place in March 2009. The balance of
• 5 million which was required to be paid at the time of entry into the alliance was also
paid. One of the pre-requisites for joining the alliance was to comply with all the 87
Minimum Joining Requirements (MJRs) by 31st July, 2011 and AI was on track to
comply with all the requirements and join Star Alliance by 31st July, 2011. However,
in the interim, Star had requested the Indian Government to give a prior written
confirmation that it would grant approval to 'Jet Airways' to join Star if and when it
applies. Star had also advised AI that if it did not receive such a written decision from
the GoI,  AI's joining may not be approved by the Star carriers, which were required
to vote unanimously in favour of AI, stating that AI had complied with all the joining
requirements and the obligation to support entry of a 2nd carrier as agreed under the
Agreement signed with Star Alliance in December 2007. Despite AI complying with
all the joining requirements by 29th July, 2011 and receiving a written confirmation
from the Star Alliance, AI was informed on 1st August, 2011, that it had not met the
joining conditions in full and therefore Al's membership had been put on hold. No
specific response was received from Star when AI sought details about the allegedly
specific requirements that were not met by it. Apprising the Committee about the
alternative actions undertaken by the Ministry to achieve the benefits that were
expected from joining Star Alliance, the Ministry stated that since AI may still join
Star Alliance, it has been decided that initially commercial co-operations would be
entered into with Star carriers and non-aligned carriers. 'On the branding front, it
may be noted that in the last couple of years, AI has taken major initiatives (particularly
on the IT front) to offer competitive product/service level to its passengers'. In addition,
it has been decided that without waiting to join Star Alliance,  AI would implement the
functionalities which a Star carrier is required to offer to its/other Star carriers'
premium passengers. The Ministry was optimistic that these efforts should enable AI
to achieve many of the benefits that would have accrued as a result of joining the Star.
On the payments made to the Star Alliance as entry fee to the tune of Euro 10 million
and on the prospects of its refund, the Ministry admitted that there was no provision
of refund in the agreement signed with Al. The agreement was signed by Air India in
good faith, and this situation of the Chief Executive Board refusing was not foreseen.
Furthermore, when AI had raised the issue of refund of joining fees during a meeting
with the Star on 18th July, 2011, the Star CEO had orally advised that the joining fees
could be returned after deducting the expenses incurred by the Star carriers. Though
'Air India's membership had been put on hold and not refused', the Committee would
like to be apprised as to how long the AI will  remain 'on hold' and what measures have

133
the MoCA or AI taken to become member of the Star Alliance or to get the refund of
the entry fee paid.
Bilateral Agreements
21. Examination of Air Service Agreements (ASAs), also known as bilateral
agreements, revealed that these were concluded, usually on the basis of reciprocity
and fair/ equal opportunity, and provided the legal framework for scheduled air services
between two countries. Under these ASAs, traffic rights and capacity entitlements
are exchanged between the countries on the basis of market requirements. The ASAs
clearly specify the "entitlements" of the designated airline(s) of both countries in
terms of frequency of operations, number of seats, points of call, etc. The concept of
"open skies policy" permits unrestricted air services between countries with minimal
government intervention. Upto 2000, bilateral entitlements to/ from India were in
line with end-to-end traffic projections based on 3rd and 4th freedom traffic i.e.
carrying passengers from the home country to another country and vice- versa; also,
foreign carriers were restricted only to major airports in India. During 2003-04,
bilateral entitlements were liberalised, and foreign airlines were permitted to operate
to "interior points" in India i.e. beyond the major airports. The bilateral air traffic
rights on international routes between India and other countries were decided on the
basis of reciprocity. However, the Committee note that the actual utilisation of available
rights on international sectors was highly imbalanced. While Indian entitlements
had remained grossly underutilised, there was a problem of inadequate capacity on
most international routes from India, with passengers finding it difficult to obtain
seats for nearly six months of the year. The Ministries of External Affairs, Tourism
and Commerce, as well as Trade, Industry and Tourism bodies felt the need to liberalise
international air services so that seats were available to/ from India all through the
year. Thus, the MoCA had adopted a 'limited open sky' policy to cater to peak season
requirements (which had expanded substantially from 2003-04 onwards), permitting
designated airlines to operate unlimited number of service to their imperative points
of call for three to six months in a year. Surprisingly, even after the substantial
increase in bilateral entitlements from 2004-05 onwards, the trend of imbalanced
utilization of entitlements (with higher utilization by foreign carriers) continued
notwithstanding the permission granted to private Indian carriers to fly on
international routes. The Committee seek explanation for such a skewed  arrangement
and the corrective measures taken to restore balance and  mutuality of interest
between the foreign airlines and the National Carrier.
India-Dubai Sector
22. The Committee were apprised that the envisaged benefits of liberalized policy
were that (a) passengers would have greater choice for international travel,
(b) India's utilisatien of traffic rights on international routes would improve, (c) tariffs
on international routes were likely to become more reasonable and affordable, and (d)
AI and IA would both gain by synergising their operations. However, the sequence of
events demonstrated that it was one-sided nature of benefits to Emirates/Dubai through
enhancement of entitlements and additional points of call in India. lnspite of Air India

134
protesting on the lack of reciprocity and the funneling of 6th freedom traffic by
Emirates through Dubai from interior locations in India, even change of gauge facility
at Dubai International Airport was not adequately pursued, nor linked to grant of
additional benefits. This resulted in vague commitments for such a facility, not at
Dubai Airport but at the upcoming Jebel Ali Airport (an impractical option for AIL and
other Indian carriers) and that too with distant timeframes between 2012 and 2018.
The Committee are distressed to note that while the Dubai Civil Aviation Authority
had actively protected the commercial interests of its airlines, MoCA on the other
hand had failed to obtain appropriate quid pro quo. When specifically asked to
substantiate the MoCA's approval for massive increase in entitlements from
2004-05 onwards inspite of repeated reservations of AIL against the proposals/
requests from Gulf Countries for increase in seat entitlements as well as additional
points of call at interior locations in India, the Ministry replied that 'although, Air
India had expressed reservations, there was a considerable increase in the demand
for opening up the Gulf routes, once the 3 years moratorium and protection of the
Gulf routes for Air India was over. There were demands from other Indian Airlines
also which needed to be catered to. Accordingly, entitlements were stepped up, at the
request of Indian carriers for the Gulf routes in a graded manner'. To the query of the
Committee regarding reciprocity in the facilities extended by India to Dubai, the
Ministry's response was, 'India has fifth freedom rights beyond Dubai while India
has not conceded fifth freedom rights for Dubai, UAE. Unfortunately, the fifth freedom
given to India is without any restriction but the Indian carriers have not been able to
take this to their advantage for want of fleet. Furthermore, the Gulf sector was
completely reserved for the National Carrier until the 31st December, 2008 and thus
Air India had the first mover advantage for this region. Further, the sector was
opened up gradually in the interest of enhancing operations of Air India'. About the
issue of change of gauge in Dubai, it was stated that the Government suo motu had
tried to get this in the agreement without any such demand coming from any of the
carriers. It was also stated that if any airline pursued this requirement then it could
be certainly addressed with the Dubai Government. On being asked if the issue of
change of gauge facility at Dubai International Airport was still being pursued by Al,
the Ministry submitted that 'the last talks with Dubai in 2008, India had proposed that
a change of gauge article should be incorporated in the air services agreement. This
would provide benefit to the Indian carriers which would allow smaller aircraft feeding
into Dubai to serve beyond points with much larger aircraft at Dubai’. The Committee
deplore that despite having accepted in principle to change the gauge article in the
service agreement, Dubai had not accepted as of April  2013 to implement the Article.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons for non-implementation of the
agreement and the adverse impact thereof on the revenues of the AI.
Want of level playing field to National Carrier
23. To a pointed query whether the liberalized policy towards bilateral
entitlements had provided a level playing field to AI, the Ministry submitted that due
consideration was given to the operational plan of the National Carrier before allocating
routes to other eligible schedule carriers. It was ensured that Air India had a first
right of refusal for allocation of traffic rights. Further, it was also stated that 'Cabinet

135
had decided in December, 2004 wherein private Indian carriers with 5 years domestic
experience and minimum 20 aircraft were allowed to fly international against Indian
entitlements. While doing this, the Government reserved the Gulf sector exclusively
for Air India for the next 3 years i.e., until December, 2007 and further had
commercialised agreements (approximately ` 400 crore annually) which Air India
had entered into with international carriers in lieu of their inability to fly to some of
the countries, and for which they are being compensated for capacity mismatch which
continued till December, 2009'. The Committee note that the Gulf region was reserved
for PSU airlines for three years but as per the assurance given by the Hon'ble
Minister (CA), this was to be increased to 5 years. The file notings of MoCA indicated
that ‘‘in the draft civil aviation policy. ..on Gulf routes, reservation of all traffic rights
for AIL and IAL is proposed to be extended from 3 yrs. to 5 yrs. There is no proposal
to review these provisions", and suggested informing the PM0 appropriately. However,
the Committee are anguished to mark that the subsequent notings indicated that
‘‘OSD to MCA has conveyed that reply to PM0 need not go".  Furthermore, the
reservation for AIL/ IAL continued only for 3 years i.e. till December 2007. This
clearly indicated that the Gulf sector was AIL/ IAL's most profitable international
segment before the liberalised policy on bilateral entitlements. AIL repeatedly
expressed strong reservations to MoCA against the proposals/ requests from Gulf
countries for increase in seat entitlements as well as additional points of call at
interior locations in India. Despite AIL's reservations, MIoCA went ahead with massive
increases in entitlements from 2004-05 onwards to the detriment of AI. When asked
if there existed any possibility of rollback of excess entitlements granted beyond
genuine traffic requirements, the Ministry's submission was that any roll back of
excess bilaterals or freezing bilateral entitlements has to be decided mutually and
cannot be a unilateral action since this principle is enshrined in the Air Services
Agreements. The arrangement is specious and unacceptable. The Committee are
shocked over the manner in which massive excess entitlements for most profitable
gulf sector were granted to foreign airlines to the serious detriment of the Al. The
Committee therefore recommend that immediate corrective measures be taken to
protect the commercial interest of AI and the Committee apprised.
Uneconomic route thrust upon Air India
24. The Committee observe that the erstwhile Air India Limited (AIL), during
the period between 2005-06 and 2009-10 on most routes (North America, UK, SE
Asia, etc.) was incurring losses, and only the Gulf/ Middle East and Far East Asia
routes were making profits till 2005-06. However, by 2009-10, all routes were turned
into loss-making. Of these, the single largest loss-making route was the India/ USA
route. Reasons attributed for this were lack of alliances, inadequate frequent flyer
programme, few code shares only and connectivity, delayed deployment of Passenger
Service System and the increased competition. Further, AI Management had stated
(February, 2011) that during the period between 2005-06 and 2009-10, access to the
Indian market for foreign carriers had increased manifold on the one hand while
Indian carriers (private) were given unrestricted rights to increase domestic
capacities besides entry into the international markets. However, the Ministry termed
the above claim of AI management as incorrect and also said that stamping out the
competition with other carriers in the economic environment was not possible. When

136
asked to elaborate on this issue, the Ministry defended by stating that the domestic
carriers, including AI,operate under the Route Dispersal Guidelines and airlines
are free to operate on any route. Operations on a particular route are decided by
airlines keeping in view the commercial viability and availability of resources.
However, the Committee note that while revising the number of aircraft one of the
reasons advanced was the requirement of Ultra Long Range aircraft for India-USA
operations. This was inspite of the fact that historically, India-USA sector was a loss-
making sector and a commercially unviable route. The Committee therefore
recommend that responsibility must be fixed for impinging on the autonomy of AI
leading to loss of traffic to AI.
Joint Position Paper
25. The position paper of February 2011 of the three leading (as then) Indian
international carriers — AI, Kingfisher and Jet Airways — brought out the serious
problems with huge expansion of bilateral entitlements in respect of several countries
(notably in the Gulf, SE Asia and Europe). This facilitated several foreign airlines
(predominantly Emirates) in tapping the vast Indian market and funneling such traffic
over their hubs (Dubai etc.) to various destinations in the USA, UK, Europe and
elsewhere, through what is termed as “6th freedom traffic". Although the bilateral
agreements do not explicitly provide for exercise of 6th freedom rights, the
entitlements exchanged were vastly in excess of "genuine" or point-to-point flying
requirements between the two countries (termed as 3rd/ 4th freedom traffic based on
Origin- Destination data) and implicitly allow "mega-airlines" with giant hubs to
exploit 6th freedom traffic. When the Committee sought MoCA's response on  this
joint position paper, the Ministry submitted that though AI was a party to  this paper,
this fact was not in the knowledge of the Ministry. This is not acceptable to the
Committee. It was also added that the Joint Position Paper on bilateral rights was not
shared with MoCA and therefore, it could not be  verified in the Ministry. The Committee
are surprised to note that the Ministry was not in the know of such a vital paper
prepared by the official carrier which is accountable to the Ministry.
Free seats and upgradation of seats of former employees of AI
26. The Committee are startled to find that, in March 2010, at a time when
NACIL was going through a major financial crisis, MoCA issued an order, whereby
the facility for upgradation of ticket for self and immediate family for travel to the
highest class available by Air India/ Indian Airlines, subject to availability of seats,
was extended to all former Secretaries of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. When
questioned the Ministry responded that it had constituted Justice Dharmadhikari
Committee and one of the terms of reference of this Committee was to look into the
facilities to the retired employees. The Committee had submitted its report on
31st January, 2012 and it was under consideration of the Ministry. However in a
subsequent submission, the Ministry stated that since the facility of upgradation of
seats was subject to availability of seats in the higher class, there was no loss of
revenue. It was further stated that the seats in an aircraft/flight were a perishable
commodity which were wasted once the aircraft took off and no revenue was generated.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the  recommendation of the Dharmadhikari
Committee on this as also of the AI  and similar practice elsewhere.  Evaluation of
performance indicators.

137
Evalutation of Performance Indicaters
27. A scrutiny of the key performance indicators of AI during the period
2005-06 to 2010-11 revealed a significant deterioration in operational performance
on most parameters such as passenger/cargo revenues, Available Seat Kilometers
(ASKM), Available Tonne Kilometers (ATKM), Revenue Passenger Kilometers
(RPKM), passenger revenue per RPKM and Passenger Load Factor (PLF) for the two
airlines (pre/post merger) between 2005-06 and 2009-10. Asked to explain the reasons
for decline in key operational and revenue markers of the National Carrier, the
Ministry conceded that the competition between the two airlines (erstwhile AIL and
IAL) resulted in lower yields, revenues and profitability to both the airlines. Further,
AI was serving these routes with wide body aircraft which produced inferior economics
on these relatively short-haul routes. The Committee find  the argument rather
specious and therefore recommend that all out efforts  must be made to revamp the
operational performance of the National Carrier and to restore to it the pride of place
that it held for long.
Survey on customer perception and improvement of services
28. The Committee were apprised that Indian Market Research Bureau was
commissioned by Air India to conduct a survey on customer perception of AI and other
airlines such as Kingfisher, Jet Airways, Singapore Airlines, Lufthansa and British
Airways. The survey revealed that in the international arena, the fliers were demanding
more than the basic facilities with overall travelling experience and comforts and that
the Air India brand was no longer preferred as it was not meeting the above standards.
The Committee hardly need to emphasize that urgent and essential measures must
be taken to further improve the services of AI so that it becomes an internationally
preferred Airline and the Committeee apprised.
Defective lease agreement
29. The Committee observe that as of March 2010, IAL and its subsidiary
Airline Allied Services Ltd. (AASL), had 37 leased aircraft. Of these 37 aircraft,
11 aircraft were of very small capacity aircraft and 8 aircraft were sold and leased
back. Of the remaining aircraft, 8 A320 aircraft had been obtained on an operating
lease from a lessor  (M/s. AerCap) in Netherlands between March 2003 and March
2005. Six of these aircraft were to be returned between March 2008 and October
2009, after completing the extended lease period. As per the lease agreements, the
leased aircraft were to be sent to a mutually acceptable MRO facility for completion
of stipulated aircraft checks before return to the lessor. Three of these aircraft were
withdrawn from commercial operations by IAL and sent to a Jordan based MRO
between February and July 2008. However, the lessor refused to accept the return of
the aircraft, by raising disputes on their physical condition and documentation and
raised claims of huge settlement amounts. Finally, one aircraft was returned to the
lessor in May 2009 after a "buy-out package" (viz. payment of compensation to the
lessor by IAL, in exchange for waiving all liabilities associated with the aircraft
"redelivery conditions") of $ 2.7 million. Queried by the Committee, the Ministry
submitted that the lessor sought huge compensation for the shortfall in the physical
condition and documentation, meeting the redelivery/return conditions of the first
aircraft. The compensation was negotiated considerably downwards in respect of the

138
first aircraft by a Negotiating Committee constituted by CMD as per the decision of
the Board. On the other two aircraft, the Ministry submitted that after completion and
inspection of the next two aircraft, the lessor sought even higher compensations
which were disputed by IAL. The excessive and highly unreasonable buy-out amounts,
being extremely disproportionate to meet return conditions, clearly indicated the
intention of AerCap (a leading aircraft lessor) to avoid or delay redelivery of aircraft
to the extent possible. That the lessor's intention was malafide is borne out by the fact
that it expected the return of about 17 year old aircraft in near brand new condition by
listing even minor ignorable issues. The Ministry further clarified that, after
protracted discussions and negotiations, the two aircraft were returned to the lessor
after inspections by the Technical Expert and carrying out the maintenance tasks,
which had become due by that time. When specifically asked if this situation could
have been averted, the Ministry stated that the Lease Agreements were executed after
proper vetting by and with the involvement of foreign legal adviser and were based on
international practices, but conceded that 'the experience had indicated that these
agreements were heavily loaded in favor of lessor and left room for manipulation by
them if their intentions were malafide'. The Committee wish to caution the Ministry
to  draw suitable lesson from the incident and be careful enough to avoid such a
recurrence and also fix responsibility for drafting the defective lease agreement
which was apparently flawed and detrimental to the National  Carrier.
Turn Around Plan
30. The Committee were apprised that for the revival of the Airline, multiple
versions of Turn Around Plan (TAP) were being considered from August 2009
onwards. These included, inter-alia, cost reduction and revenue enhancement targets.
Further, Deloitte had furnished a report on 'Review of Turn Around Plan' in
February 2011, after considering four financial scenarios proposed by AI. Asked to
elaborate on this, the Ministry stated that M/s Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu India Pvt.
Ltd. (Deloitte), independent Aviation Consultants, was appointed to review the Turn
Around Plan of Air India. They submitted their report in February, 2011 which was
then discussed with the lenders in April, 2011. The lenders appointed a Steering
Committee from amongst its members to study the Turn Around Plan alongwith the
comments of Deloitte. Based on the inputs of the lenders, the Turn Around Plan was
revised and Deloitte gave their report on the revised Turnaround Plan in June, 2011.
The Revised TAP was presented to the Group of Ministers in June, 2011, who appointed
a Group of Officers mainly from the Ministry of Finance to study the TAP. The Group
of Officers submitted the report to GOM in September, 2011 suggesting that the
Moderated Growth Scenario VII is the most suited. The Group of Ministers who had
accepted the above report in the meeting on October 28, 2011 had minuted that
regulatory forbearance of the Reserve Bank of India be obtained. Reserve Bank of
India had given its approval and dispensations that were sought by the lenders and had
asked the lenders to complete the Financial Restructuring by 20th March, 2012. The
Committee  were informed that the Plan was however awaiting approval by the various
lenders and their respective Boards. The Committee would like to be  apprised of the
Plan approved and the timelines for execution of the Turn  Around Plan.
Financial structuring and Revival Strategy
31. Deposing before the Committee on the revival strategy of Al, the Strategic
Business Unit Head MRO, Engine & Components (E&C) submitted that the Company

139
had put up a Turn Around Plan and a financial restructuring plan to the Government
after lot of deliberations and discussions. This plan looked into the matter with
respect to the market growth, the seat factor, with respect to the yields that at what
rate AI had to grow, at what rate AI should acquire aircraft not only in the integrated
entity but also in the subsidiary company like Alliance Air and Air India Express.
This financial restructuring plan also looked into as to how to restructure the debt
and also to obtain equity for acquisition of the large number of aircraft. As a part of
the financial restructuring plan that was submitted to the group of officers set up by
the Government, it was stated that AI had asked for an upfront equity infusion of
` 6750 crore and infusion of equity to fund cash deficit of ` 4552 crore. In addition,
they had asked the Government to take over the burden of all principal repayments
and all interest payments on account of fleet acquisition. So, the total equity support
that was sought from the Government was to the tune of  ` 30,231 crore. The Committee
feel that in order to bail out the Company, the infusion of further equity of  ` 30,231
crore is of paramount need and the equity infusion should be expedited.
Ground handling agreement with Air India
32. The Committee note that AI entered into a joint venture with Singapore
Airport Terminal Services (SATS) for ground handling in Bangalore and Hyderabad.
Furnishing details about this Joint venture, the Ministry submitted that AI-SATS
joint venture was 50-50 equity partnership between AI and AISATS which initially
operated as an Association of Persons (AOP) and was incorporated on 20th April,
2010 into a company by the name of Air India SATS Airport Services Private limited.
The business was transferred from AOP to the new company incorporated w.e.f
1st August, 2010. Reason submitted for entering into this joint venture was that Air
India on its own was not qualified to handle ground handling activities at Bangalore
and Hyderabad and if they had not tied up with a JV partner, they would have lost the
business to other foreign competitors who were authorized to do ground handling at
these airports. Asked to specify about how the profits were being shared between AI
and SATS, the Ministry stated that the profits were being shared in the capital ratio
of 50:50 after tax on declaration of dividends. To another query of the Committee as to
what were the profits that were earned by the Joint Venture and the amount AI got as
its share, the MoCA replied that since AISATS had to invest in capital equipment and
in running the business, till date i.e. as on 08.05.2012 no profits had been distributed
by way of dividends amongst both the partners. About the details of investment made
by SATS in the form of cash investment On ground handling equipment and human
resources were sought, the Ministry apprised the Committee that, the initial
investment made by AI and-SATS was ` 33.39 crore totalling ` 66.78 crore in the
Association of Persons (AOP) which was `  87.23 crore as on 31st March, 2011. The
share capital of Air India SATS Airport Services Private limited was 80839950
shares of `10 each issued at a premium of  ` 0.79 per share totalling ` 872263051
owned 50:50 by Air India Ltd. and SATS Ltd. Further, it was stated that since AI had
a ban on recruitment, no manpower could be recruited on the pay roll of Air India in
non-operational areas. AISATS joint venture was therefore formed to carry on ground
handling business at the new green field airports like Hyderabad and Bangalore.
SATS brought its own manpower of six officials from Singapore to India to man the
important locations and reportedly assured MoCA that they would bring in additional
share capital once Air India's equipment at Delhi is valued. When asked in
March, 2013 if the valuation had been completed, the Ministry failed to apprise the

140
Committee on this aspect. The Committee would like to be apprised of all  aspects of
the matter as also the benefits likely to accrue to the Airlines from such an
arrangement .
Rationale of a lopsided Joint Venture
33. The other notable aspect of the joint venture was that AI SATS has to be paid
for handling the flights of Air India. The Committee were apprised  that with the
depletion of the manpower strength at Hyderabad and Bangalore, it was not possible
to handle the Air India flights on its own and Air India had deployed additional manpower
either on its own pay roll or through subsidiary company to handle its flights and
foreign airline flights. Recruitment was frozen in Air India especially in non-
operational areas since 1996. Air India therefore had to hire manpower resources
through Air India Air Transport Services Ltd. (AIATSL) at various airports in order
to handle the flights of the foreign airlines which was an additional cost to Air India.
With the takeover of the ground handling activity by AI SATS, the additional manpower
in AIATSL was taken over by AISATS on their pay roll whereas, it is noteworthy that
prior to Joint Venture, Air India was not charging anything for handling its own
flights as same was done in-house and AI was earning revenue from handling other
carriers and Wide body flights before merger. After the JV (i.e. 2008-09, 2009-10 &
2010-11), AI is paying for handling of AI flights to the JV Company and the revenue
which was earned from handling foreign airlines goes to the JV Company, which on
the other hand would have accrued in toto to the Al. The Air Corporations Employees
Union (ACEU) and the Civil Aviation Joint Action Front (CAJAF) in their submission
to the Committee, described the arrangement as retrograde. The Committee would
like the Ministry to share the rationale of such a lopsided joint venture entered  into
by the AI which is, apparently, a losing proposition.
34. To conclude, the Committee recognize that to make Air India to regain its
past glory is a daunting task but nevertheless, it is in national interest that the
National Carrier becomes self sustainable, vibrant and a pride of India in the globalized
world. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Air India
to take note of their considered suggestions/recommendations, as highlighted in the
preceding paragraphs and take suitable but urgent remedial and corrective action so
that the National Carrier re-occupies its pre-eminent position.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
31 January, 2014 Chairman,
11 Magha, 1935 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE I
BRIEF CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS RELATED TO ACQUISITION OF AIRCRAFT
BY THE ERSTWHILE AIL
Date/Month Details in brief
12
December 1996 AIL's proposal for acquisition of 3 A310-300 aircraft
was not cleared by MoCA due to reasons like availability
of excess A-320 type of aircraft with the erstwhile IAL.
January 2002 Expert committee was constituted by AIL to identify
aircraft requirement and prepare fleet plan for 5 year
timeframe.
November 2002 T echno-Economic and Negotiation Committee (TENC)
was constituted by MD, AIL for finalisation of
requirement of aircraft.
April/July 2003 TENC submitted separate reports for acquisition of
17 (10 on firm basis + 7 on option basis) medium capacity
long range aircraft (A340-300/B777-200 ER); and 18 short
range aircraft (A320-200/B737-800).
November 2003 After review, TENC submitted a revised report for
18 short range and 10 or 17 long range aircraft on the
basis of revised pattern of operations, making NPV
positive.
AIL Board approved proposal for acquisition of
10 medium capacity long range aircraft (A340-300) and
18 small capacity short range aircraft (B737-800).
January 2004 AIL submitted project report for acquisition of 28 aircraft
to MoCA.
02 August 2004 In a meeting chaired by the then Minister, Civil Aviation
it was decided that Air India should revisit the proposal
for purchase of aircraft and submit a fresh project
proposal to the Government at the earliest which could
include the revised requirement.
13 September 2004 Based on the decision taken in the meeting of
2nd August, 2004, as communicated in the Ministry's
letter dated 5th August, 2004, the Board of Directors of
Air India in its 101st meeting decided that the fleet plan
could be revisited in its entirety.
24 November 2004 AIL Board approved a revised plan for acquisition of
50 aircraft for AIL, apart from 18 aircraft for its subsidiary
AICL.
03 December 2004 Bids were invited from Boeing and Airbus.
24 December 2004 T echnical bids were opened.
26 April 2005 TENC evaluated bids and submitted its report. On the
same day, AIL Board approved the acquisition of
50 aircraft (35 firm+15 on option) from Boeing with GE
engines.
141

142
14 May 2005 Project Report for Gol approval for acquisition of aircraft
was submitted to MoCA.
16 June 2005 Price Negotiation Committee was constituted by AIL,
with  'in principle' approval of MoCA.
30 June 2005 Presentation was made by AIL to MoCA on aircraft
acquisition.
18 August 2005 'Overseeing Committee' was constituted by MoCA to
oversee the process of price negotiations with Boeing
and GE for acquisition of aircraft; negotiations were
held by Overseeing Committee between August 2005
and November 2005.
31 August 2005 Pre-Public Investment Board (PIB) meeting was held.
13 October 2005 PIB cleared the aircraft acquisition at a cost not
exceeding ` 33,197 crore, indicating:
* that MoCA may evaluate AIL's cost structure and
productivity and fix benchmarks for achieving reduction
in cost and enhancing productivity;
* purchase of 35 aircraft on firm basis, and 15 on optional
basis, with the decision for exercising the option to be
taken by AIL Board, depending on the market situation.
15 December 2005 CCEA (Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs)
approved constitution of EGoM (Empowered Group of
Ministers) for final round of negotiations with lowest
bidder.
24 December 2005 EGoM held discussions with the representatives of
Boeing and GE.
30 December 2005 PMO (Prime Minister's Office) forwarded a copy of the
note of the Chairman, EGoM to the PM on the action
taken by the EGoM, where it approved acquisition of 50
aircraft by AIL on firm basis, in addition to acquisition
of 18 aircraft by AICL;
PMO returned the note indicating that the "Prime
Minister has seen the note and directed that the Ministry
of Civil Aviation may inform CCEA about the finalised
transaction".
MoCA conveyed Gol's approval to AIL.
On the same day, AIL also signed purchase agreements.
12 January 2006 CCEA noted the contents of the MoCA note apprising
them of the EGoM decision on acquisition.
July 2010 20 aircraft (8 B777-200LR+12 B777-300ER) received;
receipt of 3 B777-300ER aircraft deferred at AIL's
instance.
         1 2

ANNEXURE II
A meeting was taken by Shri Praful Patel, Minister of Civil Aviation on
2nd August, 2004 to discuss the proposal of Air India for acquisition of aircraft for its
fleet. The following were present:
MOCA
(i) Shri Ajay Prasad, Secretary
(ii)Shri V . Subramanian, AS&FA
(iii) Shri Raghu Menon, Joint Secretary
Air India
(i) Shri V. Thulasidas, CMD
(ii)Shri S. Punhani, Director (F)
2. MCA was informed that the project proposal of AI for acquisition of aircraft
after approval of the BOD of AI had been submitted to Government. After examination
in the Ministry, the proposal would have to be first discussed in a pre-PIB meeting and
thereafter it would be submitted to PIB and Cabinet/CCEA for consideration.
3 It was noted that there had been some developments of late that needed
consideration vis-a-vis the project proposal. First, the competition for AI on the India-
US route had assumed a different dimension, particularly with the introduction of non-
stop flights through ultra long-range aircraft by competing airlines in South-East Asia
and the Gulf region. Unless, AI was able to match this product and  connectivity by
adding suitable aircraft to its fleet (which was not a part of the present proposal), AI's
competitiveness, load factors and revenues were likely to be severely affected.
4. It was noted that Air India has initiated steps to lease in MCLR and ultra long
range aircraft to meet the demand and competition in the near future, since induction
based on the acquisition proposal would have a long lead time during which it was
essential for Air India to maintain market share.
5. Further, AI had recently decided to launch a no-frills, airline called Air India
Express through a separate company to destinations in SE Asia and the Gulf, which
would offer lower fares to passengers. In view of this, Air India Express would operate
the B-737-800 aircraft proposed for acquisition. It was also noted that the proposal of
AI for purchase of B737-800 aircraft had been included in the proposal before the
concept of introducing a low-cost airline was finalised. Therefore, the current project
proposal may not have taken into account the economics of acquiring these types of
aircraft if operated on low-cost basis and with fares that would be 25% lower than
existing fares.
6. CMD, AI was of the view that although the present proposal did not fully cater
to the requirement of the AI's fleet, the additional requirements of aircraft could be
projected separately through a supplementary proposal after due evaluation etc.
However, after due deliberations it was felt that it may not be advisable or prudent to
143

144
go through the pre-PIB and PIB exercise in two separate stages with two different sets
of proposals for such capital intensive projects. It would be desirable to take a total
and comprehensive view on the fleet of Air India keeping in mind its plans and growth
for the next 15 years or so.
7. Keeping all these aspects in view, it was decided that:
(a) Air India should revisit the proposal for purchase of aircraft and submit
a fresh project proposal to the Government at the earliest, which could
include the revised requirements.
(b) AI could examine whether the proposal for purchase of short-range
aircraft for the low cost airlines is justified on a stand-alone basis and
could be de-linked from the purchase of other types of medium range
and long-range aircraft for AI. While doing so, AI should examine
whether the economics of the proposal for acquisition would be
favourable, keeping in view the low-cost and low fare operations
envisaged through a separate company. If the proposal is found to be
justified and viable, Air India should revert to the Government at the
earliest.

ANNEXURE III
MOST IMMEDIATE
PRIME   MINISTER'S   OFFICE
Enclosed is a self-explanatory letter signed by 43 members of the US Congress
concerning Air India's proposed expansion of its aircraft fleet. A draft reply from PM
may kindly be sent urgently to the undersigned.
Sd/-
(Gautam Bambawale)
Director
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation
PMO U.O. No. 870/41/P/1/03-Pol. Vol. VIII Dated: 3.11.2003.
145

146
Embassy of the United States of America
New Delhi
October 28, 2003
Excellency:
I am pleased to forward the enclosed letter from 43 Members of Congress
concerning Air India's proposed expansion of its aircraft fleet. The signatories are all
members of the U.S. Congressional Caucus on India and Indian Americans, which
includes Caucus co-chairmen Representatives Jim McDermott and Joseph Crowley.
Thank you for your consideration of this matter.
Sincerely,
      Sd/-
Walter North
Charged' Affaires a.i.
Enclosure: As stated
His Excellency
Atal Bihari Vajpayee,
Prime Minister,
Republic of India,
New Delhi.

Congress of the United States
Washington, DC 20515
October 22, 2003
His Excellency
Atal Bihari Vajpayee,
Prime Minister,
Republic of India,
New Delhi, India 110 001
Dear Mr. Prime Minister.
We are writing to you as members of the U.S. Congressional Caucus on India
and Indian Americans; which is the largest country caucus in the U.S. Congress,
composed of 168 Members of the U.S. House of Representatives. We have an abiding
interest in U.S.—India relations. Our two countries continue to have many opportunities
to explore the depth and breadth of out relations. Stronger commercial ties are a natural
complement to political alignment, spawning a wider range of dialogue and enhancing
the environment for stronger, more durable links.
We understand that Air India is looking to expand its fleet of commercial aircraft
and that based on price, value, and schedule, The Boeing Company has worked hard
with Air India management and technical experts to develop an excellent 777 and 737
package. Air India's acquisition of Boeing aircraft will serve as a great demonstration
of strengthened commercial relations between India and the United States. Therefore,
we encourage you to give Boeing's proposal the utmost consideration.
Boeing and its suppliers throughout the U.S provide jobs to many of our
constituents. Unfortunately, the American airline industry is struggling as a result of
the terrorist-related events of September 11, 2001. Our country is currently experiencing
the highest levels of unemployment in a decade. A successful contract with Air India
will not only provide India's flag carrier with the finest aviation products available, but
will also help ease our unemployment concerns.
As representatives of the Congressional Caucus on India, we are confident in
Boeing's ability to provide Air India and its passengers with the safest, most efficient,
environmentally friendly, and technologically advanced aircraft in the world. We hope
you will give Boeing's offer serious consideration.
Sincerely,
Sd/- Sd/-
Jim McDermott Joseph Crowley
Member of Congress Member of Congress
147

148


149


150
Sd/- Sd/-
Joe Wilson Edward Royce
Member of Congress Member of Congress
Sd/- Sd/-
Jayslee Norm Discks
Member of Congress Member of Congress
Sd/- Sd/-
Adam Smith Howard Berman
Member of Congress Member of Congress
Sd/- Sd/-
Tom Lantos Brad Miller
Member of Congress Member of Congress
Sd/- Sd/-
Jim Matheson Thaddeus McCotter
Member of Congress Member of Congress
Sd/- Sd/-
Frank Pallone Jr. Juanita Millender-McDonald
Member of Congress Member of Congress
Sd/- Sd/-
Walter Jones Martin Frost
Member of Congress Member of Congress

151
ANNEXURE IV
SCHEDULED INTERNATIONAL PASSENGER NUMBERS & MARKET SHARE TO/FROM INDIA
Year Other
Indian
Jet Air Carriers
NACIL Airways Sahara Kingfisher (9W+S2 Foreign Industry
AI IX IC (AI+IX+IC) (9W) (S2) (IT) +1T) Carriers T otal
2005 pax  Nos.(Mill.) 3.268 0.354 1.850 5.472 0.320 0.141 - 0.461 13.421 19.364
% share 16.9 1.8 0.6 28.3 1.7 0.7 - 2.4 69.3 100.0
2006 pax  Nos. (Mill.) 3.383 0.594 2.146 6.123 0.696 0.237 - 0.933 15.321 22.377
% share 15.1 2.7 9.6 27.4 3.1 1.1 - 4.2 68.5 100.0
2007 pax  Nos. (Mill.) 3.321 1.377 2.432 7.130 1.250 0.206 - 1.456 17.586 26.172
% share 12.7 5.3 9.3 27.2 4.8 0.8 - 5.6 67.2 100.0
2008 pax  Nos. (Mill.) 2.541 1.976 2.044 6.560 2.677 0.184 0.022 2.883 18.711 28.164
% share 9.0 7.0 7.3 23.3 9.5 0.7 0.1 10.2 66.5 100.0
2009 pax  Nos. (Mill.) 2.630 2.142 1.961 6.889 3.226 0.189 0.425 3.838 18.854 29.583
% share 9.4 7.2 6.6 23.3 10.9 0.6 1.4 12.9 63.7 100.0
2010 pax  Nos. (Mill.) 3.040 2.095 1.705 6.842 4.093 0.611 1.080 5.785 20.144 32.771
% share 9.3 6.4 5.2 20.9 12.5 1.9 3.3 17.6 61.5 100.0
SOURCE; DGCA

ANNEXURE V
The Boeing Company
P.O. Box 3707
Seattle, W A 96+24-2207
6-1166-DJG-776
Air India Limited
Nariman Point
218 Backbay Reclamation
MUMBAI - 400021
INDIA
Subject: Liquidated Damages—Non-Excusable Delay
Reference: Purchase Agreement No. 2998 (the Purchase Agreement) between The
Boeing Company (Boeing) and Air India Limited (Customer) relating to
Model  787-837 aircraft (the Aircraft).
This letter agreement (Letter Agreement) amends and supplements the Purchase
Agreement. All terms used but not defined in this Letter Agreement have the same
meaning as in the Purchase Agreement.
Definition of Terms
Non-Excusable Delay: Delay in delivery of any Aircraft beyond the last day of
the delivery month (Scheduled Delivery) established in the Purchase Agreement by
any cause that is not an Excusable Delay pursuant to Article 7 of the AGTA and for
which customer is otherwise entitled to a remedy from Boeing pursuant to applicable
law.
1. Liquidated Damages
The parties want to establish liquidated damages for non-excusable delays but
recognize that the amount varies over time depending on the circumstances existing at
the time a delay occurs. Therefore Boeing agrees to pay Customer Liquidated damages
for each day of Non-Excusable Delay (collectively the Non-Excusable Delay Payment
Period) at a rate to be determined using the following liquidated damages formula.
The amount of liquidated damages will be based to data in the most recent
A VMARK publication at the time Customer receives notice of a Non-Excusable Delay
from Boeing. The AVMARK average for the newest and oldest lease rates for the
model of aircraft being delayed will be divided by 30 days to determine the rate per day.
In no even will be amount paid exceed  an aggregate sum of 180 days of the rate per day
per aircraft.
P.A. No. 2998
Liquidated Damages Non-Excusable Delay
BOEING PROPRIETARY
152

153
Air India Limited
6-1166-DJG-776 Page 2
2.  Interest
In addition to the Liquidated Damages in Paragraph 1, for each day of Non-
Excusable Delay, Boeing will pay Customer interest calculated as follows (Interest):
The product of the daily interest rate (computed by dividing the interest rate in
effect for each day by 365 day, or 366 days, as the case may be) times the entire amount
of advance payments received by Boeing for such Aircraft. The interest rate in effect
for each day shall be the three month London Inter Bank Offered Rate (LIBOR) effective
the first business of the calendar quarter and reset quarterly,  as published in the Wall
Street Journal (U.S. edition).
Such interest will be calculated on a simple interest basis and paid in full at actual
delivery.
3.  Escalation
The calculation of the escalation adjustment, pursuant to Supplemental Exhibits
AEI and EEI to this Purchase Agreement, will be based on the Scheduled Delivery
month.
4.  Right of Termination
Customer willl not have the right to refuse to accept delivery of any Aircraft
because of a Non-Excusable Delay unless and until the aggregate duration of the Non-
Excusable Delay for such exceeds 180 days (Non-Excusable Delay Period). After such
Non-Excusable Delay Period, either party may terminate the Purchase Agreement as to
such Aircraft by written or telegraphic notice given to the other.
5. Termination
If the Pruchase Agreement is terminated with respect to any Aircraft for a Non-
Excusable Delay, Boeing will, in addition to paying Liquidated Damages and Interest
as described above, promptly repay to Customer the entire principal amount of the
advance payments received by Boeing for such Aircraft.
P.A. No. 2998
Liquidated Damages Non-Excusable Delay
BOEING PROPRIETARY

154
ANNEXURE VI
Timeline Brief  Details
BRIEF CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS RELATED TO THE ACQUISITION OF 43
AIRCRAFTS BY THE ERSTWHILE IAL
October, 1996 In-house task force (Aircraft Evaluation Committee) set up by
IAL undertook evaluation of various types of aircraft for
selection and purchase.
April, 1999 GoI decided to make an equity contribution of Rs. 325 crore to
IAL in phases, linked to acquisition of aircraft and subject to
improved productivity and better working results.
April - June, 1999 IA approached MoCA for acquisition of more technologically
advanced and efficient aircraft for replacement of old/leased
aircraft and for capacity enhancement to regain market share.
Aircracft Evaluation Committee shortlisted 15 aircraft types
(9 Boeing + 6 Airbus)  of both narrow-bodied  and wide-bodied
types, and identified six types of aircraft for detailed technical,
operational and financial analysis. Commercial offers were
invited for these six aircraft types, but the offers were not opened
due to General Elections.
December, 1999 IAL Board finally shortlisted 9 types of narrow-bodied aircraft.
July-August, 2000 Technical and financial bids were invited, and received, from
Boeing and Airbus.
March,  2001 Aircraft Evaluation Committee completed techno-economic
analysis of offers and submitted its report to CMD, IAL.
Evaluation report was not processed further, due to ongoing
process of disinvestment of IAL.
December, 2001 IAL invited revised financial bids, in view of the possibility of
obtaining lower prices in the aftermath of the 9/11 incident in
the United States. IAL evaluated various combinations/sets of
Boeing and Airbus narrow-bodied aircrafts in the range of
95-200 seats.
March-April, 2002 IAL Board approved acquisition of 43 aircraft (fitted with CFM
engines) comprising 19 A 319 aircraft (122 seats), 4 A 320 aircraft
(145 seats) and 20 A 321 aircraft  (172 seats) for delivery between
2002-03 and 2007-08 at an estimated cost of Rs. 10,089 crore and
submitted its project report to MoCA.
June, 2002 up to Draft PIB memo was submitted to MoCA. Matter was not
April, 2003 processed further, as IAL was on the list of PSUs to be

155
disinvested.  In April,  2003, Cabinet Committee on Disinvestments
decided to take IAL out of the PSUs to be disinvested.
April-June, 2003 Two pre-PIB meetings held.
 October, 2003 MoCA forwarded draft PIB note for consideration  of appraising
agencies (DoE, Planning Commission, etc.)
December, 2003 Note for PIB forwarded by Planning Commission to MoCA.
January, 2004 PIB meeting scheduled for 29th January, 2004 did not take place,
due to impending General Elections.
June-July, 2004 MoCA sought CVC "clearance" for  negotiation with L-1 bidder
(Airbus). CVC informed MoCA that negotiations with L-1 bidder
were permitted.
July-October, 2004 IAL (at the request/direction of MoCA) reviewed the proposal
due to lapse of time and requirement of wide-bodied aircraft for
future international operations. However, it reiterated its existing
proposal for 43 narrow-bodied Airbus aircraft.
November 10, 2004 PIB approved the acquisition proposal.
December 6, 2004 IAL constituted an inter-disciplinary Negotiation Committee to
take "final" negotiations with the L-1 bidders (Airbus and CFM).
December 14, 2004 'Óverseeing Committee' was constituted by MoCA to oversee
the process of price negitiations and to 'guide' the Negotiation
Committee; negotiations were held by Overseeing Committee
between December, 2004 to March, 2005.
August 26, 2005 CCEA constituted EGoM for one final round of negotiations
with L-1 bidders.
September 6, 2005 EGoM held final negotiations with the representatives of Airbus
and CFM.
September 29, 2005 Government conveyed its approval to IAL for acquisition of
43 Airbus aircraft.
December 16, 2005 Letter of Intent/Term Sheets were signed between IAL and
Airbus.
February, 2006 Purchase agreement were signed between IAL, Airbus and CFM.
Ocrober, 2006 to All 43 Airbus aircraft were received in time (against the stipulated
April, 2010 delivery schedule of November, 2006 to April, 2010).
Timeline Brief  Details

ANNEXURE VII
'C' AND 'D' CHECK
Aircraft Date T otal USD
VT-EVE 'C' Jan. 07 1064879.00
A3 10-300
VT AIJ 'C' Feb.07 513753.05
B777-200
VT-AIA 'C' Feb. 07 929989.00
A310-300
VT-EVF 'C' Mar. 07 617267.38
A310-300
VTAIL 'C' Feb.07 424380.43
B777-200
VT-AIB 'C' June 07 1668540.11
A310-300
VT-AIE Redelivery Check July 07 600000.00
8777-200
VT-AIR 'C' Aug. 07 817612.74
B777-200
VT-AIK Redelivery Check Dec. 10 1173732.85
B777-200
VT-AIJ Redelivery Check Dec. 10 1344124.22
B777-200
VT-AIL Redelivery Check May 11 1672970.18
B777-200
156

157
AIRCRAFT  SENT  EXTERNAL  PARTY  FOR  MAINTENANCE
CHECKS  FROM  2007-2011.
S. No. Aircraft Date Check External-Party
1. VT-EVE 07-Jan.-07 CHKC + REDELIVERYJor AMCo. Jordan
2. VT-AIJ 29-Jan.-07 CHKC SIAEC (Singapore)
3. VT-AIA 07-Feb.-07 CHKC Jor AMCo, Jordan
4. VT-EVF 23-Feb.-07 CHKC+REDELIVERY JorAMCo. Jordan
5. VT-AIL 11-Feb.-07 CHKC SIAEC (Singapore)
6. VT-AIB 29-May-07 CHKC Jor AMCo Jordan
7. VT-AIE 20-June-07 CHKC + REDELIVERYJorAMCo. Jordan
8. VT-AIR 07-Aug.-07 CHKC AMECO (Beijing)
9. VT-AIK 15-Feb.-10 CHKC+REDELIVERY AMECO (Beijing)
10. VT-AIJ 10-April-10 CHKC+REDELIVERY AMECO (Beijing)
11. VT-AIL 04-July-10 CHKC+REDELIVERY AMECO (Beijing)

158
EXPENDITURE INCURRED BY AIR INDIA (E/W INDIAN AIRLINES LTD.) ON MAINTENANCE/REPAIR/SERVICING OF
AIRCRAFT IN FOREIGN COUNTRIES DURING LAST 5 YEARS
Fin. No. of A/c Name of Expenditure
Y ear A/C Type A/C Regn. MRO incurred Reasons for sending to the MRO
(US$)
VT-EVO* 903,818.94
VT-EVO* 1,458,946.17
VT-EVO* SIAEC 894,964.84 As per Lease Agreement, to carry out 4C+6Y
VT-EVO* 907,832.72 Check at an EASA/FAA approved MRO
2007-08 7 A320 VT -EYF 1,165,128.46
VT -EY A JORANICO 2,072,340.00 As per Lease Agreement, to carry out 4C+8Y and
VT-EYB Lease Return Check at an EASA/FAA approved
2,649,401.00 MRO
VT-EVS* 886,230.29 As per Lease Agreement, to carry out 4C+BY
MAS
VT-EVT* 801.642.59 Check at an EASA/FAA approved MRO
2008-09 3 A320 As per Lease Agreement, to carry out 4C+BY and
VT-EYC JORAMCO 2,07,614.00 Lease Return Check at an EASA/FAA approved
MRO
2009-10 0 NIL NIL NIL NIL NIL
VT-IWA* 1,74809.00 To carry out Leanding Ghar Replacement on both
2010-11 2 A330 VT -IWB* REVIMA 1,773,856.00 the aircrafts.
VT-IWB* 1,501,245.00$ As per Lease Agreement  to carry out BC Check at
A330 VT -IWB* SIAEC 2,846,485.97 an EASA/FAA approved MRO
2011-12 5 V T-SCA 298,000.00#
A319 VT -SCB ADAT 298,000-00# As per Lease Agreement,  to carry out 6 year
VT -SCC 298,000.00# Check at an EASA FAA approved MRO
VT-SCC
Note: -Payment made by Air India (e/w Indian Airlines Ltd.) to the MRO.
*MRO Expenditure re-impursed by the respective lessors has not been deducted.
$ Provisional Cost.
# This is the Basic Cost. The additional cost invoice yet to be received from the MRO.

ANNEXURE VIII
Air India &
 Indian Airlines
Opportunities Together
22 March 2006
IA - AI Fact Sheet
Parameter AI IC Combined Strength
Revenue (2004-05) Rs. 7676 Cr . Rs. 5363 Cr. Rs. 13040 Cr.
Net Profit (2004-05) Rs. 96 Cr. Rs. 66 Cr. Rs. 162 Cr.
Fleet 41 70 111
Market Share (Intl.) 20% 10% 30%
Passengers carried 4.5m 8.6m 13.1m
World Rank (Revenue) 48 70 35
Estimated with new fleet 20
Asia Pacific Rank 16 21 12
Estimated with new fleet 8
Changing Global Environment
• Industry witnessing rapid developments—mergers creating mega-carriers
with increased market power
• Increasing dominance of Global airline alliances
• Consolidation a Key-driving factor- SIZE a critical success factor
• High operating cost eliminating small/inefficient airlines
• Liberalisation/Deregulation stimulating competition, mainly from low-cost
carriers
• Expensive cutting edge technologies key to survival -only major airlines
can afford these
159

160
Evolving Indian Aviation
• Entry for new domestic carriers eased -10 domestic airlines likely - Indian
Airlines is faced with greater competition
• After years of low key growth, unprecedented growth in Civil Aviation
• Structural changes -LCCs (international & domestic), airport privatisation,
financial restructuring, mergers/acquisitions.....
• Major hubs in DEL & BOM, supporting hubs in BLR & HYD, MAA & CCU
likely in near future
• With almost doubling of capacity and more routes opening up, yields
dropping
• V alue of large network critical to full service carriers like AI and IA
• Past five years—huge increases in entitlements/new routes for foreign
airlines
• Open Skies with USA, new open skies with UK/ASEAN/SAARC
• Liberal bilateral agreements with Germany, France, Chine and most
other countires
• Domestic carriers allowed to fly overseas, forge, partnerships with foreign
carriers
• Foreign carriers interlining with domestic airlines to access secondary
destinations
• Domestic airlines like Jet Airways with vast domestic networks in a position
to fill international flights with ease
• Other domestic airlines will qualify for international operations in next 3-4
years - by then they will also have vast domestic networks
• Market Shares of AI and IA have dropped.
Y ear Domestic International Total
IA IA IA
1990 100.0 24.5 6.0 30.5
1995 59.1 22.9 8.6 31.5
2000 48.7 21.1 10.1 31.2
2005 31.0 19.5 10.1 29.6
Global Alliance Phenomenon
Major Players BA, AA LH, UA, SQ AF-KLM, DL, CO
Passengers Per Year [1] 221 Million 371 Mil lion 329Million
Market Share (RPK) 15.1% 22.2% 20.2%
Countries 133 140 146
Destinations 549 770 664
[1] As in July 2005
The alliances control over 80% of global airline capacity (ASKMs)

161


162
Comparative Load Factors
Passenger Load Factors
Alliance Members Non-alliance Airlines
United Airlines 79.2 69.5 Southwest Airlines
Air France-KLM Group 78.8 69.3 South African Airlines
American Airlines 74.8 69.0 Malaysian Airlines
British Airways 74.8 69.1 Air India
Delta Airlines 74.7 67.4 Japan Airlines Corporation
Singapore Airlines 74.3 66.3 China Eastern Airlines
Lufthansa 74.0 62.2 Saudi Arabian Airlines
Alliance members achieve higher load factors
Global Alliance phenomenon
• Imperative  for AI & IA to jointly bid for Global Partnership on an urgent
basis.
Isolation Marginalisation
• AI and IA alone bring negligible value to any global alliance
• Together, with integrated domestic/international networks, they become
very attractive
• Single airline for both domestic & international operations e.g. Qantas in
Australia, V arig in Brazil, Air France, Lufthansa—use combination of narrow-
body aircraft for domestic operations and wide-body aircraft for international
operations.
Options before the two airlines
Synergy Holding Company Merger
Past Attemps
• IA &AI Managements have tried to enhance synergy/co-operation
• Flying Returns and hub & spoke operations are successful
• Other synergetic measures not as successful due differences in perception
and needs/goals
• Both airlines recognise need to integrate resources, networks, strategies
and bottomline-possible only with complete merger
• Holding company model studied—found to be inadequate
• No operational integration

163
• Two separate entities  acting independently and divergently
• Issues of network integration and expansion still remain
• Attempts to allocate international & domestic operations provoke
resistance
• Past efforts have not fructified
• Distinctive roles for AI/IA
• No competitive pressures
• Lack of Government/top management will to push merger
• Each airline felt that merger benefits only the other airline
• Fear of loss of identify and suppression
• Daunted by task of merging manpower
• Merger was never considered seriously as both airlines worked in a protected
environment—faced no serious threat of competition and had
"complementary" roles
• Now environment vastly different. If AI & IA remain separate they will
compete with each other
• Without merger—both AI & IA face marginalisation
Best Option: Merger
Both airlines believe
• Merger within a specified time frame
• Full operational and manpower integration
• With combined fleet strength of 160+aircraft, AI/IA capable of
competing with AF-KLM (480), LH-Swiss (401), BA (284), EK-UL (102),
SQ (126), Jet-Sahara (80)
• Joint Working Group to prepare business plan with combined fleet,
common schedule and single balance sheet, as one organisation
• Merger will create a dominant competitive position
• Manpower integration will pose challenges. These can be overcome.
Merger Benefits
• Large integrated domestic/international networks—seamless connectivity—
benefits of "freed up" capacity
• Dominant domestic/international market position

164
• Scope for substantial unit cost reduction
• Synergies in sales and distribution
• Optimal utilisation of aircraft, manpower & other resources
• Economies of scale in purchasing, spares inventory,  insourcing/
outsourcing
• Opportunity of create joint ventures—engineering MRO, ground handling,
cargo
Thank You!

ANNEXURE-IX
Area Actual
accrual- Remarks
Annualized
(Rs. Cr.)
Commercial 211.7 Due network restructuring i.e. change
(Network) in aircraft/outing/frequencies
Finance 598.25 Discount on ATF price/Aviation Insurance
Premium/reduction in foreign posting.
Procurement 58.51 Synergy of vendors, contracts, rates, saving
of freight, utilization of common
warehousing facilities etc.
Ground Handling 10.69 Synergy of facilities & equipment, reduction
in capex & ratinalization of contracts. Also
review & renegotiation of ground handling
agreements at foreign stations under
progress benefits to be quantified after
finalization of agreements(s)
Engineering/MRO 7.41 Cross utilization of resources
Security 1.2 Withdrawal of overlapping staff, common
utilization oftraining faculties & saving in
capital expenditure on X-ray machines
Public Relations 0.2 Mainly because now only one in-house
magazine increased royalty for Namaskar,
withdrawal of overlapping staff
Regions 3.83 Primarily surrender of overlapping space,
cross utilization of communication lines, staff
transport, canteen synergy of catering
contracts/crew hotel accommodation
Operations 644.00 ATF savings emanating out of
implementation of Fuel Efficiency Gap
Analysis (FEGA) and Flight Planning (FWZ)
Total 1535.79
165

ANNEXURE X
THE INTEGRATION OF BOTH THE COMPANIES HA VE BEEN COMPLETED IN
THE FOLLOWING AREAS
Area Item
Admin/Corporate Initiate exchange of Minutes of Board/General
Affairs meetings (on CD)
Admin/Corporate Appointment of RTI appellate authority
Affairs
Admin/Corporate Preparation of RTI material on company website
Affairs
Admin/Corporate Finalization of legal structure & legal practices for
Affairs NACIL
Alliance Mgmt Decision to join Star Alliance
Cabin crew Standardize services provided by the company to cabin
crew (transportation, hotel, etc.—excludes allowances)
Cabin crew Integration of hotel accommodation contracts for cabin crew
Cargo Operation of first freighter with common AI Cargo branding
Cargo Common policies and procedures
Cargo Interline message exchange to be functional between
current AI and IA systems
Cargo Implementation of common pricing and SPA's in the
common markets
Cargo Common training
Cargo Integrated training facilities
Commercial Preferential SPA's sale by GSA's—passenger side
Commercial Common pricing on overlap markets—AI and IC
Commercial Integrated pricing policies and control
Commercial Filling of fares from more O&Ds—IA domestic network to/
from AI international destinations
Commercial E-ticketing between AI and IA
Commercial 1-way Freesale: IA flights by AI
Commercial Integrated & Standardized MIS
Commercial Common agreements and rate structure with all CRS/GDS
166

167
Commercial C ommon marketing, promotions advertising
Commercial Common front-end interface for website
Commercial Integrated airport facilities & City Ticketing Offices
Commercial Common sales/distribution policies
Commercial Finalization of Integrated sales force structure
Commercial Single point accountability for sales force
Commercial Design common commercial training procedures
Commercial Implement common commercial training procedures
Commercial Integrated Schedule for Summer 2008
Commercial Implement all schedule/network integration 'quick wins'
Commercial Common/integrated internet booking engine
Commercial File Summer-2008 slots at coordinated airports
Commercial Consolidated Travel Agents network & common
commission/incentives structure
Commercial Integrated PSS/Single Code
Customer Service Unified Face to Costomer (UFC) at all touchpoints—signages
Customer Service Unified face to Customer (UFC) at all touchpoints-—equipment
Customer Service Unified Face to Customer (UFC) at all touchpoints—stationary
(boarding passes, baggage tags, etc.)
Customer Service Unified Face to Customer (UFC) at all touchpoints—in flight
items
Customer Service Integrated Complaint Handling
Customer Service Integrated meal plans
Customer Service Unified  Face to Customer (UFC) at all touchpoints—uniforms
Customer Service Through check-in & seamless transfers
Customer Service Common/integrated call center
Finance Synergies/quick wins in Insurance
Finance Synergies/quick wins in Fuel procurement—ATF
Finance Synergies/quick wins in number of banks & fund
management
Finance All aspects towards standardization of revenue &
expenditure accounting & processing
Area Item

168
Finance Integration of Accounting policies, legal & tax issues
Finance Integrated Financial Statement (P&L/Balance Sheet, etc.)
Finance Integrated Route Profitability reporting
Finance Design of Transfer Pricing principles between SBUs
Flight Safety Extension of support of flight safety sections to all stations
where there is presence of any airline
Flight Safety Technical feasibility study for sharing of DFDR Frequency
data and Flight Scope software systems
Flight Safety Common safety policy along with a joint flight safety manual
(with two co-existing parts) for the purposes of AOP
(subject to in-principle approval by DGCA and other
authorities)
Flight Safety Formulation of a joint emergency response plan and a
preparatory drill for the same
Flight Safety Conducting of joint Safety audits
Flight Safety FOQA harmonization
GHS AI's Contracts Section to deal with the new customer airlines
at BOM, MAA, COK, TRV , IA to deal with the new airlines
at all other stations like DEL, CCU, AMD, CCJ etc.
GHS Decision on method of handling (erstwhile AI/erstwhile
IC/combines/outsourced) of flights at following overlap
stations
—AMD, CCJ, IXE, ATQ, PNQ and TRZ
GHS Centralized control for Ground Handling at both domestic
and international handling at MAA, CCU, TRV
Equipment to be pooled and operated as a single unit
GHS GS workshop facility and training centres at all stations to
be pooled
GHS Rationalization of handling contracts at common stations
for getting a better deal
GHS Common procedure for procurement of GH equipment,
spare inventory control
GHS Common procedure for handling contract agreements
including SLAs compliance & monitoring
GHS Common training procedures
GHS Common optimized procedure to be adopted for Ramp
services and On-ramp aircraft servicing
GHS Centralized control for both domestic/international handling
Area Item

169
at DEL and BOM
GHS Ramp-side activities to be taken over by GSD at select
stations
GHS Common optimized procedure to be adopted for Terminal
side services
GHS Automation of procedures particularly computerized system
to be implemented
—Shortage to be identified and procurement to be processed
Hindi Compilation of all reports and procedures with consultation
of directors Official Language Civil Aviation to finalize way
forward
HR Organization Structure till DGM level
HR Seniority integration principles for general cadre—ED to
DGM level
HR Formulation of integrated Sports Board
HR Delegation of Administrative and Financial Powers
IT PSS
IT Email system
IT Hardware upgrade (servers)
IT Network upgrade (MPLS IP VPN, Bandwidth, etc)
IT Through check-in & seamless transfers
IT E-ticketing between AI and IA
IT Common front-end interface for website
Materials Mangt. Aircraft Spares Procurement—Synergies in Initial
provisioning
Materials Mangt. Aircraft Spares Procurement—Synergies in common parts
Materials Mangt. Aircraft Spares—Synergies in Logistics
Materials Mangt. Synergies in Office Equipment & Hardware
Materials Mangt. Synergies in Catering & Upliftment
Materials Mangt. Synergies in Cabin Consumables
Materials Mangt. Synergies in Ground catering
Materials Mangt. Synergies in Passenger hotel
Materials Mangt. Synergies in canteen supplies
Area Item

170
Materials Mangt. Synergies in Uniforms purchase
Materials Mangt. Synergies in Crew & Cabin Hotels
Materials Mangt. Synergies in Traveling/Transportation
Materials Mangt. Integrated Policy
Materials Mangt. Integrated Process
Medical Pre-employment medical standards for ground staff, cabin
crew and cockpit crew
MRO Assessment of facilities at Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata to
identify future growth capabilities
MRO Conduct feasibility study of existing component capability
list of both IA and AI for possible integration
MRO Standardising of processes in areas of:
- Quality Procedures
- MEL/CDL
-Aircraft performance
-Licensing/Approval System
-Delay and defect analysis
MRO Exchange of information on inventory management
procedures, facilities, IT systems and manpower
MRO Policy decision on outsourcing Aircraft handling at Line
Maintenance level in foreign stations, except for
certification
MRO Common engineering office in all Line Stations with all
equipments and facilities
MRO Feasibility study of avionics and accessories space,
manpower and equipment at various locations
MRO Uniform Quality Control policy for MEL Preamble
MRO Combined Hanger planning
MRO Integration of aircraft training courses
MRO Common MOE manual as per CAR 145
MRO Aircraft performance and Component Reliability Reporting
System Procedure Harmonization
MRO Combined Overhaul shop load planning
MRO Common contract for cabin cleaning
Area Item

171
MRO Common utilization of Fabrication Facilities, Non-
Destructive Testing, Composite Repair Shop, Machine
Shop, Structural shop, etc.
Network File W-2007 slots at coordinated airports
Network Rationalization of key overlap markets—AI and IC
Network S tandardized feeder flights to/from DEL for AI's
International flights
Network Deployment for Regional Jets to Full Service vs Low Cost
Carrier
Network Rationalization of key overlap markets—Full Service and
Low Cost carriers
Network S tandardized feeder flights to/from BOM for AI's
international flights
Network Complete ''clean sheet'' network planning exercise
Operations Common use of VHF company frequency
Operations FMC database (Central Training Establishment)—Obtain
value discounts from Honeywell
Operations Operations manual integration including Training, Flight
Dispatch & Operations
Operations Requirements identification for crew scheduling & rostering
software
Operations Sharing of Jepson manuals to aircrafts instead of pilots
Operations IOSA certification for AI and IC
Operations Implementation of Fuel Efficiency Gap Analysis (FEGA)
recommendations
Operations Single Air Operators Permit (AOP)
Overall Finalization of CMD
Overall Finalization of Board of directors
Overall Finalization of organization structure for NACIL
Overall Selection of leadership team—Functional Directors,
Overall Setup of Integration Cell
Overall Setup of Grievance Redressal Mechanism
Overall Setup of Communication Plan
Overall Monitoring & tracking of overall synergy benefits
Area Item

172
Overall Creation of regional organization structures
Overall Creation of integrated MIS for CMD office
Properties & Rationalization of booking offices
Facilities
Properties & Rationalization of city offices
Facilities
Properties & Rationalization of airport facilities
Facilities
Public Relations Initiation of brand building exercise for the merged entity
Public Relations Rationalization of in-flight and in-house magazines
Public Relations Initiate joint handling of media relations
Public Relations finalize common PR agency
Security Exchange data on manpower and other available resources
in both security departments
Security Prepare note on organization structure for unified security
departments in the merged entity
Security Integration & harmonization of the 14 airline security
functions
Security Visit to airports to study processes and implementation of
aviation security processes
Security Initiate use of common aviation training facilities
Security Initiate common use of X-BIS and BRS systems at major
international airports
Security Initiate use of common manpower available
Security Present draft note to the ministry on extensions of single
agency concept to all international airports in India
Security Initiate manpower assessment to cater to security
requirements as per R.P. Singh Committee
Training Common e-mail ID for sharing of information
Training Integration of training manual for AOP
Training Integration of training manual for IOSA
Training Sharing of printing press facilities/resources
Training Harmonization of issuance of circulars/manuals
Area Item

173
Training Maintenance of common training records
Training Finalization of training captains strength and ratio per fleet
for merged entity
Area Item

ANNEXURE XI
AIRCRAFT UTILIZATION(DAILY HOURS) 2011-12
Airline A-319
Utilisation
Aeroflot 10:24
Air Canada 10:25
Air China 10:15
Air France 08:14
A VIANCA 16:19
British Airways 08:20
China Southern 09:54
Delta Air 08:06
LAN Airlines 10:07
Lufthansa 08:03
Turkish Airlines 11:52
United Airlines 12:59
Airline A-320
Utilisation
Aeroflot 10:00
Air Canada 10:35
Air China 09:09
Air France 08:25
Air New Zealand 08:56
All Nippon Airways 06.56
Austrian 09:46
British Airways 09:14
Delta Air 10:10
Lufthansa 09:04
Qantas Airways 10:06
United Airlines 12:49
174

175
Aeroflot 08:54
Air Canada 13:27
Air China 09:58
Air France 08:11
A VIANCA 09:07
British Airways 08:05
China Southern 09:24
Lufthansa 08:57
Qantas Airways 10:12
Saudi Arabian Airlines 07:02
Turkish Airlines 12:05
US Airways 07:31
AIRCRAFT UTILISATION (DAILY HOURS)
APRIL-MAY ,  2012
A319 9.9
A320 8.6
A321 10.3
Airline A-321
Utilisation

ANNEXURE XII
THE MAJOR YEAR-WISE REASONS FOR INCREASE IN LOSSES FROM 2007-08
ONWARDS ARE GIVEN AS UNDER:
Increase in loss during 2007-08
In the first year of operations of the company i.e. 2007-08, the company posted
a Net Loss (After Tax) of Rs. 2226.16 crores as against the combined Net Loss (After
Tax) of erstwhile Indian Airlines Ltd. and erstwhile Air India Ltd. amounting to
Rs. 688.22 crores in 2006-07.
The major reasons for increase in loss by Rs. 1537.94 crores are on account of
the following:
* Decline in passenger revenue by Rs. 288 crores due to decline in carriage in
RPKM by 1.8% (Rs. 191 crores) and decline in Yield by 1% i.e. from Rs. 3.25
to Rs. 3.22/RPK (Rs. 97 crores).
* Increase in fuel cost by Rs. 305 crores due to increase in A TF rates by 8%.
* Increase in interest cost by Rs. 425 crores.
* Increase in depreciation by Rs. 52 crores.
* Decrease in Other Revenue/Increase in Expenses by Rs. 468 crores.
Increase in loss during 2008-09
In the second year of operations i.e. 2008-09, the company suffered a Net Loss
(After Tax) of Rs. 5548.26 crores as compared to Net Loss (After Tax) of
Rs. 2226.16 crores in 2007-08.
The Major reasons for increase in loss by Rs. 3322.10 crores are on account of
the following:
* Decline in passenger revenue by Rs. 687 crores due to decline in carriage in
terms of RPKM by 16% (Rs. 1764 crores) due to recession. The reduction in
carriage was partially offset by increase in yield by 10.9% i.e. from Rs. 3.22 to
Rs. 3.57/RPKM (Rs. 1077 crores).
* Increase in fuel cost by Rs. 808 crores due to increase in A TF rates by 24%.
* Increase in depreciation by Rs. 464 crores mainly due to induction of new
aircraft.
* Increase in interest cost on working capital borrowings by Rs. 736 crores.
* Increase in interest cost on aircraft project by Rs. 223 crores.
* Decrease in Other Revenue/Increase in Expenses by Rs. 404 crores.
Increase in loss during 2009-10
The company has posted a Net Loss (After Tax) of Rs. 5552.44 crores in 2009-10
as against a Net Loss (After Tax) of Rs. 5548.26 crores in 2008-09.
176

177
The major reasons for the minor increase in loss by Rs. 4.18 crores are on the
account of the following:
* Decline in fuel cost by Rs. 2046 crores partly on account of decline in fuel
prices by 25% and FEGA savings.
* Decrease in Passenger Revenue by Rs. 117 crores on account of decline in
fall in yield per RPKM by 12% (from Rs. 3.57 to Rs. 3.16/RPKM) leading to a
drop in pax revenue by Rs. 1188 crores. Although decline in yield was partially
offset by increase in carriage in terms of RPKM by 11.6% (Rs. 1071 crores).
* Decline in Charter Revenue by Rs. 170 crores mainly due to decrease in Haj
Charter Revenue and a decline in Block Seat Arrangement (BSA)/Interline
Revenue by Rs. 125 crores.
* Decline in Handling Receipts by Rs. 79 crores.
* Increase in the expense of Traffic Handling by Other Operators by
Rs. 75 crores.
* Increase in Interest on working capital borrowings by Rs. 522 crores due to
increase in borrowing rates and working capital limits.
* Increase in interest on aircraft project loans by Rs. 246 crores due to induction
of new aircraft.
* Increase in depreciation cost by Rs. 164 crores due to induction of new
aircraft.
* Increase in other Expenses/Reduction in Revenue by Rs. 544 crores.
Increase in loss during 2010-11
The company has suffered a Net Loss (After Tax) of Rs. 6865.17 crores during
2010-11 as against the loss before tax of Rs. 5552.44 crores in 2009-10.
The major reasons for increase in loss by Rs. 1313 crores are on account of the
following:
* Increase in fuel cost by Rs. 1097 crores in mainly on account of increase in
fuel rates by 18.6% and increse in operations by 4.4%.
* Increase in Interest on working capital borrowings by Rs. 453 crores due to
increase in borrowing rates and working capital limits.
* Increase in interest on aircraft project loans by Rs. 408 crores due to induction
of new aircraft.
* Increase in depreciation cost by Rs. 301 crores due to induction of new
aircraft.

178
* Increase in Staff Costs by Rs. 370 crores mainly due to increase in Provision
for Gratuity by Rs. 292 crores due to increase in limits from Rs. 3.50 lakhs to
Rs. 10.00 lakhs and increase in VDA rates by Rs. 84 crores.
* Increase in Yield per RPKM by 9.5% and increase in carriage in terms of
RPKM by 4% contributed to an increase in Passenger Revenue by
Rs. 1294 crores which partially offset the increase in expenses during the
year.
* Increase in Revenue/Decrease in other expenses by Rs. 22 crores.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 11TH JANUARY , 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Wednesday, the 11th January, 2012 from
1430 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Room No. '63', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Sanjay Brij Kishorlal Nirupam
5. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
6. Dr. M. Thambidurai
7. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
Secretariat
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinor Rai — C&AG
2. Ms. Malashri Prasad — Deputy C&AG
3. Ms. Subha Kumar — Director General of Audit
(Report Central)
4. Ms. Saroj Punani — Director General of Audit (Commercial)
179

180
WITNESS
Representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Dr. Nasim Zaidi — Secretary
2. Shri S. Machendranathan — AS&FA
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the C&AG of India to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman then apprised the Members that the sitting
was convened to take Evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
on 'Performance Audit of Civil Aviation in India' based on C&AG Report No. 18 of
2011-12, Union Government (Civil).
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) were
called in and the Committee proceeded with the examination of the subject. The Secretary,
Civil Aviation apprised the Committee about the kind of operations the airlines undertook
with deregulation. He  enumerated the reasons for the decline of the company. The
Members then sought clarifications regarding several aspects of the ailing national
carrier's losses viz. fleet acquisition, merger, huge debt burden, poor financial and
operational performance, route rationalization etc. The Secretary put forth the reasons
for delay in acquisition, on the financing aspect and so on. However, the Committee
were not satisfied with the Secretary's reply and desired that the representatives of the
Ministry re-appear before the Committee with all the details and clarify their queries.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry for deposing before
the Committee and gave two weeks time to the Ministry of Civil Aviation to furnish the
details on the various points raised by the Committee. The Chairman also thanked the
representatives of the office of the C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance to
the Committee in the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting was kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 19TH JANUARY, 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 19th January, 2012 from
1130 hrs. to 1415 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'G-074', Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
P
RESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi—Chairman
MEMBER
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
4. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
5. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
6. Shri K. Sudhakaran
7. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Shri Naresh Gujral
10. Shri J.D. Seelam
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod  Rai — C&AG
2. Ms. Malashri Prasad — Deputy C&AG
3. Ms. Subha Kumar — Direcot General of Audit (Report Central)
4. Ms. Saroj Punani — Director General of Audit (Commercial)
5. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director of Audit (Economic
and Service Industries)
181

182
WITNESSES
Representatives of Erstwhile Air India
1. Shri K.M. Unni — SBU Head MRO (Airframe)
2. Shri S. Venkat — Director (Finance)
3. Shri F.J. Vaz — Executive Director (Commercial)
Representatives of Erstwhile Indian Airlines
1. Shri Vipin K. Sharma — SBU Head MRO (E&C)
2. Shri Deepak Brara — Executive Director (Hqrs.)
3. Smt. V . Bhandari — Executive Director (IR)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman then apprised the Members that the Sitting
was convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of NACIL (now renamed as
Air India) on 'Performance Audit of Civil Aviation in India' based on C&AG Report
No. 18 of 2011-12, Union Government (Civil). Thereafter the representatives of the
erstwhile Air India were called in. Before commencing the examination, they were told
that the deliberations of the Committee were confidential and not to be divulged to any
outsider untill the report on the subject was laid in the Parliament. The Commitee then
proceeded with the examination of the subject.
3. The Members sought to know the background of merger, reasons for acquisition
of aircraft, the impact of open sky policy, earnings of the organization before and after
the merger and so on. The Representatives answered the queries of the Members and
assured that the information which was not readily available with them would be
furnished to the Committee.
4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the erstwhile Air India for
deposing before the Committee and directed that written information on the various
points raised during the oral evidence be furnished to the Committee at the earliest.
5. The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed the representatives of erstwhile Indian
Airlines and apprised them that the Sitting had been convened to hear their views
regarding the points raised in CAG Report on ''Performance of Civil Aviation in India'.
They were told that the deliberations of the Committee were confidential and not to be
divulged to any outsider until the presentation of the Report of the Committee to the
House. The Chairman asked the SBU-Head MRO (E&C) to give his views on the
issues of merger, acquisition of aircraft by erstwhile Indian Airlines and so on. The
Members also sought the reasons with respect to the decline of the airline and its poor
financial position. The representatives of the erstwhile IAL attended to these queries
of the Members.

183
6. At the end, the Chairman thanked the representatives of the erstwhile IAL for
appearing before the Committee and asked them to furnish requisite information at the
earliest. He also stated that the representatives, may be asked to re-appear before the
Committee, if need be. The Chairman also thanked the representatives of the office of
the C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance to the Committee in the examination
of the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the Sitting was kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX III
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2011-12) HELD ON 22ND FEBRUARY , 2012
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Wednesday, the 22nd February, 2012
from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. in Room No. '53' , Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Sanjay Brij Kishorlal Nirupam
6. Shri  Jagdambika Pal
7. Shri Adhi Sankar
8. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri K. Sudhakaran
10. Dr. Girija V yas
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Tariq Anwar
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Naresh Gujral
14. Shri Prakash Javadekar
15. Shri J. D. Seelam
16. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
184

185
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Subha Kumar — Director General of Audit (Report
Central)
2. Shri Anand Mohan Bajaj — Principal Director (Economic and
Services Ministries)
3. Ms. Sudha Rajan — Director (PAC)
Representatives of the Associations
1. Shri K.R. Chidambaram — President, Indian Airlines
Officers'Association
2. Shri Arjun Singh Bisht — President, Indian Aircraft Technicians'
Association
3. Shri Ganesh Sabnis — President, Air India Aircraft
Engineers'Association
4. Shri A.K. Mohan — President, Airlines Ground Instructors'
Association
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Officers of C&AG
of India to the sitting of the Committee. Soon thereafter, one Member pointed out that
there was paucity of time to go through the bulky papers which had been circulated to
the Members for the sitting. The Member was explained that the full set of papers was
received on 17th February, 2012 from the Ministry of Civil Aviation and they were
circulated on the same day. To this, the Member suggested that one set of papers be
sent to the permanent address of Members. He was informed that as per the Directions
of the Speaker, papers for the sitting are circulated only at the local address of the
Members. Not satisfied with the position explained, the Member observed that there
was an intention that Members 'do not go through the papers', which was objected to
by the Chairman. Thereupon, the Member walked out of the sitting despite persuasion
of many Members not to do so.
3. The Chairman, then, placed before the Committee, the proposal for on-the-
spot Study Visit Programme to Hyderabad and Gadimoga from 29th February to
2nd March, 2012. The Members deliberated on the pros and cons of undertaking such
a Study Visit including the dates on which this tour should be undertaken. When some
Members sought clarifications about who would meet the expenditure, the Chairman
clarified that all the expenditure would be borne by the Lok Sabha Secretariat. After
further discussions, the Committee decided to defer the tour, in view of the pre-
occupation of several Members on these dates.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Indian Airlines Officers’ Association
(IAOA), Indian Aircraft Technicians Association (IATA), Air India Aircraft Engineers’
Association (AIAEA) and Airlines Ground Instructors'Association (AGIA) were called
in and the Committee proceeded with the examination of the subject 'Performance of
Civil Aviation in Indiabased on C&AG Report No. 18 of 2011-12, Union Government

186
(Civil). The representatives of the Associations presented their views on the critical
aspects ailing the national carrier viz. fleet acquisition, merger, HR issues, huge debt
burden, poor financial and operational performance, route rationalization, bilaterals
etc. and also put forth their suggestions regarding how the national carrier could
regain its past glory.
5. The Chairman then thanked the representatives of the Associations for
deposing before the Committee. The Chairman also thanked the representatives of the
officers of the C&AG of India for providing valuable assistance to the Committee in
the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
6. Thereafter, the Members were informed that the afternoon sitting for taking
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation stood cancelled
in view of the suggestions of some Members.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

APPENDIX IV
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2013-14) HELD ON 30TH JANUARY, 2014
The Public Accounts Committee sat on Thursday, the 30th January, 2014 from
1130 hrs. to 1400 hrs. in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri`Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Prakash Javadekar
9. Dr. V . Maitreyan
10. Shri N.K. Singh
11. Smt. Ambika Soni
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Jaya Kumar T. — Additional Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Deputy Secretary
5. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
6. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
7. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
187

188
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and  Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Dy. C&AG
2. Smt. Usha Sankar — Dy. C&AG
3. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit
4. Smt. Ila Singh — Director General of Audit
5. Shri C. Gopinathan — Director General of Audit
6. Shri Jayant Sinha — Pr. Director of Audit
7. Shri Purushottam Tiwari — Pr. Director of Audit
8. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Pr. Director of Audit
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Representatives
of the Officer of C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised
that the meeting was convened to consider and adopt nine Draft Reports (five Original
and four Action Taken Reports) of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up
the following draft Reports one by one for consideration.
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on 'Performance of Civil Aviation in India';
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** *** ***
(vii) *** *** *** ***
(viii) *** *** *** ***
(ix) * * * * * * * * * * * *
3. After detailed deliberations, the draft Reports at Sl. Nos. (i), (ii) and (iii) were
adopted with some modifications/amendments that are given at Annexure and the rest
were adopted without any changes. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to
finalise these Reports, in light of their suggestions and the factual verifications received
from the Audit and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***Matter does not pertain to this report.

ANNEXURE
MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY THE PAC IN THE DRAFT
REPORTS
Sl. Page No. Recommendation For Read
No.  Para/Line No.
1 . ***
*** *** ***
2. Draft Report on 'Performance of Civil Aviation in India'
165 34/first line In fine To conclude
3 . ***
(i) *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** *** ***
(v) *** *** *** ***
(vi) *** *** *** ***
189
***Matter does not pertain to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—4337LS—22.08.2014.