PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2009-10
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
ACCELERATED POWER DEVELOPMENT AND
REFORM PROGRAMME (APDRP)
[ACTION TAKEN  BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE  CONTAINED IN THEIR SEVENTY-SEVENTH
REPORT (14TH) LOK SABHA)]
MINISTRY OF POWER
THIRD REPORT
3

THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
2009-10
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
ACCELERATED  POWER  DEVELOPMENT
AND REFORM PROGRAMME (APDRP)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Seventy-seventh Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF POWER
Presented to Lok Sabha on   26.11.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   26.11.2009
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
November, 2009/Kartika, 1931 (Saka)

PAC  No.  1898
Price: Rs. 50/-
©2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of  Business
in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002

 CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10).......................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER  I. Report .................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER  II. Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by Government ............................................. 10
CHAPTER  III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government.................................................... 21
C
HAPTER  IV . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration................ 32
C
HAPTER V . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
 the Government have furnished interim replies........... 39
APPENDICES
I . Minutes  of   the  third   sitting   of   Public   Accounts
Committee  (2009-10) held on 27.10.2009...................... 42
 II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their  Seventy-seventh Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)..................................................... 44

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
Shri Jaswant Singh — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Gopinath Munde
9. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
                                                     S
ECRETARIAT
    1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy  Director
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2009-10), having been authorized by
the Committee, do present on their behalf this Third  Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
action taken by Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Seventy-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Accelerated
Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP)".
2. The Seventy-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd October,  2008.
Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report  were received on 23rd July, 2009. The Public Accounts Committee considered
and adopted their Third Report at the sitting held on 27th October, 2009. Minutes of
the sitting are given at Appendix I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventy-seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
is given at Appendix II.
N
EW DELHI; JASWANT  SINGH,
13 November, 2009 Chairman,
22 Kartika, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Commitee contained in
their 77th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the year ended 31st March, 2006 (No. 16 of 2007), Union Government
(Civil—Performance Audit) relating to “Accelerated Power Development and Reform
Programme (APDRP).”
2. The 77th Report (14th Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd October,
2008. The Committee had dealt with various issues arising out of Audit Paragraph
concerning the implementation and operationalisation of Accelerated Power
Development and Reform programme (APDRP) with a view to assess the efficacy of
the steps taken towards reforms and other policy measures for helping the State power
utilities to bring improvement in their efficiency towards bringing about commercial
viability in the power sector. The Committee had also examined the major initiatives
taken towards establishment of regulatory mechanism at central and State level,
restructuring of the State power utilities, metering of feeders and consumers, energy
accounting & auditing etc. and whether funds meant for the Power sector were being
utilised properly and efficiently.
3. The 77th Report contained 27 Observations/Recommendations and the Action
Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Power in respect of all
Observations/Recommendations which are categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government.
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 2,11,14,15,16,19,21,25,& 27
(Para Nos. 139,148, 151, 152, 153, 156, 158, 162 and 164)
Total: 9
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government.
Sl. Nos.  3,4,5,6,8,9,10,18,20,24 &26
(Para Nos. 140, 141, 142, 143, 145, 146, 147, 155, 157, 161 and 163)
Total : 11
Chapter-III
1

2
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration.
Sl. Nos. 1,7,12,22 & 23
(Para Nos. 138, 144, 149, 159 and160)
Total : 5
Chapter-IV
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect  of which the Government have
furnished interim replies.
Sl. Nos. 13 & 17
(Para Nos. 150 and 154)
Total :2
Chapter-V
4. The Committee in their 77th Report on the subject had made the following important
Observations/Recommendations:—
(i) The Committee had strongly recommended that the Ministry of Power should
take corrective measures with a view to ensure that the “Accelerated Power
Development and Reform Programme (APDRP)” is properly implemented at
least in the XIth Five Year Plan and  to re-evaluate the targets for Aggregate
Technical and Commercial (AT&C) Losses so that the targeted reduction in
these losses is achieved in the reformulated APDRP in XIth Plan.
(ii) Keeping in view the fact that there were no prescribed norms for assessment of
unmetered consumers and the criteria for assessment was not uniform amongst
various billing authorities, the Committee had desired that the Ministry should
issue fresh directions to the State Governments for making the assessment
procedure more organized and uniform with an aim to significantly reduce the
AT&C.
(iii) Perturbed at the lapses in maintenance of records, its compilation and incorrect
reporting of figures, the Committee had recommended that the responsibility
of the officers concerned be fixed for the same. The Ministry of Power and the
SEBs/Utilities had also been recommended to evolve a coordinated and
integrated system of record-keeping and reporting with periodical reconciliation
of figures in order to avoid incorrect financial reporting by the State
Governments/Utilities.
(iv) Considering the fact that delayed implementation of APDRP projects was due
to delayed/non-release of funds by the State Governments to the State Power
Utilities/SEBs, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should devise
a sound mechanism for release of grants to the State Governments. Further, the
Committee had expressed the view that immediate onward release of funds to
the SEBs/Utilities by the State Governments also warranted urgent attention of
the Ministry.

3
(v) The Ministry had released incentive claims to the SEBs/Utilities without
satisfying themselves that the incentives were being utilized for the power
sector only. As the incentive scheme was conceived for effective implementation
of the programme, the Committee had recommended to the Ministry of Power
to establish a sound mechanism for ensuring that the incentive claims of States/
Utilities are scrutinized properly in the Ministry before establishing eligibility
and realization of the incentive. The Committee had also expected the Ministry
to consider withholding the claims of the defaulter States who have been
utilizing the incentives for other purposes.
(vi) As theft of energy constitutes a substantial part of commercial loss, the
Committee had desired the Ministry to ensure adherence to the guidelines in
this regard, namely setting up vigilance squads, detection and follow-up of
cases involving theft of energy, making full use of legal provisions for launching
prosecution against offenders and conducting periodic review of cases and
imposing severe penalties for tampering with meter seal. The Committee had
emphasized to the Ministry to prioritise the Installation of automated systems
and application of Information Technology for recording of data.
(vii) The Committee had recommended that the Ministry should take up IT
enablement on priority in order to ensure that the envisaged objectives of
power distribution reforms are achieved. They were also asked to fix up a
deadline for this purpose. The Ministry had been asked to further ensure that
the States expected to adopt the IT based system within the time limit fixed by
it, should do the same failing which further sanctioning of fund to these States
should be stopped and at the same time transmission of more power to these
States should be withheld.
(viii) The Committee had desired that stringent measures were urgently required to
revamp the existing monitoring/supervisory mechanism prevailing in the
Ministry.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Power in respect of all
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.
A. STRENGTHENING OF EXISTING INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE STATES
FOR PROPER EXECUTION OF RESTRUCTURED APDRP
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1 Para 138)
6. In their 77th Report the Committee had observed that  the utilization of funds by
the Ministry of Power sharply decreased from 92.21 per cent in 2004-2005 to 57.60 per
cent in 2006-07. They were perturbed over the poor utilization of the earmarked funds
by such an important Ministry, resulting  in non-achievement of targets set under
various programmes. The Committee expressed their  displeasure over the lackadaisical
approach of the Ministry, as many  schemes/programmes for power reforms could not
make proper progress and the  funds remained idly parked year after year, which could
have been gainfully  utilized  for the fund-starved schemes/programmes. The Committee

4
had desired  that the Ministry of Power should critically examine  the reasons responsible
for such a dismal situation, and evolve realistic parameters to avoid such wide  variations
between the sanctioned provisions and actual expenditure.
7. While providing the reasons for their dismal performance in this regard, the
Ministry have stated as under:—
“Earlier the State level Utilities were not equipped to handle  the scheme
simultaneously in different towns, as the Utilities did not have the dedicated
implementation group. Further, lack of willingness to award the contract on
turnkey basis  was also one of the main reasons  for delay   in  implementation of
the Schemes. In the Restructured APDRP for XI Plan, time bound  implementation
programme has  been envisaged for each Scheme. If the Utilities fail in timely
completion of the Schemes, the loan sanctioned for the Schemes would not be
convered  into grant. Therefore, the utilities  have to ensure  timely  completion
of Schemes.”
8. The Committee feel that proper utilization of funds earmarked for restructured
APDRP for XIth Plan and timley completion of the projects selected during these
programmes should be a top priority of the Ministry.  The Ministry have indicated
that conversion of loan sanctioned to utilities for  schemes into grant has been linked
to their timely completion. The Committee hope that this provision shall have  salutary
effect on the  various projects and their timely completion. Moreover, they expect the
Ministry to plug  the loopholes that have been identified earlier as clear impediments
in the realization of the targets set for APDRP. The Committee  desire that the
Ministry must impress upon the State Governments to strengthen their existing
infrastructure on the field and aguments the ability of  State level utilities to carry
out the selected projects with precision and professionalism.
B. ACHIEVING TARGETS IN TERMS OF AGGREGATE TECHNICAL &
COMMERCIAL (AT&C) LOSSES
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7 Para 144)
9. In their earlier Report, the Committee had iner-alia observed that the objective of
reduction of Aggregate Technical and Commercial  (AT&C) Losses, as  envisaged in
the APDRP,  had remained largely unfulfilled. The Committee had also expressed their
dissatisfaction over the fact that the Ministry of Power could not provide cognet
reasons for non-achievement of targeted reduction in AT&C   Losses. The Secretary,
Ministry of Power during evidence had conceded in  this  regard that the goal of 15 per
cent loss  might not be possible, as the performance  in some of the States had been
patchy due to  varied levels of administration and  superintendence. The Committee
had also expressed their  displeasure over the fact that there were significant  deficiencies
even in the maintenance of records  relating to AT&C losses including absence of
proper  guidelines  and supporting  records. Consequently, the data  reported by the
Ministry could not be regarded as authentic, accurate and acceptable. The Committee
were dismayed that the  Ministry of Power did not have  any mechanism at all to access
and monitor the significant reduction in AT&C losses considered to be an inherent
measure of the  overall efficiency of power distribution. The Committee had strongly

5
recommended that the Ministry  should take corrective measures with a view to  ensure
that the programme was properly  implemented at least in the XIth Five Year Plan and
to re-evaluate the targets for AT&C losses  so that the targeted  production in these
losses was achieved in the reformulated APDRP in XIth Plan.
10. The Ministry of Power in their  reply  have inter-alia stated that it was true that
objective of reduction in A T&C  losses could not  be achieved by the States  but there
are many States, who have shown  significant improvement in the reducation  of
A T&C losses. As regards formulation of any  baseline data on the basis of which,
Ministry of Power could envisage that the AT&C losses would be brought down to
15%, the Ministry through their Action Taken Note  have informed the Committee that
they propose  to establish the same under the Restructured APDRP for XIth plan.
11. Taking note of the reductions brought about in AT&C losses by some of the
States,  the Committee are of the view that the Ministry should take expeditious
measures to replicate  the same in other States as well. They further reiterate that
the Ministry should ensure the maintenance of  authentic, accurate and acceptable
date in this regard, failing which, the assessment of achieved targets in terms of
AT&C losses  would become  difficult.
C. BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEEN  A VERAGE  REVENUE REALISATION
(ARR) AND A VERAGE COST OF SUPPLY (ACS)
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12 Para 149)
12. The Committee’s  examination of the APDRP had  brought out that high cost of
generation,  high cost of power  purchase, high maintenance cost, poor  billing and
metering, high A T&C  loss beyond the levels allowed by the regulator etc. were the
main contributory reasons for the gap between   ARR and ACS. The  Committee had
expressed the desire  that well conceived measures as,  enumerated by the Ministry,
such as  upgradation and strengthening of the weak  distribution system, relocation of
distribution  sub-stations, provision of additional distribution sub-stations, improvement
in metering and billing, timely filling of  Annual Revenue Realisation with State Electricity
Regulatory Commissions and proper  network  planning  for future expansion etc.
ought to be implemented earnestly in letter and spirit in order to eliminate the gap
between  ARR and ACS in future.
13.   The Ministry of Power in their Action  taken Note have stated as under:—
“The issue has been addressed under Part-A of R-APDRP, which  includes the
projects  for establishment of baseline data and IT applications for energy
accounting/auditing & IT based consumer service centers. Part-B shall include
regular distribution strengthening projects. The above recommendations have
been covered under Part-A of R-APDRP  Preparation of Base-line date for the
project are a covering  Consumer Indexing GIS Mapping, Metering of Distribution
Transformers and Feeders  and Automatic Data  Logging for all Distribution
Transformers  and Feeders  and SCADA/DMS  system for big cities only. It
would include Asset Mapping of the entire distribution network  at and below
the 11KV  transformers and include and Distribution Transformers and Feeders,
Low Tension lines, poles and other distribution  network equipment. It will also

6
include adoption of IT  applications for meter reading, billing & collection, energy
accounting and auditing, redressal of consumer grievances, establishment of IT
enabled  consumer services centres etc. the baseline  data shall be certified by an
independent agency appointed by the Ministry of Power.”
14. As regards the gap between ARR and ACS,  the Ministry have informed that the
gap between ARR and ACS can be  reduced by the action of respective State
Governments and SERCs.
15. The Ministry have contended that  the gap between Average Revenue Realisation
(ARR) and Average Cost of Supply (ACS) can be reduced by the specific action of
respective State Governments and State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs).
The Committee feel that the Ministry should continuously impress upon the State
Governments, at appropriate level, to take effective and concrete  measures to address
this problem  in right earnest.  The Ministry should not be content  by merely passing
on the whole responsibility to the State Governments  and must supplement effective
execution of the desired measures towards bridging the gap between  ARR and ACS.
The  Ministry should  apprise  the  Committee about the initiatives taken by them to
address this issue.
D. LAPSES DUE TO RELEASE OF FUNDS WITHOUT STIPULATED
CERTIFICATES  UNDER THE   APDRP  SCHEME  IN THE  XTH  PLAN
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13 Para 1 50)
16. The Committee in their 77th Report had observed that in terms of the APDRP
guidelines, States  receiving assistance  under this programme would have to open a
separate account/sub-account head to separate account classification. States  which
did not open  a separate account were not  entitled to receive any funds under APDRP.
However, the Committee  had  observed that the Ministry of Power  continued to
recommend release  of funds without the stipulated certificates  from the State
Governments regarding opening of a separate account head and  expenditure statement
prepared from the State monthly accounts. The  Committee had found that 17 out of
29 States where the programme was being  implemented, either did not operate  separate
account heads and bank  accounts  for APDRP funds, or did not operate them correctly.
The Committee  felt  that in the  absence  of separate accounting classification, practical
problems would be faced  in so far as ensuring the usage of these funds only for
legitimate and earmarked  purpose was concerned. While strongly disapproving the
failure of the Ministry to act sternly against such financial irregularities, the Committee
had recommended  a probe into these and responsibility fixed for the lapses.
17.  While responding to this issue  the Ministry in their Action Taken Note have
informed as under:—
“Under Restructured-APDRP, the funds for execution of sanctioned  Scheme are
being credited directly to the specific account  of Utility meant  for implementation
of Schemes of Restructured-APDRP.”

7
18. The Committee had pointed out that 17 out of 29 States, where the APDRP was
being implemented,  neither operated separate  account  heads  and bank accounts for
APDRP funds, nor operaed them correctly. The Ministry have responded that under
the Restructured—APDRP the funds for execution of sanctioned Scheme are being
credited directly  to the specific account  of the Utilities. The Ministry’s reply is,
however, silent  about  fixing  the responsibility for the lapses that had led to release
of funds under the scheme without stipulated certificates from the State Government
regarding opening of a separate account head and expenditure statements prepared
from the State monthly accounts. The Committee, would like to be informed about the
action taken  in respect of funds that could not be utilized  properly  or were misued
because of the State Governments not opening an account meant for the stipulated
purpose.
E. STRENGTHENING OF MONITORING MECHANISM AND CALCULATION
OF PENAL INTEREST
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17 Para 154)
19. The Committee had observed that as of March, 2006 eight States failed to
release Rs.412.03 crore of APDRP funds to the SEBs/Utilities. There  were significant
delays on the part of the State Governments  in release of APDRP funds ranging from
7 days to 1095 days. Further, the Committee were constrained to note that the Ministry
was not monitoring the details of such delays, nor did they  intimate the Committee on
the initiation and progress to levy  penal interest through  the Ministry  of Finance
even in a single case of delayed release of APDRP funds.  With regard  to the calculation
and recovery  of penal interest  from the State  Governments for delay in release  of
funds,  the Ministry  had stated that it would be  done through Ministry of Finance.
Keeping in view  the fact that delayed  implementation of APDRP projects was due to
delayed/non-release of funds by  the State Governments to the State Power Utilities/
SEBs, the Committee had  recommended that the Ministry should devise a sound
mechanism for release of  Grants  to the   State Governments. The Committee  had
further urged the Ministry  to ensure immediate  onward release of the funds  to the
SEBs/Utilities  by the State Governments.
20. While apprising the Committee about the steps taken in this direction, the
Ministry  have, through  their Action Taken Notes  simply stated that the funds for
execution of sanctioned Scheme are being credited directly to the specific account of
Utility meant for implementation of Schemes of Restructured-APDRP.
21. The Committee  have been informed that under the restructured APDRP under
Central Sector Scheme   during XI Plan  funds  shall be released  directly to the State
Power Utility. They, however, note that the Ministry’s  reply is conspicuously silent
on their observation regarding lack of proper monitoring of delays in the release  of
APDRP funds to the SEBs/Utilities.  The Committee, reiterate that the Ministry
should take  necessary steps to  strengthen the prevalent monitoring  mechanism
urgently to avoid such  delays  in the future. They further  expect the Ministry to
apprise them  regarding the calculation and recovery of penal interest from the State
Governments for delays in release  of funds.

8
F.  ADHERENCE  TO  THE  LIMITS  SET  FOR IT  ENABLEMENT  BY  THE  STATES
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22 Para 159)
22. According to APDRP Guidelines, Information Technology (IT) and Computer
Aided Tools  for revenue increase, outage reduction, monitoring  and control play a
vital role in distribution management. The performance  Audit of  APDRP  and the
Committee’s  examination of issue raised  by Audit had relvealed  poor progress in IT
works, in particular  those relating to customer  indexing, digital  mapping and
Supervisory Control  and Data  Acquisition, which  could  play a vital  role  in revenue
increase,  reduction in AT&C  losses,  and controlling  commercial  losses especially for
metering, meter  reading, billing, collection and outage  reduction. The Committee,
therefore, in their  Report,  had inter-alia recommended  that the Ministry should take
up IT enablement on priority in order to ensure  that the envisaged objectives of power
distribution reform were achieved. The  Committee  had asked  the Ministry to fix up a
deadline for this purpose, by which if  the States did  not adopt the IT based system,
they should be disallowed not only sanction of funds but also the availability of more
power in their States. Stringent guidelines were also  required to be issued by the
Ministry to State Governments in this regard.
23. In  their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have informed as follows:—
“The issue has been taken care under Part-A of R-APDRP, which include  the
projects for establishment of baseline data and IT applications for energy
accounting/auditing & IT based consumer service  centers. Part-B shall  include
regular distribution  strengthening projects. The above  recommendations have
been  covered under  Part-A of R-APDRP. The brief  scope of works to be
executed  under Part-A is as follows: Preparation of  Base-line date for the project
area covering Consumer Indexing, GIS  Mapping, Metering of Distrbution
Transformers and Feeders, and  Automatic Data Logging for all Distribution
Transformers and Feeders and  SCADA/DMS system for big cities only. It
would include  Asset Mapping of  the entire distribution network  at and below
the 11KV transformers and   include the Distribution Transformers and Feeders,
Low Tension lines,  poles and other distribution network equipment. It will also
include adoption  of IT applications for meter reading, billing & collection, energy
accounting  & auditing, redressal of consumer grievances, establishment  of IT
enabled  consumer service centers etc. The base line data shall be verified by an
independent agency appointed by the Ministry of Power.”
24. From the reply furnished by the Ministry, it is evident that  they have not laid
down any deadline for the IT enablement of power utilities in the States. The Committee
in their earlier Report had recommended that the Ministry should take up
IT enablement on priority in order to ensure that the envisaged  objectives of power
distribution reform were achieved. They, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation regarding disallowance of  sanctioning of funds  and power  to the
States who do not shift to IT based  system. The Ministry should ensure complete
adherence to the guidelines  laid down  for IT  enablement by the States and the
Committee hope that these are executed in letter and spirit.

9
G .. TIMELY COMPLETION/SHORT CLOSURE OF PROJECTS UNDER
THE XTH PLAN
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23 Para 160)
25. The Committee had found that though the APDRP guidelines stipulated that the
projects were to be completed within at least 36 months of the date of sanction, the
progress of APDRP projects was way behind schedule, resulting in non/partial
achievement of the desired objectives, even though nearly 54 per cent of the 10th Five Year
Plan provision of Rs. 20,000 crore was still available for sanction. The Commitee felt
that the delays were mainly due to poor planning, execution and lack of commitment of
the implementing agencies. Since the delay in progress of work and failure to complete
works in time would result in non-partial achievement of the desired objectives and
further time and cost over-runs, the Committee had emphasized the need to take effective
steps for stricter monitoring and control over the APDRP projects. Responding to the
Committee’s observation regarding delays due to poor planning, execution and lack of
commitment of the implementing agencies which resulted in non/partial achievement
of the desired objectives and further time and cost over-runs in the Programme, the
Ministry have furnished their reply as under:—
“The Schemes under X Plan APDRP have been completed or short closed on
31.03.2009 and the financial and physical progress of work executed against
approved detailed project report of each scheme have been reconciled by the
respective Advisor-cum-Consultants (AcCs) in accordance with the guidelines
issued by the Ministry.”
26. Expressing apprehension about the achievement of objectives of the Schemes
under Xth Plan APDRP, which have been completed or short closed on 31.03.2009,
the Committee reiterate the need to take effective steps for stricter monitoring and
control over the R-APDRP to ensure that the projects undertaken, under the
Xlth Plan are completed on time and the shortcomings noticed in the earlier plan are
addressed appropriately and timely. Further, the Ministry should take appropriate
measures to avoid recurrence of short closures of schemes in the Xlth Plan. Since
the Xlth Plan is already underway in its third year, the Committee desire that the
Ministry should furnish the latest data with regard to achievement of targets in the
Restructured-APDRP.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  HA VE BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 2
The Committee note with concern that there has been an increase in energy shortage
during the Xth Five Year Plan ranging from 7.5% in 2001-02 to 9.6% in 2006-07. The
peak power shortage has also increased from 11.8% in 2001-02 to 15.2% in 2007-08.
Power capacity addition targets have also not been achieved during Xth Plan period,
as against the target of capacity addition of 41110 MW; only 23250 MW has been
achieved. The reasons responsible for shortfall in achieving 10th Plan targets have
been cited as delay in technology tie-ups, delay in award of works, projects not taken
up, financial closure not achieved, delay in project clearance/investment decision etc.
As the problem has assured serious proportions, the Committee recommend that a
thorough review should be conducted by the Government to remedy the situation.
The Ministry of Power should work out a strategy to bridge the energy gap and meet
the ever-increasing demand of energy, while supplementing strongly the efforts at the
state level. In this context, the Government should also undertake a comprehensive
programme to renovate and modernize old power plants located in different States.
[(Sl. No. 2) Para 139 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Against the target of 41110MW for 10th Plan, a capacity of 21180 MW was achieved
during 10th  Plan. The sector-wise and type-wise break-up is as under:—
Central State Private Total
Thermal 7330 3553.64 1230.6 12114.24
Hydro 4495 2691 700 7886
Nuclear 1180 - - 1180
Total 13005 6244.64 1930.6 21180.24
The National Electricity Policy envisages that power shortage are to be fully
eliminated by 2012. Keeping in view the projection of electricity demand during the
11th Plan as contained in the 17th Electric Power Survey, the Central Electricity Authority
(CEA) had worked out that capacity addition or nearly 82,500 MW would be required
by the end of 11th  Plan.
2. The strategies adopted to meet the requirement are as follows:—
Capacity addition target for the Plan: A capacity addition target of 78700 MW has
been set for the 11th  Five Year Plan from conventional energy sources and 14000 MW
from new and renewable energy sources.
10

11
Development of Ultra Mega Power Projects: a number of Ultra Mega Power projects
of 4,000 MW each have been envisaged to be developed during the 11th Plan under
competitive bidding.
Harnessing surplus captive power into the grid: A capacity of 12,000 MW of
captive power is likely to be added to the system during 11th Plan. Out of this as on
31.10.2008 a capacity of 1648 MW has already been commissioned and balance is
under construction.
50000 MW hydro initiatives: The target is to launch 50000 MW of hydro initiatives
for accelerated development of hydro power in the country. A preliminary feasibility
report of 162 projects totalling 48000 MW has been prepared out of which 77 projects
with total capacity of about 37000 MW have been selected for execution.
An extensive network of transmission system: Commensurate with the capacity
addition programme, an extensive network of transmission is also being developed.
New inter-regional transmission capacities are also being added through the
development of the National Grid.
The other initiatives undertaken in this regard are:—
(a) Energy conservation and energy efficiency through Demand Side Management
(DSM) and end user initiatives.
(b) Renovation, modernization and life extension of old and inefficient generation
units.
(c) PFC and REC to ensure that execution of good/viable projects is not hampered
due to lack of funds.
(d) Strengthening of the monitoring mechanism.
3. Constant and close monitoring, besides regular review is essential requisites for
the achievement of the targets. The monitoring mechanism of the power projects has
been strengthened in the following manner:
(i) The CEA has a nodal officer associated with each on-going project who
continuoulsy monitors the progress at site through frequent visits and regular
interaction.
(ii) Regular meetings are being organized in Ministry of  Power with CEA, CPSUs
and other stakeholders with a view to reviewing the critical milestones
associated with each on-going project.
(iii) A Power Project Monitoring Panel (PPMP) comprising independent consultants,
has been set up in the Ministry of Power for further strengthening the monitoring
mechanism.
(iv) Based on the present status of ongoing generation projects, CEA has estimated
that a generation capacity of 79790 MW would be feasible from conventional
sources during the 11th Plan. Against this, a capacity of 11322 MW has since
been added up to 30.11.2008 and 68468 MW is under construction. Thus, in
view of the feasible addition of 79790 MW and the likely capacity addition of
14,000 MW from new and renewable energy and around 12000 MW through

12
captive power plants in the 11th Plan and other steps taken by the Ministry of
Power to improve availability of power, it is expected that power shortage in the
country could be eliminated by 2011-12.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/ 16-2007/APDRP/Vol. II/57-59 dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 11
One of the most important pre-requisites for ensuring reduction of commercial
losses, with relatively lower capital investment, is comprehensive energy accounting
and audit, which would enable quantification of losses in different segments of the
system and their segregation into commercial and technical losses. The Committee
have, however, observed that effective energy accounting and auditing was not being
carried out in the States. It had not been possible in most States due to lack of
100 per cent system metering, lack of accountability at the circle and feeder level and
low progress in respect of IT enabling activities such as consumer indexing, digital
mapping, Automated Meter Reading instruments, Data Loggers etc. The Committee
have been informed that keeping in view the poor progress by Utilities in this area, the
Ministry are proposing to establish authenticated baseline data as one of the objectives
of restructured APDRP during XI Plan, through which all the assets and consumers
will be mapped and indexed. Feeder and Distribution Transformer (FDT) meters and
bulk consumer meters will be read remotely and the base-line data will have to be got
validated through independent auditors to be appointed by the Ministry. The Committee
would welcome and await the implementation of these measures. Since the whole
purpose of metering was defeated in the absence of linkages between feeder, Distribution
Transformer and consumer metering, the Committee desire that the Ministry should
work out the modality of regular and effective  monitoring of the programme in
consultation with SEBs so as to ensure that all States carry out effective energy
accounting and auditing at the feeder and Distribution Transformer levels.
[(Sl. No. 11) Para 148 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]

13
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry has addressed the above issue under Part-A of Restructured-APDRP.
The salient features of the Part-A:
/lozenge6Establishment of reliable and automated system for sustained collection of
accurate Base-line Data, adoption of Information Technology in Energy auditing
and Accounting. There will be metering at every feeder and Distribution
transformer, as a result of implementation of Part-A of RAPDRP.
Part B: Strengthening of Sub-transmission and distribution system.
The implementation of Part-A and B Projects would  lead to reduction of AT&C loss
below 15% level. It is expected that resultant reduction of losses in the Distribution
Sector would also improve the financial health of the Distribution Utilities.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/ 16-2007/APDRP/Vol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 14
The Committee find it strange that in respect of APDRP no conditions regarding
Utilization Certificates (UCs) or Statements of Expenditure (SOEs) were incorporated
in the guidelines, despite requirement of UCs in the prescribed proforma specified in
the GFR. Further, the expenditure reported by SEBs/Utilities to the Ministry was not
correct on the ground that expenditure was booked at Detailed Project Report (DPR)
rates, even though actual procurement cost was lower.The reported expenditure was
inflated by inclusion of works not in Detailed Project Reports, incomplete works, work
done under normal development schemes, work done with old/repaired equipment etc.
Audit of 294 projects in 29 States with a total project cost of Rs. 10255.21 crore,
involving utilization of funds reported to be Rs. 5617.64 crore as of March 2006, revealed
instances of incorrect financial reporting amounting to Rs. 676.09 crore, whcih
constituted 12 percent  of the reported utilization. The Committee express their
dissatisfaction in the matter and recommend that responsibility of the officers be fixed
for the lapses in maintenance of records, its compilation and incorrect reporting of
figures.
As regards the system for verification of expenditure reported by State Governments/
Utilities, the Committee have been informed that the Ministry does not have the

14
resources to audit each and every expenditure made by Utilities under the programme.
However, Advisor cum Consultants (AcCs) do randomly check the bookings and
point out the discrepancies to the Utilities. But with a view to curbing the tendency of
incorrect financial reporting by Utilities executing APDRP projects on departmental
basis, the model procedure for maintaining records and  booking of cost has been
handed over to States during review meetings. From these facts it is abundantly clear
that the procedure for verification of the expenditure reported by state Governments/
Utilities leaves a lot to be desired. Considering the fact that the Ministry does not have
resources to audit every expenditure of the Utilities, and the fact that there are several
cases of default, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Power and the SEBs/
Utilities should evolve a coordinated and integrated system of record-keeping and
reporting with periodical reconciliation of figures in order to avoid incorrect financial
reporting by the State Governments/Utilities.
[(Sl. No. 14) Para 151 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The financial and physical progress of each Scheme approved under X Plan APDRP
have been reconciled by the respective Advisor cum Consultants (AcCs) in accordance
with the guidelines issued by the Ministry.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments. Details of the process of reconciliation would be verified during next
audit. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for their
appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110 002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/ 16-2007/APDRP/Vol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 15
During the course of examination, the Committee have come across several instances
of inadequacies in some of the State regarding utilization of funds. Some of the major
deficiencies/irregularities noticed are as follows:—
(i) Expenditure reported by SEBs/Utilities to the Ministry/ACCs was not correct,
in respect of 29 States, there were instances of incorrect financial reporting.
(ii) Proper accounting and related records in respect of APDRP Projects were not
maintained in almost all the States.

15
(iii) Surplus funds amounting to Rs. 51.07 crore not returned by the States to the
Government of India.
(iv) Instances of diversion of funds amounting to Rs. 181.78 crore in ten States.
(v) Non-release/Delayed release of funds by States to SEBs/Utilities and
Non-levy of consequent penalty.
[(Sl. No. 15) Para 152 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The Schemes under X Plan APDRP have been completed or short closed on
31.03.2009, and the financial and physical progress of works executed against approved
Detailed Project Report (DPR) of each scheme have been reconciled by the respective
Advisor cum Consultants (AcCs) in accordance with the guidelines issued by the
Ministry.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments. Details of the process of reconciliation would be verified during next
audit. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for their
appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries, New
Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/ 16-2007/APDRP/Vol. II/57-59 dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 16
There were also instances of diversion of funds by 10 States amounting to
Rs. 181.78 crore for unauthorized pruposes, and diversion of Rs. 432.23 crore by
7 States for adjustment against various dues of the Utilities, which was  effectively
equivalent to short release of funds of APDRP projects. With regard to seeking
explanation from the concerned States for diversion of funds, the Ministry have merely
stated that the States have been asked to submit the Utilization Certificates for the
funds released under APDRP. The State Utilities have also been asked to open separate
account for APDRP funds. However, many of the  Utilities either did not open separate
account or did not operate these accounts  due to various problems in their accounting
procedures. Undoubtedly, such  cases not only reveal inadequacies in the governmental
machinery but also leave  scope for proliferation of corrupt practices in the system.
This therefore, underscores the need for streamlining the procedures for utilization of
funds. The Committee, therefore recommend that the entire matter of diversion  of

16
funds  should be thoroughly looked into and responsibility be fixed for the lapses in
maintaining the funds.
[(Sl. No. 16) Para 153 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The 10th Plan APDRP schemes have been completed or short closed  after completing
the exercise of verification and reconciliation of the physical & financial progress of
the works executed by the States under APDRP schemes,  by Advisors cum Consultants,
in consultation with the State representatives. The above exercise have been carried
out in accordance with DPRs approved by the Steering Committee and the guidelines
issued by the Ministry of Power. In such  cases where ever the executions of items
have not been done according to approved DPRs, the same has been disallowed by
the AcCs.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.5.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments. Details of the process of reconciliation would be verified during next
audit. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for their
appraisal.
Director (Report) Office of the Principal  Director of Audit, Economic & Service
Ministries, New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/Vol.II/57-59 dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 19
The Committee note that the administrative intervention envisaged under APDRP
of ensuring accountability at the circle and feeder level by re-designating distribution
circles as independent profit centers and feeders as business units was not successful.
The Committee regret to note that while many States had designated the Circle
Superintending Engineer and Junior Engineer as Circle CEO and Feeder Manager, no
administrative measures were taken to ensure accountability and responsibility. In
Aruncahal Pradesh, Punjab, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, even
the designation of the JEs as Feeder Manager has not been done. With a view to
ensuring accountability and responsibility among the circle CEOs and Feeder Managers,
the Committee desire that a system of disincentive/incentive should be introduced at
the distribution circle and feeder level for achievement of targets.
[(Sl. No. 19) Para 156 of 77th Report of PAC  (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
  Under Part D of R-APDRP in XI Plan, there is provision for incentive for utility
staff in towns where A T & C loss levels are brought below the base line levels. An
amount equivalent to 2% of the grant for Part-B projects (Rs. 400 crore) is proposed as

17
incentive of utility staff in project areas where AT&C loss levels are brought below
15%.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi -110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 21
The Committee’s examination of the subject has revealed that there were significant
weaknesses in the project planning, management and implementation process. There
was inadequate examination of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) by the Steering
Committee, with 641 projects being approved in just 9 meetings. Clearly, this would not
have enabled the Steering Committee to exercise detailed scrutiny of the project before
according approval. Most SEBs/Utilities has not adopted turnkey contracting and had
executed the works departmentally or on semi-turnkey basis; in some cases the turnkey
packaging was so distorted that it negated the concept of single point responsibility
which was the objective of turnkey contracting. Obviously, this was a clear case of
negligence on the part of the Ministry which overlooked this lapse and which resulted
in lack of coordination while carrying out the works. The Committee therefore,
recommend that during XIth Plan period, the projects under the programme should be
awarded only on turnkey basis as originally stipulated in the scheme, so that the
problems arising out of lack of coordination between civil works and electrical works
are avoided.
  The audit also detected numerous deficiencies in individual projects across different
aspects, covering execution of out-of-scope items, lack of economy in procurement
and execution excess payments to contractors and other inefficiencies. The contributory
reasons as  adduced by the Ministry for shortfall in APDRP implementation are reduced
project cycle, slow implementation of the programme by States, inadequate project
management skills delay by States in pasing on funds, delay in awarding the contracts
by States, non-availability of required quantity of materials and contractors etc. The
Committee find the reply of the Ministry hardly convincing as these are the reasons
which are rather rountine in nature and could have been taken care of, if timely steps
were taken. The Committee considers it unfortunate that the Ministry had left the
entire programme at the mercy of the State-Governments, although the monitoring of

18
the implementation of the programme was the responsibility of the Ministry. Considering
the fact that the APDRP was launched for quick turnaround of the power sector, the
Committee are dismayed that no urgency was showed by the Ministry for evolving a
monitoring mechanism.
[(Sl. No. 21) Para 158 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of Committee regarding execution of projects on turnkey
basis under Re-structured APDRP has been adopted and as per the RAPDRP guidelines
issued, the utilities have to execute the works under RAPDRP through turnkey basis
only, the above guidelines have also been made the integral part of the quadripartite
agreement which is being executed between Ministry of Power, PFC, State Government
and the Utilities. The Utilities have to execute the said agreement before release of
funds to them.
 The recommendations of Committee regarding execution of out-of-scope items,
lack of economy in procurement and execution excess payments to contractors and
other inefficiencies have also been taken care during the final reconciliation of financial
and physical progress of projects done by the respective Advisors cum Consultants
(AcCs.), and items beyond scope are disallowed by the  AcCs.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No 5/8/2008-APDRP
dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Details of the process of reconciliation would be verified during next
audit. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for their
appraisal.
Director(Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 25
The Committee’s examination has revealed that the mechanism for inspection of
APDRP projects by the Ministry of Power was inadequate. The Committee are perturbed
to note that even though 155 random inspections have been conducted through lead
Advisor cum Consultants viz. NTPC during the past three years in various States, the
Ministry did not have a consolidated record of all such inspections. According to the
Ministry, the record is available with respective Advisor cum Consultants, who apprise

19
Ministry of Power about the salient findings of field inspection. The Committee note
that the reports of these inspections were not provided to Audit also. In the absence
of such reports, the objectives of the field inspections, findings of the AcCs and the
follow-up action taken thereon by the State Utilities could not be ascertained at all.
This also disenabled the Ministry of Power to monitor the status of implementation
and bring about requisite improvements in the systems and procedures. The Committee
are therefore, of the view that stringent measure are urgently required to revamp the
existing monitoring/supervisory mechanism prevailing in the Ministry.
[(Sl. No. 25) Para 162 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
    The above recommendation of the PAC will be addressed in formulation of
Restructured-APDRP.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP
dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol.II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No.  27
To sum up, the facts stated in the foregoing paragraphs revealed several shortcomings
in the implementation of APDRP. The primary objective of the programme of reducing
Aggregate Technical and Commercial Losses (AT & C Losses) by  9 percent per
annum had not been achieved. There were serious deficiencies in system metering (in
particular Distribution Transformer metering) and consumer metering. There were also
major shortcomings in the quality and reliability of power supply. Besides, effective
energy accounting and auditing had not been possible in most States, primarily due to
lack of 100 percent system metering, lack of accountability at distribution circle and
feeder levels and inadequate computerization. Significant  deficiencies were noticed in
the systems and procedures for release and utilization of APDRP funds. There were
instances of  in correct financial reporting by the States to the Central Government. In
addition, instances of irregular diversion of funds, and non-return of surplus funds
were noticed. the incentive mechanism was not successful, there were weaknesses in
the project planning, management and implementation process as well as in the

20
mechanism for reporting, momtoring and inspection.The Committee regret to conclude
that the APDRP did not succeed fully in achieving its objectives. The Committee have
been informed that the APDRP will be continued during the XI plan with revised terms
and conditions as a central sector scheme. According to the Ministry of Power
establishment of reliable and automated systems for sustained collection of accurate
base line data and the adoption of Information Technology in the areas of energy
accounting in XI Plan will enable objective evaluation of the performance of State
Power Utilities before and after implementation of the programme and will enforce
internal accountablity.
Considering the fact that a considerable amount has already been spent on the
programme during Xth Five year Plan, the Committee take a serious view of the failures
in fully achieving the objectives of such a laudable and crucial programme. The
Committee desire that in the light of the facts brought out in this Report and the
suggestions made, Government should take corrective action now with a view to
ensuring that the scheme is properly implemented at least in the XIth Five Year Plan.
[(Sl. No. 27) Para 164 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
   All the above recommendations of PAC have been addressed during formulation
of Restructured-APDRP Scheme. This Scheme is solely based on actual and sustainable
performance of each Utility, the disbursement of grant is based on the successful
completion and verification done by the independent evaluating agency. The
shortcomings experienced during the implementation of X Plan APDRP have also been
fully addressed in the Restructured-APDRP Scheme.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
   No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at
State and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to
PAC for their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
 (Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/ V ol. II/57-59
dated  24.06.2009)

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation No. 3
With a view to addressing the issues of inability of State Power Utilities to
systematically  fund essential activities relating to the upgradation of the sub-
transmission and distribution system and renovation and modernization of old plants
which resulted in shortages, poor quality of supply, frequent interruptions and escalation
in commercial  losses to the State Electricity Boards, the  Government of India in
February, 2001 launched the Accelerated Power Development Programme (APDP).
The APDP could not produce the desire results during the first year of its initiation.
Therefore, for quick turnaround of the power sector and to reward the actual
improvement in the performance of the Power Utilities by way reduction in commercial
losses and increased recvenue realization, it was renamed as “Accelerated Power
Development and Reform Programme (APDRP)” in the Union Budget 2002-03. The
project had an outlay of Rs. 40,000 crore as Aditional Central Plan Assistance to the
State Governments during the 10th Five Year (2002-2007). Of this amount, the investment
component was for Rs. 20,000 crore, with the remaining Rs. 20,000 crore for the incentive
component.
[(Sl. No. 3) Para 140 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP) was launched
in 2002-03 with the objective to make the SEBs/Utilities commercially viable through
bringing down the Aggregate Technical & Commercial (AT &C) losses below 15% in
five years in urban and in high-density areas. Government had approved the programme
with a budget provision of Rs. 40,000 Crore during X Plan, out of which Rs. 20,000
Crore was allocated under Investment component and Rs. 20,000 crore under Incentive
component.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/Vol.II/57-59 dated 24.06.2009)
21

22
Observation/Recommendation No. 4
The basic objectives of the programme were:
(i) Reduction of Aggregate Technical and Commercial Losses (AT&C Losses)
from around 60 percent to around 15 percent in five years, to begin within the
urban areas and high density/consumption areas, which implied a targeted
reduction of 9 precent per annum.
(ii) Significant improvement in revenue realization by reduction in commercial
losses leading to addtional realization of Rs. 20,000 crore approximately over a
period of 4-5 years.
(iii) Reduction of technical losses which would result in additional energy of nearly,
6,000-7000 MW to the system.
(iv) Imp rovement in quality of supply and reliable, interruption free power.
(v) Reduction in cash losses on a permanent basis
(vi) To help States to avoid heavy subsidies, which are given to SEBs/State Utilities
by State Governments.
[(Sl. No. 4) Para 141 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
 No reply is required, as there is no recommendation by PAC.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP , dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No.  AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol.II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 5
 The operation of the programme was governed by the conditions lad down in the
Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) and Memoranda of Agreement (MoA) signed
between the State Electricity Boards (SEB)/Utilities and the Ministry of Power. The
major conditions for availing benefits under APDRP are as follows:—
(i) Setting up of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs);
(ii) Restructuring of SEBs, viz. unbundling into separate entities for generation,
transmission and distribution and corporation of unbundled entities;

23
(iii) Removing cross subsidies and traffic anomalies and providing budgetary
support to SEBs towards subsidies;
(iv) Introduce private participation in generation, transmission and distribution;
(v) 100 percent metering for each KV feeder and also for consumer;
(vi) Energy accounting and audit;
(vii) Distribution Circles to be operated as independent profit centres, with
Superintending Engineer as Circle Chief Executive Office (CEO);
(viii) 11 KV feeders to be operated as business units, with the Junior Engineer as the
feeder Manager; and
(ix) Turnkey contracting system to be adopted by the SEBs/Utilities.
[(Sl. No. 5) Para 142 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
No reply is required, as there is no recommendation by PAC.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol.II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 6
The Committee’s examination of the subject is based on the Audit review of the
performance of programme in 294 approved APDRP projects during the period
2002-03 to 2005-06. Examination of the subject by the Committee in details has revealed
that the  avowed objectives of the APDRP have not been fully achieved. There have
been significant deficiencies in the implementation of the programme. The Committee
has dealt with these  deficiencies and various  aspects of the programme in the
succeeding paragraphs.
[(Sl. No. 6) Para 143 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Though the objectives of APDRP could not be achieved fully, but most of the
States have initiated reforms programmes by setting up SERCs, unbundling/

24
corporatisation of SEBs, metering of 11KV Feeders and the Consumers and
strengthening of sub-transmission and distrbution systems through APDRP  assistance.
As per the Power Finance Corporation (PFC) report on the performance of the State
Power Utilities, the overall AT&C losses at national level have been reduced from
36.64% during 2002-03 to 33.07 during 2006-07.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
The facts, however, remains that the percentage reduction of AT&C losses was a
mere 3.57% in four years against the targeted reduction from around 60% to 15% in five
years. The subject, Therefore, needs further improvement and attention at Ministry’s
level.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 8
One of the key reforms envisaged through the Memorandum of Agreements with
the Ministry of Power indicated 100 percent metering for each 11KV feeder and also for
consumer. The Committee, however, note that a significant number of installations
remained unmeterd, and the computation of energy consumed was made on asessment
basis, consequently affecting the veracity of the source data for computation of A T&C
losses. In case of Jharkhand, unmetered supply in four sample circles, ranged between
67.8 percent and 39.93 percent of total energy. The States did not have any basis of
calculation of unmetered supply and thus the estimation of unmetered energy was
reduced to a purely hypothetical exercise. The Committee are surprised to note that the
Ministry of Power have also not ascertained the reasons from SEBs for resorting to
billing/metering on assessment basis. There were also no prescribed norms for
assessment of unmetered consumers and the criteria for assessment was not uniform
either among various billing authorities, which was bound to result indeficiencies in
making accurate assessment of losses. It is, thus, evident that the Ministry of Power
have not made any earnest attempt to make the assessment procedure uniform. Various
bottlenecks such as non-availability of metering or defective/damaged metering system
etc. that come in the way of correct and accurate assessment of supply could have
been very-well removed by taking timely remedial action. While deploring the laxity on
the part of the Ministry of powr intakeing corrective measures to minimize the practice
of billing on assessment basis by improving the metering system for various segments

25
of consumers, the Committee would like the Ministry of issue fresh directions to the
State Governments for making the assessment procedure more organized and uniform
with significant reduction in the AT&C Losses.
[(Sl. No. 8) Para 145 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry has addressed the above issue under Part-A of Restructured APDRP.
The salient features of the Part-A:
/lozenge6Establishment of reliable and automated syustem for sustained collection of
accurate Base-line Data, adoption of Information Technology in Energy auditing
and Accounting. There will be metering at every feeder and Distribution
transformer, as a result of implementation of Part-A of  RAPDRP.
Part B:- Strengthening of Sub-transmission and distribution system.
The  implementation of Part-A and B Projects would lead to reduction of AT&C loss
below 15% level. It is expected that resultant reduction of losses in the Distribution
Sector would also improve the financial health of the Distribution Utilities.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP
dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised  at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, howevery, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 9
Another objective of APDRP was to make 100 percent metering of feeders,
Distribution Transformers (DTs) and consumer connections. The Committee find that
while there was considerable improvement in terms of reported feeder and consumer
metering, the progress in metering of Distribution Transformer was not adequate as
only 3 Sates had shown 80 to 100 percent metering, whilst there was no information in
respect of 10 States, with consequent lack of control on AT&C losses and inadequate
energy accounting and auditing. Feeder and consumer metering at the State level also
showed significant deficiencies, in addition to misreporting of data on installation of
meters. While conceding that the progress of Distribution Transformer metering was
indeed not upto the expected level, the Ministry have informed that it was mainly due

26
to the middle level executives pleading increase in meter reading load and their inability
to manage even for the existing customers. The Committee fail to understand as to why
no advance action was taken for the posting of additional personnel which were badly
needed for installation and maintenance of meters and to ease the meter reading load.
At least now they would expect that early action would be taken to fulfill the requirement
of additional personnel at all the levels so that implementation of the programme does
not suffer.
The Committee have now been informed in this regard that the Utilities will be
forced to install and maintain the system meters due to performance base conditionality
for converting ‘loan’ to ‘grant’ as proposed for 11th Plan APDRP. Since the Distribution
Transformer metering is an essential tool to control AT&C losses, the Committee hope
that the Ministry will closely monitor the installation and maintenance of system
meters in 11th plan in a time-bound manner including augmenting the strength of the
middle level executives so that the SEBs/Utilities complete 100 percent feeder,
Distribution Transformer and consumer metering in all ongoing and completed APDRP
projects within a clearly defined time frame. They should also ensure that the funds for
APDRP projects should be released only after completion  of 100 percent metering.
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the details of installation of meters
during XIth Plan under APDRP and action taken against the defaulting States which
only can serve as an objective index of the efforts made by the Ministry of Power in
this direction in the revised APDRP during XIth Plan.
 [(Sl. No. 9) Para 146 of 77th Report of PAC  (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The issue has addressed under Part-A of R-APDRP, which include the projects for
establishment of baseline data and IT applications for energy accounting/auditing &
IT based consumer service centers. Part-B shall include regular distribution
strengthening projects. The above recommendations have been covered under Part-A
of R-APDRP. The brief scope of works to be executed under Part-A is as follows:
/circle6Preparation of Base-line data for the project area covering Consumer Indexing,
GIS Mapping, Metering of Distribution Transformers and Feeders and Automatic
Data Logging for all Distribution Transformers and Feeders and SCADA/DMS
system for big cities only. It would include Asset Mapping of the entire
distribution network at and below the 11KV transformers and include the
Distribution Transformers and Feeders, Low Tension lines, poles  and other
distribution network equipment. It will also include adoption of IT applications
for meter reading, billing & collection, energy accounting & auditing, redressal
of consumer grievances, establishment of  IT enabled consumer service centers
etc. The base-line data shall be verified by an independent agency appointed
by the Ministry of Power.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)

27
Vetted Comments
Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 10
The Committee find that in States like Jharkhand, Punjab, Assam,West Bengal,
Karnataka, Haryana and Manipur, periodical checking of meters was not a regular
feature and the shortfall in checking of meters in these states ranged between 13 and
96 percent during 2005-06. Although the Ministry have been advising the States through
review meetings etc. to carry out periodical energy accounting and auditing, evidently,
these measures have not produced the desired results. Since the purpose of installation
of meters would be served only if the SEB/Utility conducted its periodical checking so
as to ensure that installed meters were not being tampered with and were working
efficiently, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Power should pursue the matter
forcefully with all concerned State Governments to mitigate this  serious problem.
[(Sl. No. 10)  Para 147 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha) ]
Action Taken by Government
The measures for Feeder metering, Consumer metering, Distribution transformer
metering, correct metering and billing would automatically be addressed by implementing
the Part-A of R-APDRP. The main activities covered under Part-A of R-APDRP have
already been explained in reply of para 146. [Sl. No. 9]
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)

28
Observation/Recommendation No. 18
The Committee find that the incentive mechanism of APDRP was not successful,
with just Rs. 1575.02 crore released as of January, 2007 against the provision of
Rs. 20,000 crore envisaged in the 10th Five year Plan. Further, most of the claims
pertained to the years 2001-02 to 2003-04, which indicated that the objective of reducing
cash losses of SEBs/Utilities through an incentive mechanism had largely not been
achieved. Audit examination also revealed a number of deficiencies like allowing
ineligible claims, disallowance of incentive claims on the grounds not reflected in the
guidelines, and lack of mechanism for verifying utilization of the incentive grant for
improvement of the power sector. While responding to these shortcomings, the Ministry
have clarified that many States had shown increase in cash loss and as such they
could not become eligible for incentive. The Committee are  surprised to note that there
is no mechanism in the Ministry of Power for ensuring that the incentives are  actually
utilized for improvement of power sector only. It is obvious that the  incentive mechanism
has not been working under  this programme, indicating that the actual cash loss
reduction in most States has been rather poor. Further, it is a matter of serious concern
that the Ministry released incentives claims to the SEB’s/utilities without satisfying
themselves that the incentives were being utilized for the power sector only. As the
incentive scheme was conceived to make the MOAs more successful and conducive
for effective implementation of the programme, any flow in this process will vitiate its
very objective. The Ministry of Power should, therefore, establish a sound mechanism
for ensuring that the incentive claims of States/Utilities are  scrutinized properly in the
Ministry before establishing eligibility and realization of the incentive. The Ministry
should also consider withholding the claims of the defaulter States who have been
utilizing the incentives for other purposes. The release of incentive claims should be
subject to physical target achievement and not to financial targets alone.
[(Sl. No. 18)  Para 155 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha) ]
Action Taken by Government
All the claims of incentive submitted by the various States against loss reduction
have been scrutinised and verified by the independent evaluating agency and thereafter
the proposal was concurred by the internal finance division of the Ministry. The issue
of proper utilization of Incentive funds for improvement of financial health of the State
Utility have been taken up by the Ministry with the States.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments  subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submittied to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)

29
Observation/Recommendation No. 20
Theft of electricity, in the form of unauthorized connections from the electricity
supply system, tampering, by-passing of meters by the consumers etc. constitute a
substantial part of commercial loss. The Committee find that the Ministry did not have
a mechanism for monitoring periodically the effectiveness of vigilance and legal
measures in different States to prevent theft of energy. The percentage of registering
theft cases was low ranging between 0.28 percent to 14.08 percent, and the percentage
of conviction was even lower, ranging between zero and 10.61 percent. According to
the Ministry, setting up of special courts and special police stations are the provisions
in the Electricity Act to help the States in dealing effectively with the cases of energy
theft. The Committee have been informed that as a result of these measures, detection
of 15,19,020 cases of theft  during last four years have been reported by the States,
out of which 1,61,372 cases have been reported convicted and Rs. 1091.15 crore has
been realised. The Committee are not satisfied with the number of cases reported
and convicted during the past four years, as out of more than 15 lakh cases detected
only 1,61,372 cases have been convicted which implies that no serious efforts have
been made by the State Utilities to address this issue. The Committeee have been
informed that Ministry of Power was monitoring action taken by States for constituting
Special Courts; and Special Police Stations to handle cases related to theft of
electricity, and this was proposed to be made as a condition for eligibility for APDRP
funds  during the XIth Plan. As theft of energy constitutes a substantial part of
commercial loss, the Committee would like the Ministry to ensure adherence to the
guidelines in this regard, namely, setting up vigilance squads, detection and follow-
up of cases involving theft of energy, making full use of legal provisions for launching
prosecution against offenders and conducting periodic review of cases and imposing
severe penalties for tampering with meter seal. Installation of automated systems
and application of information Technology for recording of data; should also be
accorded priority for this purpose.
[ (Sl. No. 20)  Para 157 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The implementation of Part-A Scheme of R-APDRP would make the Distribution
Sector automated and the human intervention would be Nil in recording meter reading
at feeder and distribution transformer level, which would definitely curb the theft of
electricity.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP
dated 27.05.2009)

30
Vetted Comments
No comments  subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submited to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No.  AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 24
Yet another case of APDRP implementation which required attention is the system
of evaluation and the follow-up action thereafter. Evaluation of APDRP is stated to
be undertaken by the Ministry through independent agencies such as Indian Institute
of Management, Ahmedabad, Administrative Staff College of India, Tata Consultancy
Services, Tata Energy and Resources Institute and SBI Caps. The aforesaid
Evaluators have observed that though there were considerable improvements in the
billing, metering and collection efficiencies, there was scope for further improvements.
They have, therefore, recommended cuntinuation of the programme beyond
Xth Five Year Plan. However, they have suggested a number of initiatives to be
included in the programme so as to derive better results. The main suggestions of
the Evaluators in this regard included direct  release of APDRP funds to SEBs/
Utilities, concrete action plan for quick and fast implementation of IT initiatives,
preparation of realistic Detailed Project Reports, undertaking anti-theft measures
more vigorously, out sourcing of project implementation on a turnkey basis, improving
the data quality and availability of MIS data in electronic format at the Circle Office
etc. Keeping in view the grave nature of irregularities, the large scale misuses and
also taking into account the enormous amount of revenue foregone, the Committee
regret to note that the follow-up action of the suggestions made by the Evaluators
was highly inadequate. The Ministry of Power should overcome their laxity on this
count and act promptly on the findings of the evaluation study commissioned by
the Ministry themselves.
[(Sl. No. 24)  Para 161 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The prompt action on the findings by independent evaluating agencies after
evaluation of the APDRP will be taken during implementation of Restructured-APDRP
in XI Plan.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP
dated 27.05.2009)

31
Vetted Comments
No comments  subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
 (Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Observation/Recommendation No. 26
The Committee note that while the State level Distribution Reforms Committee
(DRC) was to meet once in two months to review the progress of project implementation,
compliance of MOU/MOA conditions, performance against targets and benchmarks,
the required number of meetings of DRC was not held, with the shortfall in holding the
specified number of meetings ranging up to 80 percent in various States. The Committee
have been informed that State level DRC discusses the State specific issues and time
bound action plan is made to resolve the issues. Formal revord notes or minutes of the
meeting are circulated among the participants and copy of the same is also sent to
Ministry of Power. The Committee note that this procedure is not being followed, as
the records of such reviews along with the reasons for not following the procedures
and action proposed for overcoming shortfall were not intimated to the Ministry of
Power. Since serious deficiencies have been noticed in the implementation of the
APDRP, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Power must review the situation
and take immediate steps so that the State level Distribution Reform Committee is made
functional and its working supervised in an effective manner.
[(Sl. No. 26)  Para 163 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Ministry of  Power has been taking the review meeting on regular intervals with the
States for implementation of APDRP Schemes in accordance with the approved
guidelines.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP
dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
In view of the shortcomings noticed in Audit, the subject needs further
improvement at Ministry’s level. However, evidence in support of reply may be
submitted to PAC for their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59 dated 24.06.2009)

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation No. 1
The Ministry of Power (MoP) is primarily responsible for the development of
electrical energy in the country. The Ministry is concerned with perspective planning,
policy formation, processing of projects for investment decisions, monitoring of the
implementation of power projects etc. The Ministry also provides financial support in
the form of grants to the States. The Committee note that as against the sanctioned
allocation of funds, the Ministry of Power had been able to spend 92.21% during the
year 2004-05, 87.98% during 2005-06 and only 57.60% in 2006-07. The Committee are
concerned that the funds allocated to the Ministry of Power have not been fully
utilized during these three years. The utilization of funds sharply decreased from
92.21% in 2004-05 to 57.60% in 2006-07. The poor utilization of the earmarked funds by
such an important Ministry, resulting in non-achievement of targets set under various
programmes is indeed disconcerting. The Committee cannot but express their
displeasure over the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry, as many schemes/
programmes for power reforms could not make proper progress and the funds remained
idly parked year after year, which would have been gainfully utilized for the fund-
starved schemes/programmes. The Commitee desire that the Ministry of Power should
examine critically the reasons responsible for such a dismal situation, and evolve
realistic parameters to avoid such wide variations between the sanctioned provisions
and actual expenditure.
[(Sl. No.1)   Para 138 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Earlier the State level Utilities were not equipped to handle the scheme simultaneously
in different towns, as the utilities did not have the dedicated implementation group.
Further, lack of willingness to award the contract on turnkey basis was also one of the
main reasons for delay in implementation of the Schemes. In the Restructured APDRP
for XI Plan, time bound implementation programme has been envisaged for each Scheme.
If the Utilities fail in timely completion of the Schemes, the loan sanctioned for the
Schemes would not be converted into grant. Therefore, the utilities have to ensure
timely completion of Schemes.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
32

33
Vetted Comments
No comments, subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
 New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59 dated 24.06.2009)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I.
Observation/Recommendation No. 7
One of the basic objectives of APDRP was to reduce Aggregate Technical and
Commercial Losses (AT&C Losses) from the existing level of about 60 percent to
around 15 percent in five years which implied reduction of  AT&C Losses @ 9 percent
per annum. The Committee, however are constrained to observe that as against the
targeted reduction of 9 percent per annum in AT&C Loss, a reduction of only 1.68
percent per annum has been achieved between 2001-02 and 2004-05. The figure was
still very high, and ranged between 15.86 percent in Goa and 72.74 percent in Mizoram.
It is thus evident that the objective of reduction of AT&C Losses, as envisaged in the
Programme, remained largely unfulfilled. The Committee are dismayed that the Ministry
of Power have not elaborated convincingly the reasons for  not achieving the targeted
reduction in A T&C Losses. Although the Secretary, Ministry of Power conceded in
this regard during evidence that the goal of 15 percent loss may not be possible, as the
performance in some of  the States have been patchy due to varied levels of
administration and superintendence. What is astonishing is the fac that there were
significant deficiencies even in the maintenance of records relating to A T&C Losses
including absence of proper guidelines and supporting records. Consequently, the
data reported by the Ministry could not be regarded as authentic, accurate and
acceptable. The Committee are dismayed that the Ministry of Power did not have any
mechanism at all to assess and monitor the significant reduction in A T&C losses,
which is considered a wherent measure of the overall efficiency of power distribution.
Further, as regards formulation of any baseline data on the bssis of which Ministry of
Power could envisage that the AT&C losses would be brought down to 15%, the
Committee have been informed that the Ministry have proposed to establish the same
under  the re-structured APDRP for XI plan. Considering the fact that APDRP was
meant for quick turnaround of the powe sector, the Committee consider it unfortunate
that no worth while efforts were made by the Ministry with a view to ensuring that the
programme was actually implemented in consonance with the envisaged objectives
during Xth Five Year Plan. They did not yet have any mechanism to ensure that the
objectives of the APDRP are met even after the completion of fifth year of the programme.
The Committe srongly recommend the Ministry to take corrective measures now with

34
a view to ensure that the programme is properly implemented at least in the XIth Five
Year Plan and to re-evaluate the targets for AT&C Losses so that the targeted reduction
in these losses is achieved in the reformulated APDRP in XI Plan.
[(Sl. No. 7)  Para 144 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
It is true that objective of reduction in A T&C losses could not be achieved fully by
the States but there are many States, who have shown significant improvement in the
reduction of AT&C loss. The details of the improvements in reduction in AT&C loss
during 2006-07 (ending year of the X Plan APDRP Programme) as compared to 2001-02
are tabulated as follows:—
Sl. State AT&C loss (%) in AT&C loss(%) in
No. 2001-02 2006-07
1. Bihar 66.02 42.63
2. Jharkhand 60.21 52.51
3. Sikkim 81.33 40.72
4. West Bengal 35.92 30.92
5. Arunachal Pradesh 61.97 52.03
6. Mizoram 76.10 44.97
7. Nagaland 60.89 52.19
8. Tripura 41.60 23.46
9. Delhi 51.78 32.93
10. Haryana (UHBVNL) 45.93 28.96
11. Himachal Pradesh 28.30 13.18
12. J&K 68.22 67.56
13. Punjab 27.66 24.87
14. Rajasthan (JdVVNL) 52.77 37.21
15. Andhra Pradesh (APCPDCL) 28.90 18.24
16. Karnataka (BESCOM) 40.50 26.88
17. Kerala 31.83 25.02
18. Goa 48.53 19.39
19. Chhattisgarh 39.02 36.12
The focus of the Restructured-APDRP is on action demonstrable performance in
terms of AT&C reduction. The programme is to be executed in two parts:
Part-A: Establishment of reliable and automated system for sustained collection of
accurate Base-line Data and adoption of Information Technology in Energy auditing
and Accounting.
Part B: Strengthening of Sub-transmission and distribution system.
The implementation of Part-A and B Projects would lead to reduction of AT&C loss
below 15% level. It is expected that resultant reduction of losses in the Distribution
Sector would also improve the financial health of the Distribution Utilities.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)

35
Vetted Comments
No comments, in view of the implementation of Restructured APDRP for XI Plan
and subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State and Central
level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for their
appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol.  II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 11 of Chapter-I.
Recommendation
The Committee’s examination further revealed that one of the objectives of APDRP
was the narrowing and ultimate elimination of the gap between unit cost of supply and
revenue realization within a specified time frame. The Committee find that the objective
of elimination of the gap between Average Revenue Realisation (ARR) and Average
Cost of Supply (ACS) remained a distant goal. Only 3 out of 29 States had achieved
this target, and in fact, in 8 States, the gap between ARR and ACS had shown a
deteriorating trend. According to Ministry of Power, as many of the Utilities had
increased the subsidy over the years, monitoring of ARR on subsidy and revenue
realized basis would show the correct status. Audit did not accept the reply of the
Ministry on the ground that since the reduction of subsidies to SEBs/Utilities is one of
the key objectives of APDRP, using ARR on subsidy realized basis would not be
appropriate. Moreover, high cost of generation, high cost of power purchase, high
maintenance cost, poor billing and metering, high AT&C loss beyond the levels allowed
by the regulator etc. are stated to be the main contributory reasons for the gap between
ARR and ACS. During the course of examination of the subject by the Committee,
several  technical, commercial and managerial measures were stated to have been
taken by the Ministry to reduce this gap, such as, upgradation and strengthening of
the weak distribution system, relocation of distribution sub-stations, provision of
additional distribution sub-stations, improvement in metering and billing, timely filling
of Annual Revenue Realisation with State Electricity Regulatory Commissions and
proper network planning for future expansion etc. The Committee desire that these
well-concieved measures ought to be implemented earnestly in letter and spirit, which
would surely go a long way in eliminating the gap between Average Revenue Realisation
and Average Cost of Supply in future. The Committee may be apprised of the results
achieved therefrom.
[(Sl. No. 12)  Para 149 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The issue has addressed under Part-A of R-APDRP, which include the projects for
establishment of baseline data and IT applications for energy accounting/auditing &

36
IT based consumer service centres. Part-B shall include regular distribution
srengthening projects. The above recommendations have been covered under Part-A
of R-APDRP. The brief scope of works to be executed under Part-A is as follows:
Preparation of Base-line data for the project area covering Consumer Indexing. GIS
Mapping, Metering of Distribution Transformers and Feeders, and Automatic Data
Logging for all Distribution Transformers and Feeders and SCADA/DMS system for
big cities only. It would include Asset Mapping of the entire distribution network at
and below the 11KV transformers and include the Distribution Transformers and
Feeders, Low Tension lines, poles and other distribution network equipment. It will
also include adoption of IT applications for meter reading, billing & collection, energy
accounting & auditing, redressal of consumer grievances, establishment of IT enabled
consumer service centers etc. The base line data shall be verified by an independent
agency appointed by the Ministry of Power.
The objective of Part A and Part B implementation in RAPDRP is to ensure energy
auditing and accounting, reduce AT&C losses. The gap between ARR and ACS can be
reduced by the action of respective State Governments and SERCs.
Sd\-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol.II/57-59
dated 24.06.2009)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 15 of Chapter-I
Recommendation
According to APDRP guidelines, Information Technology (IT) and Computer Aided
Tools for revenue increase, outage reduction, monitoring and control play a vital role
in distribution management. The performance Audit of APDRP and the Committee’s
examination of the issues raised by Audit has revealed poor progress in IT works, in
particular those relating to customer indexing, digital mapping and Supervisory Control
and Data Acquisition, which could play a vital role in revenue increase, reduction in
AT&C losses, and controlling commercial losses especially for metering, meter reading,
billing, collection and outage reduction. Although, IT task force constituted by the
Ministry had recommended a cear cut roadmap for distribution Utilities for adoption of
IT based on their present status. However, the Utilities did not accept the said proposal
on the ground that the distribution infrastructure was weak. They therefore, gave

37
preference to strengthening the electricity network and gave secondary treatment to
IT enabling. The reply of the Ministry is not tenable, as it confirms lack of adequate
efforts by the Ministry of Power in ensuring the actual implementation of IT tools,
which resulted in the lack of effective energy accounting and auditing, which was
critically dependent on IT. Considering the fact that the IT applications would be used
in the distribution sector to ensure higher revenues as a result of segregation of
Transmission & Distribution Losses (T&D Losses) and controlling commercial losses,
especially for metering, meter reading, billing, collection and outage reduction, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry should take up IT enablement on priority in
order to ensure that the envisaged objectives of power distribution reform are achieved.
They should fix up a deadline for this purpose, by which if the States do not adopt the
IT based system, they should be disallowed not only sanction of funds but also the
availability of more power in their States. Stringent guidelines are also required to be
issued by the Ministry to State Governments in this regard. The Committee would like
to be apprised of the outcome of the steps taken in the matter.
[(Sl. No. 22) Para 159 of 77th Report of  PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The issue has been taken care under Part-A of R-APDRP, which include the projects
for establishment of baseline data and IT applications for energy accounting/auditing
& IT based consumer service centers. Part-B shall include regular distribution
strengthening projects. The above recommendations have been covered under Part-A
of R-APDRP. The brief scope of works to be executed under Part-A is as follows:—
Preparation of Base-line data for the project area covering Consumer Indexing, GIS
Mapping, Metering of Distribution Transformers and Feeders, and Automatic Data
Logging for all Distribution Transformers and Feeders and SCADA/DMS system for
big cities only. It would include Asset Mapping of the entire distribution network at
and below the 11KV transformers and include the Distribtution Transformers and
Feeders, Low Tension lines, poles and other distribution network equipment. It will
also include adoption of IT applications for meter reading, billing & collection, energy
accounting & auditing, redressal of consumer grievances, establishment of IT enabled
consumer service centers etc. The base line data shall be verified by an independent
agency appointed by the Ministry of Power.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of  Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi-110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V ol. II/57-59 dated 24.06.2009)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph  No. 26 of Chapter-I

38
Recommendation
The Committee find that though the APDRP guidelines stipulated that the projects
were to be completed within at least 36 months of the date of sanction, the progress of
APDRP projects was way behind schedule, resulting in non/partial achievement of the
desired objectives, even though nearly 54 per cent of the 10th Five Year Plan provision
of Rs. 20,000 crore was still available for sanction. The factors cited by the Ministry for
this are non-transferring the APDRP funds in timely manner to the Utilities and delayed
action on the part of the implementing Utilities. In this regard, the Committee have
been apprised that many of the projects showed 90 per cent completion on physical
terms, pending final reconciliation and non-payment of final bills for want of completion
of performance guarante period. The Committee are not inclined to accept the
explanation given by the Ministry on the ground that majority of projects were
sanctioned between 2002 and 2003 and isues like final reconciliation and completion of
performance guarantee period should have been settled by now. The Committee  feel
that the delays were mainly due to poor planning, execution and lack of commitment of
the implementing agencies. Since the delay in progress of works and failure to complete
works in time would result in non/partial achievement of the desired objectives and
further time and cost over-runs, the Committee would emphasize the need to take
effective steps for stricter monitoring and control over the APDRP projects.
[(Sl. No. 23)   Para 160 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
The Schemes under X Plan APDRP have been completed or short closed on 31-03-
2009, and the financial and physical progess of works executed against approved
detailed project report of each sheme have been reconciled by the respective Advisor-
cum-Consultants (AcCs) in accordance with the guidelines isued by the Ministry.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution) Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP
dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments. Details of the process of reconciliation would be verified during next
audit. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for their
appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi- 110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/Vol-II /57-59 dated 24.6.2009)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 24 of Chapter-I

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN REPORT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation No. 13
In terms of the APDRP guidelines, States receiving assistance under this programme
would have to open a separate account/sub-account head for separate accounting
classification.    States which did not open a separate account for this purpose were not
entitled to receive any funds under APDRP. However, the Ministry of Power continued
to recommend release of funds without the stipulated certificates from the State
Governments regarding opening of a separate accounts head and expenditure
statements prepared from the State monthly accounts. The Committe find that 17 out
of 29 States where the programme was being implemented, either did not operate
separate account heads and bank accounts for APDRP funds, or did not operate them
correctly. The Ministry of Power have tried to explain that many of the Utilities could
not open separate accounts due to various problems in their accounting procedures.
Evidently, there is no mechanism presently available with the Ministry to assess actual
utilization of funds released for this programme. The Committee also wonder as to how
in the absence of separate accounting classification, the Ministry could ensure that
the funds earmarked for APDRP were not being spent for other purposes. While
strongly disapproving, the failure of the Ministry to act strenly against such financial
irregularities the  Committee recommend that the matter should be enquired into and
responsibility be fixed for the lapses. The Ministry should henceforth ensure that the
accounts of APDRP funds are maintained separately reconciled periodically with banks
and got audited regularly.
[(Sl. No. 13)  Para 150 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Government
Under Restructured-APDRP, the funds for execution of sanctioned Scheme are
being credited directly to the specific account of Utility meant for implementation of
Schemes of Restructured-APDRP.
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)
(Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP dated 27.05.2009)
39

40
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level . Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi- 110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V oll-II /57-59 dated 24.6.2009)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 18 of Chapter-I
Observation/Recommendation No. 17
As regards the release of funds by States to SEBs/Utilities, the APDRP guidelines
stipulate that the State Governments shall release the funds provided under APDRP to
the State Power Utilities within a week of its credit to the State Government Account
and send a confirmation to the Government of India. The Committee find as of March,
2006 eight States failed to release Rs. 412.03 crore of APDRP funds to the SEB/Utilities.
There were significant delays on the part of the State Governments in release of
APDRP funds ranging from 7 days to  1095 days. The Ministry was not monitoring the
details of such delays, nor did they levy penal interest even in a single case of  delayed
release of APDRP funds. In many cases, the State Governments did not release the
entire funds  released by the Union Government. Evidently, there was no proper system
in Ministry of Power to ensure timely release of funds to the State Governments or
their early utilization. The Committee have been informed that keeping such delays in
view, Ministry of Power is proposing to take up APDRP under Central Sector Scheme
during XI Plan, under which, funds shall be released directly to the State Power Utilities.
The Committee deplore the fact that till now no procedure has been evolved by the
Ministry nor prescribed by the State Governments for management of grants. With
regard to the funds of Rs. 412.03  crore which were yet to be released by the State
Governments, the Ministry have stated that the states have been asked to submit the
Utilization  Certificates for the funds released so far. The Ministry have apparently
taken this action only now after the matter was considered by the Committee. Had
these steps been initiated earlier, the delay in release of funds could have been easily
avoided. Again, in regard   to the calculation and recovery of penal interest from  the
State Governments for delay in release of funds, the Ministry  stated that it will be done
through Ministry of Finance.Considering the fact that delayed implementation of
APDRP projects was due to delayed/non-release of funds by the State Governments
to the State Power Utilities/SEBs, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should
devise a sound mechanism for release of Grants to the State Governments. Further,
immediate onward relese of the funds to the SEBs/Utilities by the State Governments
also warrants urgent attention of the Ministry.
[(Sl. No. 17)  [Para 154 of 77th Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]

Action Taken by Government
Under Restructure—APDRP, the funds for execution of sanctioned Scheme are
being credited directly to the specific account of Utility meant for implementation of
Schemes of Restructured—APDRP.
Sd/-
(Devender Singh)
Joint Secretary (Distribution)Ministry of Power O.M. No. 5/8/2008-APDRP
dated 27.05.2009)
Vetted Comments
No comments subject to constant and effective monitoring to be exercised at State
and Central level. Evidence in support of reply may, however, be submitted to PAC for
their appraisal.
Director (Report)
Office of the Principal Director of Audit, Economic & Service Ministries,
New Delhi- 110002
(Letter No. AMG-I/PAC/91/16-2007/APDRP/V oll-II /57-59
dated 24.6.2009)
Comments of the Committee
Please see Paragraph No. 21 of Chapter-I
N
EW DELHI; JASWANT  SINGH,
13 November , 2009 Chairman,
22 Kartika, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
41

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 27th OCTOBER, 2009
The Committee sat from 1230 hrs. to 1330 hrs. on 27th October, 2009 in  Room No. 53,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Jaswant Singh —Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
5. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
6. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chateerjee
8. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
9. Shri Ashwani Kumar
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller & Auditor General of India
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy.  CAG Report Central (RC)
3. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit, (Defence Services)
4. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
5. Shri P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (Report Central)
A. Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of
school Education and Literacy)
1. Smt. Anshu Vaish — Secretary (SE&L)
2.    Shri S.K. Ray — AS&FA (HRD)
42

3. Smt. Anita Kaul — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Anant Kumar Singh — Joint Secretary
B.  Representative of  the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Shri Amit Mohan Prasad — Joint Secretary
C.  Representative of  the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
(Department of Food & Public Distribution)
Shri Bhagwan Sahai — Joint Secretary
2 . *** *** ***
3 . *** *** ***
4 . *** *** ***
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the  sitting has been kept on record.
5. The Committee, then, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Seventy-seventh Report (Forteenth Lok Sabha)
on ‘Accelerated Power Development and Reform Programme (APDRP)’.
6. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the above mentioned Draft Reports.
The Chairman, however, desired that suggestions/modifications, if any, of the Memebrs
may be communicated to the Lok Sabha Secretariat latest by 4th November, 2009.
7. The Committee, then, authorized the  Chairman to finalise the Draft Reports in the
light of the factual verifications received from the Office of the C&AG and present the
same to the House on a date convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Matters not related to this Report.
43

APPENDIX  II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE  PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR SEVENTY-SEVENTH
REPORT(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
       (i)  Total number of  Observations/Recommendations 27
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government
Sl. Nos./Paragraph Nos.
Sl Nos. 2, 11,14, 15, 16,19, 21, 25 & 27
(Para Nos. 139, 148, 151, 152, 153,156, 158, 162 and 164)
Total : 9
Percentage : 33
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which  the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the reply of the Government.
Sl Nos. 3,4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 18, 20, 24 & 26
(Para Nos. 140, 141, 142, 143, 145,146, 147, 155, 157, 161 and 163)
Total : 11
Percentage : 41
(iv) Observations/Recommendations   in respect of which the replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the committee and which require
reiteration.
Sl Nos. 1, 7, 12, 22 & 23
(Para Nos. 138, 144, 149, 159 and 160)
Total : 5
Percentage : 19
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies.
Sl Nos. 13 & 17
(Para Nos. 150 and 154)
Total : 2
Percentage : 7
44
GMGIPMRND—4527LS—15-3-2010.