SIXTY-EIGHTH  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ACCELERATED IRRIGATION BENEFITS
PROGRAMME (AIBP)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Thirty-first Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY  OF  W ATER RESOURCES
Presented  to Hon’ble Speaker on 16th January, 2013
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 26th February, 2013
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 27th February, 2013
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2013/ Pausa, 1934 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1995
Price: ` 38.00
     2013  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.
©

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2012-13)...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ......................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations  of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government .......... 5
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations   which  the  Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government................................................... 25
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted  by
the Committee and which require reiteration............... 26
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which
Government have furnished interim replies ................. 28
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2012-13) held on 28.12.2012...................... 29
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Thirty-first
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) ...................................... 31
(i)

(iii)
COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2012-2013)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Dr. M. Thambidurai
6. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
7. Shri Anant Kumar Hegde
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Sanjay Nirupam
10. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
*11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Ashok Tanwar
†13. Shri Takam Sanjoy
14. Dr. Girija V yas
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
18. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
19. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
20. Shri J.D. Seelam
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Shri H. R. Kamboj — Additional Director
*  Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Shri Sarvey Sathyanarayana appointed as Minister on
   28th October, 2012.
†  Elected w.e.f. 6th December, 2012 vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor appointed as Minister on
   28th October, 2012.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2012-13), having been authorized by
the Committee, do present this Sixty-eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Thirty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Accelerated Irrigation
Benefits Programme (AIBP)’ relating to the Ministry of Water Resources.
2. The Thirty-first Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
24 February, 2011. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 9th August, 2012. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 28th December,
2012. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations to the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Thirty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sahha) is given
at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 December, 2012 Chairman,
7 Pausa 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in
their Thirty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ' Accelerated Irrigation Benefits
Programme (AIBP) ' based on C&AG's Report No. 4 of 2010-11, Union Government
(Civil)-(Performance Audit) relating to the Ministry of Water Resources.
2. The Thirty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/laid
in Rajya Sabha on 24th February, 2011. The Report contained 24 Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Water Resources and
categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:
Para Nos. 1-4, 6-10, 12-14, 16-22 and 24
Total: 20
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 5, 11 and 15
Total: 03
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Para No. 23
Total: 01
Chapter-V

2
3. The Committee note that 20 recommendations contained in their Thirty-first
report have been accepted by the Government in principle which are reproduced in
Chapter-II of this report. The Committee now proceed to make certain observations on
the Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Water Resources.
A. Probe into incomplete/non-commissioned Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 5)
4. The Committee were concerned to note the certification of several incomplete/
non-commissioned projects as completed by some State Governments. The Committee
had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Water Resources should initiate
thorough probe into all such cases and should also ensure that there was no diversion
or misuse of funds in these projects. The Committee had desired to be intimated about
the project-wise details in this regard within six months of the presentation of their
report.
5. Commenting on the action taken in this regard, the Ministry of Water Resources
assured that the recommendation of the Committee has been—"Noted for compliance".
6. The Committee note the assurance given to them that the Government have
noted the irregularities for compliance, but the reply is silent about the corrective or
penal measures initiated to book all the concerned who were privy to false certification
of incomplete projects. Considering the gravity of the irregularities, the Committee
would like to be apprised, within three months of the presentation of this report, of all
projects which though incomplete but were declared as complete and the penal action
taken against the officers concerned for false certification.
B. Mismatch between the amount of grants released under AIBP to different
States and their performance in terms of project completion
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
7. The Committee were concerned to note that as per the analysis of the State-wise
grants released under AIBP for Major/Medium Irrigation Projects, 75 to 85 per cent of
the AIBP grants released during 2005-06 to 2007-08 were released to just six States
(Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Orissa).
These States were obtaining the vast majority of AIBP grants without corresponding
performance in terms of project completion, thus providing an incentive for inclusion
of fresh AIBP projects driven by construction work. What dismayed the Committee
was the fact that the nodal Ministry had failed to enforce the provisions of the AIBP
guidelines for converting the grant component into loan in cases of failure to complete
the projects in time. The Ministry had informed the Committee that Central assistance
is not released for projects, if the project is delayed beyond the time limit specified in
the MoU. The State Government is required to explain the delay and seek extension of
time by providing detained satisfactory reasons for the delay in project completion
and remedial measures taken by them to remove bottlenecks in project completion.
The Ministry had asked the State Governments to provide undertaking that any further
cost overrun occurring due to time overrun beyond the approved time would have to
be borne by the State Governments.

3
S-3/E/REPORT 2011/1892ls/1892lsPre.
8. The Ministry of Water Resources in their Action Taken Notes stated as
under:—
‘‘The recommendations have been noted for strict compliance."
9. Though assured by the Government that their recommendations have been
noted for strict compliance, but the Committee note that no time frame has been given
for the compliance. Further, no details have been given about the steps initiated to
secure compliance of their recommendation. The Committee would, therefore, like to
be apprised of the measures initiated to ensure compliance within three months of the
presentation of this report.
C. Mechanism to check diversion of funds, unauthorized expenditure and
other financial irregularities
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
10. The Committee had noted the mechanism put in place by the Ministry of Water
Resources to check diversion of funds, authorized expenditure and other financial
irregularities. The Utilisation Certificates in respect of Central Assistance related to the
States are required to be signed by the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries (Water
Resources/Irrigation Departments) of the concerned State Departments and works
executed under programme are also examined by the CWC with reference to programme
furnished by the State Governments with the AIBP proposals. There is a provision in
the AIBP guidelines that the State Government will furnish Audit Statement of
Expenditure incurred on AIBP to the Ministry of Water Resources with nine months of
the completion of the financial year. The provision seeks to ensure financial discipline.
The Ministry had informed that in the AIBP review meetings held during July/August,
2010, the States were clearly advised that they will have to furnish the Audited Statement
of Expenditure from the next financial year.
11. The Ministry of Water Resources in their Action Taken Notes stated as
under:—
"As mentioned in respect to the recommendations at para 5, the
recommendations have been noted for strict compliance."
12. The Committee are unhappy to note the stock reply given by the Ministry that
their recommendation to check diversion of funds, unauthorized expenditure and
other financial irregularities have been noted for strict compliance. Worse, the action
taken replies are silent about compliance by the State Governments regarding
submission of audited Statement of Expenditure in pursuance of the AIBP review
meetings held in July/August, 2010 and its impact on checking financial
irregularities. The Committee would like to be apprised in the matter within three
months from the presentation of this report.
D. Three level arrangement and the maintenance of projects under AIBP
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
13. Noting with concern, the Committee had observed that three level arrangement
i.e. Water User Associations, Distributory Level Associations and Minor Irrigation
Project Level Councils which were to play an important role in the execution and post
completion maintenance of the projects were either absent or practically non-functional

4
S-3/E/REPORT 2011/1892ls/1892lsPre.
in 18 major, 12 medium and 194 minor irrigation projects test checked in 21 States.
The assets created under AIBP were not being accorded due priority and arrangements
for handling over completed projects to farmers/water user associations had not been
operationalised with respect to many projects. It was proposed that Central assistance
under AIBP will be released pari-passu land acquisition required for carrying out work
of the coming year. In this regard, the Committee had desired to be apprised of corrective
measures initiated to address the existing deficiencies and the assurances given to the
Committee.
14. The Ministry of Water Resources in their Action Taken notes stated as under:
"As desired by Committee, the Action Taken Note is being submitted."
15. The Committee deplore the inordinate delay in furnishing the action taken
note indicating the corrective measures initiated to address the deficiencies and
delays in handling over the completed projects to Water Users' Associations and the
related aspects. The Committee reiterate their recommendation and desire that the
details of the corrective measures initiated to address the deficiencies be furnished
to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this report. The
Committee may also be apprised about the final outcome of the proposal of releasing
Central assistance under AIBP pari-passu land acquisition required for carrying out
the works/projects.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS   OF   THE    COMMITTEE   WHICH
HA VE    BEEN   ACCEPTED   BY   THE   GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee notes that irrigation infrastructure forms the lifeline of the Indian
agricultural productivity and key to food security. The creation of irrigation potential
both conventional as well as modern infrastructure play a crucial role in increasing the
agricultural productivity in the country. Nevertheless, the Committee is distressed to
note that the rate of creation of additional irrigation potential, which was 2.04 million
h.a. per annum from the beginning of the 6th plan in 1980 till the end of the rolling plan
in 1992 came down sharply to 1.03 million h.a. per  annum during the 8th plan. Further,
there was a sudden decline in the rate of creation of irrigation potential as well as
allocation of funds to the irrigation sector in the States. The Committee also note that
the Govenment of India launched the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)
in 1996-97 as an Additional Central Assistance (ACA) Programme for accelerating the
implementation of large, major and multipurpose irrigation projects which were beyond
the resource capability of the States, and to complete the ongoing major and medium
irrigation projects which were in an advanced stage of completion. This programme
was later extended to cover surface water Minor Irrigation (MI) projects in Special
Category (SC) States and also to projects in other States satisfying  the special criteria.
The special category States are North Eastern Region (including Sikkim), Jammu &
Kashmir, Uttarakhand & Himachal Pradesh. On examination of the subject, the
Committee has found that from 1996-97 to 2007-08, 253 major, medium and Extension,
Renovation & Modernization (ERM) projects and 6855 MI projects were approved
under AIBP and the Ultimate Irrigation Potential (UIP) of these projects was 10.49
million hectare, which represented about 8 per cent of the country's total UBP. During
the period stated above, the Government of India provided funding of Rs. 26,719 crore
for such projects, out of which Rs. 16,720 crore were disbursed in the  form of Central
Loan Assistance (CLA) and Rs. 9,999 crore as grant. However, w.e.f. December, 2006,
the AIBP was made a fully grant based programme.
The Committee are constrained to note that several deficiencies have been found
in the implementation of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) and as
such the implementation is fraught with several deficiencies and inadequacies.
Succinctly, these deficiencies are the poor  status of completion  of projects, reporting
of incomplete or non-commissioned projects as complete, non-accomplishment of the
targeted irrigation potential, non-utilization of  the created potential-and commencement
of project execution without ensuring fulfilment of essential  pre-requisites such  as
land acquisition  and obtaining statutory clearances and non-availability of irrigation
S-3/E/REPORT 2013/4653ls/4653ls
5

6
S-3/E/REPORT 2011/1892ls/1892lsPre.
benefits to the targeted beneficiaries even  after incurring substantial expenditure.
Other important deficiencies  pertain to obtaining of vast majority of AIBP grants by
six States without corresponding  performance in terms of project completion, failure
of the Ministry to enforce the provision of converting  the grant component into loan
in case of delay in timely completion of projects and rush of expenditure on AIBP
projects in the last quarter of the financial year. Lacunae  have also been noticed in
carrying out monitoring visits by the Ministry, non-circulation of material of the
evaluation study of AIBP projects conducted by Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation (MOSPI) to States/implementing  Agencies for necessary remedial
action and an inadequate  use of the Remote Sensing Technology (RST) in most of the
States to monitor the progress of AIBP projects. These deficiencies, accepted by the
representative  of the Ministry as correct during evidence, have been discussed in
detail in the succeeding  paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 1 Appendix, Part II, Para 1 of the Thirty First Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
No comments.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed substantial  dificiencies
in planning, approval and implementation of AIBP. They found that many projects
were approved and investment  clearances granted based on incomplete reports and
improper assessments. The Committee note that preliminary reports were prepared
even without conducting field surveys, investigations, working out anticipated benefits
and expected outcomes. The Committee also found that in terms of the "Guidelines for
submission, appraisal and clearance of Irrigation and Multipurpose Projects—2002"
issued by the CWC the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) should have been prepared in
accordance with the applicable Indian standards and guidelines issued by the Ministry
of Water Resources and Central Water Commission incorporting essential aspects
such as physical features, inter-State/international aspects, surveys and investigations,
hydrology, revenues. Benefit-Cost Ratio and financial returns, environmental and
ecological aspects, financial resources and estimates, Hood control and drainage,
irrigation planning, etc. However, the Detailed Projects Reports. (DPRs) were not only
found to be deficient  on severals counts but also were not available on record.
According to the Committee, the Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) analysis of projects, so
critical for the assessment of economic viability of the various projects approved
under AIBP, was conspicuously not conducted for many projects. (A) The Committee
take a serious  view of the deficiencies in the areas of planning and approval of AIBP
Projects as brought out in the above paragraph. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that comprehensive survey and investigations should be initiated immediately in regard
to all preliminary reports received for investment clearance. In the opinion of the

7
Committee, the  reports based on simple desk study and without sufficient ground
work do not constitute adequate material on record for according  due clearance to the
projects. Apparently, the projects so cleared would be unviable in the long run and
prove to be in fructuous without any benefits to the end users. (B) They also recommend
that Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) forming the basis for techno-economic scrutiny
and approval of major/medium projects must also be insisted  upon for all the projects
as concept papers or simple project proposals should not be treated as sufficient for
such a scrutiny. Further, the AIBP guidelines and the investment clearance of Planning
Commission lay great emphasis on Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) as a critical tool to assess
the economic viability of the project. (C) In this regard, the Committee recommend that
the Ministry of Water Resources must ensure that BCRs for all projects are properly
worked out, based OR validated and verifiable data and assumptions relating to cost,
revenues and cropping patterns etc. The Committee have taken a serious view of the
deficiencies in the areas of planning and approval of AIBP Projects as brought above.
(D) The Committee recommend that survey and investigations should be ensured for
all preliminary reports, since reports based on simple desk study without sufficient
ground work are not adequate for decisions on clearance. Further, DPRs must be
insisted on for all minor irrigation projects, as in the case of major and medium projects,
and concept papers or simple project proposals should not be treated as sufficient for
such scrutiny.
[Sl. No. 2, Appendix/Part II, Para 2 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) As recommended, no project is being cleared on the basis of preliminary
report. State Governments are instructed to prepare Detailed Project Report
(DPR) as per Guidelines of Ministry of Water Resources. These are then
examined by Central  Water Commission (CWC) in consultation with all
related agencies including Ministry of Environment and Forests, Ministry
of Agriculture, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, etc.
Further, in case of minor irrigation project, the State Governments have
been asked to essentially  include a representative of regional office of
Central Water Commission as a member, so that the DPR can be examined
more thoroughly.
The State TAC's have been  formed in 14 States, and remaining States have
been requested to expedite the formation of the State TACs.
(B) As indicated above in response to recommendations at Para 2 in the
preceding paragraphs/Page (2).
(C) The Ministry would ensure that the detailed examination of the project
report submitted by State Government inter-alia includes the analysis for
benefit cost ratio. In this regard, data related to cropping pattern,
productivity, rate of produce etc. has to be duly vetted by State Agriculture
Department. Further, during the course of examination by CWC, copy of the

8
DPR is also forwarded to Ministry of Agriculture for their suggestions/
endorsements.
(D) The recommendations are duly covered under the specific action points
identified in response to the recommendations at Para 2 on page 2.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
Tardy rate of completion of projects under AIBP is another area of concern for the
Committee. Out of 253 major, medium and Extension Renovation Maintenance (ERM)
projects sanctioned under AIBP between October 1996 and March 2008, only 100
projects were reported as completed. The Committee feel that the most disquieting fact
about these projects is that 12 of these "reportedly complete" projects were found to
be actually incomplete or non-commissioned. Apart from this, the project-wise data
regarding actual utilization of irrigation potential reportedly created was not furnished
by the Ministry. Consequently, the contribution of AIBP in terms of created potential
which was actually utilized ( i.e. irrigation water actually reaching the targeted
beneficiaries), could not be ascertained. The Committee is strongly of the view that the
Ministry's responsibility does not end with mere creation of dams, canals and other
irrigation structures and reported creation of irrigation potential. Since large amounts
of Government of India funds are involved, it is the Ministry's solemn duty to monitor
and verify actual utilization of such irrigation potential, without which the benefits of
irrigation water will not reach the farmers. (A) Consequently, the Committee recommend
that the Ministry continue to treat projects, where the structures are completed but
actual utilization of the targeted irrigation potential is not confirmed, as non-
commissioned. The photographs of the incomplete projects alongwith brief description
have been appended in the Part-1 of this Report.
As regards minor irrigation projects, while about 37 per cent of the projects
sanctioned under AIBP were reportedly complete, the authenticity of completion of
individual Minor Irrigation projects could not be verified due to non availability of
detailed project-wise data for creation/utilization of Irrigation Potential of Minor projects
with the Ministry. The Ministry have informed the Committee that with effect from
December, 2006, the Performa of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to be provided
by the State Government for availing Central Assistance under AIBP has been modified.
According to them, the State Governments are now required to provide year-wise
irrigation potential target till the completion of the project in the MoI). The AIBP
guidelines further provide that in case targeted irrigation potential is not achieved
during the year, further Central Assistance will be provided only on achieving the
cumulative irrigation potential targeted upto the previous year. The Committee have
been apprised by the Ministry that on certain occasions there are constraints in

9
achieving physical targets which are enumerated in the MoU signed with the States.
Such constraints are stated to be mainly related to land acquisition problems, contractual
problems, geological surprises, litigations, resettlement and rehabilitation problems,
works required to be executed by the agencies other than Irrigation Departments such
as railway crossing, highway crossings, shifting of utility lines etc. In this connection,
the Ministry have explained that in such cases it becomes inevitable to grant extension
of time and such extension is granted in cases where the delay has occurred due to
reasons beyond the control of the project authorities. However, the State Governments
are required to provide full justification for delay in project implementation and details
of remedial measures taken to tackle the bottlenecks. The Ministry have also brought
to the notice of the Committee that the State Governments are required to give
undertaking that in case of delay in project completion beyond the approved time limit,
the cost overrun, if any, will be borne by the State Government. The Committee would
take to be apprised of the tangible outcome of such initiatives/efforts.
[Sl. No.3 Appendix/Part II, Para 3 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) The actual utilisation of the targeted irrigation potential starts only after the
Command Area Development (CAD) works have been completed. Ministry
of Water Resources has initiated action for taking up the project under
CAD&WM pari passu with AIBP with a view to ensure early utilisation of
created irrigation potential.
Sd./
 Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
Notwithstanding the fact that the Ministry have shifted the responsibility on the
State Governments for the delays that occurred in the timely implementation and
completion of the projects. (A) The Committee feel that Ministry cannot absolve
themselves of the responsibility of putting up a well devised mechanism in place so
that the delays are brought to the minimum and projects are completed in time. The
field visits undertaken by the Ministry should invariably take due cognizance of the
delays in project implementation and suggest all out concerted measures to obviate
the same.
[Sl. No.4 Appendix/Part II, Para 4 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) The process of monitoring by CWC and its field offices is being critically
reviewed with a view to put in place a revised process for monitoring which
lays due emphasis on identification of the bottlenecks and recommending
the measures for minimizing the delays. Further, with a view to ensure that

10
the frequency of the monitoring of projects are adhered to as per the
guidelines, it is proposed to associate independent experts/organisation
(Retired senior officials from Projects/Water Resources Department,
WALMIs/NERIW ALM/IMTI/WALMTRI, etc.) in the process of monitoring.
Sd./
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee are aware that the process involved in the land acquisition for a
project is no doubt of a complex and socially sensitive nature. The Committee strongly
feel that the State Governments should be persuaded by the Ministry to resolve such
issues with due despatch with the avowed objective of achieving the full benefits of
the Accelerated Irrigated Benefits Programme (AIBP). It goes without saying that
funds should be released by the Ministry only after the State Governments certify that
major portion of the land required for the project has already been acquired and future
release of funds should invariably be linked with the satisfactory progress in land
acquisition process. The Committee would also recommend that an effective institutional
mechanism should be instituted to coordinate with various authorities concerned
such as the Indian Railways and the National Highway Authority of India etc. for the
speedy completion of rail and road crossings.
[Sl. No.6 Appendix/Part II,  Para 6 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It has now been decided that further release of funds for a particular year will be
made only when land required for work of that year is in possession of the State
Government and a certificate to that effect duly signed by the Secretary (WR)/Irrigation
is appended with the proposal. On the issue of coordination with various authorities
concerned, the States have been requested to form Project/State level committees to
monitor the projects which would take care of such issues. Further, it is also proposed
to lay due emphasis on these issues during the process of monitoring.
Sd./
Joint Secretary

11
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that out of 70 major/medium and 346 minor irrigation projects
test checked, the targeted irrigation potential was not created in 63 per cent of the
major/medium and 55 per cent of the minor irrigation projects. Even the Irrigation
Potential reported as created was not being utilized fully. The Committee also note that
Ministry of Water Resources have provided the year-wise targets of irrigation potential
created since 2004-05. In this connection, Irrigation Potential (including the shortfall of
previous years in lakh hectares) created between 2004-05 and 2008-09, the Committee
found that Irrigation Potential has been decreasing year after year. (A) The Committee
strongly recommended that the shortfall of irrigation potential, being a matter of serious
concern, should be addressed to at the highest level so that optimum utilization of
irrigation potential may be realized at the earliest under this programme.
[Sl. No.7 Appendix/Part II, Para 7 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) Ministry of Water Resources has initiated action for taking up the project
under CAD&WM pari passu with AIBP with a view to ensure early utilization
of created irrigation potential. Further, the issue is also under consideration
of the Working Group constituted by the Planning Commission for XIIth
Plan. It is also proposed to take up the related issues with concerned State
Governments. Further, State Governments will also be requested/advised
not to divert irrigated agriculture land to non-agriculture purposes.
Sd./
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
In addition to the delayed work execution, one of the main reasons for short
creation/non-utilisation of Irrigation Potential was lack of synchronization among
various project components ( i.e. dam & head-works, main branches and canals,
distributaries and water courses). During the examination of the subject, the
Committee also noted several instances where the representatives of the Ministry and
CWC indicated that projects had been "deemed" to be completed on the basis of
90/95 per cent completion, and the balance work was left to the State Government for
completion. It was also deposed by the CWC representatives that this was done to
facilitate granting of approvals for fresh projects from the State. The Committee strongly
disapprove of this practice. (A) Once Government of India funding under AIBP has
been initiated, it is the Ministry's responsibility to pursue and monitor its final
completion, and projects cannot be "deemed" to be completed, until the Ministry is
satisfied that the full benefits of irrigation water are reaching the targeted farmers.
 (B) While the Committee reiterate that new irrigation projects should be sanctioned to

12
meet the needs and demands of farmers and funding constraints should not be
allowed to come in its way, "deemed" completion of projects is not an appropriate
solution.
Such unsynchronised project execution, despite clear guidelines of the Planning
Commission, lead to the construction of irrigation structures without the benefit of
irrigation water. (C) The Committee recommend that the Ministry take immediate steps
to ensure that the State Governments execute irrigation projects in phases in a
synchronized manner, so that the benefits of irrigation water can flow to the farmer
when one phase (including dam and head works, main and branch canals, and
distributaries) are fully completed.
Action Taken
(A) The recommendation of the Committee is accepted. The benefits of the
created potential start flowing to the fields only after the Command Area
Development (CAD) works have been completed. Ministry of Water
Resources has initiated action for taking up the project under CAD&WM
pari passu with AIBP with a view to ensure early utilization of created
irrigation potential.
(B) Noted for compliance.
(C) State Governments have been told to lay due emphasis on construction,
planning and strictly adhere to the approved Plan. Further, it is also
proposed that these aspects would be looked into during the monitoring
of the project.
[Sl. No.8 Appendix/Part II, Para 8 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee also note that Remote Sensing Technology is an important tool in
assessing and confirming the creation of Irrigation Potential of the selected projects.
The National Remote Sensing Centre, (NRSC, Hyderabad) helps in assessing the
actual irrigation potential created by the project authorities. NRSC through its study
and survey has pointed out certain gaps in the irrigation canal network leading to
non-continuity of the irrigation water delivery. So far, only 50 projects have been
awarded to NRSC for assisting the ongoing projects. Various bottlenecks/constraints

13
have also been noticed in the creation of irrigation potential in various States such as
no supporting ayacut registers, non-completion of canal system, delay in land
acquisition, land disputes, non-completion of branch canals and distributaries, non
construction of canal bridges under rail and State/National highways crossings,
delays in forest and environmental clearances, slippage of embankments, high
vegetation, breakage in canal's and defective canal crossings etc. The Committee are
pained to observe that all these constraints are hindering an optimum utilization of the
created Irrigation potential of various projects. Subsequent to the commencement of
the examination of the subject, the Committee were informed by the Ministry that once
the irrigation potential is created for full utilization of the potential, the Command Area
Development Programme helps in creation of the infrastructure for field channels.
According to the Ministry, consultations have been initiated with the Planning
Commission on this issue that every irrigation project must have the Command Area
Development component. There is a gap between potential created and utilization as
the Command Area Development has a small budget provision of Rs. 600 crore only
whereas the budget of AIBP is Rs. 9000 crore. (A) The Committee therefore feel that the
provision of an equal matching budgetary provision for the AIBP and CAD programmes
would go a long way in making both the programmes successful.
[Sl. No. 9 Appendix/Part II, Para 9 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) Budgetary requirements for CAD programme may not be as large as AIBP as
former takes care of on farm development including field channel/drains, etc. whereas
latter takes care of dams/barrages/main canal/branch canal/distributor. States would
be requested to provide requisite matching budgetary provision. Further, as indicated
in response to recommendation at Para 7, Ministry of Water Resources has initiated
action for taking up activities related to command area development (under CAD&WM)
pari passu with the works related to the project under AIBP.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee note that the Command Area Development Programme (CADP) is
absolutely essential for availing the true benefits by the farmers which also helps in
the last phase/tail and connectivity i.e., field channel connectivity.They do not agree
with the assertion of the Ministry that the responsibility of the last phase connectivity

14
of water's supply lies with the State Governments. The Committee has now been
informed by the Ministry that CADP has been restructured and renamed as Command
Area Development and Water Management (CADWM) Programme with effect from
1st April, 2004 and matching budgetary provision has been ensured for the Twelfth
Five Year Plan. (A) They thus, recommend that Ministry should leave no stone unturned
in ensuring that the potential created is gainfully utilized by the State Governments
and the farmers.
[Sl. No. 10 Appendix/Part II, Para 10 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) As indicated in response to the recommendations at Para 3, Para 4, and
Para 9, Ministry of Water Resources has initiated action for:
(a) Taking up the command area development pari passu with project
construction;
(b) More vigorous and focussed monitoring of the project; and
(c) Further, State Governments will also be requested/advised not to
divert irrigated agriculture land to non-agriculture purposes.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
(A) The Committee have learnt that Ministry of Water Resources have put in
place a mechanism to check diversion of funds, unauthorized expenditure and other
financial irregularities. The Utilization Certificates in respect of Central Assistance
related to the States are required to be signed by the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries
(Water Resources/Irrigation Departments) of the concerned State Departments and
works executed under programme are also examined by the CWC with reference to
programme furnished by the State Governments with the AIBP proposals. There is a
provision in the AIBP guidelines that the State Government will furnish Audit Statement
of Expenditure incurred on AIBP to the Ministry of Water Resources within nine
months of the completion of the financial year. The provision seeks to ensure financial
discipline. The Ministry has informed that in the AIBP review meetings held during
July/August, 2010, the States were clearly advised that they will have to furnish the
Audited Statement of Expenditure from the next financial year.
[Sl. No. 12 Appendix/Part II, Para 12 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public  Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

15
Action Taken
(A) As mentioned in respect to the recommendations at para 5, the
recommendations have been noted for strict compliance.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
(A) Further, the Committee, recommend that the Ministry must ensure the
equitable distribution of Central funds to the Staff based on the
predefined criteria i.e. population dependent on agriculture Ultimate Irrigation
Potential (UIP) yet to be fulfilled, the past performance of the States in
completion/commissioning of projects and utilization of targeted irrigation
potential under AIBP . Stringent enforcement of the conversion of the grant
component into a loan must be given top priority as provided in the MoUs with
the States. The institutional mechanism as set up by the Ministry must be
strengthened to check diversion of funds, unauthorized expenditure and other
financial irregularities. (B) The Committee further recommends that (ensure the
sanctity of the budgeting process, the Ministry of Water Resources and the
Central Water Commission must release the AIBP fund well in time much before
the closing month of the financial year i.e. March.
[Sl. No. 13 Appendix/Part II, Para 13 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public  Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) The issues related to equitable distribution of available financial resources
are suitably addressed by way of fixation of ceiling of Central Assistance by
the Planning Commission in respect of various States. However, with a view
to ensure that the allocated funds for the schemes are gainfully utilized, the
project proposals received from various State Governments are duly
considered.
(B) Efforts are made by Ministry of Water Resources to seek the proposals from
State Governments and processing the same for forwarding to Ministry of
Finance for release of funds in time. However, the projects authorities and
the respective State Governments have a major role. Therefore, all the State

16
Governments are being requested for appropriate timely action in this
regard.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee are concerned to note that 11 major, 10 medium and 22 Minor
Irrigation projects were taken up for execution without ensuring the fulfillment of the
prerequisites such as land acquisition, clearance from forest and environmental
departments in 12 States. Apart from this, there have been numerous Instances of
Incorrect phasing of project components i.e. dam section was incomplete, but
main/branch canals were completed/nearly completed; main/branch canals were
completed, but work of distributaries and water courses had not been taken up; main
MI branch canals had been constructed in patches, with gaps (particularly in the initial
reaches). Consequently, despite incurring substantial expenditure, the benefits of
irrigation water were not fully available to the targeted beneficiaries. All these aspects
need to be thoroughly looked into and necessary correctives applied.
[Sl. No. 14 Appendix/Part II, Para 14 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public  Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is submitted that only those projects which have got investment clearance from
Planning Commission are considered for inclusion under AIBP. Clearance of Ministry
of Environment and Forest is no doubt a pre-requisite for investment clearance.
However in this context, it is clarified that for any irrigation project involving diversion
of forest land, the Ministry of Environment and Forest approves the project in two
stages:—
1. In-principle or 1st Stage approval is accorded with certain conditions
depending upon the case.
2. 2nd Stage i.e. final approval is accorded after the compliance report of
the conditions stipulated in the 1st stage of approval received by
Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of India by State Forest
Department.
For consideration and acceptance of the project proposal by Advisory Committee
of MoWR for Irrigation, Flood Control and Multipurpose Projects and subsequently
for investment clearance by Planning Commission only first stage clearance is
required to be obtained by the respective State Governments from Ministry of

17
Environment and Forest at the time of construction of such project components.
Similarly, the process of land acquisition is initiated by the respective States at the time
of construction. Different States have varying process and time schedule for land
acquisition. However, States have been informed that to avail central assistance in
respect of AIBP projects they would have to acquire the land required for works one
financial year in advance w.e.f. 1.4.2012.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee has also been informed that two States namely Maharashtra and
Uttar Pradesh have set up Water Resources Regulatory Authority/Commission. The
Government of Andhra Pradesh has enacted the Andhra Pradesh Water Resources
Regulatory Commission Act and the process of setting up of the Regulatory Commission
has been initiated. The matter is being pursued with other States. Further, the Ministry
pursued to incorporate a clause on maintenance of assets created under AIBP in the
Moll being signed by the State Government for availing central assistance under AIBP
to the effect that they will make an adequate provision in the State Budget for O&M of
the project. Moreover, the aspects of participatory irrigation management and
constitution of water users association are not covered under AIBP but they are
covered under CADWM programme. The Ministry has circulated a model bill to all the
States for enactment of a law on participatory irrigation management and constitution
of water users associations. 15 States have already enacted the law and 56,934 water
users associations have so far been formed. The matter is being pursued with other
State Governments. The State legislations provide for 3-tier mechanism for major/
medium projects except in Goa and Sikkim in which only single tier mechanism has
been provided and in Bihar only 2-tier mechanism has been provided. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the outcome of these efforts with respect to each of the
States.
[Sl. No. 16 Appendix/Part II, Para 16 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As a result of various initiatives taken by MoWR, the State Governments in
general have expressed willingness to adopt participatory approach in irrigation
management. So, far 15 states of India have either enacted exclusive legislation or
amended their irrigation Acts. Grant is being provided to States for organizing state
level and project level trainings/demonstrations/adaptive trials for farmers and field
functionaries. Further, one time functional grant @ Rs. 1000/-ha. is being provided
under CAD&WM programme which is to be shared by Centre, State and farmers

18
@ Rs. 450: 450: 100 respectively for formation of Water Users' Associations (WUAs).
Further, as indicated in response to recommendation at Para 7, Ministry of Water
Resources has initiated action for taking up the project under CAD&WM pari passu
with AIBP.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
Committee note that the steps initiated by the Ministry in strengthening AIBP and
for increasing the participation of State Governments as well as the end-users is in a
very rudimentary stage. Since concerted efforts are required by the Ministry in
concretizing the proposals as stated above, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry of Water Resources should ensure that 6 State Governments expedite setting
up Water Resources Regulatory Authorities/Commissions and make adequate
provisions in their respective State budgets for the maintenance of infrastructural
assets of the project. (A) The Committee feels that it is obligatory on the part of the
Ministry to oversee and ensure that all the State  Governments enact laws on
participatory irrigation management and constitution of water users associations for
the effective implementation of the AIBP Projects.
[Sl. No. 17 Appendix/Part II, Para 17 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) As indicated in response to Para 16.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee observe that the Central Water Commission (CWC) is required to
carry out monitoring/field visits to major/medium projects at least twice a year but the
actual percentage of monitoring visits ranged from 66 to 73 per cent during 2002-08.
 As regards the Surface Water Minor Irrigation Projects, the monitoring needs to be
carried out by the respective State Governments. However, the samples of such projects
are still required to be checked by the Central Water Commission as well as Ministry of
Water Resources. Another instance where the Committee have found that Ministry

19
have not exercised adequate monitoring is the case where CWC had made monitoring
visits to only 57 minor irrigation projects out of the total of 8699 minor irrigation
projects sanctioned under AIBP. The Committee find such symbolic monitoring grossly
insufficient for mounting effective oversight. (A) The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the monitoring visits must be augmented suitably in consonance with the instant
guidelines and the detailed inspection reports on such visits must be submitted to the
Union as well as State Governments for immediate necessary action so that the
bottlenecks and shortcomings are removed and the implementation of the projects
speeded up. (B) Further, the Remote Sensing Technology needs to be harnessed and
effectively used to monitor the progress of the AIBP Projects in 22 States.
[Sl. No. 18 Appendix/Part II, Para 18 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) As indicated in response to the recommendation at Para 4, the process of
monitoring by CWC and its field offices is being critically reviewed.
Independent agencies like, National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) and
other agencies have been contacted for assistance in monitoring and
evaluation.
(B) It is proposed to organize workshops on use of Remote Sensing technology
for assessing the progress of AIBP projects in which officials of the State
water resources department and state remote sensing department would be
invited. Further, it is to state that action in this regard has already been
initiated and the first workshop was held in May, 2011 at Hyderabad.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee have also been informed by the Ministry that the suggestions
contained in the monitoring reports are to be followed by the respective State
Governments and for this, the copies of the reports are sent to all the important officers
associated with the project planning and execution. The implementation of
suggestions is reviewed by the CWC from time to time and particularly during
subsequent visits to the project. However, the Committee note with concern that there
is no institutional arrangement in place for coordination amongst the State
Governments, Planning Commission and CWC etc. Nevertheless, the Ministry have
assured that compliance of the suggestions made in the monitoring reports will be
pursued vigorously. The reports of the NRSC are sent to the respective State
Governments for action in cases where deficiencies have been found by the NRSC.

20
The rectification of deficiencies is also monitored and pursued with States. Out of
53 projects monitored so far, deficiencies were found in 17 projects out of those,
rectification has been done in 9 projects. Although, the Committee have taken note of
all the existing mechanism and procedures that have been devised by the Ministry in
regard to monitoring of the projects, the Committee feel tint the task of bringing about
the desired results of all these procedures.
[Sl. No. 19 Appendix/Part II, Para 19 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As indicated in response to the recommendation at Para 4, the process of monitoring
by CWC and its field offices is being critically reviewed. Independent agencies like,
National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) and other agencies have been contacted for
assistance in monitoring and evaluation.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Ministry should bear in mind that this task of coordination is complex as
several organisations such as Ministry, CWC, State Governments and Water Users
Associations are involved to bring all these efforts to fruition. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the Ministry should also engage independent agencies
such as engineering colleges for monitoring and an impartial assessment of the projects
implementation. (A) The Ministry should also ensure that the suggestions made in the
Inspection Reports of the C&AG, and other independent agencies are strictly
complied with by the State Governments. (B) the rectification of gaps and deficiencies
found by the National Remote Sensing Centre must also be pursued vigorously with
the State Governments. (C) The Committee are of the view that monitoring should be
enhanced not only in quantitative terms (i.e. by increasing number of visits/inspections)
but in qualitative terms (i.e. outcome oriented) as well so that progress of projects is
steady and continuous and bottlenecks are removed by timely interventions.
[Sl. No. 20 Appendix/Part II, Para 20 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) Necessary actions have already been initiated in respect of implementation
of the recommendation made by CAG in its report. Ministry of Water
Resources has identified specific action points and all State Governments
have been requested for appropriate action. Further, CWC has planned
organization of series of workshop in different parts of the country on
project preparation, appraisal and monitoring to adequately train the working
level professionals.

21
(B) As submitted earlier, the report in respect of 17 projects were conveyed to
respective State Governments. So far, implementation of corrective
measures in respect of nine projects namely Gundlakamma (Andhra
Pradesh), Dhansiri (Assam), Shivnath Diversion (Chhattisgarh). Shahnehar
(HP), Malaprabha (Karnataka), Khuga (Manipur), Thoubal (Manipur),
Khowai (Tripura) and Teesta Barrage (West Bengal) has been reported by
the respective State Governments. The matter is being pursued with the
State Governments in respect of remaining 8 projects.
(C) As mentioned in response to the recommendation at Para 4, the process of
monitoring is being critically reviewed with due emphasis on Qualitative
aspects also. Further, involvement of independent experts/organization is
also envisaged to supplement the efforts of CWC.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee has noticed many irregularities in the works of individual projects
as well. (A) In regard to the Agra Canal Project, the Ministry should take responsibility
for ensuring water quality. They should also expand AIBP guidelines to incorporate in
them the significant issues such as water quality, growth of weeds, completion of
bridges etc. (B) The Ministry should also devise a mechanism where multiple
stake-holders could be brought to a common platform to resolve the issues such as the
public objections as mentioned in the Tapkara Reservoir Project (Jharkhand).
(C) The Committee also takes a strong exception to the assertions of the Ministry in
regard to the Mahi Bajaj Sagar Project (Rajasthan) that they have no existing
mechanism for ensuring water availability till the tail end in post-completion of the
project. The Committee views such an assertion highly irresponsible and lopsided as
it questions the very basis of the existence of this national level programme. They,
therefore, recommend in unequivocal terms that in all kinds of projects i.e. major/
medium/minor irrigation projects, the availability of water should invariably be ensured
till the tail end. The Committee further feels that instead of shifting the responsibilities
on the States, the Ministry should devise a mechanism whereby water is invariably
available till the tail end in post-completion of the projects not only for this project but
also for all the projects where any kind of Central assistance is provided to the States.
The Committee also desire that the new mechanism should be such that ultimate users
i.e. the farmers do not suffer on account of lack of water availability at the tail end of
the projects. The Committee would also like to have project-wise details to be furnished
to them after incorporating the new mechanism. The actual site photographs at the

22
time of finalization of the Audit Report have been appended to this Report along with
brief description of the respective prefect.
[Sl. No. 21 Appendix/Part II, Para 21 of the Thirty-First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) The observations of the Committee in respect of Agra Canal have been
noted. In this regard, it is submitted that issues related to water quality were
duly reflected in the report of the monitoring visit carried out by CWC from
time to time (Monitoring report dated September, 2005 and February, 2006).
Accordingly the State Governments were requested for appropriate action.
The matter is being pursued vigorously with the State Governments.
(B) As indicated in the response to recommendation at Para 4 regarding
monitoring mechanism the process of monitoring is being reviewed to
effectively address quantitative as well as qualitative aspects. However,
with respect to the involvement of multiple stakeholders it is submitted that
the process of preparation of DPR, etc. is undertaken by respective State
Governments in close cooperation with the respective departments
particularly Department of Agriculture and Department of Environment and
Forests. The process of involvement of multi stakeholder constitutes an
integral part of environmental impact assessment.
(C) It is submitted promotion of Participatory Irrigation Management, through
formation of Water Users Association, in different command of the project
is being encouraged in all States to take care of distribution of water in all
parts of the command. 15 States have enacted legislation for this purpose
while similar action by other States is under progress. States have also been
requested to form Project Level Committees for early execution of project.
Further, as indicated in response to recommendation at Para 7 Ministry of
Water Resources has initiated action for taking up the project under
CAD & WM pari passu with AIBP which would ensure full utilization of the
created irrigation potential.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
(A) The Committee would also like to recommend that in regard to the Indira
Gandhi Nahar Project Stage-II, the proposal received from the State
Government for inclusion of sprinkler irrigation system should be cleared within a fixed
time frame under intimation to the Committee. (B) The  Bansagar Canal (U.P.) draws
attention of the Committee as two years have elapsed and no progress has been
registered to take necessary corrective measures to address the problems of

23
underground water sprouting up in Maja-Jergo Link Canal (MJLK) during the visit to
the project in February, 2009. The Committee would recommend that this problem
should be addressed immediately to remedy the situation. (C) In regard to V elligallu
Reservoir Project (Andhra Pradesh), the Committee recommends the
Ministry to submit the final status of the project within 3 months of the presentation of
this report to Parliament.
[Sl. No. 22 Appendix/Part II, Para 22 of the Thirty-First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) It is submitted that the revised cost estimate was considered in the 108th
meeting of the Advisory Committee of MoWR for Irrigation. Flood Control
and Multipurpose Projects held on 4.1.2011 and investment clearance is
awaited from Planning Commission. The scheme accepted by the Advisory
Committee of MoWR for Irrigation, Flood Control and Multipurpose Projects
during its meeting held on 4th January, 2011, inter alia includes provision
for Diggi and Pressure piped system for sprinkler irrigation system.
(B) It is submitted that Government of Uttar Pradesh has been requested to take
care of this specific problem and report about action taken in this regard.
(C) In this regard it is submitted that the latest status of the project has been
collected from the State Government and has already been submitted to
Lok Sabha Secretariat.
Sd/-
 Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
In view of the complex web of deficiencies, irregularities and inherent infirmities in
the conception, design and implementation of the scheme and considering the huge
wastage of public funds, the Committee would like a basic restructuring of this
programme. While restructuring the AIBP Scheme, mindful of the aggregate benefits
expected to accrue and the limitations of monitoring/inspection mechanism available,
the Union Government need to ensure that the funds released to the States under the
AIBP are rigorously monitored in a sustained manner by the Planning Commission and
the Ministry of Water Resources by evolving a sound institutional mechanism, within
six months of the presentation of this report, in consultation with the C&AG and
Ministry of Finance for fruition of the intended objectives without time and cost
overrun.
[Sl. No. 24 Appendix/Part II, Para 24 of the Thirty-First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

24
Action Taken
As indicated in response to the recommendation at Para 4, the process of monitoring
by CWC and its field offices is being critically reviewed and necessary steps are being
taken to revitalize the monitoring mechanism.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
THE GOVERNMENT
-Nil-
25

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observations/Recommendations
The Commitee are concerned to note that there have been several instances
where the incomplete/non-commissioned projects have been certified as completed
projects by the State Government authorities. (A) In this context, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Water Resources should initiate thorough probe into
all such cases and should also ensure that there is no diversion or misuse of funds in
these projects. The Committee would like to be intimated about the project-wise details
in this regard within six months of the presentation of this report.
[Sl. No. 5  Appendix/Part II, Para 2 of the Thirty-First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) Noted for compliance.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee is concerned to note that as per the analysis of the State-wise
grants released under AIBP for Major/Medium Irrigation Projects, 75 to 85 per cent of
the AIBP grants released during 2005-06 to 2007-08 were released to just six States
(Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Orissa).
These States were obtaining the vast majority of AIBP grants without corresponding
performance in terms of project completion, thus providing an incentive for inclusion
of fresh AIBP projects driven by construction work. What dismayed the Committee is
the fact that the Nodal Ministry had failed to enforce the provisions of the AIBP
guidelines for converting the grant component into loan in cases of failure to complete
the projects in time. In his context, during examination of the subject, the Ministry has
informed the Committee that Central Assistance is not released for projects, if the
project is delayed beyond the time limit specified in the MoU. The State Government is
required to explain the delay and seek extension of time by providing detailed
satisfactory reasons for the delay in project completion and remedial measures taken
26

27
by them to remove bottlenecks  in projects completion. (A) The Ministry has now
asked the State Governments to provide undertaking that any further overrun occurring
due to time overrun beyond the approved time will have to be borne by the
State Governments. This calls for close monitoring and follow up.
[Sl. No. 11 Appendix/Part II, Para 11 of the Thirty-First Report of the Public
Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) The recommendations have been noted for strict compliance.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee also note that three level arrangements i.e. Water User Associations,
Distributory Level Associations and Minor Irrigation Project Level Councils play an
important role in the execution and post-completion maintenance of the projects.
However, they are appalled to note that such an arrangement was either absent or
practically non-functional in 18 major, 12 medium and 194 minor irrigation projects test
checked in 21 States. Astoundingly, assets created under AIBP were not being
accorded due priority, and arrangements for handing over completed projects to
farmers/water user association had not been operationalised with respect to many
projects. In this regard, the Ministry have informed that land acquisition is not a
pre-requisite for according techno-economic clearance to the project. Now it is
proposed that Central assistance under AIBP will be released pari-passu with land
acquisition required for carrying out work of the coming year. According to the
Ministry, no techno-economic clearance is now-a-days accorded without State
Government furnishing all the required statutory clearances such as forest,
environment, wild life and R&R plan. (A) Committee would like to be apprised of
corrective measures initiated to address their concerns over the forgoing deficiencies
and the assurances given to them.
[Sl. No. 15 Appendix/Part II, Para 15 of the Thirty First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) As desired by Committee that the Action Taken Note is being submitted.
Sd/-
 Joint Secretary

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that drought-prone and desert
areas of the country are in the dire need of augmentation of irrigation facilities. Specific
programmes have been developed for these areas and categorized as Drought Prone
Area Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development Programme (DDP) by the Ministry
of Rural Development. The Committee also notes that spcific provisions have been
made in the AIBP guidelines for providing irrigation facilities on priority basis for
DPAP. In addition, creating irrigation potential for the drought-prone and desert areas
need a special attention. (A) The Committee, therefore, recommends that the matter
should be taken with other related Ministries such as Ministry of Rural Development,
Ministry of Environment and Forests by the Ministry of Water Resources and vigorous
efforts should be made for creating irrigation potential for these areas in a time bound
manner. This would in turn, bring food security not only for these areas but also for the
entire country as well.
[Sl. No. 23 Appendix/Part II, Para 23 of the Thirty-First Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(A) It is submitted that as per present AIBP guidelines drought prone area projects
are eligible for 90% Central assistance as against the projects in normal areas which are
eligible for 25% grant. The projects benefiting DDP areas are presently on a par with
the projects of normal areas and eligible for 25% grant.
The MoWR has recently moved a Note for consideration and seeking the approval
of the Cabinet (CCI) for funding of ongoing as well as new projects under AIBP
benefitting DDP areas on a par with DPAP areas  i.e. 90% Central assistance to the
eligible cost of works.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI
28 December , 2012 Chairman,
7 Pausa, 1934 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
28

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2012-13) HELD ON 28TH DECEMBER, 2012
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28th December, 2012 from 1500 hrs to 1610 hrs. in
Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Shripad Yesso Naik
6. Sh. Abhijit Mukherjee
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
9. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
10. Shri J.D. Seelam
11. Shri N.K. Singh
12. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Devender Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Abhijit Kumar — Director
3. Ms. Miranda Ingudam — Under Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Yadav — Under Secretary
29

30
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri P. Sesh Kumar — Director General (c)
2. Shri Nand Keyolar S. — Director General
3. Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General
4. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Director General
5. Shri Jayant Sinha — Principal Director (RC)
6. Ms. Geetali Tare — Principal Director
7. Shri Maneesh Kumar — Principal Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the  Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India to the sitting of the Committee.
The Chairman, then, apprised that the meeting was convened to consider and adopt
the six Draft Reports circulated to them by the Secretariat.
3. The Committee then took-up the following Draft Reports one by one for
consideration:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) *** *** ***
(iv) *** *** ***
(v) Draft Report on Action taken on the 31st Report (15th Lok Sabha) on the
subject "Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)"; and
(vi) *** *** ***
4 . *** *** ***
5. During the further course of consideration, some Members suggested minor
modifications in the draft Original Reports. After some discussions and deliberations,
the Committee adopted all the Draft Reports and authorized the Chairman to finalise
these Reports in light of the factual verifications received from the Audit, if any and
present the same to the Hon'ble Speaker on a date convenient to him.
6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the Draft
Reports and active participation in the consideration and adoption of the reports.
The Committee, then, adjourned.
***not related to this Report.

APPENDIX  II
(Vide para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations 24
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee Total : 20
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage - 83%
Para Nos. 1-4, 6-10, 12-14, 16-22 and 24
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Total : 0
Committee do not desire to pursue in Percentage - 0%
view of the replies received from the
Government:
- Nil -
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect Total : 3
of which replies of the Government have not Percentage - 12%
been accepted by the Committee, and which
require reiteration:
Para Nos. 5, 11 and 15
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect Total : 1
of which Government have furnished Percentage - 5%
interim replies :
Para No. 23.
31
GMGIPMRND—4653LS—22-04-2013.