23
ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR DEVELOPING
EXPORT INFRASTRUCTURE AND ALLIED
ACTIVITIES (ASIDE) SCHEME
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2010-11)
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ASSISTANCE TO STATES FOR DEVELOPING
EXPORT INFRASTRUCTURE AND ALLIED
ACTIVITIES (ASIDE) SCHEME
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 31.08.2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 31.08.2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka)

PAC  No. 1919
Price:  Rs. 58/-
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government
of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2010-11) ...................... (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10)...................... ( V)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2008-09)...................... ( Vii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................           (ix)
REPORT
PART-I
I. INTRODUCTORY ...........................................................................
II. SALIENT FEATURES OF ASIDE SCHEME
(a) Allocation of Funds ................................................................
(b) Approval of Projects and Implementation ..............................
(c) Release of Funds ....................................................................
(d) Organizational Arrangement ...................................................
(e) Audit Review ..........................................................................
III. INELIGIBLE  ASIDE  PROJECTS
(a) Projects Not Covered under the Scheme Guidelines...............
(b) Approval of Ineligible ASIDE Projects by SLEPCs.................
IV . LOW UTILISATION OF SANCTIONED FUNDS...........................
V. FUNDS NOT ALLOCATED ON THE BASIS OF EXPORT
PERFORMANCE............................................................................
VI. AMOUNT SANCTIONED IN EXCESS OF ADMISSIBILITY........
VII. EXCESS RELEASE OF FUNDS......................................................
VIII. INCORRECT FINANCIAL REPORTING AND NON-SUBMISSION
OF UTILISATION CERTIFICATES................................................
IX. NON-LEVERAGING OF ASIDE FUNDS .........................................
X. LACK OF PROPER PROJECTS PLANNING..................................
XI. NON-APPROV AL OF PROJECTS BY STATE LEVEL EXPORT
PROMOTION COMMITTEE/ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY ..
XII. INCOMPLETE AND SUSPENDED ASIDE AND CIB PROJECTS ...
XIII. DELAY IN COMPLETION OF PROJECTS AND TIME AND COST
OVERRUN......................................................................................
1
1
2
2
2
3
4
7
9
11
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
21

PAGE
XIV . INADEQUATE MONITORING
(a) Inadequate Monitoring at Central Level ................................. 22
(b) Inadequate Monitoring at State Level .................................... 23
(c) Inadequate Monitoring at Project Level ................................. 23
(d) Inadequate Monitoring of EDF Projects ................................. 24
XV . PROMOTION OF EXPORTS IN THE NORTH-EASTERN REGION
(a) Outlay for North-Eastern States under ASIDE Scheme.......... 28
(b) Export Potential of North-Eastern States ................................ 28
XVI. PRIORITY PROJECTS DURING THE 11TH FIVE YEAR PLAN..... 30
PART-II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDA TIONS....................................................... 32
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2008-09)
held on 2nd July, 2008 .................................................................... 43
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2009-10)
held on 11th February, 2010 ............................................................ 46
III. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee (2010-11)
held on 27th August, 2010 .............................................................. 48
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi  —Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14. Shri D. Venugopal
15. Shri Arun Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Ashwani Kumar
17. Shri N. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. Shri N.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4. Shri S.L. Singh — Committee Officer
(iii)

(v)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
*Shri Gopinath Munde   —Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Arun Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
$18. V acant
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
* Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant Singh
resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
$ Vice Shri Ashwani Kumar retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-09)
*Shri Santosh Gangwar  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
**9. Vacant
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
***11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
15. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Raashid Alvi
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Prof. P.J. Kurien
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
      * Elected w.e.f. 17th December, 2008 vice Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh resigned his seat in
Lok Sabha on 11th November, 2008.
* * Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra resigned his seat in Lok Sabha w.e.f. 18th December, 2008.
   *** Elected w.e.f. 17th December, 2008 vice Shri Brajesh Pathak ceased to be a Member of
Committee consequent upon his election to Rajya Sabha.
(vii)

  INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Twenty-third Report (15th Lok Sabha) on “Assistance to
States for Developing Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities Scheme (ASIDE)”
based on Report No. 18 of  2007 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil) of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
2. The Report of C&AG of India for the year ended March, 2006 No. 18 of 2007
(Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil) was laid on the Table of the House on
11th September, 2007.
3. The Public Accounts Committee (2008-09) selected the subject for examination
and report. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) on the subject at their sitting held
on 2nd July, 2008. As the examination of the subject could not be completed due to
paucity of time, the Public Accounts Committee (2009-10) re-selected the subject for
examination. Further evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry (Department of Commerce) was held on 11th February, 2010. However, due to
paucity of time they also could not finalize the Report on the subject. The Public
Accounts Committee (2010-11) decided to carry forward the subject. The Committee
considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 27th August, 2010. Minutes
of the sittings form Appendices to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
5. The Committee thank their predecessor Committees for taking oral evidence and
obtaining information on the subject.
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) for tendering evidence
before the Committee and furnishing information to the Committee in connection with
the examination of the subject.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
27 August, 2010 Chairman,
5 Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(ix)

REPORT
PART I
1.  INTRODUCTORY
In the wake of liberalization and structural reforms in the economy exports have
come to be regarded as an engine of economic growth. With a view to promoting and
facilitating exports and creating attendant infrastructure, the Department of Commerce,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India launched a scheme namely
'Assistance to States for Developing Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities'
(ASIDE) on 13th March 2002 with an outlay of Rs. 97 crore for March 2002 and
Rs. 1,725 crore for the 10th Five Year Plan (2002-2007). The objective of the scheme was
to involve the States in the export effort by providing assistance to the State
Governments (linked to export performance) to create appropriate infrastructure for
the development and growth of exports in pursuance of EXIM Policy announcement
made in March 2000. Outlay for the scheme under 11th Five Year Plan (2007-2012) was
tentatively fixed at Rs. 3664.63 crore out of which the allocation for the year 2007-08
was Rs. 569 crore.
2. Three existing schemes for export promotion viz. Export Promotion Industrial
Parks (EPIP), Export Promotion Zones (EPZ) and Critical Infrastructure Balancing (CIB)
schemes were merged with the new scheme. After  the merger of these schemes, the
ongoing projects under the older schemes were to be funded by the States from the
resources provided under ASIDE scheme. The scheme also subsumed the Export
Development Fund (EDF), which was another existing scheme for export promotion,
for North Eastern Region (NER), including Sikkim, involving the activities permitted
under the existing EDF scheme guidelines (which  differ from ASIDE scheme guidelines).
II.  SALIENT FEATURES OF ASIDE SCHEME
(a) Allocation of funds
3. The ASIDE schemes outlay has to components—(i) 80 per cent of the funds
were to be earmarked for allocation to the States on the basis of the approved criteria;
this is called State Component; and (ii) The balance 20 per cent and amounts equivalent
to un-utilized portion of the funds allocated to the States in the past year(s), if any, was
to be retained at the Central level, to be known as Central Component for meeting the
requirements of inter-State projects, capital outlays of EPZs/SEZs, activities relating
to promotion of exports  from the North Eastern Region as per the existing guidelines
of EDF and any other activity considered important by the Central  Government from
the Regional or  the National perspective. The proposals under the scheme must show
a direct linkage with the Exports. The proposed investments should  not duplicate the
efforts of any existing organisation in the same field. The funding for  the project
should generally be on cost sharing basis, if the assistance is being provided to a non-
government agency. However, the State Level Export Promotion Committee (SLEPC)/
Empowered Committee (EC) may consider full funding  of the project on merits.
1

2
(b) Approval of Projects and Implementation
4. As per ASIDE scheme guidelines, an SLEPC headed by the Chief Secretary of
the State and consisting of the Secretaries  of concerned Departments at the State level
and a representative of the States Cell of the Department of Commerce (DoC) and the
Joint Director General of Foreign Trade posted in that State/region and the Development
Commissioners of the SEZ/EPZ in the State within their jurisdiction as  Members.
SLEPC was to scrutinise and approve specific projects and oversee the implementation
of the Scheme. The Central sector projects were to be approved and sanctioned by an
EC in the Department of Commerce, headed by the Commerce Secretary and consisting
of representatives from the Planning Commission and the respective Ministries as per
the procedure prescribed. If any project has any bearing on  the external sector,
a representative of the Ministry of External Affairs is to be invited for the meeting of
the Empowered Committee. The projects were to be implemented through various
Implementing Agencies (IAs) which could be government agencies,  trade bodies,
individual exporters etc. The Implementing  Agency of each project was to see that
wherever feasible, users of the infrastructure would pay a service charge for the same,
which could meet the expenditure on operation and maintenance of the  infrastructure
so created.
(c) Release of Funds
5. Funds under the State component were to be directly disbursed to the Nodal
Agency (NA) nominated by the State Government subject ot the limit of the entitlement
worked out on the basis of laid down criteria. On approval of the proposals by the
SLEPC, funds were to be distributed to the implementing agencies by the nodal agency.
Funds under the Central component were to be disbursed by the Department of
Commerce to the Central nodal agencies on the basis of approval of proposals by the
Empowered Committee.
(d) Organizational Arrangement
6. The Department of Commerce is responsible at the Central level for policy
formulation, allocation of funds (Central and State component), consideration and
approval of Central sector projects by EC, release of funds to nodal agencies, co-
ordination with State nodal department, nodal agency and nodal officers; and
monitoring and review of scheme. The  Nodal agencies were to look after submission
of project proposals for approval of EC; disbursal of funds to Implementing agencies;
overseeing implementation of projects; and submission of utilisation certificates (UCs).
Nodal officers (DC—SEZs/JDGFT: Development Commissioner, Special Economic Zone/
Joint Director General of Foreign Trade) were entrusted with the job of evaluation of
physical and financial progress of the projects and  submission of report to SLEPC,
nodal agency and Department of Commerce.
7. At the State Level, nodal department were responsible for convening SLEPC
meetings; preparation of annual/five year export plans; co-ordination with trade and
industry, export promotion councils and Department of Commerce; and drawing up a
shelf of location specific projects for approval of SLEPC. SLEPC was entrusted with
the task of scrutiny and approval of  State sector projects; overseeing implementation

3
of scheme; and allocation of funds for State sector projects. The Nodal agencies were
responsible for disbursal of funds to IAs; overseeing implementation of projects; and
submission of quarterly and annual reports on physical and financial status through
website of the Department of Commerce.
(e) Audit Review
8.  Audit conducted a performance review of ASIDE Scheme covering the period
from March 2002  to March 2006 with the object of assessing whether the projects
funded by ASIDE had an overwhelming export content and their linkage with exports
was fully established; ASIDE had appropriate impact on promotion of export activities;
there was adequate and effective control over the release of ASIDE funds, and such
releases were linked to export performance;  the process for planning and
implementation of ASIDE project was adequate and effective, and the projects were
executed economically and efficiently; and there were adequate and effective systems
of monitoring at the Central and State levels. The Audit review had revealed several
deficiencies; the importance of these are enumerated as under:—
• While the scheme envisaged creation of export infrastructure for specific
purposes having direct and overwhelming linkage with exports, the audit
showed that 57 State Sector Projects and 22 Central Sector Projects involving
ASIDE funding of Rs. 169.24 crore and Rs. 8.35 crore respectively were either
not covered under the scope of the scheme guidelines or were not of a capital
nature;
• The Director General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCIS) did
not have data regarding the States from which items of export originated, and
only  had data about the entities which purchased such items prior to their
export. This resulted  in allocation of ASIDE funding to the States where
purchasing entities were located rather than to States, which were producing
the export items;
• The utilisation of funds  released to some States was poor and further releases
were made without adjusting the previous unspent balances, which resulted
in excess/injudicious release of Rs. 94.12 crore, Rs. 131.60 crore, Rs. 114.17
crore and Rs. 228.97 crore during the years 2002-03, 2003-04, 2004-05 and
2005-06 respectively;
• Utilization Certificates (UCs) amounting to Rs. 37.75 crore and Rs. 61.71 crore
were not received from 14 States and 22 Central Nodal Agencies respectively
for periods ranging between two and eight years;
• In eight States there was no involvement of either private sector or any State
Government contribution, while private participation was negligible in
12 other States; and
• Expenditure of Rs. 19.98 crore was rendered infructuous in eight States on
account of rescinding contracts mid way and due to the infrastructure created
lying unused.

4
9. These Audit findings and observations along with other relevant issues and
the Ministry's submissions thereon have been discussed at length in the succeeding
paragraphs.
III.  INELIGIBLE  ASIDE  PROJECTS
10. As per the ASIDE Scheme guidelines; activities aimed at development of
infrastructure for exports could be funded from the scheme, provided such activities
had overwhelming export content and their direct linkage with exports was fully
established. The scheme also envisaged creation of assets of capital nature only i.e.
excluding activities of a revenue nature. The specific purposes for which the funds
could be sanctioned and utilized are given below:—
(i) Creation of new Export Promotion Industrial Parks/Zones [including Special
Economic Zones (SEZs)/Agri-Business Zones] and augmenting facilities in
the existing ones.
(ii) Setting up of electronic and other related infrastructure in export conclaves.
(iii) Equity participation in infrastructure projects, including the setting up of
SEZs.
(iv) Meeting requirements of capital outlay of EPIPs/EPZs/SEZs.
(v) Development of complementary infrastructure such as roads connecting the
production centres with the ports and setting up of inland Container Depots
and Container Freight Stations.
(vi) Stabilising power supply through additional transformers and islanding of
export production centres etc.
(vii) Development of minor ports and jetties of a particular specification to serve
export purposes.
(viii) Assistance for setting up common effluent treatment facilities.
(ix) Projects of national and regional importance.
(x) Activities permitted as per EDF in relation to the North Eastern States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Mizoram, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tripura
and Sikkim.
(a) Projects not covered under the Scheme Guidelines
11. Audit test check of 114 projects in the eight selected States, however, revealed
that 46 approved projects (40 per cent of projects) involving ASIDE funding of
Rs. 148.20 crore, against which an expenditure of Rs. 67.01 crore had been incurred,
were not covered under the scheme guidelines. Further, test check of records in the
Department of Commerce showed that 11 State Sector Projects in eight other States/
UTs viz. Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Lakshadweep, Meghalaya, Punjab,
Rajasthan and Uttarakhand involving ASIDE funding of Rs. 21.04 crore and 22 Central
Sector Projects relating to 13 Central Agencies involving ASIDE contribution of
Rs. 8.35 crore, against which expenditure of Rs. 10.46 crore and Rs. 2.20 crore respectively

5
had been incurred, were also not covered under the guidelines. Further, activities like
seminars, workshops, conferences, training programmes, expositions etc. were not
covered under the scope of the guidelines of EDF for North East including Sikkim.
Audit test check of records in the Department of Commerce, however, showed that
15 projects involving Central Assistance of Rs 1.12 crore, out of which Rs. 1.03 crore
had been released, were sanctioned by the Department for such inadmissible activities.
12. Audit has noticed significant instances of the ineligible ASIDE projects and
projects having no direct linkage with exports in several States. These, among others,
include: upgradation of road not having a direct linkage with exports involving ASIDE
funding of Rs. 9.15 crore in Gujarat; three projects relating to widening and strengthening
of the roads in residential areas and having no linkage with export invloving ASIDE
funding of Rs. 3.80 crore in Haryana; three projects relating to power supply with
ASIDE funding of Rs. 1.61 crore and two projects relating to water supply and premixing
of road and construction of culverts in industrial area involving ASIDE funding of
Rs. 0.76 crore in Himachal Pradesh; four projects relating to airstrips involving ASIDE
funding of Rs. 34.13 crore and three projects involving ASIDE funding of Rs. 24.95
crore for providing infrastructure  facilities like railway over-bridge, construction of
approach road and providing water and power supply for the floriculture units and two
projects related to construction of approach road to wine parks costing Rs. 3.62 crore
in Maharashtra. Three projects costing Rs. 2.10 crore relating to land development,
brick wall fencing, improvement of ceiling etc. in the existing warehouse, trade centre
and Land Custom Station complex in Manipur; and one project relating to Trade and
Exhibition Centre involving ASIDE funding of Rs. 6.18 crore in Uttar Pradesh.
13. Further 22 ineligible Central Sector Projects under ASIDE Scheme were
approved which were either not covered under the specified approved activities or
were of revenue in nature such as—preparation of DPR/feasibility reports; development
of road, waiting hall, canteen and other infrastructure activities; accommodation for
police personnel; purchase of software, hardware, furniture and office equipment; and
cost of interior decoration and furnishing of Custom Rest Room-cum-Communication
Facilitation Centre etc.
14. Asked to state the reasons for not adhering to the scheme guidelines while
approving as many 79 ASIDE projects involving about Rs. 177.59 crore, the Ministry in
a note furnished to the Committee have contended that all these projects have over-
whelming export content and were covered under the provisions 'Projects of National
and Regional Importance' of the approved purposes.
15. According to Audit, the aforesaid reply of the Ministry was not tenable in
view of the fact that the aforementioned projects did not satisfy the stipulated
requirements of the scheme viz. that they should: (i) be covered under the specified
approved activities of the Scheme; (ii) be of capital nature; and (iii) have direct and
overwhelming linkage with exports and maintained that those projects cannot be treated
as eligible.
16. Further, according to Audit, 37 State Sector and 14 Central Sector Schemes,
which were ineligible otherwise, were taken up under ASIDE  Scheme as 'Projects of

6
National and Regional Importance'. When asked to explain as to how schemes/projects
of such nature qualify under ASIDE Scheme, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
"Apparently, Projects of National and Regional Importance is one of the specific
purposes of the scheme. The Empowered Committee or SLEPC, as the case may
be, may take recourse of this provision for funding export infrastructure projects
which are important from regional/national perspective but are not explicitly
mentioned in specific purpose of the ASIDE guidelines."
17. The Committee desired to know as to how a particular project was determined
and approved as having 'direct and overwhelming linkage with exports' and whether
any criteria have been fixed in this regard. The Ministry in their note stated that no
specifric criteria had been fixed in the guidelines to establish direct and overwhelming
linkage of a project with exports through guidelines provide certain parameters to be
included in the detailed project Report for scrutiny by SLEPC. The report should also
contain, inter alia, detailed cost benefit analysis, details of cost of each component of
the project, benefits accruing from the projects in both qualitative and quantitative
terms, for growth and exports. These might be utilized establishing export linkage of a
proposal.
18. When these issues were pointed out by the Coommittee, the Secretary,
Department of Commerce during evidence explained the Department's position as
under:—
"The scheme was primarily as small effort to try and associate to give incentives
the States to take part in export activity which is also a major economic
activity now in the country. The total amount for the development of export
infrastructure comes to Rs. 22,00,000 crores. Almost anything can be called
as export infrastructure including any truck going through a national highway
in that particular road. The total amount, which is given under the ASIDE
scheme, is running between Rs. 2000 to Rs. 3000 crore. It is a very insignificant
portion of the total infrastructure. The whole purpose of the ASIDE scheme is
to focus the attention of the State Governments to show that there is something
which they have to do towards exports which is important for the development
of the infrastructure of exports."
19. The witness added:—
"I would like to say that at the State level there is tremendous pressure at
various levels for finding funds linked to infrastructure. Some times they
want a project report for a study to be done linked to exports. Then, some
times the State Level Empowered Committee may feel that one project which
is part of the overall infrastructure, can be linked to exports and therefore to
be allowed. Some times we find it to be difficult to be very very rigid."
20. The witness further stated:—
"This is primarily just an incentive to the States to focus their attention on
export infrastructure. So, many a time the State Governments have also used
this money for something not directly linked to export infrastructure. But

7
some times they have said this will lead to export infrastructure. We have
gone by the discretion of the State Level Empowered Committee. But I agree
that in a few cases it has not been really directly relevant and we have directed
the State Governments to take the corrective action."
(b) Approval of Ineligible ASIDE Projects by SLEPCs
21. The Committee enquired as to whether the Ministry had analysed the reasons
for lack of proper alignment of ASIDE scheme with the export promotion activities. In
response, the Secretary, Department of Commerce during evidence stated as under:—
"The State-level Empowered Committes have and, I think, we have also been
quite broad in not trying to make the release strictly in accordance with the
guidelines of the Scheme. Now, it is really for the Committee to say whether a
particular road, which has been built, serves the purpose or not. I just give
one example. In Uttar Pradesh, we have got a particular report about Chilla-
Gupiganj Marg connecting Badayun and Mirzapur carpet cluster with NH-2.
It says that the improvement of the road has been done to facilitate carpet
exports in that area. Now, the point is whether carpet exports would have
taken place without that or having done that particular road, slightly better
exports would have taken place. In that sense, we have not been that strict in
monitoring that. We have left it to the discretion of the State Chief Secretary.
The Empowered Committee decides whether this particular road is useful for
making exports or not. This report is about upgradation of roads and drains in
Badayun to facilitate exporters of Badayun cluster, and it has given the value
of exports. I think, that is where we have been slightly more, shall I say, liberal
in interpreting anything which has been linked to exports. As I mentioned
earlier, the Audit Report has pointed out rightly that it is not strictly as per the
guidelines."
22. On being asked whether there was any mechanism in the Ministry to check
proposals of the State Governments and to see that they conform to the guidelines the
Secretary, Department of Commerce during evidence deposed as under:—
"We have always believed that to a certain extent, this 80 per cent of bulk
allocation to the States was given on a particular basis. They give us a shelf
of projects, and the State-level Empowered Committee has a number of other
Departments including the representatives of the Department of Commerce.
We have not been very strict in trying to see that linkage is exactly as per the
guideline, and that is a point, which the Audit Report has pointed out. Now,
we have reiterated it very clearly. If there is a road and there is an improvement
to that road, we would say that it helps exports. If somebody wants to put up
a transformer and stabilizes the power that is good for the industry and,
therefore, more exports can take place. Our explanation has been that stabilizing
of power is something, which is good, and it is linked to exports. It could be
something, which the State Government should do on its own and with their
budget. Even for the larger States, the total amount, which has been given, is
about Rs. 10 crore or Rs. 12 crore a year. Many of the States are getting Rs. 1.5
crore; Rs. 2 crore; and so on. So, it is a very small amount."

8
23. Taking cognizance of the fact that in some cases it is the responsibility of
local bodies and State Government to construct infrastructure such as roads and
bridges, the Committee sought to know the rationale behind using ASIDE funds for
creating infrastructure, which lie within the domain of the States. In reply, the Ministry
stated that States did not perceive direct gain from the exports and also did not have
adequate resources to create export infrastructure. The ASIDE guidelines provided for
development of complementary infrastructure such as roads connecting the production
centres with the ports, setting up of Inland Container Depots and Container Freight
Stations which were different from general common infrastructure such as roads, bridges
etc. Exporting community sometimes found waiting for creation of complementary
infrastructure by the State Governments/local bodies; therefore, the use of ASIDE
funds for such infrastructures with overwhelming export content was necessary.
24. The Committee enquired about the measures the Ministry had taken to ensure
that ASIDE funds were disbursed only to infrastructure projects with direct linkage to
exports, the Secretary, Commerce during evidence informed the Committee that they
had taken note of the point of the Audit and they would see the manner in which the
controversial schemes were approved with a view to tightening it and ensuring in
future that much more strict discipline was followed at the State Level Empowered
Committee.
25. Asked to elaborate steps taken to streamline the functioning of SLEPC, so
that only eligible and more rewarding ASIDE Projects are taken up the Department of
Commerce have stated that the review meetings were held in Department of Commerce
with the State Governments Agencies/Central Agencies to educate the States on above
aspects with view to ensure that State Governments approve only those projects
under the ASIDE scheme which have linkage to the exports. The Ministry had requested
the Development Commissioners of the SEZs/EPZs and Jt. DGFTs, who were members
of SLEPCs toregularly monitor the efforts of nodal agencies in selection of location
and preparation of shelf of projects to be implemented in next 2-3 years and also
impress upon nodal agencies to finalize agenda items 15 days in advance and obtain a
copy of same. The agenda items so obtained might be discussed with concerned EPCs
and other export bodies so as to assess the outcome of the project. The feedback
obtained from EPCs and export bodies might be placed before the SLEPC during the
meeting which might form as input for prioritization/approval or otherwise of the project.
They had also been requested to send a report to Department of Commerce after
attending the SLEPC covering the aspects like details of project, physical and financial
phasing of the projects and expected outcome from export angle. Any wrong project
(having no export content) approved by SLEPC should be brought to the notice of
Department of Commerce.
26. On being asked whether the Ministry contemplated to revise the existing
guidelines, the Committee have been informed as under:—
"The existing guidelines are adequate, comprehensive, explicit and realistic.
The Ministry, as such, do not contemplate to modify the guidelines. There
were some instances where some components of the project like seminars,
workshops, conferences, training programme etc. were approved under EDF

9
scheme. These were not specifically mentioned in the EDF guidelines. These
activities have been brought under the provision of EDF scheme."
IV.  LOW UTILISATION OF SANCTIONED FUNDS
27. The year-wise allocation/release of funds under ASIDE Scheme as on
19.10.2007 and the expenditure incurred there against was as follows:—
(Rs. in crore)
State Sector Central Sector
Y ear Amount Expenditure % expenditure Amount Expenditure % expenditure
Released to amount Released to amount
released released
2001-02 43.52 00.00 0 6.00 00.00 0
2002-03 241.00 104.00 43 85.27 24.13 28
2003-04 252.00 217.79 86 99.42 59.08 59
2004-05 313.84 225.97 72 111.04 100.15 90
2005-06 383.00 266.00 69 121.29 63.75 53
T otal 1233.36 813.76 66 423.02 247.11 58
28. An analysis of the above shows that the utilization of funds during the years
from 2002-03 to 2005-06 ranged between 43 to 86 per cent under the State Sector and
between 28 to 90 per cent in respect of the Central Sector Schemes. According to
Audit, in the case of six States/UTs i.e. Andaman and Nicobar, Arunachal Pradesh,
Bihar, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep, out of Rs. 21.07
crore, there was no expenditure during March 2002 to March 2006. In five States/UTs
i.e. Assam, Chandigarh, Delhi, Meghalaya and Uttarakhand, the expenditure of
Rs. 34.77 crore was only 44 per cent of the release of Rs. 79.82 crore. Further, in
14 States/UTs i.e. Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Mizoram,
Orissa, Pondicherry, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, the
expenditure of Rs. 440.43 crore was 61 per cent of the release of the total amount of
Rs. 717.97 crore released. As regards the Central Agencies, 15 out of the 37 agencies
had not incurred any expenditure out of Rs. 35.25 crore released to them during
2001-02 to 2005-06, while the expenditure in respect of 11 Agencies ranged between
30 and 60 per cent of the releases.
29. On being asked whether the reasons for poor utilisation of funds by the
States/UTs and Central Agencies had been analysed, the Ministry in a note stated that
a meeting was held under the Chairmanship of the Minister of State (Commerce) on
15.11.2006 to review the impact of ASIDE scheme with all the State Governments. The
common problems faced by State Governments with respect of utilization of funds
were stated to be as follows:—
(i) Agencies implementing the projects did not raise the bills in time.
(ii) Utilization Certificate were furnished but not received by the Central
Government.

10
(iii) Infrastructure projects were big by their very nature and needed more time to
complete, hence funds remained unutilized.
(iv) The State Governments were not clear as to which years' UC was required to
be submitted.
(v) UCs become due immediately after the release of sanction while after receiving
the sanction SLEPC took time to decide the project thereby curtailing time for
implementation and furnishing UCs.
(vi) The projects taken for implementation were large. Part of the fund was utilized
but UCs could not be submitted till entire funds were exhausted. So UCs in
part might be accepted.
(vii) Uploading information in website was a problem.
30. The Ministry have further stated that the following remedial measures have
been taken to streamline the utilization of funds by States/UTs so as to remove mismatch
between the utilization and release of funds:—
(i) The reminders regarding the due Utilization Certificate are now being sent
through automated e-mail clearly stipulating the financial year and the date
on which UC is due.
(ii) Wherever, the State Government request the extension of time for submission
of UC on genuine grounds, the same is taken up with Department of
Expenditure, who are the competent authority for such extension of time.
(iii) The releases to the States are being made only after securing the pending
utilization certificates. Delays in releases to States are only due to non-
submission of due UCs in time and/or due to slow pace of expenditure over
the previous releases. States are advised to improve on these counts, so that
funds could be released to them in time and longer period for utilization of
funds could be availed by them.
(iv) Whenever, States/UTs/Central Agencies face any problem in uploading the
website, they are guided suitably by the Ministry.
31. In this context, the Committee desired to know the current status of the funds
released under ASIDE scheme and expenditure incurred there against. In their written
reply, the Ministry stated as under:—
"The total funds released to States/UTs/Central Agencies under ASIDE
Scheme upto 2007-08 are Rs. 2,62,812.10 lac where as the total expenditure by
these agencies against above release is Rs.2,16,320.25 lac. Thus the gap
between funds released and expenditure incurred is Rs. 46,491.85 lac. It is
also mentioned that out of this gap, Rs. 569,00.00 lac were released during
2007-08 for which utilization certificates would be due on 31st March, 2009.
Thus the gap between released and expenditure is satisfactory."

11
V .  FUNDS NOT ALLOCATED ON THE BASIS OF EXPORT PERFORMANCE
32. As per the ASIDE Scheme guidelines, the State component of the funds was
to be allocated to the States in two installments of 50 per cent each. The inter-se
allocation of the first installment of 50 per cent was to be calculated on the basis of the
share of the States in the total exports of the country and the second installment of the
remaining 50 per cent was to be allocated among the States on the basis of their share
in the average of the growth rate of exports of the country over the previous year. The
allocations were to be assessed on the basis of the export data available from the office
of the Director General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCIS), which was
to be compiled from the State of origin indicated in the shipping bills.
33. Audit review has revealed that during the period 2002-03 to 2005-06, the
Department of Commerce made State-wise allocations of funds on the basis of ad-hoc
assessment and not on the basis of the specified twin criteria of export performance
and share in growth rate of exports, on account of incompleteness/inaccuracies in
export data reported by the DGCIS. Audit has found that the entry regarding State of
origin was blank or invalid in a large percentage of shipping bills. Further, according to
Audit, the Department of Commerce itself observed that the DGCIS figures did not
reflect a "completely correct" picture of exports from the States, as a large number of
buying houses based in metropolitan centres sourced the products from several States,
and those exports were recorded against the States from where those exports were
shipped out, and not against the State of origin. Further, many of the products were
not manufactured at a single location in a particular State. Their components were
sourced from other States as well, a fact not possible to reflect adequately in the State
of origin column in the shipping documents.
34. During their review, Audit have noted that at the time of formulation of the
scheme in 2002, on an issue being raised by the Planning Commission regarding non-
availability of export data from the States, the Department of Commerce had explained
that there was no difficulty in capturing the data, as the shipping bill format had been
amended with effect from April 2001 to provide for indication of State of origin of the
products. However, the adhoc allocation of ASIDE funds to the States, without adhering
to the criteria specified in the guidelines, indicated that the main objective of giving
assistance to States based on export performance was not complied with.
35. The Committee enquired about the criteria for allocation of quantum of funds
to the States/UTs under ASIDE scheme and the reasons for allocating ASIDE funds on
the basis of ad-hoc assessment instead of the specified criteria of export performance
and growth rate of exports. In response, the Ministry stated in a note as under:—
"As full and reliable data about the exports from the States is not likely to be
available during the year 2001-2002, the State-wise allocations will be made
on the basis of the project proposals received from the State Governments.
The funding of Export Develpment Fund for NER and Sikkim will be made out
of this earmarked outlay and the balance amount will be distributed inter-se
among the States on the basis of the export performance criteria as laid down.
Allocation amongst N.E. States will also be done on the basis of criterion
mentioned above.

12
The ad-hoc allocations were made because realistic State-wise export data
were not available on time."
36. While admitting that there were deficiencies/inaccuracies in the compilation
of export data of the States, the Secretary, Department of Commerce during evidence
stated as under:—
"Overall the criteria have been fifty per cent on exports and fifty per cent on
the growth of exports. We try to follow, by and large, starting with an ad-hoc
allocation. But we have made sure that final allocation gets adjusted more or
less in line with this. We have one weakness with the entire data. It is that
although the export shipping bill has a column which says that it should
indicate the State from which the actual manufacture has taken place, some
times it happens that in case of States like Delhi, a lot of people from
Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, etc. the merchant exporter books their export
through Delhi. So, you will find that large amount of export is shown as being
based in Delhi. Even though it may come from UP or Haryana or Punjab, Delhi
gets the credit and not UP, Haryana or Punjab. We have not amended the
notification and we are making it mandatory for the exporter to ensure that
that column is filled up. Otherwise, his IEC code may get cancelled, so that we
are able to monitor the actual source of exports in a much better manner. We
know that some States are showing these extra exports, whereas the export is
not really taking place from there. We have made a little bit of ad-hoc sort of
deductions."
37. The Ministry further stated that efforts were being made to capture more
realistic State-wise export data in consultation with DGFT and SEZ. Division and the
review of the allocation criteria in order to make it more just and equitable was under
their active consideration.
38. Asked whether the Ministry had finalized the revised criteria for funds
allocation with the approval of the competent authority, the Ministry in a note explained
their position as under:—
"The Department had engaged IL&FS to propose few models for revised
allocation criteria. The models proposed by them were found to be very
complex and convoluted. The infrastructure index like per capital road/power
consumption etc. used for constructing an index by IL&FS was leading the
scheme to adopt industrial infrastructure approach rather than "export
infrastructure approach". Hence it was not found appropriate to capture
gaps in export infrastructure. Department, therefore, approached Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation for appropriate methodology. They
suggested, conducting all India census of SSI units by putting a "contextual
variable" in the schedule of enquiry, in order to identify clusters, which are
manufacturing exportable goods. This may capture the data regarding export
made by manufacturer exporter in SSI sector only. Data would come after a lag
of 5 years and may not satisfy the existing criteria for annual allocation as
approved by the Cabinet. During the discussions, they have generally

13
suggested to adopt export clusters approach, which may require total change
in the objective and structure of the scheme. The ASIDE scheme envisages
recognition to those States, which are involved in promotion of exports by
providing them higher allocation for creation of infrastructure critical for
export. To streamline the mechanism of capturing realistic State-wise export
data we are consulting various EPCs, DGFT and DC, SEZs."
39. The Committee's examination of the subject have revealed that only five to
six better performing States on the export front have derived the maximum benefit of
ASIDE Scheme. For instance, Gujarat and Maharashtra receivd more than two-thirds
of total allocation during 2008-09 i.e. Rs. 343.41 crore out of  Rs. 456 crore, while
allocation to some of the performing States like Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,
Goa, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala were abnormally reduced
over the previous year's allocation. In this regard, the Department of Commerce stated
that in order to ensure that benefit of the scheme is spread over to cover more States;
change in the criteria of allocation of ASIDE funds amongst States/UTs was being
considered.
40. On being asked whether the Ministry propose to make allocation of ASIDE
funds on the basis of export potential rather than the past export performance of the
States so that encouragement was given to the States which had high export potential
but were currently lagging behind, the Ministry in a note replied as under:—
"Ministry does not propose to make allocation of ASIDE funds on the basis
of potential for export promotion to encourage the States which have high
export potential but are currently lagging behind. The reason behind it may
be that the scheme in its present form provides enough scope to SLEPC to
focus on centres/Local needs where such export content is available/
established and they can implement projects to improve the export from those
centres. In such a way the State can increase its export performance and avail
higher allocation next year. The current principle provides ample scope
dynamism optimizing efforts of States/UTs in growth of exports. Moreover,
Ministry has not received any request from State Governments to provide
allocation of ASIDE on the basis of potential for export promotion rather than
past export performance."
VI.   AMOUNT  SANCTIONED IN EXCESS OF ADMISSIBILITY
41. The Scheme guidelines stipulated that only up to 50 percent cost of the
construction of Central Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) could be sanctioned as
assistance. However, in Punjab and Andhra Pradesh, Rs. 4.78 crore and Rs. 2.00 crore
respectively, being 100 percent cost of two CETP projects, were sanctioned during
2005-06, which resulted in excess sanction of Rs. 3.39 crore. Further, in Manipur, an
amount of Rs. 0.38 crore was sanctioned to an NGO, under EDF, in excess of the
entitlement.
42. In their reply, the Ministry stated that while the ASIDE guidelines had already
been circulated for strict compliance, the concerned States would again be instructed
to meet only 50 per cent of the construction of CETP from ASIDE funds. In case

14
expenditure in excess of 50 per cent from ASIDE funds had been incurred for the
project, the same would be adjusted against future allocations, unless the State
Government agreed to release an equal amount for other projects under ASIDE.
VII.  EXCESS RELEASE OF FUNDS
43. As per the Scheme guidelines, unutilized funds, if any, out of the allotted
funds were to be counted against allocations for the next year and suitable deductions
for equivalent amounts were to be made from the allocations of next year. Audit scrutiny
of records, however, revealed that while releasing the subsequent installments during
the years 2002-03 to 2005-06, the Department of Commerce did not ensure full utilization
of the previous installement, which resulted in excess/injudicious release, as detailed
below:
(Rs. in crore)
Y ear Unspent Balance at Release by DOC Excess Release
the end of the (due to non-adjustment
previous year of unspent balance)
2002-03 127.05 219.00 94.12
2003-04 175.68 198.00 131.60
2004-05 144.28 225.38 114.17
2005-06 244.85 379.80 228.97
44. On being enquired whether the unspent balances were now being deducted
from the future allocations to the respective States/UTs/Implementing Agencies, the
Ministry in their reply stated that they had written to all States/UTs about possibility
of deducting funds. As replies from number of  States were awaited, they had not made
any assessment on this issue. The Ministry further Stated that such deductions,
though might bring some financial discipline, yet these might affect the implementation
of ongoing projects, which were delayed on genuine grounds for want of funds.
During 2007-08, the following deductions were made from the sanctioned amount of
West Bengal, Chhattisgarh and Council for Leather Exports on accounts of unspent
balances for which UCs were due:—
(a) Rs. 1,15,00,000/- from Chhattisgarh (As un-utilized amount)
(b) Rs. 4,00,000/- from West Bengal (against non-submission of UC)
(c) Rs. 1,50,000/- from Council for Leather Exports (Establishment of two CETPs/
Leather Industrial park at industrial Growth Centre, Lassipora, Pulwama and
Industrial Growth Centre, Samba, J&K).
45. In a subsequent note, the Ministry elaborated about the current status of the
above mentioned cases as under:—
"Lump-sum funds are allocated to the States/UTs on the basis of approved
criteria for allocation. The funds so released to States are utilized by them for

15
funding projects approved by SLEPCs. The details of further release of funds
to agency executing the project and un-utilized funds balance with them are
monitored by SLEPC/Nodal Agency. The Ministry does not obtain project-
wise utilization certificate from States. We obtain utilization certificates for
the lump-sum funds sanctioned to a State. Pending utilization certificate which
are due for rendition are kept into account while sanctioning further funds to
a State. Therefore, the Ministry was not aware of unspent balacne available
at implementing agency/executing agency level.
In order to monitor the funds availability at the implementing agency level,
Ministry has requested DCs, SEZ to hold quarterly meeting with Nodal
Agencies and make an analysis of the funds balance with nodal agency,
funds released to implementing agencies by nodal agency of States under
the jurisdiction and funds lying unspent with each implementing agency and
furnish a report to DoC. Department of Commerce while releasing funds to
State Government may take into account the report of DCs sent after holding
such meetings."
VIII.  INCORRECT FINANCIAL REPORTING AND NON-SUBMISSION OF
UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES
46. Audit test check of records has brought out that the Department of Commerce
had not received the Utilisation Certificates (UCs) from 14 States Nodal Agencies and
22 Central Agencies against Critical Infrastructure Balancing (CIB)/ASIDE funds of
Rs. 37.75 crore and Rs. 61.71 crore respectively released to them during the years
1997-98 to 2003-04. Similarly, records relating to EDF for NER including Sikkim revealed
that UCs were not received from 10 private bodies and one State Department against
funds of Rs. 10.72 crore relased to them during April 2002 to March 2005.
47. Further, Audit examination in the Department of Commerce and the selected
States has also revealed various instances of incorrect financial reporting or submission
of improper/incomplete utilization certificates involving Rs. 176.18 crore in-Chandigarh
(Rs. One crore); Haryana (Rs. 2.37 crore); Himachal Pradesh (Rs. 6.27 crores); Orissa
(Rs. 15.98 crore); West Begnal (Rs. 11.29 crore); Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Tripura and Sikkim (Rs. 10.72 crore); Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Punjab, Tripura, and West Bengal (Rs. 118.51); and Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Nagaland and Tripura (Rs. 10.04 crore).
48. In their reply to the aforesaid Audit observations, the Department of Commerce
stated that the cases referred by audit were being cross-checked from the files and
wherever necessary, the concerned agencies from the States/UTs/Central sector would
be reminded to send the requisite utilization certificates in the proper format immediately.
The Ministry have further stated that the agencies of the State Governments had been
appropriately informed and the monitoring mechanism of ASIDE scheme had been
strengthened both by way of physical verification by designated officials and through
web monitoring system.

16
49. To a query as to what measures have been taken to ensure submission in time
the correct Utilization Certificates in future by respective States/Implementing agencies,
the Ministry in a note submitted as under:—
"In order to ensure that States/UTs submit timely utilization certificates, the
Ministry has installed auto mailer in the website which sends details of pending
utilization certificate to Secretaries of the States through e-mail. Besides, State/
UTs are periodically reminded through phone, letters from senior officer level and
review meetings convened in the Ministry. State/UTs are categorically informed
that no funds under ASIDE scheme would be released to them unless due UCs are
furnished on proper format."
50. According to Audit, as of March 2010, UCs in respect of 45 cases out of
76 cases were pending. Further, a good number of UCs submitted were funds to be
either incomplete or incorrect. On being asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to
ensure proper and timely submission of UCs by the implementing Agencies/States,
the Ministry in their reply stated that in order to ensure that States/UTs submit timely
utilization certificates; they had installed auto mailer in the website which sends details
of pending utilization certificate to Secretaries of the States through e-mail. Besides,
States/UTs were periodically reminded through phone, letters from senior officer level
and review meetings convened in the Ministry. State/UTs are categorically informed
that no funds under ASIDE scheme would be released to them unless due UCs are
furnished in proper format. The Ministry further informed that the following States/
UTs have not furnished UCs due for funds released to them under ASIDE Scheme for
the years mentioned in bracket against their names:—
"Arunachal Pradesh (2006-07, 2007-08), Assam (2007-08), Bihar (2002-03 UC not in
format), Chhattisgarh (2007-08), Dadar & Nagar Haveli (2002-03), Daman & Diu
(2002-03), Delhi (2007-08), Gujarat (2007-08), Jharkhand (2007-08), Lakshadweep
(2002-03 & 2003-04), Manipur (2007-08), Meghalaya (2007-08), Uttar Pradesh (2007-
08) should expedite and furnish the UCs immediately."
IX.  NON-LEVERAGING OF ASIDE FUNDS
51. One of the main objectives of the ASIDE scheme was to encourage the State
Governments and Private Sector to participate in developing export infrastructure. It
was made mandatory for the States to spend at least 50 percent of their allocation on
implementing projects with private participation to leverage ASIDE funds from
2003-04. Audit scrutiny of records in the Department of Commerce, however, revealed
that in Andhra Pradesh, Andaman and Nicobar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Lakshadweep, Meghalaya and Pondicherry, there was no contribution from both the
private sector and the State Governments in the infrastructure projects from 2002-03 to
2005-06. Private participation was insignificant in Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Maharashtra
and Uttar Pradesh. While there was State Government contribution to some extent in
Assam, Chandigarh, Jammu and Kashmir, Mizoram, Madhya Pradesh, Nagaland, Tripura
and West Bengal, there was no private sector participation. Although the total project
cost approved in Jharkhand, Orissa and Uttarakhand included private participation to
the extent of Rs. 97.43 crore, Rs. 135.54 crore and Rs. 51.45 crore respectively, there was
nil expenditure against private funds in these States upto March 2006. Likewise, the

17
project cost in Orissa, Tripura, Uttarakhand and West Bengal included State
Contribution, yet there was no expenditure from State funds. Thus, the scheme objective
of ensuring State and Private Sector participation has remained elusive.
52. In their response to the aforesaid Audit observations, the Department of
Commerce stated that with regard to the States that were lacking on this count, it was
proposed that a suitable penalty be imposed on them so that the mandatory guideline
of ASIDE to leverage ASIDE funds was complied with. On being asked whether the
Ministry have started imposing suitable penalty on the States failing to leverage
ASIDE funds, the Ministry stated that:—
"The ASIDE guidelines provides for incentivizing the States which take up
Private Sector Participation projects. However, it does not provide for
penalizing those States who are not leveraging the funds from Pvt. Sector
participation. In order to ensure more leveraging of funds through other
sources, the Ministry has requested to Jt. DGFTs/DCs/Nodal Officers of DoC
to get the eligible Pvt. Sector participation projects approved on priority
while attending the SLEPC meeting.”
53. The Committee asked whether the Ministry had analysed the reasons for the
poor response from the Private sector and the State/UTs with regard to participation/
allocation of funds for the Projects under ASIDE scheme. In reply, the Ministry stated
that:—
"IL&FS in their extended study report of ASIDE submitted during December,
2006 has found that Private sector has contributed to an extent of
23.39 percent in funding sanctioned projects. The States of Delhi, Orissa,
Gujarat, Rajasthan and Haryana have been partly successful in terms of Private
Sector Participation. Jharkhand, Uttaranchal, Tamil Nadu are leading States
for attracting private sector participation for the implementation of ASIDE
scheme. Jharkhand has almost 66 percent (Rs. 97.42 crores) funding from the
private sector. This is inclusive of SEZ project where entire project (Rs. 39.47
crores) is being funded through private sector only. ASIDE fund has been
used only for SEZ project development purpose and hence the State is topping
the list. While in case of Tamil Nadu, private sector contribution has topped
in the list with a maximum contribution of Rs. 731.49 crores (63 percent project
cost) for the scheme. In order to ensure more leveraging of funds through
other sources, the Ministry has requested to JDGFTs/DCs/Nodal Officers of
DoC to get eligible Private Sector Participation Projects approved on priority
while attending the SLEPC meetings."
X.  LACK OF PROPER PROJECT PLANNING
54. In August 2001, the Department of Commerce had entrusted a study on the
evaluation of the Critical Infrastructure Balancing (CIB) projects to the National Council
of Applied Economics Research (NCAER) to be completed in six months, so that the
feedback gathered through such evaluation could be a critical input in the formulation
of ASIDE scheme. However, while NCAER's draft and final reports were submitted
only in October 2002 and March 2004 respectively, ASIDE scheme was launched in
March 2002 itself, obviously without benefiting from the inputs of the evaluation of
CIB projects.

18
55. Further, the scheme guidelines provided that the Export Commissioner of the
State, as the convener of SLEPC, should draw up five year/annual export plans in
consultation with the trade and industry, the Export Promotion Councils and the
Department of Commerce. Audit scrutiny of records, however, revealed that in seven
(Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal) out of eight selected States, no such five year/annual export plans were
prepared indicating ad-hoc planning by the State Governments.
56. In their response to the aforesaid Audit observation, the Department of
Commerce stated (June, 2007) that the States/UTs had been advised on several
occasions about the need for having a shelf of good infrastructure projects. In a
meeting held in April 2007, they were again advised to prepare a shelf of good
infrastructure projects for taking up under ASIDE scheme and share best practices
amongst them. It was emphasized that export oriented clusters may be identified,
infrastructure gaps in these clusters may be assessed and projects to fill these gaps
may be implemented, preferably in Public-Private Participation mode, so as to increase
exports from these clusters.
57. Enquired whether the Ministry had ensured that all the States had finalized
the long-term export plans, the Ministry stated in a note as under:—
"States do not perceive direct gain from the growth of exports. States have
been advised to take action in this regard. However, the position is still not
very encouraging. To overcome the problem, Ministry has requested DC,
SEZs to help the nodal agencies of the State Governments in preparation of
export plan."
XI.  NON-APPROV AL OF PROJECTS BY STATE LEVEL EXPORT PROMOTION
COMMITTEE/ADMINISTRATIVE  AUTHORITY
58. Audit has pointed out that in West Bengal, eight projects involving ASIDE
cost of Rs. 20.46 crore (total cost Rs. 27.10 crore) were taken up without the approval
of SLEPC, which was irregular. In Manipur, no administrative approval of the nodal
department of the State was taken for any of the 46 projects undertaken by the IA
during the years 2002-06. Expenditure sanction had also not been accorded in any
case. The audit findings were confirmed by the nodal department in the exit conference
held with audit. In their reply (June 2007), the DoC stated that the State Governments
were being asked to clarify as to why proposals without proper approval from SLEPC/
administrative authorities were taken up from ASIDE funds.
59. The Committee asked whether the Ministry had ascertained the reasons or
sought comments from the States for taking up the 54 projects without obtaining
proper approval of the competent authority. In response, the Ministry in a note stated
that in respect of West Bengal, the 8 projects were at first approved by the Chairman,
SLEPC after being considered by three other important members of the Committee. The
projects were later ratified by a full house of the SLEPC on 02.08.2007. With regard to
Manipur, all the projects implemented were from amongst the projects approved by the
SLEPC. The approvals of the SLEPC were considered as administrative approval of the
Administrative Department of Commerce & Industries of the State Government as the

19
Committee was headed by the Chief Secretary, Government of Manipur. Further
MANIDCO, the Implementing Agency, was a company wholly owned by the State
Govt. The company had its own rules for according administrative approval, technical
and expenditure sanctions. The implementing agency applied these rules to such
approvals or sanctions.
XII.  INCOMPLETE  AND  SUSPENDED  ASIDE  AND  CIB  PROJECTS
60. The ASIDE Scheme guidelines envisage that before sanctioning new projects,
the SLEPC should allocate funds for the likely expenditure of ongoing projects and
should ensure that, except in exceptional cases, no new project had a gestation period
of more than two years. Audit had, however, noticed that 97 State Sector Projects in
24 States involving ASIDE contribution of Rs. 544.80 crore (expenditure incurred being
Rs. 156.56 crore) and 50 Central Sector Projects involving ASIDE contribution of
Rs. 164.01 crore (expenditure incurred being Rs. 81.51 crore) remained incomplete after
the maximum gestation period of two years, or after lapse of the scheduled period of
their completion.
61. Audit test check of records in the Department of Commerce had revealed that
46 CIB Projects, which were approved during 1997-98 to 2001-02, were still incomplete
after merger of the scheme with ASIDE and after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 52.76
crore. The reasons for the delay were not available in the Department of Commerce.
62. In their response to the aforesaid Audit observation, the Ministry stated in a
note as under:—
"The agencies will be instructed to get the completion of projects expedited
and ensure that in future every project is completed as per the implementation
schedule."
63. When asked whether the Ministry had identified and investigated
independently the incomplete and suspended ASIDE and CIB Projects, the Ministry in
a note submitted as under:—
"Total of 981 projects have been approved by the respective SLEPC under
State Component of ASIDE scheme since inception of the scheme. Out of
these 428 has been completed, 44 cancelled and 393 are under implementation.
It has been noticed that out of these 393 projects, 259 projects are those
projects, which have been approved during 2006-07 onwards, and therefore
the normal gestation period of two years for completion of the projects would
become due only at the end of financial year 2008-09. Rest 134 projects have
not been completed beyond the normal gestation period. The total number of
cancelled projects under ASIDE scheme has been identified through Web
Enabled Monitoring System. After examination, it has been noticed that out
of 44 cancelled projects only 12 projects are found to be cancelled after
incurring some expenditure. The Ministry proposes to take up the issue with
the concerned State Government/UT Administration at appropriate level
seeking explanation thereto."
64. As regards the status of CIB Projects and Central Projects the Ministry have
stated that information in respect of 46 projects under CIB scheme had been called for
from the concerned State Government.

20
65. The details of the State/UT-wise Projects under implementation, their total
cost and contribution proposed to be met from ASIDE scheme as furnished by the
Ministry are given below:—
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of No. of       Projects Under Implementation Cancelled Completed
No. State/UT Sanctioned No. of T otal ASIDE
Projects Projects Cost Cost
1 2 3 4 56 78
1 . Andaman & 1 1 467.00 467.00 0 0
Nicobar
2 . Andhra Pradesh 69 6 2,250.00 2,250.00 0 63
3 . Arunachal 21 10 219.65 219.65 0 9
Pradesh
4 . Assam 24 15 120.00 120.00 1 8
5 . Bihar 1 1 1,492.00 1000.00 0 0
6. Chhattisgarh 10 9 6,441.26 6,221.26 0 1
7 . Chandigarh 1 1 1,544.00 772.00 0 0
8 . Daman & Diu 2 1 0 0 0 0
9 . Delhi 3 1 406.00 406.00 0 0
10. Dadar & Nagar Haveli 1 1 470.00 235.00 0 0
11. Gujarat 23 9 32,939.00 13,356.25 1 8
12. Goa 21 14 5,259.15 5,116.90 0 3
13. Himchal Pradesh 107 13 1,169.56 1,155.95 5 81
14. Haryana 29 10 11,809.03 4,291.40 0 19
15. Jharkhand 5 4 34,823.61 1,006.29 0 1
16. Jammu & Kashmir 7 6 4,966.94 4,240.86 1 0
17. Karnataka 67 27 29,289.52 13,940.82 0 40
18. Kerala 26 8 7,619.97 5,618.52 2 7
19. Lakshadweep 9 6 226.79 226.79 0 0
20. Meghalaya 23 11 5,088.42 5,088.42 0 8
21. Maharashtra 137 50 121,332.20 64,003.47 9 46
22. Manipur 43 25 832.32 832.32 0 18
23. Madhya Pradesh 43 20 6,133.54 5,232.69 0 10
24. Mizoram 8 6 1,745.00 1,615.28 0 2
25. Nagaland 9 3 77.20 73.00 0 6
26. Orissa 28 8 44,180.75 2,059.00 7 6
27. Punjab 18 3 4,112.00 928.00 1 13
28. Puducherry 6 1 75.00 75.00 1 1

21
29. Rajasthan 21 7 11,179.98 6,034.00 3 10
30. Sikkim 1 1 530.00 530.00 0 0
31. Tamil Nadu 105 63 893,537.90 30,798.93 8 16
32. Tripura 15 10 3,734.94 3,639.94 0 5
33. Uttaranchal 9 7 13,022.60 3,473.00 0 1
34. Uttar Pradesh 51 24 6,703.95 5,261.93 5 21
35. West Bengal 37 11 13,337.55 5,886.60 0 25
Total 981 393 1267136.83 196176.27 44 428
66. The Committee enquired about the steps taken or proposed to be taken to get
incomplete projects completed on a priority basis, the Ministry in their note submitted
as under:—
"The Ministry propose to take up with State Governments to get these projects
completed on priority. In respect of 95 projects enlisted by Audit, Ministry
has written to nodal agencies to ensure completion of these incomplete ASIDE/
CIB Projects by the end of this current financial year otherwise amount
incurred on such incomplete projects may have to be deducted from first
installment of  2009-10."
67. On being asked to state the latest position in respect of the 191 incomplete
and suspended ASIDE and CIB Projects as pointed out by Audit, the Ministry stated
that a total number of 114 had been completed, 70 were under implementation and
7 had been cancelled. The Ministry furhter informed that during the meeting dated
04.08.2009 with State Governments/UTs, it was decided that the States should give
priority to fund and complete ongoing projects within time bound manner so that
projects sanctioned upto 2006-07 were completed by end of this financial year
(i.e. 2009-10) and those sanctioned during 2007-08 were completed by 2010-11. Any
constraint on part of Department of Commerce should be brought to Department's
notice. Giving overall scenario, the Ministry also informed that out of total 848 State
Sector Projects approved upto 2006-07, 543 projects were completed, 117 projects were
under implementation, 99 cancelled and 29 projects had not been started. As regards
Central Component Projects, out of 349 projects approved till 2009-10 (as on 26.02.2010),
195 projects had been completed and 13 projects cancelled, 141 projects were at various
stages of the implementation.
XIII.  DELAY  IN  COMPLETION  OF  PROJECTS  AND  TIME  AND COST
OVERRUN
68. Audit examination further revealed that there were delays in completion of
18 Central and 51 State Sector Projects ranging between 6 to 78 months. The reasons
for the delay in completion of some projects, which could be ascertained from records,
included non-availability of site, delayed release of funds by the State Governments,
additional work, heavy rains etc. Audit scrutiny had also revealed escalation of cost of
1 2 3 4 56 78

22
Rs. 0.21 crore in Orissa where the Nodal Agency released the funds to one project after
3 years of approval, which resulted in delay in completion and escalation of cost of the
project and Rs. 2.41 crore in Uttar Pradesh in which the Nodal Authority did not obtain
approval of Railway Authorities before taking up a project relating to construction of
Railway Over Bridge resulting in delay in completion of the project and escalation of
cost.
69. When asked about the total number of Projects completed beyond their
normal date of completion, the Ministry stated that 134 projects have exceeded their
normal gestation period of 2 years. It was further stated that the projects-wise cost
overrun incurred was not available with them and the number and details of projects
completed beyond due dates was being called from the State Governments/UTs.
70. The Committee asked whether the Ministry had sought and analyzed the
comments of the States for the delay in the completion of Projects and the specific
measures that were taken to ensure completion of all pending projects. In response,
the Ministry submitted in a note as under:—
"The Ministry had called for comments on Performance Report of C&AG and
from the response from the State Government it has been noticed that sizeable
number of the projects have been delayed due to problem in land acquisition,
clearance from various States/Central Government Departments/Agencies.
The Ministry has therefore, requested the States to take up those projects
which are complete in all respects so that delay in completion of the projects
may be avoided."
71. The Ministry in their subsequent note stated that the States/UTs were
informed that the projects should be completed in normal gestation period of 2 years
unless extraordinary situation hampers the progress. The cost overrun on account of
unjustified delay should not be borne on ASIDE scheme.
XIV.  INADEQUATE  MONITORING
(a) Inadequate Monitoring at Central Level
72. An Empowered Committee was to periodically review the progress of the
scheme at the Central level to ensure achievement of its objectives. It was, however,
observed by Audit that in respect of Central Sector Projects, the committee held only
one review meeting with the central agencies in 2005-06 since the inception of  the
Scheme. As regards the State Sector Projects, although one meeting each on different
dates was held with different State agencies between 2002-03 and 2004-05, no minutes
were recorded in respect of six out of 12 meetings held during 2003-04 and 2004-05.
During 2005-06, only one meeting was held with the Southern States, for which too
minutes were not recorded. Similarly, only one review meeting was held on EDF for
NER scheme since its inception, for which also no minutes were recorded.
73. Further, as per the guidelines, the meetings in which the projects were
scrutinized/approved by SLEPCs were to be attended by representatives of the
Department of Commerce. Audit noted that the Department was not represented in any
of the meetings held in Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra and

23
Orissa during 2002-03 to 2005-06. In Uttar Pradesh, the Department's representative
attended only one out of six meetings. According to Audit, in the absence of regular
attendance by the representatives of Department of Commerce, it was not clear as to
how the department ensured fairness and objectivity in appraisal of the proposals
sanctioned in those States.
74. In their response to the aforesaid Audit observations, the Department stated
in June, 2007 that in addition to the representative of the Department of Commerce, the
Joint DGFT and DC, SEZ in the States had been nominated member of the SLEPCs to
ensure proper approval and for monitoring the implementation/evaluation of projects.
(b) Inadequate Monitoring at State Level
75. The State Level Export Promotion Committee was to meet quarterly and
oversee the implementation of the Scheme. Audit scrutiny of records in the selected
States, however, revealed that their meetings were not held on regular intervals. Against
the requirement of 16 meetings, the number of meetings held during 2002-03 to 2005-06
in the test selected States of Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Maharashtra, Manipur, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Orissa and West Bengal were 1, 5, 6, 4, 10, 6, 5 and 3 respectively.
Further, the Nodal Officer/agency of a State was also to review/inspect the progress of
the projects to see that funds were spent for the scheme and also to ensure achievement
of the objectives of the scheme. It was, however, noticed that in Manipur, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Orissa neither year-wise physical and financial progress
reports were available separately for each year for each project nor financial progress
reports were obtained by Nodal Agencies (NAs) from Implementing Agencies (IAs).
In West Bengal, the IAs did not submit monthly/quarterly progress reports indicating
actual expenditures incurred by them to the Nodal Department. The Nodal Ministry
submitted quarterly reports and utilization certificates to the Department of Commerce
without verifying the progress of works and actual expenditure incurred by the IAs.
(c) Inadequate Monitoring at Project Level
76. The Department of Commerce in 2003, nominated 16 officers at the project
level from different SEZs/Regional Offices of Director General of Foreign Trade who
were to physically inspect the State Sector Projects. In addition, the Department of
Commerce had also nominated their senior officers as Nodal Officers for groups of
States/UTs to maintain interaction with the concerned agencies in the States for
monitoring the progress of projects. Audit had, however, noticed that inspections of
the projects were not being done properly. Out of 520 ASIDE/CIB Projects under
implementation/completed in 32 States/UTs during the years 2003-04 to 2005-06, the
nominated officers visited only 202 projects in 18 States during 2003-04 to 2005-06.
Even in respect of these visits, inspection reports in respect of 131 projects submitted
by them were incomplete and not in the prescribed format. It was also found that there
was no record in the Department of Commerce of the inspection reports being forwarded
to the concerned State Governments/Nodal Agencies for taking further corrective action.
77. In respect of monitoring of the Central Sector Projects, the concerned Central
Agencies were required to constitute a committee to implement and monitor the projects
in which a representative of the Department of Commerce was also to be included.

24
However, no records relating to monitoring of the Central Projects were produced to
Audit, in the absence of which it could not be ascertained how many projects were
physically inspected by officers of the Department of Commerce.
(d) Inadequate Monitoring of EDF Projects
78. As regards monitoring the progress in implementation of the projects under
Export Development Fund for North Eastern Region, the concerned beneficiaries were
to send quarterly performance figures to the Department through APEDA. Audit test
check of records had, however, revealed that out of the total 179 quarterly reports due
to be received from 22 beneficiaries during the years 2001-02 to 2005-06, the department
received only 21 reports from 13 beneficiaries. Moreover, most of the progress reports
submitted by the beneficiaries did not give the physical and financial status of the
projects in quantitative terms.
79. Asked whether the Ministry had analysed the reasons for deficient and
inadequate monitoring at the State, Central and Project levels, the Ministry stated in a
note as under:—
"The monitoring mechanism under ASIDE scheme at various levels had been
performing satisfactorily, however, it is felt that there is lack of specificity in
the role and responsibilities of Nodal Officers/DCs SEZ/Jt. DGFTs."
80. On the same issue, the Secretary, Department of Commerce during evidence
deposed as under:—
"We have taken note of it that representation at the meetings has not been
upto the mark. Many meetings are called at short notice and it is a small
Department and people have not attended this meeting. As a result, some of
the schemes which the Audit has pointed out are not strictly relevant to the
export infrastructure."
81. Taking into account the various lapses/deficiencies in monitoring of the
ASIDE scheme, the Committee desired to know about the mechanism that was in place
and the authorities that were responsible for monitoring ASIDE scheme at various
levels. In response, the Ministry submitted in a note that monitoring of the
implementation of ASIDE scheme was done through designated officers of Department
of Commerce. They had been vested with the responsibility of on the spot verification
of the projects and to send the report. The lists of officers include 29 officers of
Department of Commerce, 7 Development Commissioners of the SEZs and 15 Jt. DGFTs
of Regional Offices of DGFT. Thus a total number of 51 officers were available for this
purpose. During 2007-08 a total number of 131 projects were approved by the various
SLEPCs from State Component of the scheme and it was felt that the number of officers
designated for the monitoring was adequate. The inspection reports of the designated
officer were received in a format as prescribed in the ASIDE guidelines. They proposed
to get all incomplete projects/projects sanctioned from 2007-08 onwards physically
inspected by above authorities.
82. The Ministry of Commerce and Industry (Department of Commerce) have
further stated that out of 212 Projects under implementation, which were approved

25
beyond financial year 2007-08, verification reports in respect of 56 projects had been
received so far. From the verification reports, it had been observed that a number of
works had not started at the time of physical verification. The time line for the completion
of projects within 2 years had been reiterated during the meeting held on 04-08-2009
and State Governments/UT administrations had been requested to complete projects
approved in 2007-08 by 2010-11 and also got the projects physically verified by
designated officers.
83. When asked about the remedial steps taken to ensure that all the projects are
inspected physically on a regular basis and necessary timely actions taken thereon,
the Ministry in a note submitted as under:—
"The Ministry has since specified the role of various Central Agencies viz.
Nodal Officers of the Department of Commerce, DC, SEZs and Jt. DGFTs
making it more meaningful."
84. The Committee desired to know the number of meetings held by the ECs and
the SLEPCs in each of the States/UTs since the launching of ASIDE scheme. In
response, in a note submitted to the Committee the Ministry have stated that the EC
meeting was held only once in each of the years 2001-02, 2004-05, 2005-06 and 2007-08
and twice in each of the years 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2006-07. The position with regard
to State/UT-wise SLEPC meetings are stated to be as under:—
Sl. Number of SLEPC Meetings held in
No. Name of the State/UT 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08
1. Andaman & Nicobar 1 2 3 2 1 0
2. Andhra Pradesh 2 2 1 0 1 0
3. Arunachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0 0
4. Assam 2 1 1 1 1 0
5. Bihar 0 0 0 0 0 0
6. Chandigarh 0 0 1 1 1 1
7. Chhattisgarh 1 0 0 0 0 0
8. Dadar & Nagar Haveli 0 0 0 0 0 1
9. Daman & Diu 0 1 1 0 0 0
10. Delhi 0 0 0 0 1 1
1 1 . G o a 23 32 10
12. Gujarat 1 3 2 1 1 0
13. Haryana 0 3 2 0 0 0
14. Himachal Pradesh 1 4 4 2 3 2
15. Jammu & Kashmir 0 2 3 1 2 0
16. Jharkhand 2 2 1 1 2 0
17. Karnataka 2 2 2 1 2 1

26
18. Kerala 2 1 3 2 1 1
19. Lakshadweep 1 1 1 0 0 0
20. Madhya Pradesh 1 1 1 0 2 1
21. Maharashtra 1 3 1 0 1 3
22. Manipur 0 0 1 1 1 0
23. Meghalaya 1 2 2 1 2 1
24. Mizoram 0 1 3 0 2 1
25. Nagaland 0 1 0 1 2 1
26. Orissa 0 3 1 1 1 1
27. Pondicherry 1 1 1 0 0 0
28. Punjab 1 3 2 1 1 1
29. Rajasthan 2 2 4 2 0 1
30. Sikkim 0 0 0 0 0 0
31. Tamil Nadu 1 1 1 1 2 2
32. Tripura 2 2 1 2 1 1
33. Uttar Pradesh 2 2 1 1 2 0
34. Uttaranchal 2 1 1 0 1 0
35. West Bengal 1 1 1 0 0 1
Total 32 51 49 25 35 21
85. It may be seen from the above table that the number of SLEPC meetings held
in all the States/UTs continued to be far below the stipulated requirement of four
meetings in each year. On being asked about the reasons for not holding meetings at
regular intervals by the Empowered Committees and the SLEPCs, the Ministry in a
note stated as under:—
"The SLEPC is headed by Chief Secretary of the concerned State/UT. Being
administrative head of the State, the Chief Secretary looks after the work of all
Departments of the State/UT and therefore amid his tight schedule and the
need to address many pressing issues, it is difficult for nodal agencies to
seek his convenience for regular SLEPC meetings at regular interval."
86. When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that SLEPC
meetings are held regularly and attended by the representatives of the Ministry, the
Ministry submitted in a note as under:—
"Jt. DGFT/DCSEZ have been requested to impress upon the nodal agency
for convening quarterly SLEPC meetings as envisaged in the ASIDE
guidelines. DC (SEZs/EPZs)/JDGFD may impress upon nodal agencies to
finalize agenda items 15 days in advance and obtain a copy of it. The agenda
Sl. Number of SLEPC Meetings held in
No. Name of the State/UT 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08

27
items so obtained may be discussed with concerned EPCs and other export
bodies so as to assess the outcome of the project. The feedback obtained
from EPCs and export bodies may be placed before the SLEPC during the
meeting which may form as input for prioritization/approval or otherwise of
the project."
87. To a related query, the Secretary, Department of Commerce during evidence
submitted as under:—
"In so far as the monitoring of the projects is concerned, we have now reiterated
our instructions to all our officers who have been allocated to various States
to ensure that they attend the meetings. We have seen that in 67 meetings
and 87 meetings in 2006 and 2007, officials have attended and we are getting
the feedback from them."
88. Enquired about the nature of follow-up action taken by the Ministry on the
shortcomings/irregularities noticed in physical and financial progress reports received
from the States, the Ministry in a note stated that in case shortcomings/irregularities in
physical and financial progress came to their notice, the same were got verified/inspected
by concerned DE SEZ/Jt. DGFT. Necessary remedial measures were taken on the basis
of their report.
89. The Committee desired to know as to how the Ministry ensured co-ordination
among the various authorities that were involved in overseeing the implementation of
ASIDE projects and the specific plans or arrangements that have been made for
overhauling its monitoring mechanism at various levels. In response, the Ministry in a
note stated that they had strengthened their involvement at various levels and planned
to get the implementation of State Component of the scheme monitored through their
nodal officers and DC of SEZs. The Development Commissioners of SEZs had also
been requested to call quarterly meeting with nodal agencies of the State under their
jurisdiction and make analysis of the funds balance with nodal agency, funds released
to implementing agencies by nodal agency and funds lying unspent with each
implementing agency and furnish a report to their Department. While releasing funds
to State Government, they may take into account the report of DCs sent after holding
such meetings.
90. The Ministry have further stated that Development Commissioners of SEZ/
Jt. DGFTs had been requested to—(i) regularly monitor the efforts of nodal agencies in
selection of location and preparation of shelf of projects to be implemented in next
 2-3 years; (ii) send a report to DoC after attending the SLEPC covering the aspects like
details of project, physical and financial phasing of the projects and expected outcome
from export angle. Any wrong project (having no export content) approved by SLEPC
should be brought to their notice; and (iii) to impress upon the nodal agency to keep
an account of interest accrued on the ASIDE fund and place it before SLEPC and
should also ensure that the same is utilized for purpose of funding the ASIDE projects.
They have also proposed to hold periodical meetings with these central authorities to
take stock of progress they have achieved in improving the implementation of the
scheme by ensuring compliance by States to their above mentioned instructions.

28
XV.  PROMOTION  OF  EXPORTS  IN  THE NORTH-EASTERN  REGION
(a) Outlay for North-Eastern States under ASIDE Scheme
91. Under the ASIDE Scheme, 10 per cent of the total outlay is earmarked for
developing export infrastructure in the North-Eastern States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. Details of the
funds released for implementing projects in North-Eastern Region including Sikkim
since inception of the ASIDE scheme are as under:—
(Rs. in lakh )
Year Total Outlay Release to NE under Release to NE under T otal release
under ASIDE Central Component State Component for NE
2002-03 32,546 800.00 1,450.00 2,250.00
2003-04 35,000 950.00 1,300.00 2,250.00
2004-05 42,488 2,470.18 3,149.00 5,619.18
2005-06 50,099 1,734.00 4,000.00 5,734.00
2006-07 45,000 1,691.95 3,570.50 5,262.45
2007-08 56,900 2,217.99 3,782.00 5,999.99
Grand total 2,62,033 9,864.12 17,251.5 27,115.62
(b) Export Potential of North-Eastern States
92. The Committee drew the attention of the Ministry to the export potential of
the North-Eastern States in respect of orchids, horticultural produce and other agro-
forestry  items, which are abundantly available in the region and asked whether any
feasibility study had been conducted or proposed to be undertaken under the ASIDE
scheme for accelerating growth of exports from the North-Eastern States etc. In response,
the Ministry stated in a note that APEDA, an autonomous organization under
Department of Commerce, had conducted a quick assessment study on export potential
of horticulture products from the North-Eastern Region during October-November
2005. The study was aimed at assessing the exportable surplus quantities of horticulture
products in the North-Eastern States and to suggest an action plan for providing the
necessary support for export promotion of these products. The major findings of the
study done by APEDA are as follows:—
"...It was found that the region has huge surplus quantities available to
market in the other States and for exports to the international markets. It was
also observed that a lot of these products are also being marketed to the
other States within the country and a few of them are also being exported to
the neighbouring countries like Bangladesh and Myanmar.
The major potential crops, which are in surplus quantities and have the
potential of exports from the region are Citrus (Orange), Banana, Pineapple,
Papaya, Jackfruit, Ginger, Turmeric, Chilli, and Potato etc. other crops like
Apple, Passion fruit, Green vegetables, Cut flowers, Spices also can be

29
successfully developed and commercially exploited for targeting international
markets. The floriculture in these States is also expected to increase and can
be explored for international markets.
It was observed that the exports of horticulture produce from the North-
Eastern States have been mainly of Orange/Citrus fruits, Ginger and Pineapple
etc. The geophysical condition as well as lack of infrastructure facilities has
restricted these exports to only neighbouring South-Asian countries."
93. The APEDA study also pointed out that:—
"The promotion of exports of horticulture produces from the NER requires a
major support in building the necessary infrastructure and support systems.
The existing infrastructure for the development of horticulture is highly
inadequate in many ways. The low technological base and limited market
infrastructure with virtually no storage facilities and inadequate means of
transport have resulted in a very low or even no growth in this sector.
The status of air facilities in the region is also very poor. The L.G .B. international
airport at Guwahati has recently commenced some international flights
however they only link to the far eastern countries and are of not any help for
the export promotion of horticulture produces. V ery small cargo space is
available in the domestic flights connecting to major cities like Delhi and
Mumbai.
The basic infrastructure facilities like storage, warehousing and transportations
are missing and thereby affect the storage and mobilization of goods.
The processing capacity is developed on the potential of supply of raw
material of that area, however despite of huge surpluses available in the
region; the development of processing industry has been negligible in these
States."
94. As per the study made by APEDA, the major reasons for this scheme not
being able to work for the export promotion from the North-Eastern Region are as
under:—
• Since there is no direct international connection from Guwahati International
Airport to the export destinations of the horticulture products from the North-
East, no major consignment could be exported through this route and thereby
the assistance has been of no use to the exporters.
• There are very few direct connections from Kolkata airport to the potential
export destinations of these products and the lack of facilities at Kolkata port
to handle perishable commodities does not make it suitable for the exporters
to route their shipments through Kolkata.
• Further the rail network in the North-Eastern States is also not very extensive
and requires multiple transhipments for transporting goods through railways.

30
• The hilly terrain of the area creates huge problems in transporting the produces
from the fields to the small markets and further transportations for exports. In
the absence of any suitable assistance, the local traders are procuring the
produce through their own channels and some of the produce is being exported
to the neighbouring countries like Bangladesh and Myanmar. These exports
are taking place by road through the land custom stations in these States and
no transport assistance can be provided under the present scheme for such
exports.
95. The Ministry have further stated that thrugh APEDA they are operating the
Inland Transport Assistance Scheme (ITAS) to bring down the heavy expenditure on
transportation involved in transport of goods with a view to boosting export of fresh
and processed horticulture projects from the North-Estern Region. The scheme came
into operation w.e.f. 15th July, 2002. Based on the persistent demand from the various
North-Eastern States, the scheme for export of horticulture products in the North
Eastern region had been liberalized. Inland transport assistance would now be available
in respect of 14 identified products i.e. Banana, Guava, Lemon, Orange, Pears, Pineapples,
Plums, Cut flowers, Ginger, Passion Fruit, Kiwi, Apple, Bamboo and Cane for food
purposes to all the North Eastern States. The rates of inland transport assistance have
been modified as follows:—
(i) 90 per cent of the air freight charged by the airline from any airport in the
North Eastern States or Bagdogra to Guwahati or Kolkata for exports and in
case of highly perishable commodities, 50 per cent of the air freight charged
by the airline from any airport in the North Eastern States to Delhi or Mumbai
Airport for exports.
(ii) Re. 1 per kg. or actual freight paid whichever is less, if the goods are
transported from anywhere in the NES by road for exports through any notified
Land Cutoms Station in the North Eastern States or through Guwahati airport.
(iii) Rs. 2 per kg. or actual freight paid whichever is less, if the goods are
transported from North Eastern States to Kolkata or any other port by rail
through ICD, Guwahati for exports.
(iv) Rs. 2 per kg. or actual freight paid whichever is less, if the goods are
transported from North Eastern States by rail through ICD, Guwahati to any
place in West Bengal for processing and export."
XVI. PRIORITY PROJECTS DURING THE 11TH FIVE YEAR PLAN
96. The Committee have been informed by the Department that instead of smaller
projects, it would be preferable to take up bigger projects having distinct linkage with
exports for a visible impact on the growth of exports. Towards this direction, the
Department identified some of the key areas for focused attention during the 11th plan
period. These are as follows:—
(i) 10 per cent of ASIDE funds allocated to States having Agri. Export Zones
(AEZs) will be earmarked exclusively for development of AEZ projects.

31
(ii) Priority to provide funds for kick starting the infrastructure development
work at Land Customs Stations would be given.
(iii) Emphasis on providing funds for projects covering common facilities like
laboratories, CETP etc., involving Public-Private Participation (PPP) would
be given.
(iv) Efforts would be made for opening up special window for taking up innovative
projects especially, for rural business hubs in coordination with Ministry of
Panchayati Raj.
(v) Emphasis would be laid on development of export infrastructure in the "Towns
of Excellence" identified under the Foreign Trade Policy, in coordination with
other Departments that have funds for infrastructure development and
upgradation thereof.
(vi) Bigger projects having distinct linkage with exports would be encouraged.
97. In this connection, the Committee desired to know the type of projects that
have already been taken up under each of the Central and the State Components. In
response, the Ministry furnished the information as under:—
Sl. Type of projects No. of projects
No. Central State
Component Component
1. EPIP/EPZ/SEZ and other Business Zones 205 62
2. Complementary Infrastructure 19 278
3. Information Technology 1 29
4. CETP 4 29
5. Development of Infrastructure for Export Promotion 12 7
6. Ports/Harbours 7 12
7. Power supply - 46
8. Others 42 520
Total 290 983

PART II
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERV ATIONS
1. Considering the pivotal role played by exports in the economic growth in the
wake of liberalization and structural reforms, the Department of Commerce in the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry launched on 13th March, 2002, a scheme namely
'Assistance to States for Developing Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities'
(ASIDE) with an outlay of Rs. 97 crore for March 2002 and Rs. 1,725 crore for the
10th Five Y ear Plan (2002-07). The objective of the scheme was to actively involve the
States in the export effort by providing assistance to the State Governments for creating
appropriate infrastructure for the development and growth of exports in pursuance of
EXIM Policy announced by Government of India in March, 2000. Outlay for 11th Five
Year Plan (2007-12) was tentatively fixed at Rs. 3,664.63 crore out of which the
allocation for the year 2007-08 was Rs. 569 crore. Three existing schemes for export
promotion viz. Export Promotion Industrial Parks (EPIP), Export Promotion Zones
(EPZ) and Critical Infrastructure Balancing (CIB) schemes were merged with the
new scheme and the ongoing projects under the older schemes were to be funded by
the States from the resources provided under ASIDE. The scheme also subsumed the
Export Development Fund (EDF) for North Eastern Region (NER), including Sikkim,
which was another existing scheme for export promotion involving the activities
permitted under the existing EDI scheme guidelines which differ from the ASIDE
scheme guidelines. The outlay under the ASIDE scheme has two components — the
State Component, whereunder 80 per cent of the funds were to be earmarked for
allocation to the States on the basis of the approved criteria and the other is Central
Component, wherein the balance 20 per cent and amounts equivalent to unutilized
portion of the funds allocated to the States in the past year(s), if any, was to be retained
at the Central level for meeting the requirments of inter-State Projects, Capital
outlays of EPZs/SEZs etc.
The Committee's examination of the implementation of the ASIDE Scheme
revealed that the planning, approval, execution/implementation and monitoring of the
projects under the Scheme were plagued by many loopholes and deficiencies and as a
result, the impact of ASIDE scheme on the volume of exports and building export
infrastructure is hardly visible. Moreover, there was lack of fiscal discipline in the
financial transactions under the Scheme resulting in cases of diversion of funds
excess release of funds, cost and time overruns etc. These issues along with related
issues have been dealt with by the Committee in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. While the ASIDE scheme guidelines clearly envisaged creation of export
infrastructure for specific purposes having direct and overwhelming linkage with
exports, the Committee, however, note that in respect of 57 State Sector projects in
16 States and 22 Central Sector projects involving funding of Rs. 177.59 crore,
approvals were given despite these being not covered under the scope of Scheme
32

33
Guidelines and also not of capital in nature. Further, all the 22 Central Sector Projects
were of revenue nature such as preparation of DPR/feasibility reports, development
of road, waiting hall, canteen, accommodation for police personnel, purchase of
software and hardware, furniture and office equipment etc., which were not covered
under the specified approved activities under the Scheme. Besides, 15 projects under
EDF for North East including Sikkim involving Central Assistance of Rs. 1.12 crore
were approved for undertaking activities like seminars, workshops, conferences,
training programmes, expositions etc. which were not covered under the scope of the
guidelines. The Secretary, Department of Commerce during evidence tried to
underplay the shortcomings in the approval of projects by merely stating that the
total amount sanctioned under ASIDE scheme was between Rs. 2,000 crore to Rs. 3,000
crore only, which constituted a very insignificant portion of the total export
infrastructure capital of about Rs. 22,00,000 crore. The Committee do not accept this
view of the Ministry as the main objective of ASIDE scheme was to undertake only
such Projects which would contribute to development of the country's export
infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should probe
into all cases of such ineligible ASIDE projects, which were approved with a view to fix
responsibility on the dellinquent Officials. The Committee also desire that the Ministry
should take all necessary measures to streamline the procedure of approval of the
projects under the Scheme so as to ensure that only those Projects are cleared which
overwhelmingly contribute to the growth of exports and export infrastructure.
3. The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed that the definition
of projects which can be taken up under ASIDE scheme appears to be too vague and
general as the types of projects/works, which can be covered under the scheme, has
not been precisely delineated. Similarly, no specific or clear cut criteria for approving
the projects of 'national and regional importance' have been incorporated in the
Scheme guidelines. As a result, there is lot of scope for misinterpretation of the
scheme guidelines and any project remotely connected to exports can be accorded
approval in the guise of developing and promoting exports and export infrastructure.
As such, the State Level Export Promotion Committees and the Department of
Commerce have been freely approving any project under a mistaken notion that
anything directly or indirectly associated with exports can be deemed as export
infrastructure. This lacuna appears to be the main cause of approving the ineligible
projects under ASIDE scheme and also for the thin spread of resources amongst
small and insignificant projects. The Committee do not accept the Department of
Commerce's contention that the existing guidelines are adequate, comprehensive,
explicit and realistic and hence no modification is required. The Committee need
hardly emphasize that the aims and objectives of ASIDE scheme should not be diluted
or compromised and the type and nature of projects that can be taken up under the
scheme, subject to local variations, should be clearly spelt out and delineated so that
only those schemes, which would directly contribute to the country's long-term export
infrastructure for achieving accelerated growth of exports, are taken up under the
scheme. Necessary measures for ensuring strict compliance by the States/SLEPC to
these specific guidelines in letter and spirit should be taken and enforced invariably.

34
4. The Committee regret to observe that the percentage of utilization of funds
released under ASIDE scheme was low and ranged between 43 to 86 percent and 28 to
90 percent in respect of the State and Central sectors respectively, during 2002-03 to
2005-06. In the cases of six States/UTs, i.e., Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Arunachal
Pradesh, Bihar, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep out of
Rs. 21.07 crore released, no expenditure was incurred during March, 2002 to March,
2006. Further, in five States/UTs, an expenditure of Rs. 34.77 crore was incurred
which constituted only 44 percent of the total funds released i.e. Rs. 79.82 crore. In
14 States/UTs only Rs. 440.43 crore was spent, which was 61 percent of Rs. 717.97
crore that was released. Besides, 15 out of the 37 agencies in different States had not
incurred any expenditure out of Rs. 35.25 crore that was released to them during
2001-02 to 2005-06 and the expenditure in respect of 11 agencies ranged between
30 and 60 percent of the releases. The Committee have been informed by the
Department of Commerce that certain remedial measures have been taken by them to
streamline the utilization of funds by States/UTs, which inter-alia include on-line
monitoring of submission of Utilization Certificates and release of funds to the States
only after securing the pending Utilization Certificates etc. The Committee feel that
the belated remedial measures now being taken by the Department could have been
taken earlier while introducing ASIDE Scheme as a pre-condition for releasing
funds. Further, the Committee are not inclined to believe that the continuous low
utilization of funds during 2001-2002 to 2005-2006 could be solely attributed to the
problem in submission of Utilization Certificates. This is proved by the fact that in
spite of taking the aforesaid remedial measures, the Committee find that against the
total funds released amounting to Rs. 2,62,812.10 lakh under ASIDE scheme upto
2007-08, the total expenditure incurred there against was Rs. 2,16,320.25 lakh
resulting in a gap of Rs. 46,491.85 lakh. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Department of Commerce should revamp areas of their financial operations in close
coordination with respective States for facilitating timely, expeditious and judicious
utilization of ASIDE funds so that the projects undertaken under the scheme are
completed without any cost and time overruns.
5. The Committee note that duing the period 2002-03 to 2005-06, the State-
wise allocation of ASIDE funds was made on the basis of ad-hoc assessment and not
on the basis of the prescribed twin criteria of the State's export performance and
share in growth rate of exports. This was due to alleged inadequacy and inaccuracy in
the export data reported by the Director General of Commercial Intelligence and
Statistics (DGCIS) such as blank or invalid entry regarding the State of origin in a
large percentage of shipping bills. Further, according to the Department of Commerce,
the DGCIS figures did not reflect a “complete and correct" picture of exports from
the States as a large number of buying houses based in metropolitan cities sourced
the products from several States in the hinterland, and exports thereof were recorded
against the State from where those exports were shipped out, and not against the State
of origin. Besides, the DGCIS data was also inadequate for the reason that many of the
products were not manufactured at a single location in a particular State and their
components were sourced from other States as well — a fact which was not possible
to be reflected adequately in the State of origin column in the shipping documents.

35
Thus, the existing criteria of allocation of funds based on this unrealistic data provided
lopsided opportunities to only five or six better performing States on export front to
derive the maximum benefit out of ASIDE Scheme. What is surprising to the Committee
is the fact that at the time of formulation of the Scheme in 2002, on an issue raised by
the Planning Commission regarding non-availability of export data from the States,
the Department of Commerce had then reportedly explained that there was no difficulty
in capturing the data, as the shipping bill format had been amended with effect from
April, 2001 to provide for indication of State of origin of the products.
The Committee deplore the Department's failure to rectify this lacuna even
after assuring the Planning Commission as long back as in 2002 and as a consequence,
allocation of ASIDE funds to the States continues to be made on ad hoc basis, instead
of the specified criteria. This clearly indicates that the ASIDE scheme was launched
without proper planning and accurate database by the Department of Commerce
which is anything but regrettable. The Committee express their displeasure over the
lackadaisical attitude displayed by the DGCIS in maintaining accurate and reliable
data relating to exports. The Committee would like the Department of Commerce to
take necessary corrective measures to streamline the functioning of DGCIS, so that
in future the export data maintained by them is accurate, reliable and complete in all
aspects. The Committee, desire that efforts should now be  made to capture State-wise
export data more realistically in consultation with DGFT and SEZ Division of the
Department of Commerce so as to ensure that desrving States are not left out. Keeping
in view the need for balanced development of the country's overall export
infrastructure, the Committee urge upon the Department of Commerce to revise the
fund allocation criteria under the scheme in such a way that benefits of the scheme
are well dispersed and extended to cover all the States in just and equitable manner.
6. The Committee's examination on the subject has revealed several instances
of inadmissible and excess release of funds under ASIDE Scheme. The Committee
find that inadmissible amounts to the tune of Rs. 2.39 crore, Rs. 1.00 crore and
Rs. 0.38 crore were sanctioned in Punjab, Andhra Pradesh and Manipur respectively
during 2005-06. It has also been found that while releasing the subsequent instalments
for the years 2002-03 to 2005-06, the Department of Commerce did not ensure full
utilization of the previous instalment, which resulted in excess/injudicious release
of Rs. 94.12 crore, Rs. 131.60 crore, Rs. 114.17 crore and Rs. 228.97 crore
respectively, thereby flouting the ASIDE guideline, which stipulates that any unutilized
funds out of allotted funds were to be counted against the next year's allocations and
suitable deductions were to be made therefrom. Obviously these failures clearly
indicate laxity in the financial control exercised by the Department. The Committee
are of the firm view that strict adherence to the principles of financial management
and financial discipline is imperative for proper implementation of various ASIDE
projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all such cases which relate to
release of inadmissible funds, excess release of funds and non-submision of Utilization
Certificates should be detected and these amounts should be suitably and promptly
deducted from the subsequent allocations to them strictly in accordance with the
scheme guidelines. Monitoring System also needs to be revamped to ensure that such
instances do not recur.

36
7.  Another disquienting feature in the implementation of ASIDE Scheme relates
to delay in and non-submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) by the States and the
implementing agencies. The Committee note that Utilisation Certificates (UCs) by
14 State nodal agencies and 22 Central agencies in respect of  CIB/ASIDE funds of
Rs. 37.75 crore and Rs. 61.71 crore respectively released to them during the years
1997-98 as to 2003-04 were yet to be furnished. Similarly, UCs relating to EDF were
not received from 10 private bodies and one State Department against funds of Rs. 10.72
crore released to them during April, 2002 to March, 2005. Besides, there had been
various instances of incorrect financial reporting or submission of improper
incomplete Utilization Certificates involving Rs. 176.18 crore as on January, 2007.
The Department of Commerce have informed the Committee that they have installed
an auto-mailer, which sends details of pending Utilization Certificate to Secretaries
States through e-mail and all the States/UTs were periodically reminded through
phone, letters from senior officer level and review meetings convened in the
Department. The States/UTs are categorically informed that no further funds under
ASIDE scheme would be released to them unless due Utilisation Certificates are
furnished on proper format. The Committee find that these measures seem to be
more of a routine nature and are proving to be ineffective in improving the situation
as can be gauged from the fact as of March, 2010, out of 76 cases reported by Audit,
UCs in respect of 45 cases were still awaited. The Committee recommend that stringent
action including imposition of penalty should be taken against the erring State
Governments and other implementing agencies for the delay/non-submission of UCs.
Further, there is an imperative need for toning up the Department's internal audit
and monitoring mechanisms in order to closely monitor the process of submission of
UCs as well as their quality by the States and other agencies wherever necessary. The
Committee also desire that the Department should not shy away from taking strict
action against the chronic defaulters so as to ensure proper and timely submission of
Utilisation Certificates. Department of Commerce should also find out the procedure
being adopted by the Ministries of Agriculture and Health and Family Welfare in
obtaining Utilization Certificate in regard to various projects being run in all the
States/Union Territories.
8. With a view to encourage the State Governments and Private sector to
participate in developing export infrastructure, the ASIDE Scheme has made it
mandatory for the States to spered at least 50 percent of their allocation on
implementing projects with private participation to leverage ASIDE funds from
2003-04. However, the Committee note that this arrangement has not yielded desirable
results and the achievements made so far are limited to attracting sporadic and
almost negligible participation of some of the States and the private sector in export
promotion activities. The Committee note that in 8 States/UTs there was no contribution
from both the private sector and the State Governments in the infrastructure projects
from 2002-03 to 2005-06. Further, private participation was insignificant in
Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh. While there was contribution
from the Government to some extent in 8 States/UTs, however, there as no private
sector participation. Worse still, the Department itself has conceded that the States
did not perceive any direct gain from participating in or investing in the projects

37
under the Scheme. The Committee construe this to be the failure on the part of
Department of Commerce in motivating the States to participate in the Scheme. The
Committee desire that concerted efforts should be made by Department of Commerce
to encourage active participation of the States and private sector in these ASIDE
Schemes so that the country's export infrastructure is augmented. As one such
measure, the Committee recommend that Department of Commerce may consider
introducing a system of rewarding the States, which have achieved higher leveraging
of ASIDE funds. The Committee would like to have the details of action taken by them
in this regard within 3 months of presentation of this Report.
9. Proper project planning is imperative for ensuring effective implementation
and achieving the intended results of any Scheme. The Committee, however, note with
concern that ASIDE scheme was launched without undertaking proper planning and
assessment of actual ground realities. In August 2001, the Department had entrusted
a study on the evaluation of the Critical Infrastructure Balancing (CIB) projects to
the National Council of Applied Economics Research (NCAER) which was to be
completed in six months, so that the feedback collected through the evaluation could
be used as input in the formulation of ASIDE scheme, The Committee's examination
has revealed that while NCAER's draft and final reports were submitted in October
2002 and March 2004 respectively, ASIDE scheme was launched in March 2002
itself, much before the presentation of these Reports, and as a result, the inputs of the
evaluation study of CIB projects could not be made use of while formulating the
ASIDE Scheme. This clearly indicates adhocism on the part of the Department in
formulation of such an important Scheme, which is highly regrettable. The Committee
further note that as per the Scheme guidelines, the Export Commissioner of the
concerned State being the convener of SLEPC, should draw up five year/annual export
plans in consultation with the captains of trade and industry, the Export Promotion
Councils and the Department of Commerce. To their utter dismay, the Committee
find that in seven out of eight selected States, no such five year/annual export plans
were prepared.
The Department of Commerce have informed the Committee that the States/
UTs had been advised on several occasions to prepare a shelf of good infrastructure
projects for taking up under ASIDE scheme and share best practices amongst them.
It was also emphasized that export oriented clusters may be identified, infrastructure
gaps in these clusters may be assessed and projects to fill these gaps may be
implemented, preferably in Public-Private Partnership more, so as to increase exports
from these clusters. The Department have further stated that the Development
Commissioners of SEZs have been requested to help the nodal agencies of the
State Government in preparation of export plan. The Committee are quite skeptical
about the proposal of the Department to enlist the help and support of the Development
Commissioners of SEZs in the preparation of export plans by the State Governments
for the simple reason that it is neither mandatory nor obligatory on the part of these
officials to help prepare such export plans. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that the Department of Commerce should make concerted efforts in persuading the
States to prepare their export plans well in advance so that the projects under the
scheme could be taken up expeditiously and executed in a time bound manner.

38
10. The Committee note with concern that 8 projects in West Bengal costing
Rs. 20.46 crore and 46 projects in Manipur were taken up without the approval of
SLEPC and administrative approval/expenditure sanction of the Nodal Department
respectively during the years 2002-06. The Department of Commerce have informed
the Committee that the 8 projects in West Bengal were given ex-post facto approval
by the SLEPC. The Committee cannot but deprecate such practice on the part of State
Governments which are in total disregard to General Financial Rules. The Committee
therefore, recommend that the Department of Commerce should take up the matter
with the concerned States so that deterrent and penal action is taken against the
persons responsible for approving such projects. The Department of Commerce should
also urge upon all the States to take necessary corrective measures so that the
practice of according ex-post facto approval and taking up projects without proper
administrative approval and expenditure by them do not recur in future.
11. As per the guidelines under ASIDE scheme, before sanctioning the new
projects, the concerned SLEPC should allocate funds for the likely expenditure of
the ongoing projects and should ensure, except in exceptional cases, that no new
project had a gestation period of more than two years. Despite this condition, the
Committee note that as many as 97 State Sector Projects in 24 States involving
ASIDE contribution of Rs. 544.80 crore (expenditure incurred being Rs. 156.56
crore) and 50 Central Sector Projects involving ASIDE contribution of Rs. 164.01
crore  (expenditure incurred being Rs. 81.51 crore) remained incomplete after the
maximum gestation period of two years, or after lapse of the scheduled period of
their completion. Another 46 CIB projects, which were approved during 1997-98 to
2001-02, had remained incomplete after merger of the scheme with ASIDE scheme
and after incurring an expenditure of Rs. 52.76 crore. In this connection, the
Department of Commerce have informed the Committee that out to 981 projects,
which were approved by the respective SLEPCs under the State Component of ASIDE
Scheme since its inception, 428 projects had been completed, 44 cancelled and 393
were under implementation. Among the ongoing 393 projects, 134 projects, which
were approved before 2006-07, had passed the normal gestation period of two years
for completion of the projects. The Department of Commerce have further informed
that they propose to take up the matter with respective State Governments to get
these projects completed on priority basis and in respect of 95 projects enlisted by
Audit, the nodal agencies have been instructed to ensure completion of these
incomplete ASIDE/CIB projects by the end of financial year 2008-09, failing which
amount incurred on such incomplete projects may have to be deducted from first
instalment of 2009-10. The Committee regret to note that the Department have not
stated the reasons for the failure of the Central Agencies and the State Governments
in completing the projects within the stipulated time period and also the efforts, if
any, made by them to ensure timely completion of the projects. The Committee
cannot but conclude that the Department of Commerce have failed to ensure that the
Central Agencies and the States complete all the pending projects within a reasonable
time frame. In their opinion, the delay in completion of projects defeats the very
purpose of undertaking these projects besides incurring cost overruns. The
Committee urge upon the Department to closely monitor the projects on a continuous
basis so as to expedite completion of the pending projects by States in a time bound

39
manner. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the details of the concrete
action taken in this regard and the status of progress in the implementation of the
projects.
12. Another area of concern relating to implementation of the Scheme is
cancellation and non-commissioning of large shelf of projects. The Committee are
perturbed to note that out of total 848 State sector projects approved upto 2006-07,
99 had been cancelled and 29 projects had not been started. As regards Central
Component projects, out of 349 projects approved till 2009-10 (as on 26.02.2010),
13 projects had been cancelled. The Committee are dismayed at the cancellation of
large number of projects which had led to sheer wastage of huge sums of public
money. This could have been avoided, had the Department of Commerce and the
respective SLEPCs followed the norms of project management. As this reflects poor
project planning and management on the part of States and Implementing Agencies,
the Committee recommend that all the cases of cancellation of ASIDE projects should
be gone into with a view to fixing responsibility on the delinquent officials. While
cautioning the Department of Commerce not to resort to indiscriminate sanctioning
and consequential abandoning of ASIDE projects, the Committee recommend that the
Department should follow due diligence while preparing/approving the Detailed Project
Reports of the projects to be undertaken under ASIDE Scheme. As far as possible
only such projects which are economically feasible should be taken up for
implementation supported by best management practices.
13. The Committee note with concern the inordinate delays in completion of
18 Central and 51 State sector projects ranging between 6 to 78 months due to non-
availability of site, delayed release of funds by the State Governments, additional work
and heavy rains etc. Further, there were delays in completion of projects and escalation
of cost of Rs. 0.21 crore in Orissa and Rs. 2.41 crore in Uttar Pradesh. What is
disturbing to the Committee is the fact that the total number of ASIDE projects which
have exceeded their normal gestation period of 2 years i.e. completed beyond their
normal date of completion stood at 134 projects as of November 2008 and the
Department do not have the details of projects-wise cost overrun incurred thereon. In
this regard, the Department of Commerce have informed the Committee that the
agencies have been requested to get the completion of projects expedited and ensure
that in future every project is completed as per the implementation schedule, so that
cost escalation is avoided. The Committee regret to note that these glaring lapses and
deficiencies in the execution of projects are indicative of lack of proper project planning
and implementation of ASIDE projects and also absence of mechanism for ensuring
synchronized coordination amongst the concerned authorities and Agencies at the
Central and State levels to execute the projects. The Committee recommend that
responsibility should be fixed on the persons responsible for these serious lapses
which  had caused not only significant loss to the exchequer in terms of cost overrun
but also in slippage of targets with regard to development of export infrastructure.
The details of project-wise cost overrun in respect of 134 projects as on November 2008
may also be intimated to the Committee alongwith the reasons therefor. The Committee
further recommend that Department of Commerce should beef up their systems and
procedure with regard to project planning and management as also the mechanism

40
for monitoring the projects so that there are no cost and time overruns in the
implementation of the projects in future.
14. The Committee are constrained to note that the monitoring mechanism
under ASIDE Scheme has become virtually defunct and left much to be desired. The
number of meetings held by the monitoring bodies like the Empowered Committee
(EC) at the Central level and the SLEPC at the State level fell much short of the
stipulated requirement. At the project level, inspections of the projects were not
carried out properly so much so that out of 520 CIB/ASIDE projects under
implementation/completed in 32 States/UTs during the priod 2003-04 to 2005-06,
the 16 nominated officers could visit only 202 projects in 18 States. The Committee
also fined that inspection  reports in respect of 131 projects were incomplete and not
in the prescribed format. Further, there was no record available in the Department of
Commerce of the inspection  reports being forwarded to the concerned
State Governments/Nodal Agencies for taking further corrective action. Such kinds
of problems also persist in the case of EDF projects as well. Out of the total number of
179 quarterly reports that were to be received from the 22 beneficiaries during the
years 2001-02 to 2005-06, the Department received only 21 reports from
13 beneficiaries and most of the progress reports submitted by the beneficiaries did
not give the physical and financial status of the projects in quantitative terms. The
Secretary, (Commerce) during evidence was candid enough to admit all the lapses
pointed out by Audit regarding inadequancies in monitoring of ASIDE Scheme and
assured to take all measures to correct the mistakes/lapses and irregularities. The
Committee have been informed that as a measure for ensuring that all the projects
are inspected physically on a regular basis and necessary timely actions taken thereon,
the role of various Central Agencies viz. Nodal Officers of the Department of
Commerce, the Development Commissioners of SEZs and the Joint Directorate
General of Foreign Trade has been streamlined for making the monitoring more
effective and meaningful. In this connection, the Committee are not satisfied with the
so called remedial measures taken by the Department as these are at best perfunctory
and are not comprehensive and effective in pinpointing the grey areas and weak
points in the system. Apparently no concrete measures have been taken to ensure co-
ordination amongst the various authorities that are involved in overseeing the
implementation of ASIDE projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Department of Commerce should take urgent and concrete measures for streamlining
the existing monitoring mechanism so that the loopholes and deficiencies in the
implementation of projects are detected at an early stage and corrective measures
taken to remedify them. Responsibility for various lapses and irregularities in the
implementation of the scheme should be fixed on the erring  officials. The Committee
also expect that the meetings of the monitoring bodies of ASIDE scheme at all levels
would be held as per stipulation without fail and representatives of the Department of
Commerce attend all the meetings of SLEPC. The Committee further recommend
that all the monitoring bodies/concerned authorities should undertake surprise and
random inspections of ASIDE projects on a periodical basis to physically verify their progress.
15. The North Eastern States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura hold huge export potential in

41
respect of high quality horticulture produce like Citrus fruits, Apple, Banana, Passion
fruit, Pineapple, Papaya, Jackfruit, Ginger, Turmeric, Chilli, Potato, Green  vegetables,
Spices, Orchids, Cut flowers, etc., which are available in abundant quantity. Further,
being natural home to a variety of rare orchids and considering favourable local
climate and geographical conditions export of floriculture  produce from these States
can also be explored. However, the scope and quantum of exports of the aforesaid
produce/articles from this region is  currently  much below its potential due to
various factors/constraints like poor availability of export infrastructure facilities,
remoteness of the region, unfriendly terrain, transport bottlenecks etc. This is further
worsened by the low technological base and limited market infrastructure with virtually
no storage facilities resulting in a very low or even no growth  in this sector. As a
consequence, the States in the region have not been able to tap the full export  potential
of their produce. The Committee find that no specific and significant  export
infrastructure for the purpose has been set up so far in the region under ASIDE
scheme. With a view to augmenting export infrastructure in the region especially for
horticultural and agro-forestry produce, the Committee desire that  possibility of
linkages between ASIDE Scheme and the regional schemes of North Eastern Council
and those of the respective State Governments should be  explored so that a systematic
chain for exports of the aforesaid items from the region are put in place and
operationalised. In this connection, the Committee would like the Department  of
Commerce to enter into an understanding with the North Eastern States with a view
to providing assistance to the exporters in such  a way that local bodies/NGOs/private
sector are encouraged to come forward and take active part in the production and
export of horticultural and agro-forestry produce from the region. The Committee
also desire that necessary infrastructure like storage, warehousing and
transportation facilities should be created/upgraded in the region to encourage
establishment of export-oriented agro-forestry food processing industry in the region.
16. The Committee observe that the country's exports and foreign exchange
earnings in the recent years have adversely been affected by the current global
economic recession. This downturn in the country's export performance is certainly
bound to deal a heavy blow to the ongoing process of export infrastructure building
and more especially the participation of the States in these activities. At this difficult
stage, certain urgent remedial measures are desperately required to safeguard the
country's distressed export sector. In these circumstances, the purport, scope and
importance of ASIDE scheme have assumed greater importance. The Committee
expect the Department of Commerce would take all out measures to ensure that
ASIDE projects are precisely fine tuned and synchronized with other related activities
in such a way that only those bigger projects having distinct and direct linkage with
exports are taken up under ASIDE scheme instead of smaller and fragmented projects
so that the scheme does not turn out to be a liability to the Exchequer and the challenges
in the export front emanating from the recent global economic crisis are effectively
met with. In this context, the Committee welcome the idea of giving focused attention
during the 11th Plan period to the promotion of Agri Export Zones (AEZs) and rural
business hubs, which were not given prominence earlier. The Committee desire that
the machinery responsible for planning and approval of ASIDE projects and financial
transactions should be systematically overhauled and properly monitored. The

42
Committee expect that these measures would be taken expeditiously and their strict
and effective compliance by the State is ensured by the Department of Commerce.
17. The Committee note that more than 70 per cent of the projects under
Central Component of the ASIDE Scheme and a sizable number of State Sector ASIDE
projects have been sanctioned for SEZs which are being developed in few State only.
Considering the fact that SEZs have already been extended various benefits in the
form of tax holidays, duty exemptions, concessional land and other benefits, the
Committee are of the view that concentration of a large number of ASIDE projects in
SEZs would result not only in duplication of Central Assistance but also in lopsided
growth of export infrastructure and widening of inter-state disparities, which does
not augur well for the equitable growth of export infrastructure in the country. To
sustain the long-term export development of the Country, the Committee believe that
apart from SEZs, the Government need to build critical export infrastructure in
areas/regions with high export potential. The Committee would, therefore, like the
Department to fine tune ASIDE Scheme in such a way that greater emphasis is given
to the non-SEZ export schemes.
18. As ASIDE Scheme has been in operation since 2002, the Department of
Commerce must have come to know by their experience the kind of infrastructure
projects being successful in some States. This experience could have been tried to
replicate in other States. The Committee would like to know whether any such effort
has been made by the Government during the last 8 years.
N
EW DELHI; DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
27 August, 2010 Chairman,
5 Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-09) HELD ON 2ND JULY , 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1240 hrs. on 2nd July, 2008, in Room No. ‘63’,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri Shailendra Kumar
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brijesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Kharabela Swain
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Raashid Alvi
14. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
15. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
16. Shri Shanta Kumar
17. Dr. K. Malaisamy
18. Shri Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri M.K.Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
43

44
OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE C&AG OF INDIA
1. Ms. Praveen Tripathi — ADAI
2. Shri Nand Kishore — P r. Director (PA)
3. Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director (ESM)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)
1. Shri G.K. Pillai     —   Secretary
2. Shri R. Gopalan  —   Additional Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers
to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting
has been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Commerce
and Industry (Department of Commerce) on the C&AG's Report No. 18 of 2007 relating
to Performance Audit of "Assistance to States for Developing Export Infrastructure
and Allied Activities (ASIDE) Scheme".
3. Thereafter the Officers of the C&AG of India briefed the Committee on specific
points arising out of the afforesaid Audit Report.
4. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
(Department of Commerce) were called in. The Chairman read out contents of the
Direction 58 by the Speaker regarding secret nature of the proceedings of the Committee.
5. The Secretary, Department of Commerce after introducing his colleagues in
the Ministry to the Committee, gave a brief background of the genesis and
implementation of ASIDE scheme and the Audit findings thereon. He explained to the
various queries raised by the Chairman and the Members. To certain queries, for which
the witnesses could not give satisfactory replies, the Hon'ble Chairman directed the
representatives of the Ministry to furnish the requisite information as desired by the
Members in writing, at the earliest, particularly in regard to:
(i) quantitative performance of ASIDE scheme and details of infrastructure created
in each of the States/UTs under the scheme;
(ii) reasons for large-scale violation of the guidelines while approving ASIDE
scheme leading to improper approval and sanctioning of ASIDE projects by
the Ministry and measures taken by the Ministry for rectifying the lapse;
(iii) release of funds on the basis of ad-hoc assessment and revision of criteria for
allocating ASIDE funds to the States;
(iv) Irregularities in the operation of ASIDE scheme viz. excess release of funds,
diversion of funds, non-adjustment of unspent balances, retention of
unutilized funds by the implementing agencies, non-recovery of interest,
etc.;
(v) the States to whom the bulk of ASIDE funds have been allocated and their
performance;

45
(vi) corrective measures undertaken by the Ministry to ensure that ASIDE funds/
projects are directly linked with export activities;
(vii) remedial measures taken by the Ministry pursuant to the mid-term appraisal
report of the scheme;
(viii) steps taken for overhauling the scheme at the Central, State and project
levels; and
(ix) fixing of responsibility and action taken against the erring officials/individuals
for lapses in the implementation of ASIDE scheme.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX  II
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10) HELD ON 11TH FEBRUARY , 2010
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 11th February, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs.
in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi — In the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
6. Shri K. Sudhakaran
7. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Shanta Kumar
9. Dr. K. Malaisamy
10. Shri N.K. Singh
11. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri P.K. Kataria — Principal Director (Report Central)
2. Shri K.R. Sriram — Principal Director (Economic and Service
Ministries)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
(DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE)
1. Dr. Rahul Khullar — Commerce Secretary
2. Dr. Shyam Agarwal — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Anil K. Bamba — Director
46

47
2.  As the Hon'ble Chairman was not present, the Committee, under Rule 258 (3),
chose Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi, M.P. and a Member of the Committee to preside
over the sitting.
3. The acting Chairman welcomed the Members and the Audit Officers to the
sitting of the Committee. Then, the Audit Officers briefed the Committee on the important
issues arising out of the C&AG's Report No. 18 of 2007 on "Assistance to States for
Development of  Export Infrastructure and Allied Activities (ASIDE) Scheme."
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
(Department of Commerce) were called in and the acting Chairman welcomed them to
the sitting. The Committee commenced further evidence on the subject. The Commerce
Secretary explained in brief the action taken by the Department of Commerce with
regard to the Audit findings and the general impact of the scheme. He also clarified
various points raised by the Members. The acting Chairman desired that the Ministry
might furnish written replies to certain queries which required detailed and statistical
information.
5. The acting Chairman thanked the representatives of the Department of
Commerce for appearing before the Committee and furnishing the information that the
Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX  III
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11) HELD ON 27TH AUGUST, 2010
The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th August, 2010 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in
Room No. '62', Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramen Deka
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
4. Shri Satpal Maharaj
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
7. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
8. Shri K. Sudhakaran
9. Dr. M. Thambidurai
10. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Ashwani Kumar
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Tiruchi Siva
14. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Ms. Rekha Gupta — D y. CAG (Report Central)
2. Shri R.P.  Singh — Director General of Audit (P&T)
3. Ms. R. Rajalakshmi — Director General of Audit (Railways)
48

49
4. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Pr. Director (RC)
5. Shri Bhawani Shankar — Director, AMG-II (ESM)
6. Shri Kulwant Singh — Director, AMG-IV (CE)
** ** ** **
** ** ** **
5. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration and adoption the following
Draft Reports:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) Draft Report on 'Assistance to States for Developing Export Infrastructure
and Allied Activities (ASIDE) Scheme' based on C&AG's Report No. 18 of
2007 (Performance Audit), Union Government, (Civil).
6. After some deliberations, the Chairman desired that suggestions/modifications,
if any, to the above mentioned Draft Reports may be communicated to the Secretariat
in writing for suitable incorporation in the respective Reports. The Committee, then,
adopted the Draft Reports and authorized the Chairman to finalise them in the light of
factual verification by Audit or otherwise and present the same to the House on a date
convenient to him.
The Committee then adjourned.
GMGIPMRND—4545LS—20.10.2010.

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are available on sale
at the Sales  Counter, Reception, Parliament House (Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495,
23034496). Agents appointed by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said information is
available on website ‘www. parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales Counter,
Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir items with Parliament Museum
logo are available for sale at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website
mentioned above.”