THIRTY-FIRST REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-2011)

FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA

ACCELERATED IRRIGATION BENEFITS PROGRAMME (AIBP)

MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES

Presented to Lok Sabha on: 24.02.2011
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 24.02.2011

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

February 20)1\/Phaiguna 1932 (Saka)


PAC NO. 1938

Price: Rs. 70.00

© 2011 By Lox Sasa SECRETARIAT

Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager. Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi.


CONTENTS

ComposiTION oF THE Pusiic Accounts ComMiTTEE (2010-11).......

INTRODUCTION .....

ACRONYMS ....

REPORT
PARTI

I. Introductory

Il. Inclusion of new project under AIBP....

Ill. Surface Water Minor Irrigation Schemes ....
Iv. Audit Review
(A) Poor Progress in completion of projects

(B) Short creation of Irrigation Potential/Non-utilisation of created
Irrigation Potential ...

(C) Deficiencies in Planning and Approval of AIBP Projects ........
(D) Poor Project Execution .....

(E) Poor Financial Management...
V___ Funding pattern under AIBP

(A) Poor Contractual Management
(B) Monitoring and Evaluation ..
VL Deficiencies in Planning and Approval

जा, Poor Progress in completion of projects ..

Viti. Shortfails in creation and utilization of Irrigation Potential ....

IX. Poor Financial Management .......

X. Poor Project Execution...

Xi. Monitoring and Evaluation .
XII. Western Kosi Canal Project and Sone Canal Project (Bihar)
XIII. Agra Canal Project...
XIV. Tapkara Reservoir Project (Jharkhand) ...
XV. Mahi Bajaj Sagar Project (Rajasthan)...
XVI. Velligallu Reservoir Project (Andhra Pradesh) ....

XVI. Champamati irrigation Project and Modernization of Jamuna Project
(Assam) हि पर ae

PAGE

ii)
vy)
Wii)

Ub के

DARHDuUuua

a

x


(i)

XVIIL Upper Krishna Stage-I! (Kamataka) ...
XIX. Patgaon Project (Maharashtra)
XX. Rongai Valley (Meghalaya)
XXi. Indira Gandhi Nahar Project Stage-I! ..
XXII Bansagar Canal (U.P.) ...
XXIII. Rajghat Canal (U.P.)...
XXIV, Miscellaneous .................-
XXV. Actual site photographs of the incomplete फछाणुं*०5...................-

PART II

Observations and Recommendations...

APPENDICES

I. Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2010-11) held on 21st September, 2010. ...

Il. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2010-11) held on 29th September, 2010. .... AMA

वा... Minutes of the Twenty-third sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2010-11) held on 15th February, 2011

PAGE

49


COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2010-11)

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha
Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Dr. Baliram
. Shri Ramen Deka
. Shri Naveen Jindal
. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Dr. M. Thambidurai
14, Shri D. Venugopal
15, Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli

Rajya Sabha

CP 9० ३ 9 ए क# ४० ७

*16. Vacant
17. ShriN. Balaganga
18. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
19. Shri Kalraj Mishra
20. ShriN.K. Singh
21. Shri Tiruchi Siva
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Devender Singh तू Joint Secretary
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary

*Vacancy occurred vice Shri Ashwani Kumar has been appointed as Minister of State w.ef
19th January, 2011 i

i)


INTRODUCTION

1, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee (2010-11), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Thirty-first Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (4187)? based on the C&AG Report
No. 4 of 2010-11 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil) relating to the Ministry
of Water Resources.

2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India was laid on the
Table of the House on 7th May, 2010.

3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Water
Resources on the subject at their sittings held on 21st and 29th September, 2010. The
Committee considered and finalized the Thirty-first Report at their sitting held on
15th February, 2011. The Minutes of the sittings form Appendices to the Report.

4. For facility of reference, the Observations and Recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.

5. While taking the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry on
2150 September, 2010 the Committee expressed their unhappiness over lack of adequate
preparedness on the part of the officers of the Ministry in properly responding to the
queries of the Members on such an important subject. The Committee advised the
officers of the Ministry to acquaint themselves thoroughly with the subject and come
better prepared for the next sitting. Accordingly, the Committee met again on
29th September, 2010 and completed the evidence of the representatives of Ministry of
Water Resources.

6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Water Resources for tendering evidence before the Committee and
furnishing information that the Committee desired in connection with the examination
of the Subject.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

New DELHT, DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
21 February, 201 | February, 2011 Chairman,
2 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

vy)


List of Abbreviations containing in Report on ‘Accelerated
Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)’

ACA Additional Central Assistance

AIBP Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme
BCR Benefit Cost Ratio

CAD Command Area Development

CBWR Compulsory Basic Water Rates

CCA Culturable Command Area

10४ | Cross Drainage

CLA Central Loan Assistance

DPA Drought Prone Area

DPR Detail Project Reports

DTW Deep Tube Well हि

FE Executive Engineer

E-in-C Engineer-in-Chief

ERM Extension, Renovation & Modernisation
FIP Flow Irrigation Project

FTP Fast Track Project

0665 General Category States

Gol Government of India

ha Hectare

P Irrigation Potential

K.T. Weirs Kolhapur Type Weirs

KBK Areas falling within erstwhile Koraput, Bolangir and Kalahandi
Districts of Orissa

Ls Lift Irrigation Scheme

MIPs Minor Irrigation Projects

MoEF Ministry of Environment and Forests.
MoF Ministry of Finance

MoU Memorandum of Understanding

MoWR Ministry of Water Resources

NHAI National Highways Authority of India
NPCC National Project Construction Corporation
RST Remote Sensing Technology

(vii)


SCS
SoE
SRSWOR
UCs
UIP
WUAs
SWMI
DDP
DPAP
CWC
NSCS
MoSPI
TAC
NRSC
CADWM
SSNNL_
O&M
WPLC
SCMP
SWLLC
ALBC
KBJNL
MILK
IBWL

(viii)
Special Category States
Statements of Expenditure
Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement
Utilisation Certificates
Ultimate Irrigation Potential
Water User Associations
Surface Water Minor Irrigation
Desert Development Programme
Drought Prone Area Programme
Central Water Commission.
Non Special Category States
Ninistry of Statistics and Programme Implementatio
Technical Advisory Committee
National Remote Sensing Centre
Command Area Development and Water Mana». aent
Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Limited
Organisation & Management
Western Parallel Link Canal
Sone Canal Modernization Project
Sone Western Low Level Canal
Almatti Left Bank Canal
Krishna Bhagya Jala Nigam Limited
Maja-Jergo Link Canal
Indian Board of Wild Life


REPORT
PARTI

BACKGROUND ANALYSIS

L Introductory

Irrigational infrastructure forms the lifeline of Indian agricultural productivity and
food security. The creation of irrigational potential both conventional as well as
modern infrastructure have so far played a crucial role in increasing the agricultural
production in the country. The AIBP was conceived in the year 1996 in order to
provide financial assistance to States to complete various ongoing projects in the
country so that envisaged irrigation potential of the project could be created and
irrigation could be started within 4 years. The Central assistance of 50% of the cost
was provided to States as loan. Projects with estimated cost of Rs.1000 crore (or more)
only were eligible under AIBP. Since its formulation, the terms of the programme have
been widened and liberalized over time as under:

1997—Muitipurpose projects costing over Rs.500 crore were covered.

1999- Projects in Area falling within erstwhile Koraput, Bolangir and Kalahandi
Districts of Orissa (KBK) districts in initial stages covered. MI schemes of
special category States and KBK districts covered.

2002-—Fast track projects to be completed in 1-2 working seasons were
covered.

2004—FTP time limit extended to 3 working seasons. Time limit for major and
medium projects of 3-4 years.

2005—Inclusion of MI schemes of non-special category States with potential
of more-than 100 hectares with preference for tribal and drought prone areas
wholly benefiting dalit and adivasis.

FTP to be completed in two years.
One for one condition specified for major/medium projects (with exception).

2006—A!I major/medium/ERM projects with Planning Commission clearance,
which were in advanced stage of construction and could be completed in
4 years.

MI schemes of non special category States to be completed in two years.
Development cost of MI schemes raised to Rs.1.5 lakh.
FTP concept removed.

For Surface Water Minor Irrigation (SWMI) Schemes, the development cost
per hectare of the scheme prescribed in the guidelines effective from December
2006 was a maximum of Rs. 1.00 lakh per hectare. Keeping in view the persistent
demands of the various State Governments in view of increasing cost of


2

construction materials and land, the development cost was raised to Rs.1.50
lakh per hectare with effect from 8th October 2007;

Cabinet Committee on Infrastructures in its meeting held on 130 May 2010
considered proposal of the Ministry of Water Resources for further relaxation
in the AIBP guidelines and approved the following proposals;

@ Allowing funding for three projects (one project of Karnataka and two projects
of Punjab) benefiting areas under Desert Development Programme (DDP)
under AIBP at par with projects benefiting Drought Prone Area Programme
(DPAP) area and;

e@ Enhancing present cost norm for surface water minor irrigation schemes from
Rs.1.50 lakh per hectare to Rs. 2.00 lakh per hectare for the purpose of inclusion
of projects under AIBP with the condition that wherever the estimated cost of
the project is more than Rs.1.50 lakh per hectare, the AIBP assistance would
be limited to the cost norm of Rs. 1.50 lakh per hectare.

2. On the questions of food security and the need to increase the irrigation potential
of the country the Committee were informed that according to the Working Group for
Water Resources that rapid harnessing of water resources was the prime objective of
the Government and the successive plans after Independence. The State Governments
were encouraged to expeditiously formulate and develop water resources projects for
irrigation, flood control, hydro-power generation, drinking water supply, industrial
and other miscellaneous uses, and a large number of dams, barrages, hydro-power
structures, canal network etc. were constructed all over the country in successive
Five Year Plans. The storage backed projects provide assured irrigation, hydro-power
generation, water for domestic and industrial use, and also enabled flood moderation.
The net impact of all these measures are: despite a three fold increase in the population
since independence, India is now self-sufficient in food production, has sufficient
buffer stock of foodgrains to be able to bear the brunt of consecutive years of drought;
and is also moderately exporting foodgrains. The target now is to grow enough food
and fiber for a population of over 1000 millions now, and around 1600 millions in the
year 2050. As per this report, the estimated requirement for irrigation in 2050 is
807 Billion Cubic Metres. Hence, there is need to construct more storage based irrigation
projects in the country for food security of the country.

Asked about the loss of vegetation and cultivation, if any due to short creation of
irrigation potential, the Ministry through a written note informed that:

“It was not possible to provide this information as each project had different
intensity of irrigation and cropping pattern. Further, most of the projects provide
supportive irrigation which mean that irrigation still depends on rainfall but in
case of failure of rainfall, irrigation was provided from the irrigation projects”.

3. However, the rate of creation of additional irrigation potential which was
2.04 million ha. per annum from the beginning of the 6th plan in 1980 till the end of the
rolling plan in 1992 came down sharply to 1.03 million ha. per annum during the 7th plan
(1992-1997). In addition, a sudden decline was also noticed in the rate of creation of
irrigation potential as well as allocation of funds to the irrigation sector in the States.


3

Responding to this sudden decline, the Government of India launched the ‘Accelerated
Irrigated Benefits Programme (AIBP)’ in 1996-97 as an Additional Central Assistance
(ACA) Programme for accelerating the implementation of large, major and multipurpose
irrigation projects which were beyond the resource capability of the States, and to
complete the ongoing major and medium irrigation projects which were in an advanced
stage of completion. This programme was later extended to cover surface water Minor
Irrigation (MI) projects in Special Category (SC) States and such projects satisfying
special criteria in other States. Special category States are North Eastern Region
(including Sikkim), J&K, Uttarakhand & Himachal Pradesh.

4. From 1996-97 to 2007-08, 253 major, medium and ERM (Extension, Renovation &
Modernisation) projects and 6855 Minor Irrigation (MI) projects were approved under
AIBP; the Ultimate Irrigation Potential (UIP) of these projects was 10.49 million hectare,
which represented about 8 per cent of the country’s total UIP. During this period,
Government of India provided funding of Rs. 26,719 crore for such projects. Out of
which Rs. 16,720 crore were in the form of Central Loan Assistance (CLA) and
Rs. 9, 999 crore as grant.

The Committee have been informed that AIBP is also meeting part of the requirement
of the Bharat Nirman Programme under which a major thrust is laid on irrigation sector.
AIBP has also been providing assistance to the major/medium projects under the
Prime Ministers Package for agrarian distressed districts. A part of the funds are also
earmarked for the scheme of National Projects for dedicated funding to the projects
having international, interlinking and large irrigation potential aspects.

II. Inclusion of New Project under 4187

5. The Committee have been intimated that except for projects located on Intra-
State rivers, Detail Project Report (DPR) of all the major/medium projects are required
to be prepared by the State Governments after carrying out necessary field investigation
and the DPR is required to be submitted to the Central Water Commission for appraisal.
As per current procedure, all the requisite clearances such as environmental & forest
clearance, wild life clearance, clearance from Ministry of Tribal A ffairs for resettlement
& rehabilitation plan etc. are required to be obtained by the State Government to the
extent they are required for the project and the same are required to be submitted to the
Central Water Commission (CWC). Clearance from State Finance Department is also
required to be obtained for the finalized estimated cost of the project. After receipt of
all these clearance and on finding that project is techno-economically viable as per
norms set up, the project proposal is placed before Advisory Committee of Ministry of
Water Resources on Irrigation, Flood Control & Multipurpose Projects for according
techno-economic clearance. After techno-economic clearance, investment clearance
of the Planning Commission is required on receipt of which, State Government if it so
wishes, may submit proposal for inclusion of the project in the AIBP through field
units of the CWC. The proposal is examined at field Units, CWC Headquarter and
finally by the Ministry of Water Resources in Project Section and Finance Desk of the
Ministry and if found in order, is recommended for inclusion in the AIBP. Ifthe project
benefits Drought Prone Area Programme (DPAP)/Tribal Area/DDP area/Flood Prone
areas, the proposal is sent to the Planning Commission by the PR Section for
confirmation of such areas and grant is recommended as per recommendations of the


4

Planning Commission. Normally, this exercise (consultation with the Planning
Commission) is required to be carried out only at the time of inclusion of the project/
project component in the AIBP.

IIL Surface Water Minor Irrigation Schemes

6. These schemes are techno-economically cleared by the State Governments
themselves. The State Governments submit proposals directly to the Ministry of Water
Resources. There are two classes of States under AIBP namely Special Category
States (SCS) and Non-Special Category States (NSCS). The schemes of SCS are not
required to be sent to the Planning Commission and on receipt of proposals, the
Ministry itself examines proposal and recommend to Finance Desk of the Ministry. As
far as, schemes in NSCS are concerned, only schemes benefiting DPAP/Tribal areas
are considered for inclusion in AIBP and the proposal is required to be sent to the
Planning Commission for confirmation of DPAP/Tribal areas. The recommendations of
grant to be released by the MOWR are based on recommendations received from the
Planning Commission.

IV. Audit Review

व. The Committee have learnt that earlier Audit report on AIBP (No. 15 of 2004)
revealed numerous instances of discrepancies and shortcomings in the implementation
of the AIBP such as poor progress in completion of projects, short creation of Irrigation
potential/non-utilization of created Irrigation potential, cost and time over-runs,
injudicious selection of projects (despite elaborate guidelines), diversion and misuse
of funds, poor contract management and also repeated modifications of the programme
resulting in dilution of the original focus.

It is in this backdrop, a follow-up audit was conducted to assess whether the
performance of AIBP had improved, and also whether the key issues highlighted in the
earlier report have appropriately been addressed.

The performance audit of the implementation of AIBP was carried out for the period
2003-04 to 2007-08, covering 70 major and medium irrigation projects, and 346 Minor
irrigation projects in 26 States.

The main objectives of the Performance Audit were to ascertain whether:—

@ The programme was well-designed and the investment focus and priorities
were well defined and managed;

@ Projects taken up under AIBP were completed within the stipulated time and
cost, and the Irrigation Potential targeted under AIBP was actually created
and effectively utilized;

@ The process for planning & approval of new projects was adequate and
effective, and the AIBP guidelines were fully complied with;

Adequate funds were released on time and were properly utilized;

The desired Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) was achieved, and the actual BCR was
properly evaluated and assessed;

® Individual projects were executed in an economical, efficient and effective
nanner; and


5

@ = The mechanism for monitoring and evaluation of AIBP projects was adequate
and effective.

The Committee have been intimated that Important findings of the Performance
Audit Review were as under:—

(A) Poor Progress in completion of Projects

8. The status of completion of projects taken up under AIBP continued to be poor.
Of the 253 major, medium and Extension, Renovation and Modernization (ERM) projects
sanctioned under AIBP between October, 1996 and March, 2008, only 100 projects
were reported as completed. Out of 70 major and medium projects, 12 “reportedly
complete” projects were found to be actually incomplete or non-commissioned.

(B) Short creation of Irrigation Potential/Non-utilisation of created Irrigation
Potential

9. Out of 41 major, 29 medium and 346 minor irrigation projects test-checked by the
Audit, the targeted irrigation potential was not created in 25 major, 19 medium and
189 minor irrigation projects, even the Irrigation Potential reported as created was not
being utilized fully.

The Committee desire to know the plan-wise targets and actual in regard to the
AIBP Scheme. In response, the Ministry intimates that the targeted irrigation potential
for Eleventh Plan for AIBP was only available with the Ministry which was 58.46 lakh
hectares. Against this, actual achievement up to 2009-10 is 22.81 lakh ha.

(© _ Deficiencies in Planning and Approval of AIBP Projects

10. Many of the AIBP projects were approved by the Ministry of Water Resources
and investment clearances were granted based on incomplete reports and improper
assessments. Many preliminary reports were prepared without field survey and
investigation. Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) were either found to be deficient in
several aspects or were not available. The Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) which is critical for
assessing the economic viability of an irrigation project was either not assessed at all
or overstated in almost half of the test-checked projects.

(D) Poor Project Execution

11, Projects were taken up for execution without ensuring the fulfilment of the
prerequisites such as land acquisition, forest & environmental clearance etc. Incorrect
phasing of project components i.e. incomplete main/branch canals, distributaries and
water courses were noticed. Consequently, despite the incurring of substantial
expenditure the benefits of irrigation water were not fully available to the targeted
beneficiaries.

© Poor Financial Management

12. As per the analysis of the State-wise grants released under AIBP for Major/
Medium Irrigation Projects, 75 to 95 per cent of the AIBP grants released during
2005-06 to 2007-08 were released to just six States (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Orissa). These 6 States were obtaining the vast


6

majority of AIBP grants without corresponding performance in terms of project
completion. Moreover, the Nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Water Resources had failed
to enforce the provisions of the AIBP guidelines for converting the grant component
into a loan in case of failure to complete the projects in time. There was a substantial
‘rush of expenditure’ on AIBP projects in the last quarter/month (March) of the financial
year, which was also indicative of poor financial management.

V. Funding pattern under AIBP

13. The Committee have been given to understand that major/medium projects of
normal areas are eligible for 25% grant. Minor Irrigation schemes of normal areas are
not eligible for inclusion in the AIBP. Major/medium projects and minor irrigation
schemes of special category States are eligible for 90% grant. The Undivided Koraput,
Bolangir and Kalahandi districts of Orissa are considered at par with special category
States for funding under AIBP. Major/medium projects benefiting Drought Prone Area
Programme (DPAP)/Tribal areas and flood prone areas are eligible for 90% grant
assistance. Surface Water Minor Irrigation (M1) schemes of (Non-Special Category
States) NSCS benefiting DPAP/Tribal areas are also eligible for 90% grant assistance.
Cabinet has accorded specific approval for 3 projects benefiting Desert Development
Programme (DDP) areas for 90% grant assistance.

The Committee desired to know what were the actual against the targets in regard to
short creation of potential in the six States mentioned above. The Ministry in this
regard intimated as under:—

“The targeted potential of AIBP assisted projects (Major/medium) and
potential created up to March 2009 is given in the following table:

(In lakh hectares)

SI.No. State Target Potential Potential
created
1. Andhra Pradesh 15.18 4.70
2. Gujarat 18.29 5.17
3. Karnataka 877 4.54
4. Madhya Pradesh 756 2.73
5. Maharashtra 971 441
6 Orissa 5.10 1.46
(A) Poor Contractual Management

14, Grant of undue benefits to contractors amounting to Rs. 186.89 crore in 14 States
viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Manipur, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal as well
as cases of unauthorized/irregular expenditure of Rs. 403.83 crore in 17 States viz.
Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West
Bengal was noticed. In addition, other cases of irregular contractual management were
also detected in 12 major/medium and 28 minor irrigation projects.


(B) Monitoring and Evaluation

15. The Central Water Commission (CWC) is mandated to carry out the monitoring
visits tomajor/medium projects at least twice a year. However, the actual percentage of
monitoring visits was ranged from only 66 to 73 per cent during 2002-08.

As regards the monitoring of minor irrigation projects, CWC had made monitoring,
visits to only 57 minor irrigation projects in 10 States out of the 8699 minor irrigation
projects sanctioned under AIBP. The monitoring of AIBP projects at the State and
Project levels was deficient. Apart from this, the evaluation study of AIBP projects
was conducted by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI1)
but the reports of the study were not circulated to the States/implementing agencies
for necessary remedial action. Moreover, the Remote Sensing Technology (RST) has
not been used in most of the States to monitor the progress of AIBP projects.

These issues along with the other related matters pertaining to the implementation
of the programme have been discussed at length in the succeeding paragraphs.

भा. Deficiencies in Planning and Approval

16. Preliminary reports, which form the first stage in the process for obtaining
investment clearance for the irrigation projects from the Planning Commission, were
deficiently prepared in 11 out of 28 major/medium projects approved during 2003-08;
The Committee have been informed that many preliminary reports were prepared without
field survey and investigation and anticipated benefits and expected outcomes.

Subsequently, the Committee through a post evidence reply was intimated by the
Ministry that concept of the preliminary report was introduced from 2002 in order to
have a quick assessment of feasibility of the project. It was not mandatory on the part
of States to prepare preliminary report and get it approved. However, in each case, it
was essential to prepare detailed project report after field investigation and get it
appraised from CWC and then follow up with investment clearance of the planning
commission to make the project eligible for inclusion in the AIBP.

17. In terms of the “Guidelines for submission, appraisal and clearance of Irrigation
and Multipurpose Projects - 2002” issued by the CWC, the Detailed Project Reports
(DPRs) should be prepared in accordance with the applicable Indian standards and
guidelines issued by the Ministry of Water Resources and Central Water Commission
incorporating broad aspects such as physical features, Inter-state/International aspects,
surveys and investigations, hydrology, revenues, Benefit Cost Ratio and financial
return, environmental and ecological aspects, financial resources and estimates, flood
control and drainage, Irrigation planning, etc. However, the Committee noted that the
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) were either found to be deficient in several aspects or
were not available. The Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR), which is critical for assessing the
economic viability of an irrigation project was either not assessed at all or overstated
in almost half of the test-checked projects. Moreover, in many projects, the proposed
cropping pattern (which is critical to determination of incremental benefits and BCR)
were not adapted in consultation with the State Agriculture Departments and were not


8

based on soil surveys of the command area, casting further doubts on the calculated
BCR and the economic viability of the projects approved under AIBP.

18. As regards the measures/steps taken by the Ministry of Water Resources on the
above mentioned aspects, the Ministry in a note stated as under :—

“On receipt of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) from the State Governments,
various aspects of the project proposals are examined in Central Water Commission
and Central agencies concerned. In order to assess the economic viability, the
following parameters are also examined. (i) approval of cropping pattern by the
State Agriculture Department based on the soil survey of the command area,
(ii) Approval of agriculture production details 1.९. yield per hactare, cost of
inputs and rates of produce used for counting the irrigation benefits into
monetary terms by the State Agriculture Department, (iii) Agricultural production
in the command in pre and post project stage are based on the approved data as
mentioned above. In addition, once the technical aspects of the project are
firmed up and agricultural and other economic data as mentioned above are
submitted by the project authorities duly approved/vetted by the State Agriculture
Department concerned, Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) of the project is worked out for
the finalized cost estimate as per the approved guidelines. DPR of the project is
also sent to the Ministry of Agriculture for examination. Ministry of Agriculture
is also represented in the Advisory Committee which gives techno-economic
clearances to the project. This mechanism will be strengthened to do a more
detailed analysis of BC ratio and so far as major/medium projects are concerned,
as per prevailing guidelines of the Ministry of Water Resources for preparation
of Detailed Project Report (DPR), cropping pattern suggested by the State
agriculture department has only been considered in the DPR. Soil survey is also
an integral part of the DPR. DPR of minor irrigation projects is approved by the
State Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) mentioning that the cropping pattern
adopted in the project is vetted by the State agriculture department. It is being
ensured that there should be a representative of the Ministry of Water Resources
in the State TAC.”

The aforesaid statement suffers from several deficiencies as pointed out in part of
Part-II of this Report.

In regard to the preliminary Report, field investigation and rehabilitation aspects,
the Committee was intimated in a written note as under:

“Concept of the preliminary report was introduced from 2002 in order to have a
quick assessment of feasibility of the project. It is not mandatory on the part of States
to prepare preliminary report and get it approved. However, in each case, it is essential
to prepare detailed project report after field investigation and get it appraised from
CWC and then follow up with investment clearance of the planning commission to
make the project eligible for inclusion in the AIBP. The issue of court cases generally
arises in respect of land acquisition or resettlement and rehabilitation aspects of the’
project which cannot be fully avoided. However, efforts are made to avoid such situation
by paying prevailing market rate of the land to the project affected persons”.


VII. Poor Progress in completion of projects

19. Audit scrutiny has revealed that the completion rate of projects under AIBP
continued to be poor. Out of 253 major, medium and Extension Renovation Maintenance
(ERM) projects sanctioned under AIBP between October 1996 and March 2008, only
100 projects were reported as completed. However, of the 70 major and medium projects
based on audit sampling, 21 projects were reported as completed, 12 of these “reportedly
complete” projects were found to be actually incomplete or non-commissioned. Apart
from this, the project-wise data regarding actual utilization of Irrigation Potential
reportedly created was not furnished by the Ministry. Consequently, Audit could not
ascertain the contribution of AIBP in terms of created potential which was actually
utilized (i.e. irrigation water actually reaching the targeted beneficiaries).

As regards minor irrigation projects, while about 37 percent of the projects
sanctioned under AIBP were reportedly complete, the authenticity of completion of
individual Minor Irrigation projects could not be verified due to the non-availability of
the detailed project-wise data for creation/utilization of Irrigation Potential of Minor
projects with the Ministry.

Actual site photographs of some of the incomplete projects at the time of finalization
of the Audit Report have been appended to this Report.

When asked about the measures/steps initiated to investigate the cases of
incomplete/non-commissioned projects, maintenance of project-wise details and the
completion of projects within the budgeted time and cost and optimal utilization of
central funds, the Ministry in a written note intimated as under:—-

“Once the project is declared as completed by the State Government, monitoring
team of the Central Water Commission visits the project to confirm completion of
important components of the project. In order to confirm that there is no
discontinuity in the canal system, remote sensing technique is being applied. In
first instance, 53 major/medium projects were taken up for the study by National
Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) and reports in respect of all the projects have
been received. Findings of the NRSC have been communicated to the respective
State Governments and in cases where deficiencies have been found in the
system, the State Governments have been asked to rectify deficiencies and
CWC monitors the rectification works. Out of 53 projects, deficiencies were
found in 17 projects out of which deficiencies in 9 projects have been rectified.
The Ministry also reviews this aspect in the annual AIBP review meetings.
Further, 50 more projects have been taken up for study by the National Remote
Sensing Centre (NRSC).The Ministry will take up more projects in future for
study by remote sensing as required from time to time. However, the mandate of
the AIBP is for creation of infrastructure upto the level of outlets which cater to
a group of farmers within a block of about 50 ha. The work below the outlet level
for providing field channel and other activities is also required for the created
potential to be fully utilized and these activities are carried out under command
area development and water management programme. In order to ensure this,
the Ministry will consider making command area development works as an integral

part of the project.

The Ministry of Water Resources collect information regarding creation of
irrigation potential annually thro CWC headquarters and field units at the



10

end of working season in June/July. Information regarding utilization of irrigation
potential is collected at the beginning of Five Year Plan. However, as suggested
by the CRAG, guidelines of the AIBP will be amended to get information annually
from the respective State Governments up to five years after completion of the
project. With effect from December, 2006, the proforma of Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) to be provided by the State Government for availing
Central Assistance under AIBP has been modified. The State Governments are
required to provide year-wise irrigation potential target till completion of the
project in the MoU. The AIBP guidelines further provide that in case the targeted
irrigation potential is not achieved during the year, further Central Assistance
will be provided only on achieving the cumulative irrigation potential targeted
upto the previous year. However, sometimes there are constraints in achieving
physical targets as stipulated in the MoU. These constraints relate to land
acquisition problems, contractual problems, geological surprises while
implementing the projects, litigations, resettlement and rehabilitation problems,
works required to be executed by the agencies other than Irrigation Department
such as railway crossings, highway crossings, shifting of utility lines etc. and in
such cases it becomes inevitable to grant extension of time. The extension of
time is granted in cases where the delay has occurred due to reasons beyond the
control of the project authorities. For sanction of extension of time, the State
Governments are required to provide full justification for delay in project
implementation and details of remedial measures taken to tackle the bottlenecks.
Further, the State Governments are also asked to give undertaking that in case of
delay in project completion beyond the approved time limit, the cost overrun, if
any, will be borne by the State Government. The Ministry will further strengthen
monitoring mechanism and will also ask State Governments to set up State level
and project level monitoring committees to address the inter-departmental issues.”

VIII. Shortfalls in creation and utilization of Irrigation Potential

20. In order to ascertain the shortfalls in creation and utilization of irrigation potential
the Committee desired to know from the Ministry that what was the total cultivable area
of the country and also the details as to how much out of it was rain fed and how much
was irrigated area. In this regard the Ministry, in a written note submitted as under:—

“As per statistics of 2007-08, total cultivable land in the country is 182 million
hectares. The ultimate irrigation potential of the country is 140 million hectares.
Of this, irrigation potential created in the country by Tenth Plan (2002-2007) was
102.77 million hectares. The ultimate irrigation potential of the projects under
AIBP is about 1.25 million-hectares of which, irrigation potential of 0.69 million
hectares has been created till 2009-10.”

21. The Committee noted that out of 70 major/medium and 346 minor irrigation
projects test checked, the targeted irrigation potential was not created in 63 percent of
the major/medium and 55 percent of the minor irrigation projects. Even the Irrigation
Potential reported as created was not being utilized fully. In addition to the delayed
work execution, one of the main reasons for short creation/non-utilisation of Irrigation
Potential was lack of synchronization among various project components (i.e. dam
and head-works, main branches and canals, distributaries and water courses).


11

The Committee wanted to know from the Ministry that how much potential was
created through Major/Medium and Minor Irrigation Schemes and where had the
potential gone in case the created potential was under utilized. In this regard, in a post
evidence reply sent the Committee that an additional irrigation potential of 5.486
million hectare had been created through major/medium irrigation projects and an
irrigation potential of 0.454 million hectares had been created through Surface MI
Schemes upto March, 2009. Irrigation potential of 9.82 lakh hectares was estimated to
have been created during 2009-10 up to March, 2010.

22. The Committee further noted that Remote Sensing Technology is an important
tool in assessing and confirming the creation of Irrigation Potential of the selected
projects. In this regard, National Remote Sensing Centre, (NRSC, Hyderabad) helps in
assessing the actual irrigation potential created by the project authorities. NRSC through
its study and survey has pointed out certain gaps in the irrigation canal network
leading to non-continuity of the irrigation water delivery. As per the Audit survey,
various bottlenecks/constraints/impediments have been noticed in the creation of
irrigation potential in various States such as no supporting ayacut registers, non-
completion of canal system, delay in land acquisition, land disputes, non-completion
of branch canals and distributaries, non-construction of canal bridges under rail and
State/National highways crossings, delays in forest and environmental clearances,
slippage of embankments, high vegetation, breakage in canals and defective canal
crossings etc, All these constraints are hindering an optimum utilization of the created
irrigation potential of various projects. ~

23. On being asked about the gaps in the main/branch canals/distributaries, the
findings of National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) and various overlapping structural
bottlenecks in project implementation, the Secretary of Ministry of Water Resources
stated as under:—

“Once the irrigation potential is created for full utilization of the potential, the
Command Area Development Programme helps in creation of the infrastructure
for field channels......... Now, we have started from this year in consultations
with the Planning Commission that every irrigation project must have the
Command Area Development component. In related context, the witness have
also stated that .......... there is gap between potential creation and utilization as
the Command Area Development has a small budgetary provisions of Rs. 600
crore only whereas the budget of AIBP is Rs. 9000 crore. In this regard, the
Planning Commission acceded to the Ministry’s request for inclusion of an
equal matching budgetary provision in the Twelfth Five year Plan so that both
the AIBP and CAD programmes should be taken up simultaneously

In this regard the Ministry have clarified to the Committee through a post evidence
reply that Planning Commission has constituted a Working Group for Water Resources
for the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-2017) who will examine the issue and make suitable
recommendations.

24. The Committee have also been informed during evidence that in 17 cases, NRSC
reported that whatever has been reported by the State is not correct; there are gaps in
between still the state has reported completion. When the Ministry had informed the
State Governments, 9 States have reported that they have filled up the gap by removing



12

the discrepancies. The Ministry have further stated that, all the projects would gradually
be given to NRSC for an accurate satellite monitoring. Accordingly, 50 projects have
been awarded to NRSC.

25. The Committee wanted to know about the current cost of water potential creation
per hectare at present and also at the time of inception of the programme including the
average cost of water potential per hectare. In this regard, the representatives of the
Ministry of Water Resources explained that in the year 1996-97, when this programme
was introduced, the cost of irrigation potential creation per hectare was Rs. 89,000 and
in the year 2009-10 it was Rs. 2.01 lakh per hectare. Further, giving the plan-wise status
of the same, the representatives also informed that during the 8th Plan, the cost of
irrigation potential creation for major and medium projects was Rs. 95,347 per hectare
and for minor irrigation projects, it was Rs. 46,900. In the 9th Plan, it was Rs. 1.20 lakh
per hectare and for minor irrigation, it was Rs. 38,328; during the 10th Plan, it was
Rs. 1.55 lakh per hectare and for minor irrigation it was Rs. 76,000.

In this connection, the Committee enquired about the year-wise targets (lakh
hectares) for the period i.e. 2004-05 to 2009-10. In reply, the Ministry in a written note
have intimated that in 2006-07, the AIBP underwent a change and became a grant
based programme. The MoU pattern was also changed and a system of defining the
irrigation potential targets on a year to year basis in the MoU was introduced for the
first time. The shortfalls in respect of those projects which executed the fresh MoU
under this pattern have been worked out by using the yearly targets as provided in
their respective MoUs. An overall view is presented in the following table:

SIL.No. Year Irrigation potential created Targeted Irrigation Potential
under AIBP in lakh hectares for the year including

shortfall of previous years

as per the guidelines (in lakh

hectares) starting from

1998-99
1. 2004-05 4.96 54.00
2 2005-06 6.00 50.49
3. 2006-07 9.32 46.25
4. 2007-08 644 41.69
5. 2008-09 655 43.46
6. 2009-10 9.82 7681

(The Ministry subsequently have clarified that the column 3 shows irrigation potential created
during the year and column 4 shows cumulative shortfall till the year in question. The column 4
in fact represent the sum total of targets of irrigation potential to be created in the following
years and the shortfall or backlog of potential that could not be created in the previous year. The
value in column 4 of irrigation potential in the table against the year 2009-10 (i.e. 76.81 lakh ha.)
represents the total balance potential to be created in respect of all ongoing projects included
under AIBP and likely to complete in future)


13

26. The Committee noted that Command Area Development Programme which plays
a vital role in the utilization of irrigation potential was initiated in 1974-75 for providing
financial assistance to State Governments for development of adequate delivery system
of irrigation water up to farmers’ fields and other support services for promoting
irrigated agriculture. This involves construction of field channels, providing drainage
where necessary, equitable distribution of water among farmers, land leveling and
shaping etc. with an objective to enhance water use efficiency and production and
productivity of crops thus improving socio-economic condition of farmers, The
programme was restructured and renamed as Command Area Development and Water
Management (CADWM) Programme with effect from Ist April, 2004.

IX. Poor Financial Management

27. The Committee find that Financial Assistance under AIBP Scheme to the States
was initially through loans but subsequently it was given as grants. When asked
specifically to elaborate on this aspect the Ministry informed ina post evidence reply
as under:

“The AIBP started in 1996-97 as a loan assistance programme and continued the
same up to 2003-04. Grant component was introduced in AIBP during 2004-05.
Total loan provided to States during 1996-97 to 2004-05 was Rs.16757.6438 crore
and grant provided was Rs. 10428.117 crore totalling to Rs. 27185.761 crore.”

28. The Committee have learnt that as per the analysis of the State-wise grants released
under AIBP for Major/Medium Irrigation Projects, 75 to 85 percent of the AIBP grants
released during 2005-06 to 2007-08 were released to just six States (Andhra Pradesh,
Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharastra, and Orissa). These States were
obtaining the vast majority of AIBP grants without corresponding performance in terms
of project completion, thus providing an incentive for inclusion of fresh AIBP projects
driven by construction work. Moreover, the Nodal Ministry had failed to enforce the
provisions of the AIBP guidelines for converting the grant component into loan in cases
of failure to complete the projects in time. Further, Audit scrutiny has revealed that
during the period 2003-04 to 2004-05 against the actual expenditure of Rs. 1702 crore
incurred by the Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd. (SSNNL), the State Government of
Gujarat reported an expenditure of Rs. 2987 crore to the Government of India. Thus, the
State Government had overstated the expenditure incurred under AIBP.

Subsequently, the Committee was informed that The Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam
had furnished necessary clarification on the issue which had been examined. The
clarification was found to be satisfactory. However, further action in the matter would
be taken as per final decision on the issue when ATN on the para would be submitted
to the CAG and further comments on it are received from tiem.

On being asked about the steps/measures initiated on various issues such as
ensuring equitable distribution of AIBP funds; applications of the MoU provision for
conversion of grant component to loan; diversion of funds, unauthorized expenditure
and other financial irregularities by the implementing agencies of State Government,


14

evaluating the actual expenditure in respect of Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd.
(SSNNL), the Ministry in a written note stated:—

“The Ministry of Water Resources has amended AIBP guidelines with effect from
December, 2006 making specific provisions for irrigation developments in those
States where irrigation and development are below national average:

* The Planning Commission holds annual plan discussions with the State
Governments and fixes AIBP ceiling for each State as per its fund absorption
capacity. Central assistance to the States is released accordingly.

+ _ There is no restriction in inclusion of new MI Schemes under AIBP provided
they fulfil criteria prescribed in the AIBP guidelines.

* The Ministry of Water Resources has not denied central assistance under
AIBP to any project which has been otherwise found eligible for funding
under the AIBP as per guidelines in force.

+ The projects of the States having irrigation developmeat below national
average may be included in AIBP in relaxation to one to one criteria of inclusion
of new projects in AIBP.

* Projects benefiting drought prone/tribal areas may also be included in AIBP
in relaxation to one to one criteria.

*. The issue will be discussed and pursued with State Governments in respect
of States where irrigation development is low and below national average.

+ The Ministry of Water Resources holds annual review meetings with the
State Governments to review performance of State Government under AIBP
and their physical and financial programme for coming year. They are
encouraged to submit AIBP proposals for ongoing as well as new projects as
quickly as possible so that flow of funds starts as early as possible.

Central Assistance under AIBP is not released to projects if the project is delayed
beyond the time limit specified in the MoU. The State Government is required to
justify the delay and seek extension of time by providing detailed satisfactory
reasons for delay in project completion and remedial measures taken by them to
remove bottlenecks in project completion. Now, the State Governments are also
being asked to provide undertaking that any further cost overrun occurring due
to time overrun beyond the approved time will be borne by the State Government.
Sometimes there are valid and justified reasons occurring in project completion
such as land acquisition problems, resettlement and rehabilitation problems,
contractual problems, geological surprises during project construction, delay in
completion of works to be taken up by other than water resources/irrigation
department such as railway crossings, highway crossings shifting of utility lines
etc. The Ministry of Water Resources will review éach delayed project in above
con‘ext and if required, the provision of guidelines for conversion of grant into
Joan: will also be considered for enforcement. During AIBP review meetings held in
July/August, 2010 this year, the provision of guidelines has been reiterated to
State Governments.

The Ministry of Water Resources have put in place a mechanism to check diversion
of funds, unauthorized expenditure and other financial irregularities. The Utilisation
Certificates in respect of Central Assistance related to the States is required to be


15

signed by the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries (Water Resources/Irrigation
Departments) of the concerned State Departments and works executed under
programme are also examined by the CWC with reference to programme furnished
by the State Governments with the AIBP proposals. There is provision in the
AIBP guidelines that the State Government will furnish Audited Statement of
Expenditure incurred on AIBP to the Ministry of Water Resources within nine
months of the completion of the financial year. The provision will be enforced to
ensure financial discipline. In the AIBP review mectings held during July/August,
2010, the States were clearly advised that they will have to furnish the Audited
Statement of Expenditure since the next financial year.

As regards the financial irregularities, the SSNNL has furnished detailed replies to
the observations contained in the CAG report which is being examined. The facts
stated in the report are being verified and remedial action will be taken accordingly.”

29. On the feasibility of conducting joint audit for the AIBP Projects, the Ministry in
a post evidence reply intimated that the Audit of the accounts of the projects were
carried out by the Auditor Generals of the State Governments and there was no
mechanism to carry out joint audit of the project.

X. Poor Project Execution

30. The Committee have been informed that 11 Major, 10 Medium and 22 Minor
Irrigation Projects were taken up for execution without ensuring the fulfilment of the
prerequisites such as land acquisition, clearance from forest and environmental
departments in 12 States. Apart from this, numerous instances of incorrect phasing of
project components ie. dam section was incomplete, but main/branch canals were
completed/nearly completed; main/branch canals were completed, but work of
distributories and water courses had not been taken up; main and branch canals had
been constructed in patches, with gaps (particularly in the initial reaches). Consequently,
despite the incurring of substantial expenditure, the benefits of irrigation water were
not fully available to the targeted beneficiaries.

31. It has also been observed that three level arrangement i.e. Water User
Associations, Distributary Level Associations and Minor Irrigation Project Level
Councils play an important role in the execution and post-completion maintenance of
the projects. However, such 3 level arrangement was either absent or practically non-
functional in 18 Major, 12 Medium and 194 Minor Irrigation Projects test checked in
21 States. As such, assets created under AIBP were not being accorded due priority,
and arrangements for handing over completed projects to farmers/water user
associations had not been operationalised in many projects.

32. The Committee wanted to know from the Ministry about the steps taken to
ensure the fulfillment of the essential prerequisites i.e. land acquisition, clearance from
Forest and Environmental Departments; setting up of Water Regulatory Authorities
by the State Governments for the post-completion maintenance of projects; three level
arrangement i.e. Water user Associations, distributory level societies and Minor
Irrigation Project Level Councils for the maintenance of project assets. Replying to
various queries of the Committee, the Ministry in a written note intimated as under:


16

“Land acquisition is not a pre-requisite for according techno-economic clearance
to the project. Now it is proposed that Central Assistance under AIBP will be
released pari-passu with land acquisition required for carrying out work of the
coming year. It is also to be stated here that no techno-economic clearance is
now-a-days accorded without State Government furnishing all the required
statutory clearances such as forest, environment, wild life and R&R plan.

So far, two States namely Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh have set up Water
Resources Regulatory Authority/Commission. The Government of Andhra
Pradesh has enacted the Andhra Pradesh Water Resources Regulatory
Commission Act and process of setting up of the Regulatory Commission has
been initiated. The matter has been pursued with States.

The Ministry of Water Resources Proposes to incorporate a clause on
maintenance of assets created under AIBP in the MoU being signed by the State
Government for availing central assistance under AIBP to the effect that they
will make adequate provision in the State Budget for O&M =f the project.

The aspect of participatory irrigation management and constitution of water
users associations is not covered under AIBP but is covered under CADWM
programme. The Ministry has circulated a model bill to. "' the States or enactment
of a law on participatory irrigation management and cuustitution of water users
association.15 States have already enacted the law and 56,934 water users
associations have so far been formed. The matter is being pursued with the
other State Governments. The State legislations provide for 3-tier mechanism
for major/medium projects except in Goa and Sikkim in which only single tier
mechanism has been provided and in Bihar only 2-tier mechanism has been
provided.”

XI. Monitoring and Evaluation

33. Audit scrutiny has revealed that the Central Water Commission (CWC) is
required to carry out monitoring/field visits to major/medium projects at least twice a
year. However, it was found that the actual percentage of monitoring visits ranged
from 66 to 73 percent during 2002-03 to 2007-08. As regards the Surface Water Minor
Irrigation Projects, the monitoring needs to be carried out by the respective State
Governments. However, a sample of such projects is to be checked by the Central
Water Commission as well as the Ministry of Water Resources. Audit found that CWC
had made monitoring visits to only 57 minor irrigation projects out of the total of 8699
minor irrigation projects sanctioned under AIBP. The monitoring of AIBP projects at
the State and Project levels was very much inadequate. Apart from this, in the aftermath
of Monitoring Visits, Monitoring Reports are issued which inter alia contain existing
bottlenecks/constraints in the project implementation and suggestions for speedy
implex ion of the projects. Subsequently, the Monitoring Reports are sent to the
author: <> i.e. Central Water Commission (Hq.), Ministry of Water
Resources, Pic Project Officers of various State Governments
concern! for necessary action. In this context, the audit has found that Remote
’ mnology was not used to monitor the progress of the AIBP Projects in

sand ihe results of the study conducted by the National Remote Sensing
2 were not shared by the Ministry of Water Resources with the respective State
Governments.



17

34, In the light of the deficiencies noticed, the Committee, enquired about the steps/
measures initiated by the Ministry to ensure the stipulated monitoring visits to all
major and medium projects; mechanism to ensure the follow up action on the Monitoring
reports and sharing the results of the monitoring study of NRSC for the effective
implementation of the scheme. The Ministry in their response have stated as under:—

“The Ministry has already issued instructions to the CWC to carry out required
monitoring visits to major/medium projects twice during the year. Instructions
have also been issued that in case, the monitoring visit is not carried out due to
any reasons including physical progress made after last visit, the same should
be recorded and communicated to the CWC (HQ). CWC will also monitor 5% of
minor irrigation projects. The Ministry will also consider engaging independent
agencies such as engineering colleges to monitor all the schemes.

The suggestions contained in the monitoring reports are to be followed by the
respective State Governments and for this, the copies of the reports are sent to
all the important officers associated with project planning and execution. The
implementation of suggestions is reviewed by the CWC from time to time and
particularly during subsequent visits to the project. However, there is no
institutional arrangement in place for coordination amongst the State
Governments, Planning Commission, CWC etc. Compliance of the suggestions
made in the monitoring reports will be pursued vigorously.

The reports of the NRSC are sent to the respective State Governments for action
in cases where deficiencies have been found by the NRSC. The rectification of
deficiencies is also monitored and pursued with States. Out of 53 projects
monitored so far, deficiencies were found in 17 projects out of such rectification
has been done in 9 projects.”

35. In this connection, during evidence the representatives of the Ministry have
informed the Committee that as suggested by the Audit, there must be some State level
Committees to monitor the implementation of the projects and the Ministry would not
support any project in any State unless they set up a Committee and send quarterly
monitoring reports. They have further stated that they are proposing project level
monitoring Committees and without these Committees the Ministry would not extend
any assistance to the States,

INDIVIDUAL PROJECTS/STATE SPECIFIC FINDINGS
XIL Western Kosi Canal Project and Sone Canal Project (Bihar)

36. It has come to the notice of the Committee that in respect of Western Kosi Canal
Project and Sone Canal Project (Bihar), only 0.24 lakh hectares have been utilized out
of created irrigation potential of 1.76 lakh ha due to non-completion of canal system. In
respect of Sone canal project from the same State, irrigation potential of 1.69 lakh ha
created under AIBP could not be utilized due to non-completion of Western Parallel
Link Canal (WPLC). Further non-lining of canals/distributaries resulted in damage to
canals and reduction in quantum of water flow.


18

The Committee wanted to know about the mechanism of measuring 0.24 lakh
hectares. Elaborating on the same, the Ministry intimated through a written note that
irrigated area was either directly measured or the area was taken from the revenue
record of the land. The Ministry also intimated that the surplus water (1.52 lakh hectares)
in the western Koshi canal was available for utilization in the following year.

37. The Committee in this connection, wanted to know whether the Ministry has
initiated any investigation in this regard and sought any clarification from the State
Government. The Ministry in a written note have stated that the clarification of the
State Government of Bihar is as under.

The State Government of Bihar have submitted that:
(Restoration of Western Kosi Main Canal is almost complete.
(ii) The Kamala Siphon had also been completed.

(ii) 4234.58 ha out of 4752.46 ha of land have already been acquired for
distributaries and the balance land is also in advanced stage of acquisition.
After completion of distribution system, full irrigation potential will be utilised.

The Project is likely to be completed in 201 1-12.
The State Government of Bihar have further intimated that:

“(a) As the works of headworks/main canals/branch canals is almost complete
and approximately 88% works of the distributaries is also complete, the Sone
Canal Modernization Project (SCMP) has been treated as complete and closed
for AIBP funding after March 2009. Consequently, the remaining 12% works of
the distributaries and other remaining essential works are proposed to be
completed under State Plan in the shortest possible time.

(b) The work of Western Parallel Link Canal (WPLC) could not be completed due
to the problem of seepage from the Sone Western Low Level Canal (SWLLC)
running very close to it, non-clearance of road cutting from RCD, and delay in
shifting of electric lines and poles by the BSEB. The seepage problem was
referred to a committee of chief engineers, which has submitted its report
suggesting measures to be adopted for construction. Meanwhile as the SCMP
has been closed under AIBP after March 09, the remaining works of WPLC are
proposed to be completed under State Plan at the earliest.”

XIE. Agra Canal Project

38. In respect of modernization of Agra Canal project, the Ministry have intimated
that State Government has submitted completion certificate of this project. They have
also informed that water quality aspects were not covered under AIBP. Further, the
State Government has to ensure that only treated waste water is released in the canal.
State Government has reported that the bridges are under construction by Uttar Pradesh
Project Construction Corporation.

39. On being asked about various deficiencies notice in regard to Agra Canal Project
such as ensuring the water quality aspect, reasons for the delay of construction of


19

bridges, number of bridges to be constructed under MoU, field visits undertaken by

the M

inistry under the MoU and the subsequent reports/findings of the visits. In

response, the Ministry have submitted the following information:—

“The water quality aspect is a project specific issue in Agra Canal Project and
hence not covered under general AIBP guidelines. However, the following
aspects have been suggested by the monitoring team of CWC:—

The growth of weeds etc. was noticed in the various reaches of the Agra
Canal which needs to be cleared at the earliest to facilitate smooth flow of
water for irrigation.

@ The quality of water in Agra Canal needs to be checked for its fitness for

XIV.

irrigation and other usages. Necessary steps are required to be taken by
Project Authorities by liaisoning with polluting organizations/units to stop
disposal of waste material in the canal water.

As per the MoU, there were 49 bridges contemplated to be constructed and
all 49 bridges have been completed.

Monitoring visits are not specified as part of MoU stipulations. However, as
per directions of the Ministry of Water Resources, two monitoring visits per
year are to be undertaken in respect of major/medium projects under AIBP. In
the year 2003-04, two visits were undertaken on 05.06.2003 and 27.10.2003. In
the year 2004-05, two visits were undertaken on 14.05.2004 and 15.01.2005. In
the year 2005-06, two visits were undertaken on 15.09.2005 and 14.02.2006.”

Tapkara Reservoir Project (Jharkhand)

40. The Ministry have stated that Tapkara Reservoir Project (Jharkhand) was
included in AIBP in the year 1997-98. The State has not sought any central assistance
after 2000-01. The project had a potential creation target under AIBP for 1.819 thousand
hectares of which, 1.53 thousand hectares have been reported as created. As the
progress could not be continued due to various difficulties, the project was considered

compl

leted in 2003.

41. Asked about the difficulties faced in the progress of the project and the rationale
behind the declaration of the incomplete project as completed project, the Ministry in
their response have stated in a written reply as under:—

“The headworks of the project were completed before the AIBP assistance was
provided for construction of distributaries and water courses in 1998-99. Except
for Khelga Branch canal & Kindarkela distributary, all other works were completed.
The matter for non-completion of the branch canal and distributary were taken
up by CWC with the Project authorities and they intimated that these could not
be completed due to public objection. The status is same as on today. Since it
was not possible to complete Khelga Branch canal and Kindarkela distributary,
these works were excluded from the scope of AIBP component of the project and
the AIBP component of the project was declared complete by the State of
Jharkhand.”


20

XV. Mahi Bajaj Sagar Project (Rajasthan)

42. In respect of Mahi Bajaj Sagar Project (Rajasthan), the Ministry have stated that
the maintenance of this project including ensuring the availability of water upto the tail
end of the canal system alongwith its maintenance is required to be taken up by the
State Government from their resources. Not ready to bear the responsibility of ensuring
the supply of water till the tail end, the Ministry in this regard intimated the Committee
as under:—

“As per the guidelines of AIBP and the scope of the scheme, only the works for
construction of the irrigation facilities upto the outlet are funded and monitored.
There is no existing mechanism under AIBP for ensuring water availability to tail
end in post-completion of the project. Equitable distribution of water may be
ensured by formation of Water Users Association (WUA).”

XVI. Velligallu Reservoir Project (Andhra Pradesh)

43. Inregard to Velligallu Reservoir Project (Andhra Pradesh), the Committee have
been informed by the Ministry that this project was included in AIBP in 2006-07 with
irrigation potential target of 9.7137 thousand hectares of which full potential creation
has been achieved and resettlement and rehabilitation works were reported as
incomplete.

When enquired specifically about expediting the process of resettlement and
rehabilitation works of the project. The Ministry in their response through a written
reply have stated:—

“As could be ascertained from the latest CWC monitoring report, due to
construction of this project, one village i.e. Velligallu with 5 hamlets namely
(1) Krishnapuram Chinna Thanda (2) Pasalavandla Palli (3) Veligallu Harijanawada
(4) Indukurivandla Palli and (5) Krishnapuram Pedda Thanda will be submerged.

The affected hamlets are proposed to be rehabilitated in two R&R centres.
Estimate for R&R package was proposed as per latest State R&R policy and
subsequent guidelines. Government have accorded administrative approval for
Rs. 1478.00 lakhs vide 0.0. Ms. No. 151 dated 14.12.2005. Since two Scheduled
Tribe hamlets are affected, necessary clearance from Ministry of Tribal Affairs,
Government of India has been obtained for the R&R plan vide letter R. No. 20011/
17/2005 CP&P(NGO) dated 13.7.2006.

R&R Centre No.1 is located at the border of Anantapur District. An extent of
81.14 acres land is procured for R&R Centre-1.

R&R Centre No. 2 is located near the diversion road joining Veligallu-Thumu
Kuntaroad. An extent of 9.28 acres land is procured for R&R Centre-Hl.

Total plots allotted in the two R&R centres for displaced families are 559 out of
which 527 houses were constructed upto 8/2010 by the beneficiaries themselves.
The balance houses to be constructed are 32 Nos. The R&R plan is being
implemented and the expenditure on R&R upto 8/2010 is reported to be Rs. 11.2109
crore. In this expenditure, an amount of Rs. 3.65 crore before AIBP and


21

Rs.7.5609 crore under AIBP were spent. The project authorities have intimated
that the R&R works would be completed by December. 2010.”

XVII. Champamati Irrigation Project and Modernization of Jamuna Project (Assam)

44. As regards Champamati irrigation project and Modernization of Jamuna Project
(Assam) the State Government have stated that the figures of irrigation potential
created/ready for utilization given by irrigation department is reliable as the same are
based on data collected from field information. There is discrepancy due to different
methodologies adopted by Economics & Statistics Directorate.

On being asked about the removal of anomalies/discrepancies, the Ministry in their
response have stated as under:—

“Generally we rely on the data furnished by the Irrigation Department of the
State. However, in case of serious discrepancies, the project can be taken up for
monitoring by NRSA for verification of irrigation potential using remote sensing
technique.”

XVILL Upper Krishna Stage-II (Karnataka)

45. As far as Upper Krishna Stage-II (Karnataka) is concerned, it was reported that
there was shortage in creation of irrigation potential due to delay in construction of
distributaries and non-completion of approach canal works. In response, the State
Government has replied that there was delay in creation of irrigation potential in Almatti
Left Bank Cana! (ALBC) due to dispute raised by the villagers for aligning the canal
through the village.

On being asked about the initiative of State Governments in resolving the dispute
by the villagers, the Ministry in their response have stated as under:—

“This problem has now been overcome by convincing the village leaders that
Krishna Bhagya Jala Nigam Limited (KBJNL) is going to adopt the technology
of excavation of the hard rock by chiselling method which will avoid fly rock and
vibration. Different groups in the village have agreed to cooperate in this regard.”

XIX. Patgaon Project (Maharashtra)

46. The Committee understand that in respect of Kolhapur Type (KT) weirs that
water was being impounded in dam partially since 1989. Balance works were taken
up under AIBP and full storage capacity was created for monsoon 2007. From
October 2007 full capacity water was stored in the dam. The 17 KT weirs were
constructed on the river through State Government funds, 8100 hectares irrigation
was declared immediately after full storage was created. This project comprises
dam and series of 17 no. KT weirs. The irrigation is by lifting of water by farmers
through Lift Irrigation (LI) schemes at farmers cost. As these schemes are to be
constructed by the farmers at their own cost, some period is required for completion
of these LI schemes covering entire command area. This activity is in progress and
the farmers are being motivated to complete the required LI schemes to bring the
entire command area under irrigation.


22

Asked about the reasons for the farmers to develop lift irrigation at their own cost,
the Ministry in their response have stated in a written note:-—

“The prevailing practice in this area is that State Government constructs storage
structures and KT weirs along the river and farmers lift water directly from the
storage created in KT Weirs. The project was formulated keeping in view of the
prevailing practice of the area. There are many such similar projects in the area”.

XX. Rongai Valley (Meghalaya)

47. In regard to this project, the Committee have learnt that this project was
suspended due to various technical and administrative reasons.

Asked specifically to dwell on technical and administrative reasons for the
suspension of the project, the Ministry in their response have stated through a written
note:—

“Technical Reasons:

Considerable command area lies in the flood zone of river Rongai and Jinjiram
close to the confluence of Rongai/Jingiram and Brahmaputra. The command
area is prone to submergence every year without even any of the rivers
experiencing high floods. Also, considerable portion of the command area is
occupied by low lying areas/beels. This may further reduce the actual command
area receiving the benefit of irrigation.

Administrative Reasons:

The main bottlenecks in implementation of AIBP are :
* — Abnormal delay in land acquisition
+ _ Insufficient budget allotment by State Government

* Lack of timely sanction of revised cost estimate by the State Finance
Department.”

XXI. Indira Gandhi Nahar Project Stage-II

48. The Committee have been observed that the project has not been seeking AIBP
assistance since 2006-07. The project is still going on with financial assistance under
12th Finance Commission.

49. Creation of Irrigation Potential was not declared due to the incomplete Pumping
Station/HEM works. Construction of Water Courses is done under Command Area
Development Programme but not under AIBP. State Government has taken up the
works to establish sprinkler Irrigation system in IGNP stage-II lift command in place of
water courses.


23

Asked about the steps initiated for the completion of various components of the
project, the Ministry in their written reply intimated the Committee as under:

“The project was included for AIBP assistance in the year 1997-98. However, the
project has been receiving assistance from Twelfth Finance Commission for last
three years, i.e. from 2006-07 to 2008-09. The proposal for further central assistance
under AIBP from State Government is yet to be received in Central Water
Commission. However, State’s proposal for inclusion of sprinkler irrigation
system under AIBP has been received. The State Governments have been
informed that as per prevailing AIBP guidelines, it will not be possible to provide
central assistance to this component of the project as AIBP funding is restricted
up to Outlet level and sprinkler system is installed below Outlet level.”

XXIL ~~ Bansagar Canal (U.P.)

50. Audit findings reveal that underground water sprouted up in chainage km.40.7-
43.3 of the Maja-Jergo Link Canal (MJLK) stopping further excavation. Further, MJLC
intersected the existing upper Khajuri Left Canal at km 43.050, blocking the latter and
depriving farmers of existing irrigation facilities. The Ministry have stated in their reply
that proposals are being collected from the State Government with regard to various
problems of the project and action shall be taken after the receipt of the proposals.

51. On being asked about initiating any action in this regard, the Ministry in their
written reply intimated that the CWC monitoring team had suggested to the State
Government to take necessary corrective measures to address the problem of
underground water sprouting up in MJLC during the visit to the project in February,
2009. The team also suggested to take the expert opinion in this field. Further, the
construction of head regulator for the link channel has not yet been taken up due to
seepage problem in this area. It was strongly suggested that this work be taken up
immediately and any geo-technical issue related to seepage may be referred to some
expert agencies like IITs.”

52. When enquired further about various issues such as sanctioning of Bansagar
Canal Project, the amount spent on this project till date and also the latest position of
the implementation of the project, the Ministry in a written note have replied that
Bansagar project is joint venture of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Bansagar
Canal project of Madhya Pradesh was accorded investment clearance by the Planning
Commission on 29.11.2001 for estimated cost of Rs. 344.66 crore. The Ministry of
Environment & Forest has accorded clearance to the project in May 2003. Against
targeted potential of 123.634 th hectares included in the AIBP, irrigation potential of
65.934 th hectares has been created up to March 2009. Bansagar canal project of
Uttar Pradesh was accorded investment clearance by the Planning Commission on
29.7.2004 for Rs. 570.35 crore. The latest estimated cost of the project is Rs. 3149.90
crore (cost of works is Rs. 2386.50 crore and Rs. 305.37 crore as direct and indirect
charges and Rs. 158.03 crore to be given to Madhya Pradesh as share cost of the dam)
and expenditure incurred on canal works up to March 2010 is Rs. 1822.91 crore. MoEF
vide its letter dated 1.8.2007 have granted permission for diversion of 180.79 ha forest
land in UP for the construction of Adwa Mejaand Meja Jirgo Link Channel with some
conditions imposed by the Indian Board of Wild Life (IBWL). In compliance of this
Rs. 87.50 crore has been paid to DFO Mirzapur till 3/2009. But forest department of
Uttar Pradesh has not permitted construction of Adwa Meja Link Channel from
km 18.800 to 25.600 which lies under Wild Life Sanctuary due to non fulfilment of


24

one condition of IBWL of rehabilitation of 13 villages from Kaimpour Wild Life
Sanctuary. The Environmental and forest clearance has been accorded by the MoEF
vide its letter dated 19.5.2003.

XXIIL Rajghat Canal (U.P)

53. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that although the project was
declared complete in 2007-08, various works for which 22 MoUs were signed with
UPPCL during 1997-2006 were still incomplete - 3 z1MoUs were rescinded, and
9 MoUs were still to be finalized. Further, only four out of eight crossings and none of
the five bridges over National Highways could be constructed.

On being asked about furnishing the comprehensive details about the project, the
Ministry in their response have stated as under:—

“The Rajghat canal project being constructed by Uttar Pradesh takes off from
right flank of Rajghat dam project on river Betwa. The project envisages
construction of six canal system in U.P.-4 new and 2 involving remodelling of
existing canals to irrigate a CCA of 2,70,520 hectare at 72.7% intensity. The
project was started during the year 1976-77. The components of the project
funded under AIBP include (i) Lower Rajghat canal, (ii) Upper Rajghat canal,
(iii) Jhansi canal, (iv) Jakhlaun Pump canal, and (v) increasing capacity of Betwa-
Hamirpur canals.

The State Government of Uttar Pradesh has reported that project has been
completed”.

XXIV. Miscellaneous

54, The Committee enquired from the Ministry that whether they had ever identified/
analysed the areas or regions in the country which are in the dire necessity of creating
irrigation potential, and where it was imminently needed to improve the productivity of
various crops particularly the food crops. In response, the Ministry in their written
reply have stated that the drought prone and desert areas of the country are considered
the areas in the dire need of irrigation facilities. Specific programme have been
developed for these areas and have been categorized as Drought Prone Area Programme
(DPAP) and Desert Development Programme (DDP). The areas in above categories
have been identified by the Ministry of Rural Development for the country. Specific
provision has been made in the AIBP guidelines for providing irrigation facilities on
priority for DPAP areas as under:—

“1. As per AIBP guidelines, a new major/medium project may be included in the
AIBP on completion of an ongoing project under AIBP on one to one basis.
However, project benefiting DPAP areas may be included in the AIBP in relaxation
to above criteria.

2. Projects benefiting DPAP areas are eligible for 90% grant assistance under
AIBP while for normal areas, the admissible grant is 25%.

Similar dispensation has been provided to three projects benefiting DDP areas
by the Cabinet Committee on Infrastructures. However, to provide this benefit to
all projects of the Country benefiting DDP area, the matter is under consideration
of the Government.”


25

Actual Site photographs of the Incomplete
Projects

Western Kosi Main Canal - Bihar : Siltation in upstream (BIHAR)

Western Kosi- Bihar - Breakage in Saharghat Branch Canal (BIHAR)


—— a! =

Sone Canal Modernisation Project (SCMP) - Bihar : Incomplete Western Parallel
Link Canal (BIHAR)


Sardar Sarovar Project — Gujarat : Vehalam D Minor —- No Water (GUJARAT)

No Water (( AR



nit it
Structure at Rd, km. 42 (MADHYA PRADESH}

MRR TTD sa ad
Thoubal Multipurpose Project - Manipur : Siltation, shrubs/weeds in Canal
(MANIPUR)


4 aA A CANAL SY OWEN AT
DB. “8a km Riv
Granting +
Si, ot no & o 3 pea
4 in Pas * = at
Thoubal Multipurpose Project - Manipur: Non-functional Canai Siphon
(MANIPUR

\gra Canal Project — Uttar Pradesh: incomplete

despite the fact that the project was declared as ८ 7


Jamaged headwork at M} Projection Kanabui
ARUNACHAL PRAL

2 Village, Managar Division
SH



Siltation in upstream of Western Kosi Main Canal (WKMC) at RD 55 Km (BIHAR)

Siltation and vegetation in WKMC at RD 135.45 Km (BIHAR


Incomplete spillway of Nayaki Reservoir Scheme (BIHAR

Damaged embankment of



33

ह# १« Tae
Mukteshwar Project-Dry canal with Weeds and Siltation (GUJARAT)

Work held up due to railway land falling within canal alignment
(HIMACHAL PRADESH)


No water and need for bush clearing at Chainage 319 km of Tapkara Projec
UHARKHAND)

Jottleneck in tail end of Almutti Left Bank Canal of Upper K
KARNAT



Pulamon Distributory of Kallada Irrigation Project — Canal filled with grass and
plantations on the banks (KERALA

Non-initiation of work on Ezuthonipadam Aqueduct over Railway Lir
Project (KERALA)

Muvattupuzha Irrigation


e-~, be —
> g

Lee’ ७ «5. “

ncomplete river closure of Bawanthadi Project ( MADHYA PRAD



37

5s a, :
Pah inate f
SE Nip <a

Incomplete Minors in Krishna Project (MAHARASHTRA)

nal work in progress i Kadakpurna River Project (MAHARASHTRA)



38

Slow progress of canal works in Arunawati River Project( MAHARASHTRA)

Repairs 10 the existing KT weirs in Patgaon Medium Project yet 16 be carried out

(MAHARASHTRA


a ee ™
ee Se Nha

houbal! Multipurpose Project—Siltation & shrubsweeds in canal (MANIPUR)

houbal Multipurpose Project —Non-fuunetic nal syphon at RD25.518km. (MANIPUR


40

Ringdee MI Project—Headwork in progress (MEGHALAY


igkhoi MI Project — Less water at the tail end (MEGHALAYA

Reservoir under construct Saihapui MI Project under Kolasib di
MIZORAM


Narmada Canal Project - Incomplete work in the Inlet of Diggi No. 5 Basan Minor at
tail 3,701 km - Vank Distributory (RAJASTHAN

Narmada Canal Project complete work in the Inlet of Diggi No. 5 Basan Minor at
311 3.70) km =Vank Distnbutory (RAJASTHAN



Narmada Canal Project ~ Incomplete work in the Inlet of Diggi No. 5 Basan Minor 8
tail 3.701 km —Vank Distributory (RAJASTHAN)

Agra Canal Project (UTTAR PRADESH}


Rajghat Canal Project — Incomplete canal crossing bridges of NH-26 at Asaupur
Minor (UTTAR PRADESH)

Bansagar Canal Project (UTTAR PRADESH


Bheeda gul (Gawani MI P ) UTTARAKHAND


Jauk Nagar Main Canal of TBP at Ct
served due to land dispute in Uttar Dina

ett Bank M

hainage 551.20 in Purulia D he work was held up d )



actual bed level was t than the design bed

whict

Chainage 199.89m beyo'

level in Purulia District. Resultantly there was ni w of water.

(The water in picture is rain water) (WEST BENGAL


PART I
Observations and Recommendations

1. The Committee note that irrigation infrastructure forms the lifeline of
Indian agricultural productivity and key to food security, The creation of
irrigation potential both conventional as well as modern infrastructure plays a
crucial role in increasing the agricultural productivity in the country.
Nevertheless, the Committee are distressed to note that the rate of creation of
additional irrigation potential, which was 2.04 million h.a. per annum from the
beginning of the 6th plan in 1980 till the end of the rolling plan in 1992, came
down sharply (० 1.03 million h.a. per annum during the 8th plan. Further, there
was a sudden decline in the rate of creation of irrigation potential as well as
allocation of funds to the irrigation sector in the States. The Committee also
note that the Government of India launched the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits
Programme (AIBP) in 1996-97 as an Additional Central Assistance (ACA)
Programme for accelerating the implementation of large, major and multipurpose
irrigation projects which were beyond the resource capability of the States, and
to complete the ongoing major and medium irrigation projects which were in an
advanced stage of completion. This programme was later extended to cover surface
water Minor Irrigation (MI) projects in Special Category (SC) States and also to
projects in other States satisfying the special criteria. The special category
States are North Eastern Region (including Sikkim), Jammu & Kashmir,
Uttarakhand & Himachal Pradesh. On examination of the subject, the Committee
have found that from 1996-97 to 2007-08, 253 major, medium and Extension,
Renovation & Modernisation (ERM) projects and 6855 MI projects were approved
under 4187 and the Uitimate Irrigation Potential (UIP) of these projects was
10.49 million hectare, which represented about 8 per cent of the country’s total
UIP. During the period stated above, the Government of India provided funding of
Rs. 26,719 crore for such projects, out of which Rs. 16,720 crore were disbursed
in the form of Central Loan Assistance (CLA) and Rs. 9, 999 crore as grant.
However, w.e.f, December, 2006, the AIBP was made a fully grant based
programme.

The Committee are constrained to note that several deficiencies have been
found in the implementation of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme
(AIBP) and as such the implementation is fraught with several deficiencies and
inadequacies. Succinctly, these deficiencies are the poor status of compietion of
projects, reporting of incomplete or non-commissioned projects as complete,
non-accomplishment of the targeted irrigation potential, non-utilization of the
created potentiak and commencement of project execution without ensuring
fulfilment of essential pre-requisites such as land acquisition and obtaining
statutory clearances and non-availability of irrigation benefits to the targeted
beneficiaries even after incurring substantial expenditure. Other important
deficiencies pertain to obtaining of vast majority of AIBP grants by six States
without corresponding performance in terms of project completion, failure of
the Ministry to enforce the provision of converting the grant component into
loan in case of delay in timely completion of projects and ‘rush of expenditure’ on

49


50

AIBP projects in the last quarter of the financial year. Lacunae have also been
noticed in carrying out monitoring visits by the Ministry, non-circulation of
material of the evaluation study of AIBP projects conducted by Ministry of
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPJ) to States/implementing
Agencies for necessary remedial action and an inadequate use of the Remote
Sensing Technology (RST) in most of the States to monitor the progress 04187
projects. These deficiencies, accepted by the representative of the Ministry as
correct during evidence, have been discussed in detail in the succeeding
paragraphs.

2. The Committee’s examination of the subject have revealed substantial
deficiencies in planning, approval and implementation of AIBP. They found that
many projects were approved and investment clearances granted based on
incomplete reports and improper assessments. The Committee note that
preliminary reports were prepared even without conducting field surveys,
investigations, working out anticipated benefits and expected outcomes. The
Committee also found that in terms of the “Guidelines for submission, appraisal
and clearance of Irrigation and Multipurpose Projects — 2002” issued by the
CWC, the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) should have been prepared in
accordance with the applicable Indian standards and guidelines issued by the
Ministry of Water Resources and Central Water Commission incorporating
essential aspects such as physical features, interstate/international aspects,
surveys and investigations, hydrology, revenues, Benefit-Cost Ratio and financial
returns, environmental and ecological aspects, financial resources and estimates,
flood control and drainage, irrigation planning, etc. However, the Detailed Project
Reports (DPRs) were not only found to be deficient on several counts but also
were not available on record. According to the Committee, the Benefit Cost Ratio
(BCR) analysis of projects, so critical for the assessment of economic viability
of the various projects approved under AIBP, was conspicuously not conducted
for many projects.

The Committee take a serious view of the deficiencies in the areas of planning
and approval of AIBP Projects as brought out in the above paragraph. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that comprehensive survey and investigations
should be initiated immediately in regard to all preliminary reports received for
investment clearance. In the opinion of the Committee, the reports based on
simple desk study and without sufficient ground work do not constitute adequate
material on record for according due clearance to the projects. Apparently, the
projects so cleared would be unviable in the jong run and prove to be infructuous
without any benefits to the end users. They also recommend that Detailed
Project Reports (DPRs) forming the basis for techno-economic scrutiny and
approval of major/medium projects must also be insisted upon for al! the projects
as concept papers or simple project proposals should not be treated as sufficient
for such ascrutiny. Further, the AIBP guidelines and the investment clearance
of Planning Commission lay great emphasis on Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) asa
critical tool to assess the economic viability of the project. In this regard, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Water Resources must ensure that


51

BCRs for all projects are properly worked out, based on validated and verifiable
data and assumptions relating to costs, revenues and cropping patterns etc. The
Committee have taken a serious view of the deficiencies in the areas of planning
and approval of AIBP Projects as brought above. The Committee recommend that
survey and investigations should be ensured for all preliminary reports, since
reports based on simple desk study without sufficient ground work are not
adequate for decisions on clearance. Further, DPRs must be insisted on for all
minor irrigation projects, as in the case of major and medium projects, and
concept papers or simple project proposals should not be treated as sufficient for
such scrutiny.

3. Tardy rate of completion of projects under AIBP is another area of concern
for the Committee. Out of 253 major, medium and Extension Renovation
Maintenance (ERM) projects sanctioned under AIBP between October 1996 and
March 2008, only 100 projects were reported as completed. The Committee feel
that the most disquieting fact about these projects is that 12 of these “reportedly
complete” projects were found to be actually incomplete or non-commissioned.
Apart from this, the project-wise data regarding actual utilization of irrigation
potential reportedly created was not furnished by the Ministry. Consequently,
the contribution of AIBP in terms of created potential which was actually-utilized
(ie. irrigation water actually reaching the targeted beneficiaries), could not be
ascertained. The Commtittee is strongly of the view that the Ministry’s
responsibility does not end with mere creation of dams, canals and other
irrigation structures and reported creation of irrigation potential. Since large
amounts of Gol funds are involved, it is the Ministry’s solemn duty to monitor
and verify actual utilization of such irrigation potential, without which the benefits
of irrigation water will not reach the farmers. Consequently, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry continue to treat projects, where the structures
are completed but actual utilization of the targeted irrigation potential is not
confirmed, as non-commissioned. The photographs of the incompleted projects
alongwith brief description have been appended in the Part-I of this Report.

As regards minor irrigation projects, while about 37 per cent of the projects
sanctioned under AIBP were reportedly complete, the authenticity of completion
of individual Minor Irrigation projects could not be verified due to non availability
of detailed project-wise data for creation/utilization of Irrigation Potential of
Minor projects with the Ministry. The Ministry have informed the Committee
that with effect from December, 2006, the proforma of Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) to be provided by the State Government for availing Central
Assistance under AIBP has been modified. According to them, the State
Governments are now required to provide year-wise irrigation potential target
till the completion of the project in the MoU. The AIBP guidelines further.
provide that in case targeted irrigation potential is not achieved during the year,
further Central Assistance will be provided only on achieving the cumulative
irrigation potential targeted upto the previous year. The Committee have been
apprised by the Ministry that on certain occasions there are constraints in
achieving physical targets which are enumerated in the MoU signed with the


52

States. Such constraints are stated to be mainly related to land acquisition
problems, contractual problems, geological surprises, litigations, resettlement
and rehabilitation problems, works required to be executed by the agencies other
than Irrigation Departments such as railway crossing, highway crossings,
shifting of utility lines etc. In this connection, the Ministry have explained that
in such cases it becomes inevitable to grant extension of time and such extension
is granted in cases where the delay has occurred due to reasons beyond the
control of the project authorities. However, the State Governments are required
to provide full justification for delay in project implementation and details of
remedial measures taken to tackle the bottlenecks. The Ministry have also
brought to the notice of the Committee that the State Governments are required
to give undertaking that in case of delay in project completion beyond the approved
time limit, the cost overrun, if any, will be borne by the State Government. The
Committee would take to be apprised of the tangible outcome of such initiatives/
efforts.

4. Notwithstanding the fact that the Ministry have shifted the responsibility
on the State Governments for the delays that occurred in the timely
implementation and completion of the projects, the Committee feel that Ministry
cannot absolve themselves of the responsibility of putting up a well devised
mechanism in place so that the delays are brought to the minimum and projects
are completed in time. The fieid visits undertaken by the Ministry should
invariably take due cognizance of the delays in project implementation and suggest
all out concerted measures to obviate the same.

5. The Committee are concerned to note that there have been several instances
where the incomplete/non-commissioned projects have been certified as
completed projects by the State Government authorities. In this context, the
Committee recommend that the Ministry of Water Resources should initiate
thorough probe into all such cases and should also ensure that there is no
diversion or misuse of funds in these projects. The Committee would like to be
intimated about the project-wise details in this regard within six months of the
presentation of this report.

6. The Committee are aware that the process involved in the land acquisition
for a project is no doubt of a complex and socially sensitive nature. The Committee
strongiy feel that the State Governments should be persuaded by the Ministry to
resolve such issues with due despatch with the avowed objective of achieving the
full benefits of the Accelerated Irrigated Benefits Programme (AIBP). It goes
without saying that funds should be released by the Ministry only after the State
Governments certify that major portion of the land required for the project has
already been acquired and future release of funds should invariably be linked
with the satisfactory progress in land acquisition process. The Committee
would also recommend that an effective institutional mechanism should be
instituted to coordinate with various authorities concerned such as the Indian
Railways and the National Highway Authority of India etc. for the speedy
completion of rail and road crossings.



53

7. The Committee note that out of 70 major/medium and 346 minor irrigation
projects test checked, the targeted irrigation potential was not created in
63 percent of the major/medium and 55 percent of the minor irrigation projegts.
Even the Irrigation Potential reported as created was not being utilized fylly.
The Committee also note that Ministry of Water Resources have provided the
year-wise targets of irrigation potential created since 2004-05. In; this
connection, Irrigation Potential (including the shortfall of previous years in
lakh hectares) created between 2004-05 and 2008-09, the Committee found that
Irrigation Potential has been decreasing year after year. The Committee strongly
recommend that the shortfall of irrigation potential, being a matter of serious
concern, should be addressed to at the highest level so that optimum utilization
of irrigation potential may be realized at the earliest under this programme.

8. In addition to the delayed work execution, one of the main reasons for short
creation/non-utilisation of Irrigation Potential was lack of synchronization
among various project components (i.e. dam & head-works, main branches &
canals, distributaries and water courses). During the examination of the subject,
the Committee also noted several instances where the representatives of the
Ministry and CWC indicated that projects‘had been “deemed” (606 completed on
the basis of 90/95 per cent completion, and the balance work was left to the State
Government for completion. It was also deposed by the CWC representatives that
this was done to facilitate granting of approvals for fresh projects from the State.
The Committee strongly disapprove of this practice. Once Gol funding under
AIBP has been initiated, it is the Ministry’s responsibility to pursue and monitor
its final completion, and projects cannot be “deemed” to be completed, until the
Ministry is satisfied that the full benefits of irrigation water are reaching the
targeted farmers. While the Committee reiterate that new irrigation projects
should be sanctioned to mect the needs and demands of farmers and funding
constraints should not be allowed to come in its way, “deemed” completion of
projects is not an appropriate selution.

Such unsynchronised project execution, despite clear guidelines of the
Planning Commission, lead to the construction of irrigation structures without
the benefit of irrigation water. The Committee recommend that the Ministry
take immediate steps to ensure that the State Governments execute irrigation
projects in phases in a synchronized manner, so that the benefits of irrigation
water can flow to the farmer when one phase (including dam and headworks,
main and branch canals, and distributaries) are fully completed.

9. The Committee also note that Remote Sensing Technology is an important
tool in assessing and confirming the creation of Irrigation Potential of the
selected projects. The National Remote Sensing Centre, (NRSC, Hyderabad)
helps in assessing the actual irrigation potential created by the project
authorities, NRSC through its study & survey has pointed out certain gaps in
the irrigation canal network leading to non-continuity of the irrigation water
delivery. So far, only 50 projects have been awarded to NRSC for assisting the
ongoing projects. Various bottlenecks/ constraints have also been noticed in


54

the creation of irrigation po te.ntial in various States such as no supporting ayacut
registers, non-completion of cainal system, delay in land acquisition, land disputes,
non-completion of branch camals & distributaries, non construction of canal
bridges under rail and State/N:ational highways crossings, delays in forest &
environmental clearances, slippa ge of embankments, high vegetation, breakage
in canals and defective canal crossings etc. The Committee are pained to observe
that all these constraints are hindering an optimum utilization of the created
irrigation potential of various projects. Subsequent to the commencement of the
examination of the subject, the Committee were informed by the Ministry that
once the irrigation potential is creiated for full utilization of the potential, the
Command Area Development Programme helps in creation of the infrastructure
for field channels. According to the Ministry, consultations have been initiated
with the Planning Commission on this issue that every irrigation project must
have the Command Area Development component. ‘There is a gap between potential
created and ufilization as the Commangl Area Development has 2 small budgetary
provision of Rs. 600 crore only whereas the budget of AIBP is Rs. 9000 crore.
The Committee therefore feel that the provision of an equal matching budgetary
provision for the AIBPand CAD programimes would go a long way in making both
the programmes successful.

10. The Committee note that the Command Area Development Programme
(CADP) is absolutely essential for availing the true benefits by the farmers
which also helps in the last phase/tail end connectivity i¢., field channel
connectivity. They do not agree with the assertion of the Ministry that the
responsibility of the last phase connectivity of water’s supply lies with the State
Governments. The Committee have now been informed by the Ministry that
CADP has been restructured and renamed as Command Area Development and
‘Water Management (CADWM) Programme with effect from Ist April, 2004 and
matching budgetary provision has been ensured for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
They thus, recommend that ry should leave no stone unturned in ensuring that
the potential created is gainfully utilized by the State Governments and the farmers.

11. The Committee are concerned to note that as per the analysis of the State-
wise grants released under AIBP for Major/Medium Irrigation Projects, 75 to
85 percent of the AIBP grants released during 2005-06 to 2007-08 were released
to just six States (Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharastra, and Orissa). These States were obtaining the vast majority of AIBP
grants without corresponding performance in terms of project completion, thus
providing an incentive for inclusion of fresh AIBP projects driven by construction
work. What dismayed the Committee is the fact that the Nodai Ministry had
failed to enforce the provisions of the AIBP guidelines for converting the grant
component into loan in cases of failure to complete the projects in time. In this
context, during examination of the subject, the Ministry have informed the
Committee that Central Assistance is not released for projects, if the project is
delayed beyond the time limit specified in the MoU. The State Government is
required to explain the delay and seek extension of time by providing detailed
satisfactory reasons for the delay in project completion and remedial measures


55

taken by them to remove bottlenecks in project completion. The Minis 7१ have
now asked the State Governments to provide undertaking that any further 7
overrun occurring due to time overrun beyond the approved time will have 0 हे"
borne by the State Governments. This calls for close monitoring and follow up,

12. The Committee have learnt that Ministry of Water Resources have put in
piace a mechanism to check diversion of funds, unauthorized expenditure and
other financial irregularities. The Utilisation Certificates in respect of Central
Assistance related to the States are required to be signed by-the Principal
Secretaries/Secretaries (Water Resources/Irrigation Departments) of the
concerned State Departments and works executed under programme are also
examined by the CWC with reference to programme furnished by the State
Governments with the AIBP proposals. There is a provision in the AIBP guidetities
that the State Government will furnish Audit Statement of Expenditure incurred
on AIBP to the Ministry of Water Resources within nine months ofthe completion
of the financial year. The provision seeks to ensure financial discipline. ‘The
Ministry have informed that in the AIBP review meetings held during July/
August, 2010, the States were clearly advised that they will have to furnish the
Audited Statement of Expenditure from the next financial year.

13. Further, the Committee, recommend that the Ministry must ensure the
equitable distribution of Central funds to the States based on the predefined
criteria i.e. population dependent on agriculture Ultimate Irrigation Potential
(UIP) yet to be fulfilled, the past performance of the States in completion/
commissioning of projects and utilization of targeted irrigation potential under
AIBP. Stringent enforcement of the conversion of the grant component into a
joan must be given top priority as provided in the MoUs with the States. The
institutional mechanism as set up by the Ministry must be strengthened to check
diversion of funds, unauthorized expenditure and gther financial irregularities.
The Committee further recommend that te ensure the sanctity of the budgeting
process, the Ministry of Water Resources and the Central Water Commission
must release the AIBP funds well in time much before the closing motith of the
financial year Le. March,

14. The Committee are concerned to qote that 11 major, 10 medium & 22
Minor Irrigation projects were taken up for execution without ensuting the
fulfilment of the prerequisites such as land acquisition, clearance froth forest
and environmental departments in 12 States. Apart from this, there have been
numerous instances of incorrect phasing of project components de. dam section
was incomplete, but main/branch canals were completed/nearly completed; main/
branch canals were completed, but work of distributaries and water courses had
not been taken up; main and branch canals had been constructed in patches, with
gaps (particularly in the initial reaches). Consequently, despite incurring
substantial expenditure, the benefits of irrigation water were not fully available
to the targeted beneficiaries. All these aspeets need to be thoroughly looked into
and necessary correctives applied.


56

15. The Committee also note that three level arrangement i.e. Water User
Associations, Distributory Level Associations and Minor Irrigation Project Level
Councils play an important role in the execution and post-completion maintenance
of the projects. However, they are appalled to note that such an arrangement was
either absent or practically non-functional in 18 major, 12 medium and 194
minor irrigation projects test checked in 21 States. Astoundingly, assets created
under AIBP were not being accorded due priority, and arrangements for handing
‘over completed projects to farmers/water user associations had not been
operationalised with respect to many projects. In this regard, the Ministry have
informed that land acquisition is not a pre-requisite for according techno-
economic clearance to the project. Now it is proposed that central assistance
under AIBP will be released pari-passu with land acquisition required for carrying
out work of the coming year. According to the Ministry, no techno-economic
clearance is now-a-days accorded without State Government furnishing all the
required statutory clearances such as forest, environment, wild life and R&R
plan. The Committee would like to be apprised of corrective n.easures initiated
to address their concerns over the forgoing deficiencies and the assurances
given to them.

16. The Committee have also been informed that two Stat. .amely Maharashtra
and Uttar Pradesh have set up Water Resources Regulatory Authority/
Commission. The Government of Andhra Pradesh has enacted the
Andhra Pradesh Water Resources Regulatory Commission Act and the process
of setting up of the Regulatory Commission has been initiated. The matter is
being pursued with other States. Further, the Ministry propose to incorporate a
clause on maintenance of assets created under AIBP in the MoU being signed by
the State Government for availing central assistance under AIBP to the effect
that they will make an adequate provision in the State Budget for O&M of the
project. Moreover, the aspects of participatory irrigation management and
constitution of water users association are not covered under AIBP but they are
covered under CADWM programme. The Ministry has circulated a model bill to
all the States for enactment of a law on participatory irrigation management and
constitution of water users associations. 15 States have already enacted the law
and 56,934 water users associations have so far been formed. The matter is
being pursued with other State Governments. The State legislations provide for
3-tier mechanism for major/medium projects except in Goa and Sikkim in which
only single tier mechanism has been provided and in Bihar only 2-tier mechanism
has been provided. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of
these efforts with respect to each of the States.

17. “ie Committee note that the steps initiated by the Ministry in
Strengilatning AiB? aad for increasing thé participation of State Governments
as well as th Sika very radimentary stage. Since concerted efforts
Uiaang the proposals as stated above, the
sty of Waier Resources should ensure
that the Grate Governinents expedite setting up Water Resources Regulatory
Asthorities/Commissions aud make adequate provisions in their respective State
E ts for the maintenance of infrastructaral assets of the projects. The



57

Committee feel that it is obligatory on the part of the Ministry to oversee and
ensure that all the State Governments enact laws on participatory irrigatioa
management and constitution of water users associations for the effective
implementation of the AIBP Projects.

18, The Committee observe that the Central Water Commission (CWC) is
required to carry out monitoring/field visits to major/medium projects at least
twice a year but the actual percentage of monitoring visits ranged from 66 to
73 percent during 2002-08. As regards the Surface Water Minor Irrigation
Projects, the monitoring needs to be carried out by the respective State
Governments. However, the samples of such projects are still required to be
checked by the Central Water Commission as well as Ministry of Water
Resources. Another instance where the Commiitee have found that Ministry
have not exercised adequate monitoring is the case where CWC had made
monitoring visits to only 57 minor irrigation projects out of the total of
8699 minor irrigation projects sanctioned under AIBP. The Committee find
such symbolic monitoring grossly insufficient for mounting effective oversight.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the monitoring visits must be
augmented suitably in consonance with the instant guidelines and the detailed
inspection reports on such visits must be submitted to the Union as well as State
Governments for immediate necessary action so that the bottlenécks and
shortcomings are removed and the implementation of the projects speeded up.
Further, the Remote Sensing Technology needs to be harnessed and effectively
used to monitor the progress of the AIBP Projects in 22 States.

19. The Committee have also been informed by the Ministry that the
suggestions contained in the monitoring reports are to be followed by the
respective State Governments and for this, the copies of the reports are sent to
all the important officers associated with the project planning and execution,
The implementation of suggestions is reviewed by the CWC from time to time
and particularly during subsequent visits to the project. However, the Committee
note with concern that there is no institutional arrangement in place for
coordination amongst the State Governments, Planning Commission, CWC etc.
Nevertheless, the Ministry have assured that compliance of the suggestions
made in the monitoring reports will be pursued vigorously. The reports of the
NRSC are sent to the respective State Governments for action in cases where
deficiencies have been found by the NRSC. The rectification of deficiencies is
also monitored and pursued with States. Out of 53 projects monitored so far,
deficiencies were found in 17 projects out of those, rectification has been done
in 9 projects. Although, the Committee have taken note of all the existing
mechanism and procedures that have veen devised by te Ministry in regard to
monitoring of the projects, the Committee feel tiiat the task of bringing about
the desired results of all these procedures.

20. The Ministry should bear in mind that this task of coordination is complex
as several organizations such as Ministry, CWC, State Governments and Water
Users Associations are involved to bring all these efforts to fruition. The


38

Committee, accordingly, recommend that the Ministry should also engage
independent agencies such as engineering colleges for monitoring and an
impartial assessment of the projects’ implementation. The Ministry should also
ensure that the suggestions made in the Inspection Reports of the C&AG, and
other independent agencies are strictly complied with by the State Governments.
The rectification of gaps and deficiencies found by the National Remote Sensing
Centre must also be pursued vigorously with the State Governments. The
Committee are of the view that monitoring should be enhanced not only in
quantitative terms (i.e. by increasing number of visits/inspections) but in
qualitative terms (i.e. outcome oriented) as well so that progress of projects is
steady and continuous and bottlenecks are removed by timely interventions.

21. The Committee have noticed many irregularities in the works of individual
projects as well. In regard to the Agra Canal Project, the Ministry should take
responsibility for ensuring water quality. They should also expand AIBP
guidelines to incorporate in them the significant issues such xs water quality,
growth of weeds, completion of bridges etc. The Ministry should also devise a
mechanism where multiple stake-holders could be brought to a common platform
to resolve the issues such as the public objections as mentioned in the Tapkara
Reservoir Project (Jharkhand). The Committee also take a strong exception to
the assertions of the Ministry in regard to the Mahi Bajaj Sagar Project
(Rajasthan) that they have no existing mechanism for ensuring water availability
till the tailend in post-completion of the project. The Committee view such an
assertion highly irresponsible and lopsided as it questions the very basis of the
existence of this national level programme. They, therefore, recommend in
unequivocal terms that in all kinds of projects i.e. major/medium/minor irrigation
projects, the availability of water should invariably be ensured till the tail end.
The Committee further feel that instead of shifting the responsibilities on the
States, the Ministry should devise a mechanism whereby water is invariably
available till the tail end in post-completion of the projects not only for this
project but also for all the projects where any kind of Central assistance is
provided to the States. The Committee also desire that the new mechanism should
be such that ultimate users i.e. the farmers do not suffer on account of lack of
water availability at the tail end of the projects. The Committee would also like to
have project-wise details to be furnished to them after incorporating the new
mechanism. The actual site photographs at the time of finalization of the
Audit Report have been appended to this Report along with brief description of
the respective project.

22. The Committee would aiso like to recommend that in regard to the Indira
Gandhi Nahar Project Stage-II, the proposal received from the State Government
for inension of sprinkler irrigation system should be cleared within a fixed
time-frame under intimation to the Committee. The Bansagar Canal (U.P.) draws
attention of the Committee as two years have elapsed and no progress has been
registered to take necessary corrective measures to address the problems of
underground water sprouting up in Maja-Jergo Link Canal (MJLK) during the
visit to the project in February, 2009. The Committee, would recommend that


59

this problem should be addressed immediately to remedy the situation. In regard
to Veltigallu Reservoir Project (Andhra Pradesh), the Committee recommend
the Ministry to submit the final status of the project within 3 months of the
presentation of this report to Parliament.

23. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that drought-prone
and desert areas of the country are in the dire need of augmentation of irrigation
facilities. Specific programmes have been developed for these areas and
categorized as Drought Prone Area Programme (DPAP) and Desert Development
Programme (DDP) by the Ministry of Rural Development: The Committee also
note that specific provisions have been made in the AIBP guidelines for providing
irrigation facilities on priority basis for DPAP. In addition, creating irrigation
potential for the drought-prone and desert areas need a special attention. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter should be taken with other
related Ministries such as Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of
Environment and Forests by the Ministry of Water Resources and vigorous efforts
should be made for creating irrigation potential for these areas in a time bound
manner. This would in turn, bring food security not only for these areas but also
for the entire country as well,

24. In view of the complex web of deficiencies, irregularities and inherent
infirmities in the conception, design and implementation of the Scheme and
considering the huge wastage of public funds, the Committee would like a basic
restructuring of this programme. While restructuring the AIBP Scheme, mindful
of the aggregate benefits expected to accrue and the limitations of monitoring/
inspection mechanism available, the Union Government need to ensure that the
funds released to the States under the AIBP are rigorously monitored in a
sustained manner by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Water
Resources by evolving a sound institutional mechanism, within six months of the
presentation of this report, in consultation with the C&AG and Ministry of
Finance for fruition of the intended objectives without time and cost overrun.

New DELHI, DR. MURLI MANOHAR JOSHI,
21st February, 2011 Chairman,
2 Phalguna 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.


APPENDIX I

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD ON 21ST SEPTEMBER, 2010

The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 21st September, 2010 from 1400 hrs. to 1530 hrs.
in Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi _ Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. ShriBaliram
3... Shri Ramen Deka
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
6. Shri Yashwant Sinha
7. Shri K. Sudhakaran
8 Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Ashwani Kumar
10. Shri. Balaganga
11... Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12... Shri Kalraj Mishra
13. ShriN.K. Singh
14. Shri Tiruchi Siva
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sareen —_ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Sekhar Sharma _ Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma _ Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1... Shri Vinod Rai _ Comptroller & Auditor General
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta _ Dy. CAG (Report Central)
3. ShriK.R. Sriram _ Pr. Director of Audit (ESM)
4. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Pr. Director (RC)
5. Shri Bhawani Shankar — Director (ESM)
Representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources
1. Shri U.N. Panjiar _ Secretary (WR)
2. ShriG Mohan Kumar — Addl. Secretary (WR)
3... Shri A.K. Bajaj जप Chairman CWC (Status of Secretary)
4. Shri S.C. Dhiman _— Chairman (CGWB)
(Status of Addl Secretary)
5. ShriR.C. Jha — Member, (CWC)
(Status of Addle. Secretary)
6. Shri Sudhir Garg न Joint Secretary (Parl.)

60


61

7. Smt. Ananya Ray co Joint Secretary & FA (WR)
8 ShriM.E. Haque — Commissioner
9. ShriA.B. Pandya _ Commissioner
10. Shri GS. Jha — Commissioner
11. ShriS.P. Kakran _ Commissioner
12. Shri G. Aranganathan _— Commissioner

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the C&AG, and other Audit
Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised the Members
that the meeting has been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Water Resources based on the subject ‘Accelerated Irrigation Benefits
Programme' on CAG Report No. 4 of 2010-11 Union Government (Civil), Performance
Audit.

3. The representatives of Ministry of Water Resources were then called in and the
Chairman welcomed them to the siting. The Chairman impressed upon the
representatives of Ministry of Water Resources and reminded the Members and all
others present in the meeting not to disclose the contents of the deliberations of the
sitting to any outsider, especially the Press. The Committee, thereafter, commenced the
examination of the subject ‘Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme’. During the
course of deliberations, the Committee expressed their dissatisfaction over the Ministry's
inability to attend to some basic queries raised by the Members on the subject. The
Committee, consequently, decided to resume oral evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry on a future date and the Chairman advised the representatives of Ministry
of Water Resources to come betier prepared next time.

4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the office of the C&AG of India for
providing assistance to the Committee in the examination of the subject.

The witnesses, then, withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.

The Committee, then, adjourned.


APPENDIX II

MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD ON 29TH SEPTEMBER, 2010.

The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 29th September, 2010 from 1430 hrs. to
1625 hrs. in Room No. '53', Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman

MEMBERS

Lok Sabha
Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
Shri Naveen Jindal
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Dr. M. Thambidurai
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli

Rajya Sabha

aw ७ २

7. ShriN. Balaganga
8 Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
. Shri Kalraj Mishra
10. ShriN.K. Singh
11... Shri Tiruchi Siva
12. _ Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
‘SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Raj Sekhar Sharma _ Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma - Deputy Secretary

Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India

1. Shri Vinod Rai _ Comptroller & Auditor General
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta _ Dy. CAG (Report Central)

3. ShriK.R. Sriram a Pr. Director of Audit (ESM)

4. Ms. Shubha Kumar _ Pr. Director (RC)

5. ShriBhawaniShankar — _ Director(ESM)

62


63

Representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources

1 ShriUN. Panjiar _ Secretary (WR)
2. ShriG Mohan Kumar —_— Addl. Secretary (WR)
3. ShriA.K. Bajaj oni Chairman, CWC
4, Shri S.C. Dhiman — Chairman, CGWB
5. ShriR.C. Jha _ Member, CWC
6. Shri Sudhir Garg _— Joint Secretary (Parl.)
7. Smt. Ananya Ray ~_ Joint Secretary & FA(WR)
8... ShriM.E. Haque _ Commissioner
9. ShriA.B. Pandya -—— Commissioner

10. ShriGS. Jha — Commissioner

N. Shri S.P. Kakran — Commissioner

12. ShriG, Aranganathan _ Commissioner

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the C& AG, and other Audit
Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then, apprised the Members
that the meeting was convened to take further orai evidence of the representatives of
the Ministry of Water Resources based on the subject ‘Accelerated Irrigation Benefits
Programme’ based on CAG Report No. 4 of 2010-11 Union Government (Civil)
Performance Audit.

3. The representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources were then called in and
the Chairman welcomed them to the sitting. The Chairman impressed upon the
representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources and reminded the Members and
all others present in the meeting not to disclose the contents of the deliberations of the
sitting to any outsider, especially the Press. The Committee, thereafter, commenced
further examination of the subject ‘Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme’. The
representatives of the Ministry highlighted various important points and attended to
related queries of the Members on the subject. The Chairman, then apprised the
representatives of the Ministry that they might be summoned to tender further evidence
before the Committee in future, if required.

4. The Chairman thanked the representatives of the Ministry for appearing before
the Committee and furnishing the available information that the Committee desired in
connection with the examination of the subject. The Chairman also thanked the office
of the C&AG of India for providing assistance to the Committee in the examination of
the subject.

The witnesses, then, withdrew.

A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.


APPENDIX Il

MINUTES OF THE TWENTY THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2010-11) HELD ON ISTH FEBRUARY, 2011

The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 15th February, 2011 from 1130 hrs. to 1230 hrs.
in Room No. '62’, First Fl loor, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBER
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Ramen Deka
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
7. Dr.M. Thambidurai
8 Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. ShriN.K. Singh
11... Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIAT

1. Shri Devender Singh —_ Joint Secretary

2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma —_ Deputy Secretary

3. Shri D.R. Mohanty _— Deputy Secretary

4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi _ Under Secretary

Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India

1... ShriK.R. Sriram) — Principal Director of Audit (ESM)
2... Shri Subir Mallick — Principal Director (Indirect Taxes)
3. ShriC.M.Sane — Principal Director of Audit (Air Force & Navy)

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India to the Committee. The Chairman then apprised the

64


65

Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt three Draft
Reports viz. two Original Reports and the one Action Taken Report which was deferred
adoption in the last sitting held on 3rd February, 2011.

3. ४ककंक कक कक केक

4. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:

@ tee we के

ही). *##* cored कक केक

ii) Draft Report on "Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)"
(Ministry of Water Resources) based on C&AG Report No. PA 4 of 2010-11.

5. After going through the Drafts Reports one by one, the Committee adopted the
Draft Reports with some modifications/amendments. The Committee, then, authorized
the Chairman to finalise the abovementioned Reports adopted by them, in light of their
suggestions and the factual verifications received from the Audit and present the
same to the House on a date convenient to him.

6. The Chairman thanked the Members for their valuable suggestions on the
consideration of the Draft Reports.

The Committee, then, adjourned.

eee

‘The Matter does not pertain to this Report.

GMGIPMRND—7236LS—12.05.2011.