9
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR NUTRITIONAL
SUPPORT TO PRIMARY EDUCATION
(MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME)
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & LITERACY)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
NINTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
NATIONAL PROGRAMME FOR NUTRITIONAL
SUPPORT TO PRIMARY EDUCATION
(MID-DAY MEAL SCHEME)
MINISTRY   OF   HUMAN   RESOURCE   DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF SCHOOL EDUCATION & LITERACY)
Presented  to  Lok  Sabha  on  11.3.2010
Laid  in  Rajya  Sabha  on  10.3.2010
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February, 2010/Phalguna, 1931 (Saka)

P.A.C.1904
Price: Rs. 28.00
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Govt. of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10)........................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (v)
PART-I         Report
I. Introductory ................................................................................. 1
II. Organisational set up ................................................................... 1
III. Budget and Expenditure............................................................... 1
IV . Input System for the Scheme ....................................................... 2
V. Implementation of the Scheme ..................................................... 3
VI. Objective—Supporting the universalisation of primary education
by improving enrolment, attendance and retention ..................... 6
VII. Impact on enrolment..................................................................... 8
VIII. Impact on attendance ................................................................... 8
IX. Impact on retention ...................................................................... 9
X. Supply of Foodgrains and Stock out with FCI godowns ............. 10
XI. Drawal of foodgrains in excess of requirement ............................ 11
XII. Diversion of funds and foodgrains .............................................. 11
XIII. Provisioning of cooking infrastructure ........................................ 12
XIV . Monitoring and evaluation .......................................................... 13
PART-II Observations and Recommendations .......................................... 14
APPENDICES
I. Minutes   of  the  Third  Sitting  of  Public   Accounts  Committee
(2009-10) held on 27th October, 2009............................................ 19
II. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of  the Public Accounts  Committee
(2009-10) held on 28th January, 2010............................................ 21

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
*Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
*Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant Singh
resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
 (iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "National Programme for Nutritional
Support to Primary Education (Mid-day Meal Scheme)" based on Report No. PA-13 of
2008 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India Union Government (Performance
Audit).
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2007, Union  Government, No. PA 13 of 2008 (Performance Audit) was laid on
the Table of the House on 24.10.2008.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (Department of School Education and Literacy) on the subject
at their sitting held on 27.10.2009. The Committee considered and finalised this Report
at their sitting held on 28th January, 2010. Minutes of the sittings form Appendices to
the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in  the body of the
Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the representatives of the
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of School Education and
Literacy) for tendering evidence before the Committee and furnishing information that
the Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
26 February, 2010 Chairman,
6 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

PART  I
REPORT
I. Introductory
The National Programme for Nutritional Support to Primary Education
(commonly known as the Mid-Day Meal Scheme) was launched as a
centrally-sponsored scheme in August 1995. The scheme was intended to boost
universalisation of primary education by increasing enrolment, attendance and
retention levels of children and simultaneously impacting on the nutritional levels
of primary students across the country in phased manner by 1997-98. The scheme
was further revised in 2004 and again in 2006. The scheme of 2006 was intended to:
(i) Improve the nutritional status of children in classes I-V in Government, local
body and Government aided schools, and Education Guarantee Scheme (EGS)
and Alternative & Innovative Education (AIE) centres;
(ii) Encouraging poor children belonging to disadvantaged sections  to attend
schools more regularly and help them concentrate on classroom activities; and
(iii) Providing nutritional support to children of primary stage in drought affected
areas during summer vacation.
The nutritional value of the cooked mid-day meal was increased from 300 to 450
calories and the protein content therein from 8-12 grams to 12 grams. The scheme of 2006
also provided for adequate quantities of micronutrients like iron, folic acid, vitamin-A etc.
II. Organisational set up
2. The Mid-day meal scheme is approved, funded and monitored by the Ministry
of Human Resource Development (Department of Elementary Education and Literacy).
The Joint Secretary (Elementary Education-I) is in-charge of the scheme under the
overall supervision of the Secretary, Department of Elementary Education and Literacy.
One Deputy Secretary and one Deputy Education Adviser assist the Joint Secretary
(Elementary Education-I) in discharging his duties under the scheme.
The implementation of the scheme rests with the State/Union Territory
Governments. Each State has its own implementing, monitoring and control structure.
III. Budget and Expenditure
3. The table given below shows the details of budget allocation and expenditure
from the years 2002-03 till 2006-07:
(Rupees in crore)
Year Total grant as per Appropriation accounts Expenditure as per Appropriation accounts
2002-03 199.03  1099.00
2003-04 1375.00 1375.00
2004-05 1588.55 1588.55*
2005-06 3186.34 3184.00
2006-07 5234.27 5230.74
*As per Audit there was difference of Rs. 1232 crore in the expenditure as per records of the Ministry
(MDM Division) and as per Appropriation Accounts. Ministry stated (September 2007) that the
amount was released as additional Central assistance by Ministry of Finance to States directly.
1

2
4. It has been stated by the Audit that the expenditure as stated above excludes
value of subsidy of Rs. 6898.29* crore allowed to Food Corporation of India on supply
of foodgrains for the scheme during the years 2002-03 to 2006-07.
5. In the post evidence reply the Department  of School Education and Literacy
intimated the Committee that the budget allocation and expenditure incurred during
2007-08 and 2008-09 is as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Y ear Budget allocation Expenditure
2007-08 6678.00 4930.77
2008-09 8000.00 6982.54
6. When asked about the value of subsidy allowed for the scheme during the
years 2007-08 and 2008-09, the Ministry simply informed in a post evidence reply:
"Department of Food and Public Distribution has been requested vide letter
no. 8-4/2008-MDM dated 16.11.2009 to furnish the details of subsidy received in
the year 2007-08 to 2008-09. The information is awaited".
IV .  Input  System  for  the  Scheme
7. According to Audit, Central assistance was provided to the States by way of:
(i) Free supply of foodgrains from the nearest godown of FCI at the rate of 100
grams of wheat/rice per student per school day (cost of which was reimbursed
to FCI by Government of India);
(ii) Reimbursement of actual cost of transportation in the form of subsidy for
transportation of foodgrains from the nearest FCI Depot to the primary schools,
subject to a maximum of Rs. 50 per quintal with additional cost to the States
which were hilly, economically backward and/or lacked rail facilities**.
(iii) Cost of cooking (including ingredients such as pulses, vegetables, cooking
oil, condiments, cost of fuel and wages payable to the cooking agency)  was
being met by the States until September, 2004. However, from 2004-05, the
Government of India allowed the States Governments to earmark a maximum of
15 per cent of the additional Central assistance (ACA) under the Pradhan Mantri
Gramodaya Yojana ((PMGY) for meeting cooking costs. Assistance for cooking
costs at the rate of Rs. 1.00 per child per school day was provided from
September, 2004 in addition to the above ACA of 15 per cent. Rates of assistance
for cooking costs were revised to Rs. 1.80 per child per school day for special
category States in the Northern Eastern Region provided these States contributed
a minimum 20 paise (Rs. 1.50 per child per school day for other States/Union
Territories provided these contributed minimum of 50 paise) from 16 June, 2006;
*Calculations, according to Audit, are based on the difference between economic rate and the BPL
 rate of food grains.
**Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland,
 Mizoram, Sikkim, Tripura, Assam and Uttarakhand.

3
(iv) Physical infrastructure such as kitchen-cum-store, adequate water supply for
drinking and cooking, cooking devices, containers for storage of foodgrains
and other ingredients and utensils for cooking and serving were to be provided
by States/local bodies  by utilizing their funds along with those available under
various centrally-sponsored schemes. Assistance to construct a kitchen-cum-
store up to a maximum of Rs. 60,000 per unit per school and replacement of
kitchen devices at the overall average cost of Rs. 5000 per school was also
provided w.e.f 16 June, 2006 under the National Programme of Nutritional
Support to Primary Education; and
(v) Assistance for Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (MME) at a rate not
less than 0.90 per cent of the total assistance on items such as foodgrains,
transport cost and cooking cost was provided only from 2004-05. This was
increased to a minimum of at least 1.8 per cent of such assistance from 2005-06.
However, 0.2 per cent of such assistance was retained/utilized by the
Central Government out of the total 2 per cent provided in the scheme.
V . Implementation of the Scheme
8. It has been broughtout by Audit that at the local level, the State Governments
were expected to assign responsibility for implementation and supervision of the
programme to an appropriate body e.g. Gram Panchayat, Municipality, Village Education
Committee, Parent-Teacher Association and School Management-cum-development
Committee. Responsibility for cooking would as far as possible be assigned to local
women's Self-Help Groups (SHGs), Youth Clubs affiliated to Nehru Yuvak Kendras
(NYKs), Village Education Committees (VECs), School  Management-cum-Development
Committees (SMDCs), Parent Teacher Associations/Mother Teacher Associations
(PTAs/MTAs), or good Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) where available.
9. As per the scheme of 2004, the overall responsibility for implementation of the
programme vested with the State/UT Administration. This included providing necessary
infrastructure such as a kitchen-cum-store, adequate water for drinking and cooking/
washing, cooking devices, containers for storage and utensils for cooking and serving
making all logistical/administrative arrangements necessary for regular serving of a
wholesome, cooked mid-day meal of satisfactory quality and nutritive value of 300 calories
and 8-12 grams of protein content (raised to 450 calories and 12 grams of protein content
in the revised scheme 2006) to eligible schools/Education Guarantee Scheme (EGS)/
Alternative and Innovative Education (AIE) centres and providing financial and other
inputs over and above those to be provided by way of central assistance.
10. On being asked whether the each of the organizations such as SHGs/VECs/
NGOs etc. were assigned the responsibility for implementation in supervision of the
programme, the Ministry stated in a written note:
"District-wise data is not maintained by the GOI. However, after receiving this
questionnaire relevant information has been sought from the States/UTs which
is still awaited. It will be made available on receiving it from them".
The Ministry also intimated that in 35 States/UTs the involvement of Self Help
Groups (SHGs)/Mahila Mandal/Panchayati Raj Institution (PRI)/Standard Monitoring
Committee (SMC)/Village Education Committee (VECs)/School Management

4
Development Committees (SMDCs)/Mother Groups/Parent Teacher Association (PTA)/
NGOs/Centralised Kitchen was in present.
11. On a specific query whether the scheme was a Government programme or
private programme, the Secretary, Department of Elementary Education and literacy
stated during evidence:
"It is a completely Government programme except that the community is
encouraged to contribute in things like utensils, plates for children to eat on,
glasses and so on. All the crucial elements of the programme are provided for by
the Central Government and the State Governments''.
12. As regards the involvement of NGOs in the programme, the Secretary stated:
"We do have information about NGOs being involved in the programme.
According to information available with us, in about 20 States NGOs are being
utilized for the mid-meal programme and this is actually in keeping with the
guidelines of the mid-day meal scheme where we have allowed voluntary
organizations to be associated for the supply of the mid-day meal and for
provision of resource support to the programme in terms of training, monitoring
and research''.
13. On being asked to provide  a list of NGOs, Trusts or any other organization
(other than Government Agencies involved in implementating the Mid-Day Meal
programme in any manner in all the States/Union Territories of India, the Ministry
furnished the information received from 10 States. The list showed nil involvement of
agencies in the States of Jammu & Kashmir, Meghalaya, Government of Andaman and
Nicobar Administration, Union Territory of Daman and Diu, Government of
Lakshadweep etc., but it shows heavy involvement of Public Private Partnership (PPP)
in the States of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. In Rajasthan, NGOs were active in
22 Districts with 7,443 number of schools having a capacity of 7,42,598 students. In the
State donations were also received in MDM trust to the tune of Rs. 90,35,101.00 lakhs.
Donors also contributed a sum of Rs. 2,183.96 lakhs for the NGOs in PPP in this
programme. In the State of Uttar Pradesh NGOs were implementing the MDM  programme
in 32 districts. In the West Bengal only one NGO is stated to have been involved in the
implementation of the programme.
14. When the Committee enquired about the guidelines laid down for engagement
of volunatary organizations with the programme, the Ministry in a written note stated
as under:
"As per Guidelines of Mid-Day Meal Scheme 2006, the major groups of activites
for which V oluntary Organizations may be associated with the programme are—
• Supply of cooked mid-day meal, and
• Provision of resource support to the programme, e.g.
 /trianglecentrt Training and capacity building,
 /trianglecentrt Monitoring and evaluation, and
 /trianglecentrt Research.
Assignment of supply responsibilities to Voluntary Organizations:
Identification of voluntary organizations, which are suitable for being assigned
supply responsibility under the NP-NSPE, 2006 for a school or group of schools may

5
be done by the City level SMC for Municipal towns and District level SMC for all other
areas. Once a voluntary organization is so identified, the decision to actually award
supply work to it for  a school or a group of schools may be taken by a body empowered
in this behalf by the State Government, e.g. the Gram Panchayat, VEC/SMC/PTA,
Municipal Committee/Corporation, etc. The City or District SMC should keep the
following aspects in mind while determining suitability of a voluntary organization for
supply of cooked mid-day meal.
(i) The voluntary agencies should not discriminate in any manner on the basis of
religion, caste and creed, and should not use the programme for propagation of
any religious practice.
(ii) The voluntary agency should be a body that is registered under the Societies
Registration act or the Public Trust Act, and should have been in existence for
a minimum period of two years.
(iii) Commitment to undertake supply responsibility on a no-profit basis.
(iv) Financial and logistic capacity to supply the mid-day meal on the requisite
scale.
(v) Commitment to abide by the parameters of NP-NSPE, 2006 particularly with
regard to the prescription of eligible children, nutrition content etc.
(vi) W illingness to work with PRIs/Municipal bodies in accordance with relevant
guidelines of the State Government.
(vii) It will furnish to the body assigning the work to it an Annual Report along with
audited statement of accounts in terms of all grants received from the State
Government, both in cash and kind, duly certified by an approved Chartered
Accountant.
(viii) The voluntary organisation shall not entrust/sub-contract the programme or
divert any part of the assistance (foodgrains/money) to any other organization/
agency.
(ix) Commitment to return to the State Government any permanent/semi permanent
assets acquired by the V oluntary Organisation from the grants received under
the programme, once the Voluntary organization ceases to undertake the supply
work.
(x) All accounts, stock and registers maintained by the voluntary organisation
should be open to inspection by officers appointed by the State Government.
(xi) State Governments may prescribe such other conditions, as they may deem
appropriate in addition to the conditions stated above.
Engaging Voluntary Organizations  for Resource Support:
The State/UT level SMC may identify voluntary organizations for providing
resource support to NP-NSPE, 2006 in the form of training and capacity building
programmes, monitoring and evaluation and research studies''.

6
15. The Committee also wanted to know in unequivocal terms whether any of the
sitting or former Member of Parliament, his near family Members or relatives have been
involved in any capacity through an NGO or any other body in the implementation of
the Scheme and also desired to know whether the spouse/relative of any of the District
Collectors or any other official of the Ministry/State Government/District Administration/
Block Administration has been involved in the implementation of the Scheme in any
capacity. Even after granting two extensions for furnishing the reply, the Ministry
could not provide any concrete information in this regard but stated:
"All States/UTs have been requested to give the information. In spite of repeated
reminders on phone, the information is still awaited''.
VI. Objective—Supporting the universalisation of primary education by improving
enrolment, attendance and retention
16. Audit has pointed out that though the scheme had been operational for more
than 12 years and involved annual outlays reaching Rs. 5234.27 crore in 2006-07, the
Ministry had not established any system to assess the outcome of the scheme in terms
of well-defined parameters. according to Audit, the Mid-Day-Meal Scheme (MDM)
which was to provide the impetus for attracting and retaining children in the schools is
being implemented with the primary purpose for providing one daily meal without link
to the education, nutrition and health objectives. This instrumentality has not been
followed up with a comprehensive detailed impact analysis on support to the
educational, nutritional and health objectives.
Audit has observed that the objectives of increasing enrolment, retention and
attendance and impacting on nutrition , which were set right from the start of the
programme in 1995, were not dependent on cooked meal or uncooked ration. Thus, the
crucial aspect of the system of measurement of the outcomes of the scheme objectives
had remained elusive for a long period. The MDM scheme was launched with the aim
of attracting children to schools and, thus, bringing about improvement in enrolment.
However, the objective related to enrolment was consequently not mentioned in the
scheme objectives of 2006.
In this connection, the Ministry have stated in their advance information that as
the objectives of this scheme were the same and supplementary to the main programmes
on Elementary Education and Health and Nutrition under which these parameters are
being assessed under these main schemes, so no separate assessment of impact
exclusively due to Mid-Day Meal (MDM) was got done.
17. The Committee enquired about the assessment made by the Ministry, the
Secretary Department of School Education and Literacy whilst deposing before the
Committee said:
"The first issue that I want to touch upon is the observation of the Audit that
objectives of the Scheme have not been pursued or monitored and that there is
a lack of clarity in the objectives. The Department of School Education and
Literacy implements two flagship programme for universalisation of elementary
education. One is Sarva Siksha Abhiyan and the other is the Mid-Day
Meal Programme. Both these Schemes have common objectives and they also

7
have a common Mission structure. There is one National Mission and one
Executive Body for both Sarva Siksha  Abhiyan and the MDM Scheme. There
are 42 independent monitoring institutions which monitor both the programmes
together. So if a particular monitoring institution goes to a particular district to
monitor the SSA, that same monitoring institution is also entrusted with the
responsibility of monitoring  the Mid-Day Meal Programme. No separate mission
has been created for the Mid-Day Meal Programme as it is seen as a programme
that should serve the ends of the SSA by addressing the problem of class room
hunger. In this sense, the Mid-Day Meal supplements the efforts of the SSA
programme and together they have the goal of creating a positive environment
which would lead to universalisation of elementary education. Together, these
two programmes seek to make elementary education available and accessible to
all children specially to those children who belong to the most disadvantaged
sections so, the Mid-Day Meal Scheme, supplementing the SSA to bring these
children to school, to enroll and to retain them in school becomes a very important
factor and support for SSA.
The basic purpose of the Mid-Day Meal Scheme is to help children overcome
hunger in school, to be able to concentrate better on class room activities. The
obejective of the Scheme is also to increase enrolment, attendance and retention,
to improve nutritional status of the children in elementary schools, to decrease
the number of drop-outs, to teach them hygienic practices, to develop the feeling
of togetherness and social harmony because of the opportunity to eat together
and to break social divide such as caste, gender community divides. One very
important step that Mid-Day Meal Scheme takes in this direction is to prescribe
that the cook, as far as possible should belong to SC and ST communities. For
the SSA and the Mid-Day Meal Programme and other programmes of this nature,
to take effect, it takes a pretty long time. It is a long gestation period for Schemes
of this type.''
The witness also added:—
"There has been some rephrasing of the objectives in the revised guidelines of
the Mid-Day Meal Scheme. But the basic purpose remains the same to address
the class room hunger and to create an environment for universalisation of
elementary education through addressing class room hunger. I also want to
mention that just as the Mid-Day Meal Scheme is implemented as part of SSA in
the Ministry of HRD, Department of School Education, similarly the arrangement
is that the Department of Education implements the Scheme in 31 States and UTs
and it is only in four States that some other Department implements the Scheme.
That is for historical reasons. All other components for universalisation of
elementary education have been practically subsumed under Sarva Siksha
Abhiyan. But we continue to implement the Mid-Day-Meal Scheme as a separate
Scheme. It seems that MDM is a stand alone programme because it has separate
budget allocations but that is essentially because of its size and administrative
ease. If it were not such a large programme requiring this kind of an administrative
effort and attention it too would have been subsumed in the SSA itself.''

8
18. The Committee wanted to know why did the Ministry not establish any
system to asess the outcome of the scheme in terms of well-defined parameters to
ensure proper evaluation of the scheme specially when it entails budgetary allocation
of as much as Rs. 5234.27 crore (in 2006-07). In the post evidence reply it has been
intimated by the Ministry that for the year 2008-09 budgetary allocation was of
Rs. 8000.00 crores. It is not practicable and feasible to measure the exclusive impact of
Mid-Day Meal on educational, social and nutritional development of children. Since
MDM Scheme supplements the efforts of SSA towards universalisation of Elementary
Education and under SSA the educational parameters are being monitored it is not
considered advisable to duplicate the same efforts under the MDM also. Measurement
of nutritional level is the mandate of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and
they have been requested by this Ministry to measure the nutritional status of these
children in the next round of NFHS. This Ministry has also commissioned a
comprehensive evaluation of the Scheme to the Programme Evaluation Organization
(PEO) of the Planning Commission in December 2005. The report is awaited.
VII. Impact on Enrolment
19. According to Audit, the MDM Scheme was launched with the aim of attracting
children to schools and, thus, bringing about improvement in enrolment. However, the
objective related to enrolment was consequently not mentioned in the scheme objectives
of 2006. The Ministry neither analyzed/used the available State level data to assess the
impact on enrolment nor fixed any measurable target to improve the coverage of children.
20. The Committee wanted to know from the Ministry whether food/meal provided
under MDM Scheme could be leveraged for inducing poor and disadvantaged sections
to send their children to school and whether the Ministry proposed to take any suitable
action in this regard. Replying to the query the Ministry intimated through a written
note:—
"It is generally understood that amongst the children attending Government
schools, a large number belong to the disadvantaged social and economic groups
of the society. Since MDM is provided in all the Government, Government-aided
and Local Body schools and EGS/AIE centres including Madarsas and Maqtabs
supported under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, it serves the purpose of bringing the
children of poor and disadvantaged groups to schools.''
VIII. Impact on Attendance
21. It has been brought out in Audit Report that the scheme objectives of 1995
and 2004 included among others, a positive impact on the attendance rate of primary
school children. The objective related to attendance was dropped from the scheme
objectives of 2006 for reasons not on record. The Ministry did not analyse the data of
attendance received from the State governments to assess the impact of the scheme
on attendance despite collecting the data of estimated average attendance rate since
2004. Neither the Ministry nor the State governments has established or even attempted
to establish any system for measuring a direct relationship between increase in
attendance and the MDM Scheme.

9
22. When asked as to why the dropout rates were not collected for MDM covered
schools and whether the Ministry were serious about successful implementation of
the scheme, the Ministry stated through a written note:—
‘‘As mentioned earlier this Ministry has elaborate arrangements to track the
changes/improvement in educational parameters including dropout rates. The
information regarding dropout rate is being collected by Statistical Division of
this Ministry in Selected Education Statistics. So, there is no need to collect the
same data by MDM as it will be duplication.”
23. The Committee enquired about the reasons for not analysing the data of
attendance received from Governments to assess the impact of MDM Scheme. Replying
to the query the Ministry stated in a written reply:—
"It is not practicable and feasible to measure the exclusive impact of Mid-Day
Meal on educational parameters including attendance. Since MDM scheme
supplements the efforts of SSA towards universalisation of Elementary Education
and under SSA the educational parameters are being monitored it is not considered
advisable to duplicate the same efforts under the MDM also. MHRD
commissioned a sample study on student attendance at primary and upper primary
level in 2006-07 in 20 major States. The overall attendance at primary and upper
primary level was 68.5% and 75.7% respectively. In 2009 another study on
attendance of students was conducted. The attendance was found to be 75.7%
at primary and 81.6% at upper primary level.''
24. When asked specifically the reasons for not analysing direct relationship
between increase in school attendance and MDM Scheme the Ministry intimated
through a written note:—
"There are so many interventions, including Mid-Day Meal Scheme, to attract
and retain children in schools. It will not be possible to analyse direct relationship
between increase in school attendance and Mid-Day Meal Scheme.Further, the
attendance in school is also dependent on several other factors including,
inter alia, the overall school environment, availability of teachers, the teaching-
learning process and the games and sports facilities available.''
IX. Impact on Retention
25. Audit has brought out that the scheme also envisaged in 1995/2004 the
decrease in the dropout  rate was one of the outcomes. The Ministry had no scheme
specific data with regard to dropout rates in Government and Government aided schools/
EGS/AIE centres and thus the impact of MDM on dropout rate could not be analyzed.
The statistical division of the Ministry furnished data to audit showing a reduction in
dropout rates. However, this data included private school children as well and therefore,
could only serve as a broad base rather than specific indicator for dropouts. Thus, the
dropout rates were not collected for MDM covered schools at all.The Ministry,
consequently, was unable to assess the impact of MDM on retention levels. The
states also did not establish a system of reliable data capture on retention/dropout
rate of children in the primary schools covered under the scheme and its consolidation
at district and block levels.

10
X. Supply of Foodgrains and Stock out with FCI godowns
26. The Committee were informed that the scheme inter-alia, provide for central
assistance by way of free supply of foodgrains from the Food Corporation of India (FCI)
as also reimbursement of the cost of transportation from the nearest FCI depot to the
concerned primary school. The Committee were also apprised that the State
Governments were responsible for ensuring availability of adequate stocks of
foodgrains with the FCI so that there was a continuous supply of foodgrains to
schools. However, in Jharkhand, foodgrains were short lifted (between 17 per cent and
32.33 per cent) during 2005-06 due to non-availability of stock with the FCl. In
Uttarakhand, children in 75 test checked schools were deprived of the meal for the
same reason. Instances of delay and short delivery of foodgrains in schools were also
noticed in other States like Assam, Kerala, Arunachal Pradesh, Orissa and Bihar.
27. On a specific query of the Committee regarding measures taken to ensure
availability of sufficient foodgrains, the Ministry replied that instances of non-
availability of foodgrains in some States as pointed out by audit were brought to the
notice of FCI for furnishing their comments and taking corrective action. The Ministry
also stated that in case of Uttarakhand geographical condition hampered transporting
of foodgrain. When further asked whether the comments from FCI have since been
received, the Ministry in a post evidence reply submitted as under:—
"FCI has informed that the position of availability of foodgrains in these States
can be assessed from the monthly closing balance of stocks. During the year
2005-06, the closing stocks of rice in the said States were as under:—
Month Closing Balance of Stocks (Rice)
Jharkhand Uttarakhand Assam Kerala Arunachal Orissa Bihar
Pradesh
April-05 72 196 125 172 4 250 213
May-05 67 177 114 180 5 252 220
June-05 39 147 151 181 5 278 169
July-05 23 129 126 221 6 264 162
Aug.-05 13 87 118 229 8 216 151
Sep.-05 11 67 99 195 7 232 119
Oct.-05 11 42 58 116 5 148 104
Nov.-05 13 55 45 84 4 87 81
Dec.-05 14 87 50 112 6 142 66
Jan.-06 18 115 46 134 3 249 93
Feb.-06 39 169 71 130 1 336 194
Mar.-06 47 98 91 198 4 405 226
From the above stated position, it can be seen that as compared to the proportionate
monthly allocations, ample stocks were available with FCI throughout the year in the
said States."

11
XI. Drawal of Foodgrains in Excess of Requirement
28.As per the scheme guidelines, the State nodal Departments were to furnish to
the Ministry, by 15th January every year, a district-wise request for allocation of
foodgrains based on the enrolment data of eligible primary schools and Education
Guarantee Scheme/Alternative and Innovative Education (EGS/AIE) centres as on the
perceding 30th September and anticipated enrolment in the next financial year. Based
on the request, the Ministry in turn, allocated foodgrains district-wise. However, the
Ministry did not maintain the figures of actual enrolment for the various States.
The scrutiny by Audit revealed that allocation of foodgrains was based in
anticipated enrolment (not on actuals) and an average of attendance rate prepared
district-wise and submitted by the Nodal Departments of the State concerned.
It was noticed that the projected enrolment was unrealistically high and led to
significantly higher allotment of foodgrains by the GOI than what was drawn.
Based on the enrolment data furnished to audit and limiting it to the average
attendance rate of the children, it was noticed that in ten States there was an unexplained
excess drawal of foodgrains valued at Rs. 72.17 crore over the estimated requirement
during 2002-07 as worked out by audit (as shown in the table given below). Since
utilization certificates (paragraph 18.4) were not being received regularly by the Ministry,
the systemic imperfections and the need for an explicit accounting for the foodgrains
drawn was evident.
29.In regard to the drawal of foodgrains in excess of requirement the Ministry
admitted in February, 2008 that allocation of foodgrains based on anticipated enrolment
and average attendance rate was not realistic and from 2007-08 onwards, the Central
assistance to the States was being provided on the basis of the number of children
actually availing mid-day meal. The Audit has observed that excess withdrawal was
noticed in 7 States viz. Tripura, UP, Kerala, Manipur, Meghalaya, Haryana and Rajasthan.
The Ministry have, as revealed by Audit stated that they were pursuing the concerned
States Governments to investigate the matter and send the ATR immediately.
30.When asked as to what action was being contemplated by the Ministry in
order to adjust the quantities registering excess withdrawal, the Ministry intimated in
a post evidence reply as under:—
"It appears that due to lack of understanding of the operation of scheme in the
field this observation has come up. The States are entitled to lift within the
allocated quantity. Whatever remains unutilized at the end of the financial year
is treated as resource for the next year and is adjusted against the allocation of
the next year."
XII. Diversion of Funds and Foodgrains
31.Audit has pointed out diversion of funds and foodgrains in 11 States/UTs
viz., Kerala, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Nagaland, Assam, A&N Islands,
Meghalaya, Bihar, West Bengal and Madhya Pradesh. The Ministry have informed
that out of these 11 States, 5 States i.e. Bihar, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya and

12
Uttar Pradesh have furnished details of remedial measures taken by them in this regard.
In a post evidence reply the Ministry informed that the information from three States
i.e., Government of Nagaland, UT administration of Andaman and Nicobar Islands and
Government of West Bengal had since been received. It is apparent to note that
Ministry could not procure information from three States in a time bound manner to be
submitted to the Committee. On a specific query whether any accountability on diversion
of funds and foodgrains being fixed, the Ministry did not give any comments and the
reply of the Ministry was silent on this aspect.
XIII. Provisioning of Cooking Infrastructure
32.The essential infrastructure for implementation of the cooked Mid-Day Meal
Scheme was the pucca kitchen-cum-store, kitchen devices and clean drinking water.
However, during audit of selected schools, deficiencies relating to kitchen sheds,
kitchen devices and facility of clean drinking water noticed in 20 States. The Ministry
stated in February 2008 that Central assistance for kitchen sheds was being provided
in a phased manner and it intended to cover all schools by 2008-09.
33.It has been brought out by Audit that the Ministry prescribed in its guidelines
that teachers should not be assigned responsibilities that would interfere with teaching
and learning activities. Test check of the selected schools revealed that in most States
the teachers were actively involved in receipt of foodgrains, procurement of vegetables
and condiments, supervision of cooking and serving of meals thereby leading to a loss
of valuable teaching time.
34. It was informed during oral evidence that only half of the total number of
schools availing MDM Scheme had kitchen sheds despite allocating Rs. 5,000/- crores
for the purpose. The Committee wanted to know what was the figures regarding
construction of kitchen sheds in schools. Replying to the query the Ministry informed
through a written note that:—
"In the year 2006-07, a decision to provide Central Assistance towards
construction of kitchen shed-cum-stores @ Rs. 60,000 per unit to the States/UTs
in a phased manner was taken. The total gap reported by the States/UTs in the
annual plan and budget 2009-10 is 2,62,809 units. Since then Central assistance
of Rs. 4480 crores has already been released to States/UTs for construction of
7,46,758 Kitchen Sheds as per details given below:—
Y ear Units Amount (Rs. in crore)
(a)  2006-07 2,21,039 Rs. 1,326
(b)  2007-08 2,22,849 Rs. 1,337
(c)  2008-09 3,02,870 Rs. 1,817
Total 7,46,758 Rs. 4,480
The number of kitchen sheds completed and in progress are 2,73,131 and 98,142
respectively. As per the information provided by the States/UTs in their Annual Work
Plan 2009-10, there are still 2,62,809 schools where no kitchen shed is sanctioned. It is

13
proposed to provide kitchen sheds in these schools during the balance period
11th Five Year Plan.
The progress in construction of kitchen-cum-store has been slow because many
of the States/UTs have complained that the Central assistance released for this purpose
is not adequate and the unit cost required to be enhanced. The Government of India
has considered the request of the States/UTs and revised the policy for construction
of kitchen-cum-store. Now, the Central Govt. will prescribe plinth area norm on the
basis of number of children studying in the School. The cost of construction of kitchen-
cum-store would be determined on the basis of prescribed plinth area and the State
Schedule of Rate. The cost will be shared between Centre and NER State on 90:10 and
other States/UTs on 75:25."
XIV . Monitoring and Evaluation
35.The original scheme provided for supervision, monitoring and evaluation by
setting up committees at Block, District and State levels to generate community support
for the goal of universalising primary education. At the national level the scheme had
no monitoring in place until 2004 when a National Level Steering cum Monitoring
Committee was prescribed in the revised scheme (September 2004). The Steering cum
Monitoring Committees (SMCs) were to be set up at four levels viz. National, State,
District and Block with functions of guidance, monitoring, coordination and taking
action on reports of independent monitoring agencies. The Ministry have informed
the Committee that as per information received from States/UTs in their Annual Work
Plan and Budget 2008-09 SMCs have been constituted in all States/UTs.
36.The Committee desired to know whether the Steering cum Monitoring
Committees regularly and whether there were any shortfalls in meetings and the reasons
thereof. Replying to the query the Ministry candidly admitted in a written note as
under:—
"The Steering cum Monitoring Committee meetings are not being held regularly.
However, due to the repeated insistence from GoI the situation has improved.
The reasons of shortfalls in meetings has been sought from States/UTs."
They also added:—
"This Ministry is not receiving the minutes of meetings of SMC on regular basis.
However, this Ministry has also prescribed in the QPR the mention of major
decisions taken in the SMC meetings held at the State level."

PART  II
Observations and Recommendations
1. The National Programme for Nutritional Support to Primary Education,
commonly known as the Mid-Day Meal Scheme launched as a Centrally-sponsored
scheme in August, 1995 was intended to boost universalisation of primary education
by increasing enrolment, attendance and retention levels of children and
simultaneously impacting on the nutritional levels of primary students across the
country. Budget allocation for the scheme has increased from Rs.1099.03 crores as
in 2002-03 to Rs.8000 crores in 2008-09. In addition to the budgetary support the
scheme was also aided by a subsidy of Rs. 6898.29 crore allowed to Food Corporation
of India on supply of foodgrains for the scheme during the years 2002-2003 to
2006-07. The scheme was revised in 2004 and again in 2006. According to the
Department of School Education and Literacy, the Mid-Day Meal Scheme supplements
the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), which is a scheme for universalisation of
elementary education. The improvements brought about as a result of revised scheme
are increase in the  calorific value of the food supply to the children (from 300 to 450
calories) and increase in the protein content from 8-12 grams to 12 grams. Although
the objectives of the Mid-Day Meal Scheme are laudable and have assisted in moving
towards universalisation of primary education, yet, certain shortcomings in the
implementation of the scheme have come to the notice of the Committee through the
examination of the subject which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
2. The Committee regret to observe that the funds allocated for the Mid-Day
Meal Scheme were not utilized during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09. Against the
budgetary allocations of Rs. 6678.00 crores and Rs. 8000.00 crores in 2007-08 and
2008- 09 respectively the actual expenditure during these years was
Rs. 4930.77 crores and Rs. 6982.54 crores. Obviously under utilisation of funds
during last two years must have affected various features of the scheme. The Committee
would like the Ministry to analyze the reasons for this under utilization of funds and
take suitable steps to obviate such a situation in future.
3. The Committee note that the guidelines stipulated for the scheme do provide
for the operation of voluntary organisations and  non-governmental  organisations
etc. Considering that  such organisations could also play a useful role in
operationalising the scheme, however, it is important to emphasize that the programme
must neither be perceived as NGO-driven nor get dominated by them. Since Public
Private Partnerships (PPPs)are being used in some States for associating Voluntary
Organisations/ NGOs in the Mid-Day-Meal Scheme, the Committee desire that the
Ministry should prescribe specific guidelines to govern particularly the PPP
framework. Although the State Governments, keeping in view their own circumstances
and requirements, do require a degree of flexibility to  modify the guidelines but the
basic principles underlying the guidelines governing PPPs should not be diluted.
14

15
The Committee also desire that the Ministry should develop appropriate criteria
to adjudge the suitability of NGOs/private partners for participating in the scheme's
implementation. The selected NGOs/private partners should have a strong local and
grassroot presence in the States where they operate and should also be fully conversant
with local needs and culture. In order to meet the above mentioned criteria, the
Ministry and State Governments should discourage the tendency of outside agencies
undertaking such tasks and maintain that Voluntary Organisations /NGOs deliver
the required results from the local perspective. The Committee are also of the view
that the Ministry should undertake periodic assessments of the performance of such
Voluntary Organisations /NGOs in order to satisfy themselves that the scheme is
being implemented in the intended spirit complying with the prescribed procedures
laid down for the purpose.
In the light of the fact that the Government plays a pre-eminent role in the
funding and implementation of the scheme, the Committee would like to emphasize
that monetary grants, if required to be provided should be made available only to good,
reputed and functional Voluntary Organisations/NGOs which comply with all the
directives of the Government  and fulfil all the parameters laid down by the Ministry.
The Committee also feel that concerted efforts should be made by Ministry to raise
the bar for entry of NGOs in the programme and their performance constantly
monitored in order  to check misuse of public funds that may take place in the  guise
of Public Private Partnership.
4. The Committee also note that, in some cases, public figures/civil servants
have associated themselves through the device of the establishment and management
of such organizations as NGOs. However, the Committee are constrained to point out
that such information in regard  to the association of public figures/civil servants
with the programme was not furnished to them by the Ministry. It would, therefore, be
appropriate if the Ministry devise a mechanism whereby full disclosure exists about
the role of such persons in these organisations considering its sensitivity and the
issue of utilization of funds for private purpose. They feel that service delivery of the
scheme should not become an instrument of benefit for interested persons.
5. The Committee's examination has also revealed that the scheme of central
support for providing the foodgrains through Food Corporation of India (FCI)  is
plagued with several deficiencies. The scheme, inter alia, provide for central assistance
by way of free supply of foodgrains through the Food Corporation of India (FCI), as
also reimbursement of the cost of transportation from the nearest FCI depot to the
concerned primary school. The Committee are surprised to note that the allocation of
foodgrains was based on anticipated and not on actual enrolments, prepared district-
wise and submitted by the Nodal Department to the States concerned. The Committee
are of the view that this approach could lead to a situation where the extent of lifting
of foodgrains by the State Governments could be confused with or interpreted as
progress in terms of the scheme's objectives. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the Ministry and the State Governments should devise such measures, as are based
on actual and original  numbers to measure genuinely the progress regarding  the
MDM scheme in terms of student enrolment, attendance, retention and reduction in
the drop-outs which were the major objectives of the scheme at the time of its inception.

16
6. In this connection, the Audit has also brought out some instances of stock out
with FCI godowns and also cases of drawal of foodgrains in excess of requirements. At
the instance of the Committee, the Ministry have simply forwarded a tabulated data
submitted by FCI indicating the closing balance of stocks in seven States which did
not contain any data regarding foodgrains received against the specific requirements
made. The Committee are surprised that the Ministry seem to be satisfied with the
reply of the FCI in regard to the stock out situation in FCI godowns. According to
them, mere furnishing of tabulated data indicating monthly closing balance of stocks
can not be a parameter which can substantiate that FCI had sufficient stock at all
times to cater to the requirements of the schools in serving the Mid-Day Meals in an
uninterrupted manner. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should
obtain district wise details from FCI where the food shortages were noticed during
the last three years so that corrective measures could be taken and shortcomings
removed. In their opinion, it is imperative that the Ministry should continuously
monitor the supply of the foodgrains and also give clear cut instructions to the States
for maintaining buffer stock in the areas/districts having rough terrain and inclement
weather like in Uttarakhand and other hilly States. The Committee also recommend
that the Ministry should explore the feasibility of buying food grains locally when
conditions like stock outs are noticed.
7. The Committee note that seven States viz. Tripura, UP, Kerala, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Haryana and Rajasthan drew foodgrains in excess of their requirements.
This depicts faulty assessment on their part and tardy monitoring mechanism in
place for the purpose. The Ministry have conceded that the allocation of foodgrains
was based earlier on anticipated enrolment and average attendance rate. However,
from 2007-2008 onwards, the central assistance to the States is being provided on the
basis of the number of children actually availing Mid-Day Meals. The Committee
hope that the Ministry and FCI would take appropriate measures with the implementing
authorities in various States so that foodgrains is lifted on realistic assessments.
The Committee feel that the reported cases of overdrawal of foodgrains as also the
stock out situations mentioned above should invariably form an integral part of the
agenda during the monitoring/review meetings of the Ministry.
8. The Committee have been given to understand that the two schemes viz.,
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan and Mid-Day Meal have been dovetailed by the Government
and no separate mission has been created for the MDM programme as it was seen as
a programme that would serve the purpose of SSA by addressing class room hunger.
In the opinion of the Committee as both the schemes are supplementary to each other,
it would be difficult for the Government to measure the achievements of the MDM
scheme which were anticipated at its inception apart from satisfying class room
hunger. The Committee desire that a mechanism ought to be worked out by the
Ministry which would enable them to assess the impact of Mid-Day Meal Scheme
independent of SSA.
9.  Another area of concern has been the reported instances of diversion of
funds and foodgrains meant for the Mid-Day Meal programme in 11 States which
present an appalling scenario whereby the very purpose of establishing this scheme
remains defeated. It clearly indicates lack of proper monitoring on the part of the

17
Ministry. The Committee take a very serious view of such instances whatever be the
reasons thereof. The Committee are of the view that such instances may lead to
financial manipulation by vested interests. The Ministry should have initiated suitable
remedial measures to check such repeated instances. That this was not done is
regretted. The Committee hope that Ministry would now take this matter with the
States at appropriate level so that such instances do not take place. The Committee
regret to point out that the Ministry have not responded to their specific query in
regard to fixation of accountability in respect of diversion of funds and foodgrains.
They, therefore, urge that the States should be persuaded to fix responsibility for
such irregularities at the earliest in a time bound manner.
10. The Committee are surprised to find that the most vital infrastructure
requirement for implementation of the cooked Mid-Day Meal Scheme i.e., pucca
kitchen-cum-store/kitchen sheds has not yet been provided in all the schools which
avail of this scheme notwithstanding the fact that an amount of Rs. 5000 crore has
been allocated for this and other related purposes. The Ministry had informed the
Committee in February, 2009 that based on the central assistance all the schools
would be provided cooking infrastructure by the year 2008-2009. They have now
stated (17th December, 2009) that 2,62,809 schools are yet to be sanctioned kitchen
sheds. They have also stated that it was proposed to provide these schools with kitchen
sheds during the remaining period of 11th Five Y ear Plan. It is matter of concern that
even according to the Ministry, it would take at least three years to provide kitchen
infrastructure to more than two and half lakhs of schools. Obviously due to lack of
infrastructure for cooking food the meals may have to be provided by outside agencies
or it will be cooked in unhygienic conditions or by using space provided for class
rooms. To remedy such a situation, the Committee recommend that the policy for
construction of kitchen-cum-store should be revisited and all out efforts should be
made for construction of required kitchens without further loss of time.
11.  Another related area which requires intervention of the Committee is the
fact that contrary to the existing guidelines prescribed by the Ministry that teachers
should not be assigned responsibilities which would interfere with the teaching and
learning activities, it was found that in most States teachers were actively involved in
the implementation of the scheme such as receipt of foodgrains, procurement of
vegetables and condiments, supervision of cooking and serving of meals thereby
leading to a loss of valuable teaching time. The Committee are of the view that any
splurge in the duties of the teachers other than teaching activities is not only violation
of the prescribed guidelines but also an obstruction in learning eventually leads to
injustice to the students. The Committee therefore, would like to have an assurance
from the Ministry in unequivocal terms that involvement of teachers in the scheme is
limited only to supervision/cooperation in serving of the meals without compromising
with their teaching duties and alternatively additional support mechanism in terms of
manpower and related facilities should be provided to the schools wherever required.
12. The Committee note with satisfaction that Steering-cum-Monitoring
Committees (SMCs) have been constituted in all the States/UTs which would enable
an effective monitoring and evaluation of the scheme. However, they would still like to

18
know from the Ministry whether SMCs have been set up at all the four levels i.e.,
National, State, District and Block and have been performing their functions of
guiding, monitoring, coordinating and taking action on reports of independent
monitoring agencies. Although the SMCs in States/UTs have been constituted, yet
their meetings are not being held regularly. It appears to the Committee that the
Government is reluctant to mobilize these SMCs to meet regularly and submit their
minutes to the Ministry. The Committee feel that Ministry should have taken proactive
action suo-moto to ensure that meetings of SMCs are held regularly and the findings
sent to the Ministry. The Committee would like to be intimated about the concrete
steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.
13.  Although the scheme has now been in operation since 1995, yet no specific
assessment has been conducted by the Ministry to find out the extent to which the
original objectives of the scheme such as improving enrolment, attendance and
retention have been achieved. The Committee do not approve of the common monitoring
institution that has been entrusted with the responsibility of monitoring both the
schemes i.e., SSA and Mid-Day Meal Programme. The improvements in educational
outcomes, health and nutrition must be assessed and measured with reference to the
stated objectives of the scheme. The Committee are of the view that the Ministry and
State Governments should conduct an impact assessment of the scheme in order to
ensure that its implementation was resulting in the desired outcomes.
14. The Committee note that there was a qualitative shift in the focus of the
scheme in September, 2006 from education (with its emphasis on enrolment, learning
levels and attendance) to nutrition and health. The Committee are constrained to note
that although one of the main objectivities of the revised scheme in September, 2006
was to positively impact the nutritional and health levels of primary school children,
the Ministry had not collected data on the nutritional status of children covered under
the Mid-Day Meal Scheme. Further, it is disconcerting to note that there were no
linkages with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for the health checks
prescribed under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry
should ascertain the impact of the nutritional and health levels of primary school
children and adhere to this revised objective.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH  MUNDE,
26 February, 2010 Chairman,
6 Phalguna, 1931 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10) HELD ON 27TH OCTOBER, 2009
The Committee sat from 1230 hrs. to 1330 hrs. on 27th October, 2009 in Room
No. 53, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Jaswant Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
5. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
6. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
9. Shri Ashwani Kumar
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma   — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan   — Additional Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma   — Deputy  Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller & Auditor General of India
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG. Report Central (RC)
3. Shri Gautam Guha — Director General of Audit, (Defence
Services)
4. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
5. Shri P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (Report Central)
19

20
A. Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource  Development (Department
of School Education and Literacy)
1. Smt. Anshu Vaish — Secretary (SE&L)
2. Shri S.K. Ray — AS&FA (HRD)
3. Smt.  Anita Kaul — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Anant Kumar Singh — Joint Secretary
B. Representative of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Shri Amit Mohan Prasad — Joint Secretary
C. Representative of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and  Public
Distribution (Department of Food and Public  Distribution)
Shri Bhagwan Sahai — Joint Secretary
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India and the representatives of the Ministries of Human Resource
Development, Health and Family Welfare and Food and Public Distribution to the
sitting of the Committee, The Chairman then, drew the attention of the representatives
of the Ministries to the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker
regarding confidentiality of proceedings.
2. The Committee, thereafter, took up the subject 'National Programme for
Nutritional Support to Primary Education (Mid-Day Meal Scheme)' for discussion. The
representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development explained various
aspects of the Mid-Day Meal Scheme and attended to the queries of the Members. As
some queries required detailed and statistical reply, the representatives of the Ministry
submitted that they would furnish written replies in due course.
3. The Chairman thanked the C&AG of India and his colleagues for providing
assistance to the Committee in examining the subject. The Chairman also thanked the
representatives of the Ministries of Human Resource Development, Health and Family
Welfare and Food and Public Distribution for appearing before the Committee and
furnishing information that the Committee desired in connection with the examination
of the subject.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
*** Matters not related to this Report.

APPENDIX  II
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-10) HELD ON 28TH JANUARY , 2010
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 28th January, 2010 from 1130 hrs to
1415 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Yashwant Sinha
10. Shri K. Sudhakaran
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
14. Dr. K. Malaisamy
15. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
4.  Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
5.  Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
21

22
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — Comptroller & Auditor General of India
2. Ms. Rekha Gupta — D y. C&AG (Report Central)
3. Shri H. Pradeep Rao — Director General of Audit (Central
Expenditure)
4. Shri P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (Report Central)
5. Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit (Economic & Service
Ministries)
Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of
Health and Family Welfare)
1. Ms. K. Sujatha Rao — Secretary (Health and Family Welfare)
2. Shri R.K. Srivastava — DGHS
3. Shri Naved Masood — Additional Secretary (Finance)
4. Shri V .Vekatachalam — Additional Secretary
5. Shri B.K. Prasad — Joint Secretary
6. Shri Vineet Chawdhry — Joint Secretary
7. Ms. Shakuntala Gamlin — Joint Secretary
8. Dr. H.C. Goel — Addl. DG., DGHS
2 . *** *** ***
3 . *** *** ***
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The representatives of the Ministry then withdrew.
5. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports:
( i ) *** *** ***
(ii) C&AG's Report No. PA 13 of 2008 (Union Government—Performance Audit)
relating to ‘National Programme for Nutritional Support to Primary Education
(Mid-day Meal Scheme)’; and
(iii) *** *** ***
6. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the same with some
modifications/changes and authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the
light of suggestions made by the Members and the consequential changes arising out
of factual verification by the audit and present the same to the Parliament.
7. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Matters not related to this Report.
GMGIPMRND—1438LS(S-3)—05.05.2010.