18
PROCUREMENT OF STORES
AND INVENTORY CONTROL
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2009-2010
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

EIGHTEENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
PROCUREMENT OF STORES AND
INVENTORY CONTROL
(DEPARTMENT OF SPACE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on  29 April,  2010
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  29 April,  2010
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April 2010/Vaisakha 1932 (Saka)

PAC NO. 1913
Price: Rs. 40/-
© 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of  India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-10) ............................ (iii)
COMPOSITION  OF S UB-COMMITTEE -V OF THE P UBLIC ACCOUNTS  C OMMITTEE
(2009-2010)....................................................................................................... (v)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (vii)
REPORT
PART-I Narrative Portion
I. Introductory ...................................................................................... 1
II. Status of Pendency Position ............................................................ 2
III. Performance  Audit  on  Procurement  of  Stores and Inventory
Control .............................................................................................. 3
IV . Persistent Savings ............................................................................ 5
V. Deficient Procurement Procedure & Planning.................................. 7
(i) Non-prescription of any time frame...................................... 7
(ii) Inaccurate Assessment of Requirement by Indentors ........ 8
(iii) Lack of Competitiveness in the Tendering Process ............. 9
(iv) Purchase of Furniture on Proprietary Basis ......................... 11
(v) Non-adherence to CVC Guidelines ...................................... 12
(vi) Irregular Payment of Advances to Suppliers ....................... 13
(vii) Delay in Inspection of Materials and Non-replacement of
Rejected Stores ..................................................................... 14
VI. Inventory Control & Management ................................................... 16
(i) Non-conduct of Physical Verification of Bonded Stores ..... 16
(ii) Non-Disposal/Delayed  disposal  of  Surplus  &  Obsolete
Items ..................................................................................... 17
PART-II Observations and Recommendations.................................................... 19
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of Sub-Committee-V held on
5th February, 2010............................................................................. 26
II. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of Sub-Committee-V held on
23rd February, 2010........................................................................... 29
III. Minutes of the Eleventh sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2009-10) held on 26th April, 2010..................................................... 33
(i)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2009-10)
PRESENT
*Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Naveen Jindal
6. Shri Satpal Maharaj
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
9. Shri Jaswant Singh
10. Shri Jitendra Singh (Alwar)
11. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
12. Shri Yashwant Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
14. Dr. M. Thambidurai
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Sharad Anantrao Joshi
18. $V acant
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Dr. K. Malaisamy
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
*Appointed as the Chairman of the Committee  w.e.f . 6th January, 2010 vice Shri Jaswant Singh
resigned from the Chairmanship of the Committee.
$Vice Shri Ashwani Kumar retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
(iii)

COMPOSITION  OF  SUB-COMMITTEE-V  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2009-2010)
*Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convener
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee/Sub-Committee on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha
w.e.f. 9th April, 2010.
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Eighteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "Procurement of Stores and
Inventory Control" based on Chapter II of C&AG Report No. PA 2 of 2008 for the year
ended March, 2007 relating to the Department of Space.
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
March, 2007 was laid on the Table of the House on 24th October, 2008.
3. Taking cognizance of the inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/
Departments in furnishing the Action Taken Notes on the Non-selected Audit
Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports within the stipulated time frame, the Public Accounts
Committee  (2009-10) took up the subject for detailed examination and report. A
Sub-Committee was specially constituted for the purpose. In due consultation with
the Audit, it was decided to examine the position in respect of the Department of Space
alongwith some other Ministries/Departments.
4. In the process of the scrutiny of the Audit Paragraphs/Chapters/Reports
pending with the Department of Space, the Sub-Committee came across certain
pending Paragraphs/Chapters on very important issues and considered it prudent to
examine and report the same alongwith the Non-Compliance issue. Accordingly, the
Sub-Committee took up the above mentioned Chapter of the Audito Report for
in-depth examination.
5. The Sub-Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Department of
Space on 5th February, 2010 and 23rd February, 2010. The Committee considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 26th April, 2010. Minutes of the Sittings
form Appendices to the Report.
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
7. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for their efforts in examining the
subject in detail and finalizing and placing the Report before the main Committee.
8. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Department of Space for tendering evidence before the Sub-Committee and  furnishing
information that the Sub-Committee/Committee desired in connection with the
examination of the subject.
9. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH MUNDE,
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 V aisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(vii)

REPORT
PART- I
Narrative Portion
I. INTRODUCTORY
The Reports of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India, after being laid in
Parliament in accordance with Article 151 of the Constitution of India, stand referred to
the Public Accounts Committee for their scrutiny. As it becomes practically impossible
for the Public Accounts Committee to examine each and every paragraph contained in
the Audit Reports, the Committee adopt a selective approach and take up a few relatively
more important paragraphs for indepth examination at the beginning of the term every
year. As regards the paragraphs which are not formally selected for examination by the
Committee, these are dealt with by means of a procedure where-by the Ministries/
Departments are required to furnish the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to the
Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department  of Expenditure).
2. But as there was inordinate delay on the part of the Ministries/Departments in
furnishing the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes, the Committee in their 105th
Report (Tenth Lok Sabha) had recommended that with effect from 31st March, 1996 the
Action Taken Notes on all the Paragraphs of the Reports of the C&AG, which are not
formally taken up by the PAC for examination and Reports presented thereon, should
be furnished to the Committee within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports.
3. During 2000-01, the Committee decided that the remedial/corrective Action
Taken Notes furnished by the respective Ministries/Departments should be categorized
by the Audit under three broad heads namely 'Accepted', 'Partially Accepted' and 'Not
Accepted'. In subsequent developments, the Committee also decided that a breif on
those Action Taken Notes which are categorized as 'Not Accepted' should be furnished
by the Office of C&AG , clearly indicating the reasons for such categorization as well as
the points of difference between Audit and the Ministry/Department concerned.
4. Even then, various Ministries/Departments have been unable to furnish the
remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to the Committee through the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Expenditure) within the prescribed time line of four months.
For example as on 28th February, 2010 remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on a
total number of 3450 Chapters/Paragraphs were pending with various Ministries/
Departments.
5. Against this backdrop, the Committee took up the subject for detailed examination
during the year 2009-10. A Sub-Committee was constituted to go deep into the matter,
prepare separate Reports on each Ministry/Department concerned with the subject
and place the same before the Main Committee for their consideration. In the process,
the Sub-Committee obtained Background Notes/Preliminary Materials and Written
Replies from the Ministries/Departments concerned. The Sub-Committee also took
separate evidence of the representatives of the respective Ministries/Departments on
different dates.
1

2
6. This Report pertains to the remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes on the
Audit Paragraphs pending with the Department of Space. Out of the 3450 Chapters/
Paragraphs pending with various Ministries/Departments, four Chapters/Paragraphs
were pending with DOS as on 28th February, 2010. One of the important Chapters/
Paragraphs out of these four pending Chapters/Paragraphs is Chapter-II of the Report
of the C&AG of India for the year ended March, 2007—Union Government, Scientific
Departments No. PA 2 of 2008 relating to the Performance Audit on Procurement of
Stores and Inventory Control in the Department of Space. The Sub-Committee decided
to take up this Chapter for examination in order to gauge the compliance of the
Department to the Audit observations/suggestions, in addition to the status of the
remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes pending with the DOS.
II.   STATUS OF PENDENCY POSITION
7.   As mentioned above, the Sub-Committee were informed by the Audit that as of
February, 2010, four Paragraphs of the C&AG Reports upon which remedial/corrective
Action Taken Notes were to be furnished, were pending with the Department of Space.
Out of these four pending Paragraphs, Audit was awaiting the re-submission of three
ATNs consequent upon their observations and ATNs on one Paragraph was yet to be
received from the Department even for the first time.
8. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to be apprised of the latest
status of the pending ATNs. In reply, the Department of Space stated that one Audit
Paragraph i.e., No. PA 9 of 2006—Non-Tax Receipts was pending with them. ATN in
respect of another Audit Para on Performance Audit Report on Procurement and
Inventory Control had already been submitted to the Principal Director of Audit,
Scientific Departments, who had sent his vetted comments on March, 2010 and the
Department were seeking certain details from the DOS/ISRO centres/units for sending
the revised ATN to the Audit.
9. Asked to state categorically the exact date by which the Department would be
able to send the ATNs/Revised ATNs to the Audit, it was replied that the revised ATN
on Performance Audit on Procurement of Stores and Inventory Control was proposed
to be sent by 31st March, 2010 whereas ATN on Non-Tax Receipts was proposed to be
submitted latest by 30th April, 2010 to the Principal Director of Audit, Scientific
Departments, for vetting.
10. The Sub-Committee then desired to know the mechanism devised by the
Department to ensure submission of corrective/remedial ATNs within the stipulated
time frame. In reply, the Department of Space stated that they had been taking utmost
care to send the ATNs to the Principal Director of Audit (PDA) within the stipulated
time for vetting on receipts of which they were presented to the Monitoring Cell of the
Ministry of Finance. However, in respect of the above stated pending Audit Paras,
delays occurred because extensive data/information were to be collected from various
centres/units and also due to some important major decisions/action like revision of
the Department's purchase procedure and guidelines issued to various centres/units
that were to be taken at the Departmental level during the intervening period consequent
upon the C&AG's recommendations.

3
11. The Department further stated that it was possible to adhere to the stipulated
time period in respect of those Audit Paras which contained Audit observations on
one particular transaction or on a set of similar type of financial transactions on a
particular issue. However, in case of Performance Audit, observations were system
based covering various issues, locations of different Centres/Units of the Department/
Ministry and voluminous data for which it became extremely difficult to stick to the
prescribed time line. The Department, however, assured that efforts would be made to
send the ATN at the earliest in respect of the future Reports of the C&AG.
III. PERFORMANCE  AUDIT ON PROCUREMENT OF STORES AND
INVENTORY CONTROL
12. The Department of Space (DOS) and their constituent Units are responsible
for planning and execution of national space activities. The main objectives of the
Space programme include development of satellites, launch vehicles, sounding rockets
and associated ground systems. DOS are also involved in research activities for the
development and application of Space, Science and Technology. The programmes
taken up by DOS include:—
• INSAT programme for telecommunications, broadcasting, meteorology and
developmental education.
• Remote sensing programme for application of satellite imagery for various
developmental purposes.
• Research and Development in space sciences and technology.
• Launch vehicle programme for launching spacecraft indigenously.
13. DOS spends around 56 per cent of its overall budget on procurement of stores
and equipment for implementation of the above programmes. The procurement budget
of DOS ranged from Rs. 905.43 crore in 2001-02 to Rs. 1921.10 crore in 2006-07,
aggregating to Rs. 8636.18 crore over these six years.
14. The overall control of the procurement of stores and inventory control of the
DOS rests with the Chairman, Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO)/Secretary,
DOS. There are nine Centres of ISRO/DOS to execute the various programmes. As far
as individual Centres are concerned, the Control rests with their respective Directors,
who are assisted by Associate Directors, Controller and Purchase and Stores division
at each Centre. Purchase and Stores Division of a Centre is headed by Head, Purchase
and Stores who is assisted by Purchase/Stores Officers. Purchase proposals beyond
the powers of Directors of the Centres are approved/sanctioned by DOS.
15. The Performance Audit of the Procurement of Stores and Inventory Control in
DOS was conducted during July to October, 2006 and October to November 2007,
covering a period of six years from 2001-02 to 2006-07. The aims and objectives of the
Audit were to examine and assess whether:—
• planning for procurement was efficient and the requirements were determined
realistically;

4
• procurements were made in a transparent, competitive and fair manner to
secure best value for money;
• adequate efforts were made to exploit available alternatives and broaden
vendor base to maximize competition, especially in respect of single tender/
proprietary items;
• the system of evaluation of tenders was fair and objective giving equal
opportunity to all the participating bidders and selection of vendors was
made in a transparent manner, following laid down criteria as per codal
provisions;
• system of processing and finalization of tenders was efficient ensuring timely
placement of orders at most economic rates;
• a sound mechanism of post contract management was in place in the context
of inspection of materials, monitoring of rejected items & their replacement,
adjustment of outstanding advances etc.;
• inventory control was effective and there were no cases of overstocking/
shortages, of bonded/non-bonded stores; and
• physical verification of stores was carried out on a regular basis and surplus,
obsolete & unserviceable stores were disposed off timely.
16.  The Highlights of the Performance Audit were as follows:—
• Out of a total procurement budget of Rs. 8636.18 crore of the Department of
Space (DOS) during 2001-02 to 2006-07, the unutilized budget increased
consistently from Rs. 83.28 crore in 2002-03 to Rs. 438.28 crore in 2006-07. The
extent of savings was as high as 30 to 38 per cent in some years in certain
Centres, indicating serious deficiencies in procurement planning and
management.
• Procurement planning of DOS was deficient as it placed orders on piecemeal
indent basis. Assessment of requirement and cost estimations by indentors
were inaccurate, leading to a large number of indents not resulting in purchase
orders and wide variations between indent value and order value. Non-
consolidation of similar purchase also resulted in uneconomical purchases
and extra expenditure of Rs. 93.95 lakh.
• Procurement practices adopted by DOS did not ensure adequate transparency
and competition as 67 per cent of procurements amounting to Rs. 996 crore
were made on proprietary/single tender basis. There were instances of
proprietary purchases being made for routine items and also in cases where
more than one source of supply was available.
• In violation of codal provisions and CVC guidelines, negotiations were held
with other than lowest bidders resulting in placement of irregular purchase
orders in eight cases, amounting to Rs. 44.58 crore. Non-award of contract to
the lowest bidders resulted in extra expenditure of Rs. 3.42 crore in two cases.

5
• ISAC awarded contract to a supplier who was not found technically suitable
and thus, extended undue favour by awarding contracts worth Rs. 4.27 crore.
In other two procurements, ISAC extended undue favour to the suppliers in
award of contract worth Rs. 9.99 crore by changing the selection criteria after
invitation of bids. Changes in terms of purchase order/contracts in other
three cases benefited suppliers to the tune of Rs. 1.87 crore.
• Delay and inefficiencies in processing and finalization of tenders resulted in
avoidable additional expenditure of Rs. 2.70 crore in two cases due to
procurement of stores at higher rates, after expiry of inital validity of offer.
• There were significant delays in inspection of the stores received. Non-
replacement of rejected items at Indian Space Application Centre (ISAC)
which resulted in infructuous expenditure of 8.73 crore in five cases.
• Advances in 1177 cases, worth Rs. 437.73 crore, paid to foreign and
indigenous suppliers were pending for 1 to 15 years and more. No interest
was charged on these long pending advances by the Department of Space
(DOS).
• There was lack of monitoring of adjustment of advances and renewal of Bank
Guarantees. Non renewal of 147 cases of Bank Guarantees amounting to
Rs. 83.65 crore may expose the organization to financial risks in cases where
suppliers default in making supplies/executing work orders.
• ISAC did not revise its procurement policy for Bonded Stores since the last
decade which resulted in blocking of funds worth Rs. 600 crore.
• There was overstocking in 9055 categories of electronic, electrical, electro-
mechanical components (Bonded Stores) worth Rs. 75.02 crore, resulting in
infructuous expenditure due to obsolescence of items. No physical verification
of Bonded Stores was conducted in ISAC after 1995-96.
IV. PERSISTENT SAVINGS
17. The budget and expenditure of the Department of Space during the years
2001-02 to 2006-07 was as under:—
Expenditure Against Budget-DOS
(Rs. In crore)
Sl. No. Description 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07
1. Budget 2034.95 2264.99 2368.89 2731.02 2848.60 3270.42
2. Expenditure 1900.97 2162.22 2268.80 2533.48 2667.60 2988.67
3. Procurement Budget 905.43 1025.22 1433.96 1715.19 1635.28 1921.10
4. Procurement Exp. 784.25 941.94 1332.56 1583.12 1396.16 1482.82
5. Un-utilised 121.18 83.28 101.40 132.07 239.12 438.28
Procurement
Budget
6. Procurement 13 8 7 8 15 15
Budget not
utilized
(Percentage)

6
18. Thus, during the period under Audit review, the Department could not utilize
7 to 15 per cent of their procurement budget, which was on an average 56 per cent of
the overall budget and thus constituted the major activity of DOS. As would be seen
from the above data, the amount of procurement budget remaining unutilized increased
consistently from Rs. 83.28 crore in 2002-03 to Rs. 438.28 crore in 2006-07. According to
Audit, it indicated the declining efficiency of the procurement system adopted by the
Department in ensuring timely delivery of stores and equipment.
19. Responding to the above findings of Audit, the Department of Space stated
that the DOS/ISRO functioned in a Project and Mission mode towards development
and realization of satellites & launch vehicles, and their applications for the socio-
economic benefit of the country. The satellite and launch vehicle projects were stated
to be very challenging, involving advanced technologies, complex manufacturing
processes and extensive development and testing. Most of the systems and sub-
systems were realized from the Indian Industry as a move towards indigenization.
Some of the high-end components/materials/parts/sub-assemblies required for
realization of the systems/sub-systems were imported. As such the expenditure relating
to the various Projects/Programmes of the Department was largely related to the progress
of milestones such as design review, proto-fabrication, realization of systems/sub-
systems, testing and delivery of various equipment, components, etc. It was further
stated that the Department, while formulating its annual budget, arrived at the
requirement of funds for the various projects/schemes based on the assessment of the
progress of milestone targets to be achieved and the likely cashflow requirement
during the year. However, owing to the complex nature of the space technology,
developmental uncertainties and export restrictions in foreign procurements, marginal
variations in actual expenditure with reference to BE became inevitable.
20. In the above context, the Sub-Committee desired to know the specific reasons
for which the allocated funds could not be optimally utilized. In reply, the Department
of Space stated that major savings i.e., 15 per cent shown by Audit were during the
years 2005-06 and 2006-07. The entire provision in 2005-06 for Satellite navigation and
Resourcesat-2 could not be utilized due to non-finalisation of the Global participations
and the associated financial implications and owing to detailed interaction required
with various user communities for fine tuning the payload requirements.  Similarly, due
to non-approval of Advanced Communication Satellite, Semi-Cryogenic Engine
Development and Earth Observation New Missions and non-finalisation of the Industry
Contract, Management Strategy and Financial aspects of the Galileo Programme, the
entire provision earmarked for these programmes could not be utilized during 2006-07.
21. The Additional Secretary, DOS, explaining the position, stated in evidence:—
"......Contrary to other Departments, we are not a monthly-oriented expenditure
Department. It is a project-oriented expenditure Department. It is possible
that five of my total nine projects will take fruition only in November or
December. But my Revised Estimate is decided on the basis of my performance
upto November. So, it can happen that when the Government of India wants
us to spend 65 per cent of the Budget Estimate, we would have spent only
40 per cent only till November. We are fully capable of spending the remaining

7
60 per cent within March because our major expenditure will be in December
and January. We still are not able to convince the Expenditure Department in
the Ministry of Finance about this. Even if they are convinced, may be it would
be convenient for them also to invoke the normal principle and procedure and
to cut our Budget. Our RE had always been less than our BE...."
22. The Additional Secretary, DOS further submitted:—
''....Our expenditure compared to RE in the past three years is 95 per cent
plus........"
23. When asked about the measures taken to convince the Department of
Expenditure to get the required Budgetary support, the Additional Secretary, DOS
deposed:—
".......Now, this year we made a new attempt. We said our projects would be
advanced in the first and the second quarter itself."
24. The Department responding to another query, stated in a Post-Evidence Reply
that during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09, the non-utilisation of the Procurement
Budget had been 5.55 per cent and 7.59 per cent respectively.
V .  DEFICIENT   PROCUREMENT   PROCEDURE   &  PLANNING
(i) Non-prescription of any time frame
25. Procurement by Ministries/Departments, is an important activity, which should
facilitate availability of stores/equipment at the optimal level and in a timely manner for
carrying out vairous organizational activities and programmes. Besides being
economical, efficient and effective, procurement process should ensure transparency
and fairness. But, Audit review revealed that the DOS purchase procedure did not
prescribe any time frame for various stages of procurement, which adversely impacted
efficiency and economy of the procurement system.
26. Responding to the above observation by Audit, the Department of Space
stated that though the Department did not prescribe any time frame for various stages
of procurement, they had a mechanism in place to periodically monitor/control various
sub-processes involved in the procurement cycle.
27. Not convinced with the clarification made by the Department, the Sub-Committee
desired to know the reasons for not prescribing any time frame at different stages of
procurement, in accordance with the General Financial Rules (GFR). In reply, the
Department stated that taking into account the observation of Audit and the requirement
under GFR 2005, the Department vide its Circular No. 13045/8/2008-III dated November,
28, 2008 had issued necessary instructions to the DOS/ISRO Centres/Units prescribing
a time limit of 3 months from the date of indent to the date of placement of purchase
order as under:—
(a) The lead time (from the date of finalization of indent to the date of procurement
of purchase order) should not exceed 3 months in case of all the procurements

8
(indigenous as well as foreign procurements). Reasons for delay, if any should
be recorded; and
(b) Depending upon the type of item, each Centre may chart out a calendar in this
regard covering different stages like indent finalization, tendering, purchase
approvals, issue of PO, etc., conforming to the prescribed lead time.
(ii) Inaccurate Assessment of Requirement by Indentors
28. Audit pointed out that the procurement planning of DOS was weak as
requirements were not accurately assessed by the Indentors, cost of estimates were
not realistic and requirements of different users were not clubbed, which led to
inefficiencies and uneconomical purchases. For example, during the period 2001-06 at
ISAC, out of 15478 items raised, 1798 indents (12 per cent) amounting to Rs. 682.50
crore did not result in purchase orders. Similarly, at Space Application Centre (SAC),
random test check revealed that 83 indents valuing Rs. 63.42 crore did not result in
purchase orders.
29. The Department clarified that the DOS Purchase Procedure prescribed that
whenever there was a change in the specifications, a fresh indent should be raised.
The systems, sub-systems, equipment, etc., used in the Space projects/programmes
involved complex technologies susceptible to changes/modifications due to scientific/
technological innovations/improvements took place with regard to the indented item,
the initial indent would be cancelled and a fresh indent raised for the improved item.
Most often, there would be no response to the tenders floated by DOS/ISRO for
procurement of strategic items, resulting in the closure of the purchase file concerned,
and a fresh indent raised with revised specifications or scaled down requirements. The
Department further stated that all the above cases were beyond the control of the
indentors. The indents in such cases, therefore, would not fructify into purchase
orders, and this could not be termed as inadequate planning at the indenting stage.
30. Drawing the attention of the Department to the importance of a prudent and
realistic procurement planning for releasing purchase orders according to plan and
requirement, the Sub-Committee asked about the measures taken by the Department in
that direction. In reply, DOS stated that they had a system of preparing the White Book
(Budget Proposals) wherein the proposed Annual Budget indicated expenditure to be
incurred on projects/equipment/civil works for a particular year as well as the following
year. It was further stated that as the Department operated in a project/programme
mode, the procurements of various items were prioritized and carried out by various
centres/units accordingly.
31. Asked to state the specific efforts made by the Department to ensure accurate
projection of requirements and realistic estimation of coat etc., the Department replied
that they had issued instruction to consolidate the requirements of all the end users at
the central level for procurement of the  same iems on half-yearly/annual basis and
chalk out procurement plans to avoid delays, repetitive procurements etc., and to
maximize value for money by availing quantity discounts. It was also stated that the

9
Department had issued its revised purchase procedure effective from 1st April, 2009
consistent with GFR-2005 to the possible extent.
(iii) Lack of competitiveness in the Tendering Process
32. Audit observed that majority of the procurements were made on proprietary/
single tender basis. This mode of procurement was observed even in cases of routine
items and where more than one source of supply was available.
33. In response to the above observation by Audit, the DOS stated that the
systems, sub-systems, components, equipment, etc., used in the satellite and launch
vehicle projects/programmes of DOS/ISRO involved complex technologies and were
to be space-qualified. For space applications, one of the most important criteria was
the heritage of the items being used on board the satellite, etc. Usage of any component,
etc., without any heritage, however, small, might jeopardize the entire satellite or launch
vehicle resulting in the failure of the entire project. It would, therefore, be inevitable to
go in for proprietary procurement of space-qualified components. Taking into account
the specific requirements of ISRO for implementing its various projects and programmes,
the DOS has formulated its own Purchase Procedure. The DOS Purchase Procedure
provided that purchase of proprietary goods might be made on single tender basis
from either the manufactures or their authorized distributors or agents. DOS/ISRO
Centres/Units accordingly raised proprietary indents wherever required duly following
the DOS Purchase Procedure. However, before proprietary indent was raised, the
Centres/Units had to ensure that  there was no other manufacturer available to meet
their critical requirements. For this purpose, the Centres/Units utilized all the available
means including internet before embarking on proprietary indent. The availability of
the provision for proprietary procurement in the DOS Purchase Procedure
notwithstanding all proprietary indents whose value exceeded Rs. 2.00 lakh, were
vetted and cleared by the Indent Review Committee.
34. When the Sub-Committee desired to be apprised of the exact position, the
Director, Space Commission deposed in evidence:—
"In regard to space activities, we have a very strange requirement of specific
electronic components, metals, materials and the like. Most of them are
imported. The percentage of import is very large. We have a major difficulty in
importing from foreign countries. They have put a total ban on the components
being obtained for India very specifically. It has come to a stage where they
are watching what we are buying, what is our intenton of buying. These are
being watched very carefully. So, we have one reason of the type. The other
one is, for Space, we use very specific electronic components which are not
manufactured by so many people. I would cite a few very specific examples,
which are the radiation hardened Integrated Circuits (ICs) and the electronic
Devices. In the world, only one or two companies make them and most of
them are in the US. We have done extensive survey and we found that
worldwide there are only very few electronic items which can be used for the
space programme. The point is that the normal electronic items will not work
in the Space programme. So, we have prepared a big document called Preferred

10
Part List for ISRO and similar thing is there for NASA as well as the Space
Agency of the Europe. So, we strictly follow it. We are allowed to use
components from that book only. Hence, we are constrained to use that along
for Space programmes. Therefore, there is no point in going for a public
tender etc. This is one of the reasons. Here, I would like to mention that we are
trying to get the support from the Indian industry. We have cultivated 125
Indian industries investing our own money, instrumentation and machinery.
They are now the partners with us. There also, again, some very specific
areas are there which we have cultivated with them. We selected those as our
preferred manufacturing companies. A majority of the items for Space come
from these two heads........ We are constrained to buy very specialised
components available from very restricted suppliers. There is also very tight.
Political compulsions tell us that we have to go for this mode of procurement."
35. The Additional Secretary, DOS supplemented this colleague by stating:—
"I want to add that what the Space Department needs cannot be produced
en masse. We need materials which are very few in number. We have to take
into consideration two factors: one, the continuous efforts to have
indigenization to the best extent possible so that tomorrow we are not under
threat by any external forces, and, two, to keep the Space Department going.
So, what we do is apart from going abroad for purchase wherever essential,
we spend a lot of money on R&D. We choose industries which are capable of
manufacturing what we want. We also help them in developing our research.
In some of the cases, we have provided them facilities in our own campus
because we do not want to let know the material combination to outsiders.
Even, manufacturing is done here because components are so little in number
that they do not have a big market. So, if I have to spend again on another
person, I have to spend a lot of money. This is one reason why when I go for
indigenization, perforce, I am constrained to go one particular party repeatedly.
After the last Audit, what we have done is that where there are going to be
materials, units which are to be procured by us in large numbers, we try to
create competition within the industry. Even there, we first try to approach
our public sector units. If they are not able to produce, then, we go to the
private sector. In reality, our dependence, to some extent, on foreign elements
will be continuing for some more time because right are the moment, the
Indian industry is not capable of manufacturing everything that we want. So,
we have targeted those items where there can be a threat of ban as the priority
items to be given to the Indian industry for manufacturing."
36. Asked to state specifically the remedial measures taken by the Department
post Audit Observation, the Director, Space Commission submitted:—
"As you have rightly pointed out, there are some aberrations which we found
from the observations of Audit. We had made some of the few mistakes that
you have mentioned. We have tightened the procedures. We assure you that
even such small errors will not occur in future."

11
37. The Department also stated that they had issued instruction to various DOS/
ISRO Centres/Units:—
(a) To ensure that in case of proprietary/specific brand items, the detailed
justification for purchase on proprietary basis/specific brand is to be placed
on record to be approved by the Competent Authority.
(b) To provide equal and fair opportunity, it is essential that utmost importance is
given to the preparation, continuous evaluation and updating of the vendor's
list.
(c) To build up centralized database of vendors for generic products to bring in
more competition in the procurement process and reduce proprietary/single
tender procurements, which could be accessed by other Centres also, if
required.
38. It was further stated that during the period 2006-07 to 2008-09, the percentage
of proprietary/single mode of tendering/procurement had substantially reduced in
terms of amount as well as number.
(iv) Purchase of Furniture on Proprietary Basis
39. Audit scrutiny revealed that Space Application Centre (SAC) raised a limited
tender indent for supply and installation of furniture items. Six firms responded, out of
which three, including M/s. Godrej and Boyce Co., were rejected on technical grounds.
M/s. Sudama Furniture Ltd. was selected, whose offer of Rs. 63.26 lakh was the lowest
and the Indentor decided to place the order with the firm. However, the items were not
purchased by SAC from the L
1 and another indent was raised on proprietary basis in
favour of M/s. Godrej and Boyce Co., which was rejected earlier on technical grounds.
Finally, order was placed on M/s. Godrej and Boyce Co., at a total cost of Rs. 79.88 lakh.
Thus, Proprietary Article Certificat was issued for a common item like furniture for
which other manufacturers were availbale in the market, as proved by the response to
the limited tenders issued. Further, having known that earlier offer was only for
Rs. 63.26 lakh which was accepted by the Indentor, order was placed for Rs. 79.88 lakh,
thus, incurring avoidable expenditure of Rs. 16.62 lakh.
40. The Department of Space clarified that the furniture items were for the
Laboratory in the Radar Imaging Satellite (RISAT) building in SAC. The offer of
M/s.Godrej & Boyce Co., contained in two pages, did not contain any information
regarding made-go-order furniture items, which were the main requiement of SAC.
Further,  M/s. Godrej & Boyce Co. did not give the material specifications in the
Request for Proposal (RFP). The offer of M/s. Godrej & Boyce Co. did not meet the
technical requirements of SAC, and hence, was not considered. The order, thereafter,
was to be placed on M/s. Sudama Furniture Ltd., whose offer was the lowest, viz.
Rs. 63.26 lakh. At that stage, SAC reconsidered the issue taking into account the facts
that (a) M/s. Godrej & Boyce Co., had already supplied furniture items to SAC, (b) their
products were of high quality, (c) furniture items required were made-to-order, i.e.
non-standard items, and decided to go in for proprietary procurement from M/s. Godrej
& Boyce Co., mainly to have uniformity in the furniture items in SAC and the high

12
quality of the products of M/s. Godrej & Boyce Co., were superior in quality when
compared to the furniture products of small-time traders.
41. Not satisfied with the Department's clarifications when the Sub-Committee
further enquired into the matter, the Director, Space Commission deposed in evidence:—
"..........It is a very small aberration. But I would tell what happened. There was
a purchase order from our Ahmedabad Centre. The purchase file was ready
for signing. But the highest authority there found that the party we were
going to place order was a small furniture shop. Somehow it got missed. So,
immediately correction was done, not to go with large money to a small
furniture shop, and go for a reputed company as we are buying for the
Government. The furniture should be durable and its quality should be good.
It was a correction done at the last moment. Before signing it, they recognized
that we were making an error."
42. The Additional Secretary, DOS supplemented:—
"In the tender conditions, we should have stated that whoever is giving
tender should have had a minimum turnover of this much. This point was
missed. So, we will rectify it in future. We admit that it is a point which was
missed."
43. The Sub- Committee enquired whether specification of a minimum turnover in
the tender condition would not discourage competition and encourage monopoly. In
reply, the Additional Secretary, DOS submitted:—
"Sir, in matters of furniture we may not create a monopoly because today in
India, we have a number of concerns and good companies."
(v)   Non-adherence to CVC Guidelines.
44. As per the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) Guidelines issued in November,
1998 and as per DOS purchase procedure, all post tender negotiations are banned
except in the case of negotiations with L
1 (Lowest Tender). But Audit observed that
DOS not only violated its own purchase procedure but also CVC Guidelines and
provisions contained in GFR, by negotiating with the firms and awarding contracts to
the firms who were not found lowest in the bid evaluation and who were not technically
suitable. To be specific, in eight cases negotiations were held with vendors other than
L
1 and in two cases and Liquid Propulsion System Centre (LPSC) and Space Application
Centre (SAC), orders were placed in L2 bidders, ignoring L1, despite the lowest bidders
being found technically suitable by the Technical Evaluation Committee.
45. Clarifying the position, the Department of Space stated that the Best and Final
Offers (BAFOs) were called for not only from the L1 bidder but also from other technically
suitable bidders primarily to ensure that the final prices were advantageous and result
in savings to the exchequer. The Department further clarified that if L
1 was alone called
for price negotiation, there might not be any reduction in the price offered and if at all

13
there was any price reduction, it would only be marginal, as the party would surely
know that its quotation was the lowest.
46. Not satisfied with the reasonings offered by the Department, the Sub-Committee
querried whether it would not be prudent to adhere to the CVC Guidelines as well as to
the Department's own Purchase Procedure. In reply, DOS stated that they had instructed
Centres/Units to strictly comply with the instructions of CVC and accordingly
negotiations except with L
1, would be banned without any exception. It was further
stated that similar provisions had been included in the Department's Purchase procedure
also.
(vi) Irregular Payment of Advances to Suppliers
47. As per DOS Purchase Procedure, the normal terms of payment provided for the
release of 100 per cent payment within 30 days time after receipt and acceptance of
materials in good condition. As a relaxation, payment upto 98 per cent against proof of
dispatch was allowed. Advance payment should be made in exceptional cases only.
For imported items, the DOS Purchase Procedure provided for advance payment
through 'Sight Draft' and letter of Credit. As per the CVC Guidelines, advance payments
should be made only against payment of interest. But Audit review revealed that ISAC
Satellite Centre (ISAC), Space Application Centre (SAC) and Liquid Propulsion System
Centre (LPSC) were making advance payments in a routine and liberal manner, without
documenting any reasons. As of march, 2006, Rs. 437.73 crore paid as advances in
1177 cases was pending settlement. In case of imports, in 557 cases, advance payments
amounting to Rs. 199.64 crore had been outstanding for more than one year of which,
advances paid in 250 cases amounting to Rs. 5.43 crore were pending for more than
five years. Similarly, in 620 cases of indigenous purchases, advance payments
amounting to Rs. 238 crore were outstanding for more than one year of which, advance
paid in 155 cases amounting to Rs. 14.85 crore were pending for more than five years.
48. Responding to the above revealations by Audit, the Department of Space
inter-alia stated that DOS/ISRO Centres/Units normally gave advances only when
the suppliers insisted for the same either for setting up the facility or for procurring
costly raw materials. Any insistence of interest on such advances would only result in
increase in the cost/price to that extent or more by the suppliers. Normally, most of the
advances got cleared as soon as the supply was completed. In many of the large value
purchase orders/contracts, payments were released in different milestones and final
payment were released on delivery and acceptance where the lead time was between
3-4 years for completion of the contract. Hence, in these types of contracts, all milestone
payments made were treated as advances till final product was delivered and accepted.
The Department further stated that all these milestone payments were supported by
Bank Guarantees and were kept valid till the contractual obligations are fulfiled. The
payments released on Letter of Credit (LC)/Sight Draft (SD) cases were also treated as
advances and being monitored till the materials were received and accepted. Out of the
total advances outstanding, major portion were payments against LC/SD and milestone
payments in the real sense, these were not advances since the payments were made
against dispatch of materials. However, these were treated as advances to have effective
internal control for its receipt in good condition and acceptance. These payments

14
might not be treated as advances since the materials had already been received and
Objection Register was not closed for want of Stores Receipt V oucher on acceptance
by the Indentor. It was further stated that majority of Import related to space qualified
devices/components etc., which would be further subject to various test procedures
by Quality Assurance Department before integrating/assembling on-board which was
most time consuming process. Hence, clearance could be given by the indentor after
satisfying all the tests as per standards. Most of the outstanding advances for clearance
pertained to previous year and the advances were treated as "outstanding advances"
due to discrepancy in supply or short-supply of items. In these cases, 100% advances
were shown as outstanding for small discrepancies/short-supply only.
49. When the Sub-Committee desired to be apprised of the latest position with
regard to the advance payments pending settlement, the Director, Space Commission
deposed in evidence:—
"I do not have the numbers with me, but I want to add one point that the
advances paid, what is accounted in the Audit include what is called LC
opening. That is also accounted in the advances. The actual cash has not
gone. The real monies are less."
50. In a post-evidence information, the DOS stated that as on 28th February, 2010,
273 Foreign cases amounting to Rs. 8.13 crore and 265 indigenous cases amounting to
Rs. 97.93 crore were pending settlement in respect of ISAC, SAC and LPSC.
51. Asked to state the measures taken to expeditiously settle the pending advance
payments as well as to comply with the CVC Guidelines and DOS Purchase Procedure,
it was replied that action had already been initiated to clear the old outstanding advances
by review with Purchase, Stores and Indentors on top priority basis. Moreover, in
addition to the instructions issued by DOS in November, 2008, based on the C&AG's
recommendations, the Department had once again instructed all the Centres/Units to
scrupulously monitor the advances and settle/clear them expeditiously as far as possible
and to ensure that advance payments to the suppliers were made only in exceptional
circumstances. The Department had further directed that the objection book should
contain and update the reasons for giving advances and pendencies thereof besides
other information already available therein.
(vii) Delay in Inspection of Materials and Non-replacement of Rejected Stores
52. As per the DOS Stores Procedure, inspection of materials should normally be
completed within three days from the date of receipt. In case of materials which require
qualitative test, it shall be completed within seven days. In cases where 100 per cent
advance payment has already been made, the SRVs shall be forwarded to the Accounts
Officer for adjustment of the pending advance in the books of Accounts. But Audit
Scrutiny revealed that ISAC did not follow the prescribed time limit, delayed the
inspection of material and failed to obtain replacement of rejected stores worth Rs. 8.73
crore from the suppliers. To be specific, in five particular cases of placement of orders
with different foreign firms, ISAC failed to conduct timely inspection of the materials
received from the suppliers and thus lost the opportunity of getting rejected materials

15
replaced from them. It also did not take effective action to obtain replacement of the
rejected stores. Thus, expenditure of Rs. 8.73 crore was rendered unfruitful.
53. The Department of Space clarified that generally, the time limit of ten days for
inspection of all standard general items was followed. However, Electrical, Electronics
and Electro-mechanical High reliance (Hi-rel) components were to be inspected and
accepted under controlled environmental conditions. Most of the components, etc.,
were required to undergo various lab tests such as lot acceptance test, QCI test,
quality test, burn-in test, reliability test, performance test, etc., and a simple visual
inspection would not be enough in such cases. In the normal course, inspection of
such items took about 3 to 4 weeks. In cases such as ICs, ASICs, Microprocessors and
other sensitive active items, a minimum inspection period of 3 to 4 months would be
required. However, the Department, taking into account the observations of the Audit,
stated that inspection activity would be expedited to the extent possible depending on
various tests/screening to be conducted on each component before they were sent to
the bonded stores.
54. When the Sub-Committee further enquired into the matter, the Director, ISAC
submitted in evidence:—
"....They (Components) came in sealed conditions. We stock it. What we do
is that as soon as it comes, we only do a visual inspection and we do not open
it....It so happened, actual use came after 18 months or 20 months or so.
When we opened, we found that some of them were not of good quality. We
immediately took action and returned the thing to the Company and recovered
the materials. The process if you look at it is that we have not inspected the
day it came because we could not open it...."
55. Expressing surprise, the Sub-Committee asked whether it was appropriate to
inspect the quality of the product without unpacking it and the basis on which the
suppliers would replace a faulty product after a considerable delayed period of storage.
In reply, the Director, ISAC submitted:—
"Most of the time, I would say 99 per cent of the time, they immediately
replace them. They are all good companies....There will be a very valid reason
when they have not been able to replace them. Otherwise, they are all reputed
companies and they return the items immediately. This is a very particular
case and we are very pained with the loss of items."
56. The Director, ISAC further stated:—
"....Within a year, if something happens, we immediately get replacement.
This particular case happened after the warranty period. That is why, we have
to use only the goodwill............. Legally we could not argue. They can always
say that we have misused or whatever it is. It is beyond the warranty period.
That is why, all the problems cropped up."
57. In response to a specific query regarding the commencement of the warranty
period, the Director, ISAC stated that the warranty period started from the date of
shipment. Asked to state whether agreement should not be made in such a way that

16
the warranty period started from the date of actual use, the Additional Secretary
submitted:—
"I think we will follow this advice. It is better that we correct the procedure to
ensure that it is after installation that the warranty starts. They can certainly
demand a reasonable period for this installation. We will find out what best
will be the period. Then, we will follow it up accordingly."
58. The Director, ISAC supplemented:—
"I will add one more thing, to the extent possible, we will ask even pre-
shipment inspection either by our people or by our representatives in the
foreign country. We have taken it very seriously because some items we
believed that they were good and this way we lose money. So we are taking it
very seriously."
59. As regards inspection of items/components immediately after receipt, the
Director, ISAC deposed:—
"...We have now made it mandatory that inspection should be completed as
soon as possible....The Department of Space has issued orders to all the
Centres saying that it is compulsory that inspection should be
completed..........."
60. In a Post-Evidence Information, the Sub-Committee were apprised that majority
of the rejected items/components had been replaced/received/accepted. A few more
items were likely to be received in the near future and as such no substantial financial
loss was envisaged.
VI.  INVENTORY   CONTROL   &   MANAGEMENT
61. The formulation of appropriate policy and procedures relating to Inventory
Control and Management assumes greater significance, especially in the context of
the organizations where the level of procurement is very high. But Audit review of the
Inventory Control and Management by the Department of Space revealed that physical
verification of stores was not conducted; the procurement policy of Bonded Stores
was not revised; and there were cases of overstocking and non-disposal of rejected/
obsolete/surplus stores in the DOS/ISRO Centres/Units.
(i) Non-conduct of Physical Verification of Bonded Stores
62. Audit Review revealed that physical verification of Bonded Stores in ISAC
was not conducted after 1995 and thus, discrepancies were not identified for disposal.
Similarly, no physical verification of Bonded Stores was conducted in SAC except in
March, 2004. In LPSC, however, such verification was carried out every year.
63. In response, the Department of Space clarified that physical verification of all
types of Stores were generally conducted in the Centres/Units. However, DOS had
issued instructions to its Centres/Units to ensure that the physical verification of all
types of stores was conducted periodically to reduce the inventory cost and make
inventory management more efficient. Based on this, the Centres/Units have
constituted different Committees for this purpose.

17
64. When the Sub-Committee desired to know the specific efforts made by the
DOS/ISRO Centres/Units to conduct annual inspection of the Bonded Stores to reduce
the inventory cost as well as to make inventory management more efficient, the
Department stated that based on the instructions issued, the Centres/Units had
constituted different Committees for this purpose. The Department had issued
instructions to the Centres/Units (including ISAC) to develop Management  Information
System (MIS)/Software to monitor the stock position and track the requirements in
pipeline. It was also stated that the stock verification of Bonded Stores items had been
completed during January 2010 in respect of ISAC.
65. Throwing more light on the inventory management, the Director, ISAC
submitted in evidence:—
"Sir, with regard to component management, I would like to submit that we
have one of the best component management arrangements in the Space
Centres. Somehow the information was not fully exposed to the Audit team.
In the Bangalore Centre where I come from, we have almost a million
components, not one or two and each one of them is put in a very small cabin
like bank lockers. They are all computerized. Every item is numbered and the
data is available on the computer. We have information such as where it came
from, what is the manufacturing date, when it expires, what has to be done
etc. Periodically, whole checking goes on, on a day-to-day basis. We check
about 100 lockers in a day. There is a continuous operation of stock checking.
The information is also classified as to what is there inside. It is only on 'need
to know' basis, the information is shared. Then, obsolete items have to be
removed and once they are removed, we do not want the items to come back
to market. So, we cannot sell it in the open market as scrap because they may
come back through another source as a good one. So, we make sure that
obsolete ones and the corroded ones are actually destroyed. We have a very
fool-proof  technique of dealing with these components and it is one of the
best methods. They are well protected from the security point of view and
they are kept at more than one place. The temperature is maintained and it is
very large arrangement........"
(ii) Non-Disposal/Delayed disposal of Surplus & Obsolete Items
66. Audit observed that ISAC did not carry out any exercise to dispose off
Bonded Stores since 1995. Moreover, in ISAC, for non-bonded store items, there was
a delay ranging from 8 to 25 months, in final disposal of nine lots of obsolete surplus/
unserviceable materials in 2004-05. Further, during the period under review, out of 694
items, which were more than one year old, 192 items remained to be disposed off till
date.
67. The DOS clarified that necessary instructions had been issued by the
Department to dispose off obsolete/surplus/unserviceable items to avoid intrinsic
value from diminishing and thus incurring avoidable carrying cost.
68. The Sub-Committee desired to be apprised of the measures taken by DOS to
change the policy to stock the Bonded Stores on actual need basis and past utilization

18
pattern. In reply, the Department stated that the procurement policy of ISAC on Bonded
Stores items was based on programmatic/strategic requirements giving considerations
for consumption pattern, shelf life, cost advantages due to bulk procurement, lead time
for space grade parts etc.

PART-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
1. Pursuant to the recommendation made by the Public Accounts Committee in
their 105th Report (Tenth Lok Sabha), the Ministries/Departments are required to
furnish remedial/corrective Action Taken Notes to the Committee through the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) on those Paragraphs of the Reports
of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India (C&AG) which are not formally selected
for examination by the Committee and upon which Reports of the Committee have not
been presented to Parliament. With effect from March, 1996 such remedial/corrective
ATNs are to be furnished within four months of the laying of the Audit Reports in
Parliament. The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed that there has
been inordinate delay on the part of various Ministries/Departments in furnishing
the remedial/corrective ATNs within the prescribed time line. This can be corroborated
from the fact that as on 28th February, 2010, as many as 3450 Audit Paragraphs upon
which ATNs were to be furnished, were pending with different Ministries/Departments.
Out of all these pending Paragraphs, four Paragraphs pertained to the Department of
Space, as revealed by Audit. The break-up of these pending four Paragraphs is the re-
submission of ATNs on three Paragraphs consequent upon Audit Observations and
furnishing of ATN on one Paragraph even for the first time. The Department of Space
clarified that only two Paragraphs are pending with them, the break-up being
sumission of the revised ATN on Performance Audit Report on 'Procurement and
Inventory Control' and ATN on 'Non-Tax Receipts'. In this context, the Committee are
informed that delays in submission of ATNs occurred on the part of the Department
as extensive data/information were to be collected from various Centres/Units and
also due to some major decisions taken by the Department in revising the Purchase
Procedure and issuing fresh guidelines to the Centres/Units, consequent upon the
C&AG's recommendations. The Department have further contended that it becomes
extremely difficult to stick to the prescribed time line in case of Performance Audit
where observations are system based covering various issues, voluminous data etc.
The Committee are somehow not convinced with the reasons advanced by the
Department in their failure to adhere to the stipulated time frame for furnishing the
ATNs on Audit Paragraphs. The basic objective of the Performance Audit of the
Ministries/Departments by the C&AG is to examine in depth the performance of the
Ministry/Department concerned on whole lot of issues which obviously involve
voluminous data and various Centres/Units under their administrative control. Such
Audit guide/help the Ministries/Departments in plugging the loopholes and taking
corrective action for overall better performance in many spheres of activities . The
Department of Space have also been benefited from the Audit review, as is evident
from their own admission that based on the C&AG recommendations they have revised
their decade old Purchase Procedure and issued guidelines to the Centres/Units
accordingly. So, instead of advancing Performance Audit as a plea for delay in
submission of ATNs, the Department should rather welcome such review which is
intended to facilitate corrective action. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Department to submit/re-submit the pending ATNs by April, 2010, as assured, and
strengthen their co-ordination mechanism with different Centres/Units for timely
19

20
collection of data/information so that ATNs in respect of future Reports of the C&AG
are furnished well within the prescribed time line of four months. In fact, the
Committee would like the Department of Space to set an example, akin to their
excellence in the execution of national space activities, for other Ministries/
Departments in timely submision of ATNs on Audit Observations.
2. The Performance Audit of the Procurement of Stores and Inventory Control,
the Department of Space was conducted during July to October, 2006 and October to
November, 2007, covering a period of six years from 2001-02 to 2006-07. During the
period under review, the Committee find that the Department could not utilize 7 to
15 per cent of their Procurement Budget which was on an average 56 per cent of the
overall Budget and thus constituted a major activity of the Department. The Committee
are more concerned to note that the unutilized amount of the Procurement Budget
increased consistently from Rs. 83.28 crore in 2002-03 to Rs. 438.28 crore in
2006-07. The Department have stated that the major savings i.e. 15 per cent occurred
during the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 when the entire provision could not be utilized
due to non-finalisation of the Global participations and the associative financial
implications, the Industry Contract and Management Strategy as well as due to the
non-approval of Advanced Communication Satellite, Semi-Cryogenic Engine
Development and Earth Observation New Mission programmes. The Department
have further argued that owing to the complex nature of the space technology,
developmental uncertainties and export restrictions in foreign procurements,
marginal variations in actual expenditure with reference to the Budget Estimates
become inevitable. The Committee are aware of the complex nature of the Space
Technology and the restrictions/uncertainties involved therein, but 15 per cent savings
during the years 2005-06 and 2006-07 are no marginal variations vis-a-vis the BE
and that too for a Department which has been engaged in so many importance space
activities like development of satellites, launch vehicles and research in Space Science
and Technology. Moreover, such savings occurred due to non-finalisation and non-
approval of certain programmes/activities which imply that there are deficiencies in
the planning and management of the projects undertaken by the Department. The
Additional Secretary, DOS's statement that they are fully capable of spending hundred
per cent Budgetary allocation by the end of March of a particular year does not
convince the Committee in view of the generally 40 per cent utilization of funds by the
Department upto November in a given fiscal. Moreover, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) determine the RE on the basis of the performance of a
Ministry/Department upto the month of November/December. In such cases, if the
spending pattern is not consistent right from the beginning of a financial year, the
Department of Space might face fund constraints at the RE stage which in turn would
adversely impact the achievement of important projects/activities. The savings of
5.55 per cent and 7.59 per cent during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively,
although an improved performance on the part of the Department compared to the
preceding years, are still a matter of concern as savings in any form amount to bad
budgeting. The Committee, therefore, would like to impress upon the Department to
resort to appropriate planning and prudent management of their Budgetary exercise
for a realistic projection of their fund requirements as well as effective execution of
the activities/projects undertaken.

21
3. The Committee are constrained to note that the DOS Purchase Order does not
prescribe any time frame for various stages of procurement, adversely impacting
thereby the efficiency and economy of the procurement system. The Department's
contention that they have a mechanism in place to periodically monitor/control various
processes in the procurement cycle does not convince the Committee, because timely
procurement of stores/equipment carries utmost significance for a project oriented
organization like the Department of Space. And for that, prescription of a definite
time frame for each of the procurement activities is an absolute imperative. Now that
the Department, taking into account the Audit Observations and the requirements
under the General Financial Rules, 2005, have issued instructions to the Centres/
Units to adhere to a time limit of three months from the date of indent to the date of
placement of the Purchase Order, the Committee recommend that DOS should also
intensify their monitoring mechanism to ensure strict adherence to the prescribed
time limit by the Centres/Units so that optimal availability of stores/equipment in a
timely manner is facilitated.
4. The Committee observe that during the period 2001-06, out of 15478 items
raised by Indian Space Application Centre (ISAC), 1798 indents (12 per cent)
amounting to Rs. 682.50 crore did not result in purchase orders. Similarly, a random
test check by Audit revealed that 83 indents valuing Rs. 63.42 crore raised by Space
Application Centre (SAC) did not result in purchase orders. It implies that
requirements of the Centres/Units were not accurately assessed by the Indentors.
The Department have clarified that the systems, sub-systems, equipment etc. used in
the Space projects/programmes are susceptible to changes/modifications due to
scientific/technological innovations/improvements in the global market. If such
innovations take place after an indent is raised, the initial indent is cancelled and a
fresh indent raised for the improved items. The Department have further submitted
that most often, there is no response to the tenders floated by DOS/ISRO for
procurement of strategic items, resulting in the closure of the purchase file concerned.
The Committee are, however, of the view that if the actual requirements of the Centres/
Units and the specifications of the equipment are firmed up prior to raising the
indent, keeping in view the technological advances, knowledge of which is necessary
on the part of DOS, the cancellation of indents due to scientific/technological
innovations/improvements can be avoided to a great extent. Similarly, if sources of
supplies of the equipment, status of technology and availability in the market are
judiciously asessed and evaluated before raising the indent, there would be hardly
any occasion of non-response to the tenders floated by DOS/ISRO. The revision of the
Purchase Order by the Department is a measure in right direction and the Committee
hope that the Department will now streamline the system of assessment of requirement
by the indentors by maintaining a centralized database of various items, specifications
thereof etc. so that there is adequate planning at the indenting stage itself to avoid
complications later on.
5. The Committee note that the DOS Purchase Order provides for purchase of
proprietary goods on single tender basis from either the manufacturers or their
authorized agents. However, before proprietary indent is raised, the Centres/Units
have to ensure that there is no other manufacturer available in the market to meet

22
their critical requirements. The Committee's examination of the subject have revealed
that majority of the procurements by the Centres/Units have been made on proprietary/
single tender basis, even when more than one source of supply was available. Specific
requirement of electronic components, metals, materials etc., manufacture of such
components by very limited companies, over-dependence on import of these components,
reservations on the part of the foreign countries in the supply of critical components
to India and political compulsions have inter-alia been attributed towards the
Department's preference for proprietary/single tender mode of procurement of
components. In order to overcome these problems, the Committee find that the
Department  are spending substantial sums of money on Research and Development
and making continuous efforts to have indigenizaiton to the best possible extent.
Besides, instructions have been issued to the Centres/Units to continuously evaluate,
prepare and update the vendor's list and build up a centralized database of vendors to
bring in more competition in the procurement process and reduce proprietary/single
tender procurements. As a result, the Committee are informed that during the period
from 2006-07 to 2008-09, the percentage of proprietary/single mode of tendering
procurement has been substantially reduced both in terms of amount and number.
However, it is a matter of concern for the Committee to note the statement of the
Additional Secretary, DOS that their dependence, to some extent, on foreign elements
will be continuing for some more time because right at the moment, the Indian Industry
is not capable of manufacturing everything that the Department requires. The
Committee recommend that DOS should further intensify the measures adopted
towards indigenization, R&D activities and promotion of competition so that
dependence on import of critical components and proprietary/single tender
procurements come to an end sooner than later.
6. The Committee note that pursuant to a limited tender floated by Space
Application Centre (SAC) for supply and installation of furniture items, six firms
responded, out of which three firms were rejected on technical grounds. Out of the
remaining three, the lowest bidder at an offer of Rs. 63.26 lakh was preferred and
SAC decided to place the order with the firm. At the last moment, it was detected that
the firm upon which orders were about to be placed was a small furniture shop,
therefore, instead another indent was raised on proprietary basis in favour of two
firms, which were earlier rejected on technical grounds, and that too at a cost of
Rs.79.88 lakh. The logic advanced by the Department in raising the indent on
proprietary basis in favour of the rejected firms is that their products were of high
quality and they have already supplied furniture items to SAC. According to the
Committee, SAC committed two fundamental mistakes. Firstly, before rejecting the
offer of the two firms at the first instance, the quality of their products and earlier
supply of furniture to SAC should have been taken into consideration. Secondly,
since the offer of the lowest bidder was technically and financially acceptable to SAC,
a fresh indent on proprietary basis should not have been raised in favour of the two
rejected firms at a higher cost. It appears to be clear case of indifference and
mismanagement on the part of SAC. The Committee, therefore, advise the Department

23
of Space to prevail upon their Centres/Units to take all possible precautionary measures
in the tender terms and conditions and ensure that indents on proprietary basis are
not raised for routine items like furniture.
7. The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed that in eight cases of
procurement of equipments/components negotiations were held with vendors other
than the lowest bidders (L
1), and in two cases at Liquid Propulsion System Centre
(LPSC) and Space Application Centre (SAC), orders were placed with the L2 bidders,
ignoring L1, despite the latter being found technically suitable by the Technical
Evaluation Committee. By doing so, the DOS violated not only its own Purchase
Procedure but also Central Vigilance Commission Guidelines and provisions
contained in the General Financial Rules, all of which ban any sort of post tender
negotiations with any bidder other than the lowest tenderer. The Department have
clarified that the Best and Final Offers (BAFOs) were called for not only from the L
1
bidder but also from other technically suitable bidders primarily to ensure that the
final prices are advantageous which would result in savings to the exchequer. The
Committee are not satisfied with the clarifications as the price quoted by the lowest
bidder ought to be considered as the best offer and if at all any negotiations are to be
carried out to bring down the price further, it should be done with the lowest tenderer.
However, the Committee note that the Department have now issued instructions to the
Centres/Units to strictly comply with the CVC Guidelines, General Financial Rules
and the Department's own Purchase Procedure. The Committee would like to impress
upon the Department to monitor the actual implementaiton of their instructions with
a view to ensuring that all post tender negotiations, except with L
1, are disallowed.
8. Audit scrutiny has revealed that Indian Space Application Centre (ISAC),
Space Application Centre (SAC) and Liquid Propulsion System Centre (LPSC) have
been making advance payments in a routine and liberal manner, without documenting
any reasons and in violation of the provisions contained in the DOS Purchase Order
according to which advance payments should be made in exceptional cases only. The
Committee find that as of March, 2006, Rs.437.73 crore paid as advances in 1177
cases was pending settlement, the break up being Rs. 199.64 crore pertaining to 557
cases of import and Rs. 238.09 crore pertaining to 620 cases of indigenous purchases.
Updating the figure as on 28th February, 2010, the Department have later on stated
that 273 import cases amounting to Rs. 8.13 crore and 265 indigenous cases
amounting to Rs. 97.93 crore were pending settlement in respect of ISAC, SAC and
LPSC. According to the Department, the DOS/ISRO Centres/Units normally give
advances only when the suppliers insist for the same either for setting up the facility
or for procuring costly raw materials. Any insistence of interest on such advances
would only result in increase in the cost/price to that extent or more by the suppliers.
The Committee are not convinced with the reasoning of the Department as advances
worth crores of ruppes remaining outstanding for long periods involve financial risk
in case the suppliers fail to honour the contractual obligations. The Department have
further deposed that out of the total advances outstanding, major portion are payments
against 'sight Draft', Letter of Credit and milestone payments supported by bank
Guarantees. In this context, the Committee desire that a system should be evolved for

24
prompt and timely renewal of the Performance Bank Guarantees in order to avert any
financial loss in cases of default by the suppliers. The Committee also recommend
that an effective mechanism be devised by the Department to monitor the present
outstanding advances of Rs. 106.06 crore and that may arise in future also and settle
them expeditiously. It is also desirable that the Centres/Units may be prevailed upon
to make advance payments only in exceptional circumstances, documenting reasons
therefor, in tune with the provisions contained in the DOS Purchase Order.
9. The Committee note that as per the DOS Stores Procedure, inspection of
materials should normally be completed within three days from the receipt of ordinary
materials and within seven days in repect of those materials which require qualitative
test. But one of the Centres i.e. ISAC failed to follow the prescribed time limit by
delaying the inspection of material and consequently replacement of the rejected
stores worth Rs. 8.73 crore could not be obtained from the suppliers. The Committee's
examinations has revealed that the Department follow a somewhat unusal procedure
for inspection of materials upon receipt. They do not unpack the containers and just
resort to a visual inspection of the materials. Moreover, there is no system of pre-
shipment inspection also. Further, the warranty period starts from the date of shipment
and not from the date of use/installation. What happens, therefore, at the time of
actual requirment when the container is unpacked, some materials even if found to be
deficient/faulty, cannot be replaced as by that time the warranty period normally
expires. This state of affairs is totally unacceptable to the Committee as it depicts
lack of planning and faresightendness, to say the least. The Committee, therefore,
urge upon DOS, ISRO and their Centres/Units to overhaul their inspection
mechanism and evolve a foolprof system wherein there is proper and through
inspection of materials/componenets with a definite time frame both at pre-shipment
and post-receipt stages.
10. The Committee are constrained to note that physical verification of Bonded
Stores in ISAC has not been conducted after 1995 and such verification has been
conducted only once in March, 2004 in respect of SAC. The Department on their part
have issued instructions to the Centres/Units to ensure that physical verification of
all types of stores are conducted periodically. The Department have also instructed
the Centres/Units to develop Management Information System (MIS)/Software to
monitor the stock position and track the requirements in pipeline. The Committee
are of the view that mere issuance of instructions would serve little purpose unless an
effective mechanism is put in place to ensure their execution. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Department should strengthen their monitoring system to
see that the instructions issued to the Centres/Units for physical verification of all
types of stores are carried out without fail for reducing the inventory cost and making
inventory management more efficient.
11. Another disquieting aspect that has come to the notice of the Committee is
that ISAC has not carried out any exercise since 1995 to dispose off the Bonded
Stores. Similarly, out of the 694 non-bonded items, which were more than one year
old, 192 items remained to be disposed off till the time of Audit review. In this case
also, the Department more have just issued instructions to the Centres to dispose off

25
the obsolete/surplus/inserviceable items. The Committee would like to reiterate that
alongwith the issuance of instructions, the monitoring aspect needs to be intensified
so that surplus and obsolete items are timely disposed off to prevent avoidable carrying
cost.
N
EW DELHI; GOPINATH  MUNDE,
26 April, 2010 Chairman,
6 V aisakha, 1932 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX-I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-V OF THE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2009-2010) ON "NON-COMPLIANCE
 BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY SUBMISSION OF THE
REPLIES TO THE AUDIT PARAGRAPHAS OF C&AG OF INDIA”
HELD ON 5TH FEBRUARY , 2010
The Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Friday, the 5th
February, 2010 from 1500 hrs to 1750 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'A', Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
Rajya Sabha
1. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
1. Shri Subir Mallick — P r. Director (INDT)
2. Ms. Rebecca — P r. Director (DT)
3. Shri Shourjo Chatterjee — Director
4. Shri Partha Sarathy Das — Director (CX)
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
CBDT
1. Shri Sunil Mitra — Revenue Secretary
2. Shri S.S.N. Moorthy — Chairman, CBDT
3. Shri Narinder Singh — Member (A&J) CBDT
4. Shri R.K. Yadav — Commissioner (A&J) CBDT
5. Shri Shravan Kumar Gotru — Director (A&PAC) CBDT
CBEC
1. Shri V . Sridhar — Chairman and Spl. Secretary, CBEC
2. Shri S.D. Majumdar — Member (CX)
3. Shri Najib Shah — Joint Secretary (Drawback)
4. Shri Ranjan Jha — Commissioner (PAC), CBEC
5. Ms. Vandana K. Jain — Director (CX) CBEC
26

27
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri S.K. Goel — Member (Customs)
2. Ms. Kameswari Subramanian — Joint Secretary (Customs)
3. Shri M.M. Parthiban — Director (Customs)
Representatives of the Ministry of Commerce and Industry
1. Shri Amitabh Jain — Additional Director General
2. Shri Sanjay Rastogi — Zonal Joint Director
Representatives of the Department of Space
1. Dr. T.K. Alex — Member, Space Commission
2. Shri G. Balachandhran — Additional Secretary, Department of
Space
3. Shri S.K. Jha — Director, Department of Space
4. Shri H.N. Madhusudhana — Director, Budget Evaluation and
 Analysis, ISRO HQ
2. At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee,
[Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar] welcomed the representatives of the Office of the C&AG of
India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
"Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the
Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India".
3. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened
for taking oral evidence of the representatives of the (i) Ministry of Finance, Department
of Revenue-CBDT/CBEC and (ii) Department of Space on the subject relating to "Non-
Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies to the Audit
Paragraphs of C&AG of India". The Convenor also informed the Members that the
meeting will proceed with a discussion on (i) Loss of Revenue due to short levy of Tax
re: M/s. India Overseas Bank as Contained in para 3.2.24 of Chapter-III of Audit
Report No. 8 of 2007 (Direct Taxes); (ii) Incorrect classification of excisable goods
resulting in short levy of duty—Hair Oil as contained  in para 2.2.1 of Chapter-I of
Audit Report No. CA 7 of  2008 (Central Excise); (iii) Non-fulfilment of export  obligation
as contained in para 7.1 of Audit Report No. 10, 1998 (Customs) and (iv) "Procurement
of Stores and Inventory Control" as contained in Chapter-II of Audit Report No. PA 
2
of 2008 relating to the Department of  Space.
4. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Revenue—CBDT/CBEC were called in and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting
of the Sub-Committee. The representatives then, briefed the Sub-Committee on the
initiatives taken by their Ministry in timely submission of replies to the Audit paragraphs
of C&AG. They also,  inter-alia, threw light on the current status of pending paras in

28
their Ministry. The representatives also elaborated on the various issues and concerns
raised by the Sub-Committee. To certain queries, which the representatives of the
Ministry could not give immediate clarification or explanation, the Sub-Committee
directed the representatives to furnish written information/replies at the earliest with a
view to timely finalization of the Report on the subject.
5. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue—CBDT/CB EC for appearing before the Sub-Committee and
for furnishing information that the Sub-Committee desired in connection with the
examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
6. After a short break the sitting was resumed and the Audit Officers and the
Secretariat briefed the Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
Non-compliance with special reference to the Department of Space.
7. Thereafter, the representatives of the Department of Space were called in and
the Convenor welcome them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The representatives
then, briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry in timely
submission of replies to the Audit paragraphas of C&AG. They also, inter-alia, threw
light on the current status of pending paras in their Ministry. The representatives also
explained on the various issues and concerns raised by the Sub-Committee. To certain
queries, which the representatives of the Ministry could not give immediate clarification
or explanation, the Committee desired the representatives to appear before the Committee
again on 23rd February, 2010 with a view to timely finalization of the Report on the
Subject.
The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Department of Space for
appearing before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the information and urged the
representatives to come again with the requisite information and material on those
select points where they failed to give satisfactory answers.
The witnessess, then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX-II
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-V OF
THE  PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE COMMITTEE (2009-10) ON
"NON-COMPLIANCE BY MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENTS IN TIMELY
SUBMISSION OF REPLIES TO THE AUDIT PARAGRAPHS OF
C&AG OF  INDIA” HELD ON 23RD FEBRUARY, 2010
The Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts Committee sat on Tuesday, the 23rd
February, 2010 from 1430 hrs to 1610 hrs. in Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Ashwani Kumar — Convenor
M
EMBERS
Lok  Sabha
2. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
Rajya Sabha
4. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Subir Mallick — P r. Director (INDT)
2. Shri Anadi Mishra — Director (Costoms)
3. Shri Raj G. Viswanathan — Pr.  Director of Audit Scientific Deptt.
4. Ms. Nameta Prasad — Director (Report)
A. Representatives of the Ministryof Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri Sunil Mitra — Revenue Secretary
CBEC
2. Shri V . Sridhar — Chairman and Spl. Secretary, CBEC
3. Shri S. Dutt Majumdar — Member (CX)
4. Shri S.K. Goel — Member (Customs)
5. Ms. Kameswari Subramanian — Joint Secretary (Customs)
6. Shri Najib Shah — Joit Secretary (DBK)
7. Shri Sushil Solanki — Commissioner (CX)
29

30
CBDT
8. Shri S.S.N. Moorthy — Chairman, CBDT
9. Shri Narinder Singh — Member (A&J) CBDT
10. Shri R.K. Yadav — Commissioner (A&J) CBDT
B. Representatives of the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (DGFT)
1. Shri R.S. Gujral — Director General of Foreign Trade
2. Shri Amitabh Jain — ADG DGFT
C. Representatives of the Department of Space
1. Shri G. Balachandhran — Additional Secretary, DOS
2. Shri S.K. Jha — Director, DOS
3. Shri H.N. Madhusudhana  — Director , Budget Evaluation & Analysis,
ISRO HQ
D. Representatives f the Ministryof Environment and Forests
1. Dr. P .J. Dilip Kumar — DGF&SS
2. Shri J.M. Mauskar — Additional Secretary
3. Shri M.B. Lal — ADG (WL)
4. Shri P.B. Gangopadhyay — ADG (FC)
5. Shri Saurabh Chandra — AS&FA
6. Dr. Rajesh Gopal — MS(NTCA)
7. Dr. Rajneesh Dube — Joint Secretary
8. Shri A.K. Goyal — Joint Secretary
9. Shri S.P. Yadav — DIG
10. Shri Atul Chadha — DIG
11. Mrs. Renu C. Deshpande — CA
12. Shri N. Muruganandam — Director
13. Shri S.K. Agarwal — Director
14. Dr. Subba Rao — Director
15. Shri A.K. Johri — DIG
16. Shri M. Hota — Additional Director
17. Dr. B. Sikka — Director
18. Shri B.B. Barman — Additional Director
2.  At the outset, the Convenor, Sub-Committee-V of the Public Accounts
Committee, [Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar] welcomed the representatives of the Officers of
the C&AG of India to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. Thereafter, the Audit Officers
and the Secretariat briefed the Sub-Committee on the various issues concerning the

31
subject on "Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission of replies
to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG of India".
3. The Convenor then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened
for taking further oral evidence of the representatives of the (i) Ministry of Finance—
Department of Revenue and the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (DGFT);
(ii) Department of Space; and the (iii) Ministry of Environment and Forests on the
subject relating to "Non-Compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely submission
of replies to the Audit  Paragraphs of C&AG of India" especially on those issues where
select information were sought by the Committee in their earlier sitting held on 5th
February, 2010.
4. The Convenor also informed the Members that the meeting will proceed with a
discussion on (i) Para 2.2.1 of Audit Report CA 7 of 2008 relating to "Incorrect
Classification of Excisable Goods Resulting in Short Levy of duty—Hair Oil" and
Para 7.1 of Audit Report No. 10 of 1998 relating to "Non-fulfillment of Export Obligation",
(ii) Chapter II of Audit Report No. PA 2 of 2008 relating to "Procurement of Stores and
Inventory Control in Department of Space" and (iii) Audit Report No. 18 of 2006
relating to "Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger Reserves".
5. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Revenue—CBDT/CBEC and the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (DGFT) were called
in and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-Committee. The
representatives then, briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry
after the last sitting with regard to timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs
of C&AG. They also, inter-alia, threw light on the current status of pending paras in
their Ministry. The representatives also explained on the various issues and concerns
raised by the Sub-Committee. In response to certain queries, to which the
representatives of the Ministry could not provide the requisite information, the Sub-
Committee gave them seven days time to submit the same with a view to timely
finalization of the Report on the Subject.
The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Finance-Department
of Revenue-CBDT/CBEC and the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (DGFT) for
appearing before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the information. The first session
concludes.
The representatives of the Ministry of Finance—Department of Revenue—
CBDT/CBEC and the Ministry of Commerce & Industry (DGFT), then withdrew. This
was followed by a short break.
6. After the short break the Committee resumed the sitting. The Audit Officers and
the Secretariat briefed the Committee on the various issues concerning the subject on
Non-compliance with special reference to the Department of Space.
7. Therafter, the representatives of the Department of Space were called in and the
Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-committee. The representatives
then, briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their Ministry after the last
sitting with regard to timely submission of replies to the Audit Paragraphs of C&AG.

32
They also, inter-alia, threw light on the current status of pending paras in their Ministry.
The representatives also explained on the various issues and concerns raised by the
Sub-Committee. To certain queries, which the representatives of the Ministry could
not give immediate accurate data, the Committee gave them 10 days time to submit
those information with a view to timely finalization of the Report on the Subject.
The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Department of Space for
appearing before the Sub-Committee and furnishing the information.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
8. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
were called in and the Convenor welcomed them to the sitting of the Sub-committee.
The representatives then, briefed the Sub-Committee on the initiatives taken by their
Ministry after the last sitting with regard to timely submission of replies to the Audit
Paragraphs of C&AG. They also, inter alia, threw light on the current status of pending
paras in their Ministry. The Committee asked the representatives of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests to appear before the Committee again for further evidence at
a later date.
9. The Convenor thanked the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests for appearing before the Sub-Committee and for furnishing information that
the Sub-Committee desired in connection with the examination of the subject.
The witnesses, then withdrew.
A copy of the verbatim proceeding has been kept on record.
The Sub-Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX-III
MINUTES  OF  THE  ELEVENTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2009-10) HELD ON 26TH APRIL, 2010
The Committee sat on Monday, the 26th April, 2010 from 1530 hrs. to 1650 hrs. in
Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Gopinath Munde — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Satpal Maharaj
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Dr. K. Sambasiva Rao
8. Shri Yashwant Sinha
9. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
Rajya Sabha
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
11. Shri N.K. Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Raj Shekhar Sharma — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Additional Director
3. Shri D.R. Mohanty — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Rekha Gupta — Dy. CAG Central (RC)
2. Shri R.B. Sinha — Director General (Report Central)
3. Ms. Usha Sankar — Director General (Autonomous Bodies)
4. Shri Gautham Guha — Director General of Audit (Defence
Services)
5. Shri P.K. Kataria — Pr. Dir ector of Audit, Report Central (RC)
33

34
6. Shri K.R. Sriram — Pr. Director of Audit, Report Central
(Economic & Services Ministries)
7. Shri R.G . Viswanathan — P r. Director of Audit (Scientific
Departments)
8. Shri C.M. Sane — Principal Director of Audit (Air Force &
Navy)
9. Shri H.K. Dharmadhekari — Pr. Director (State Report Audit)
10. Shri Rajvir Singh — Accountant General (Audit) Delhi
11. Ms. Divya Malhotra — Pr. Director of Audit (Railways)
2.  At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members of the Committee and
the Audit Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman, then apprised the
Committee that out of the eleven Draft Reports slated for consideration, eight have
been finalized by Sub-Committee V . Thereafter, the Committee took up the following
Draft Reports for consideration and adoption:
(i) Draft Report on "Non-compliance by Ministries/Departments in timely
submission of Action Taken Notes on Non-selected Audit Paragraphs'
(Ministry of Finance—Department of Expenditure);
(ii) Draft Report on "Functioning of A.D.G.E.S. Radar, Procurement of Special
Clothing and Mountaineerng Equipment and Delay in Execution/Renewal of
lease" (Ministry of Defence) based on Chapter 1 of C&AG Report No. PA 5 of
2008 (Air Force and Navy), Para No. 3.1 of C&AG Report No. CA 4 of 2008
(Army) and Para No. 2.1 of C&AG Report No. 4 of 2007 (Army) respectively;
(iii) Draft Report on "Revenue loss due to delay in levy of Toll Fees" (Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways) based on Chapter XIV of C&AG Report
No. CA 2 of 2007;
(iv) Draft Report on "Administration of Universal Service Obligation (USO)
Fund" (Ministry of Communications and Information Technology—
Department of Telecommunications) based on Chapter 1 of  C&AG Report
No. PA 1 of 2008;
(v) Draft Report on "Loss of Revenue due to Short Levy of Tax, Incorrect
Classification of Excisable Goods and Non-fulfillment of Export Obligation"
(Ministry of Finance—Department of Revenue) based on Para No. 3.24.4 of
C&AG Report No. 8 of 2007 (Direct Taxes), Para No. 2.2.1 of C&AG Report
No. CA 7 of 2008 (Central Excise) & Para No. 7.1 of C&AG Report No. 10 of
1998 (Customs) respectively;
(vi) Draft Report on "Disaster Management and Land Management in Indian
Railways"  (Ministry of Railways) based on Chapter I and Chapter II
respectively of C&AG Report No. 8 of 2008;

35
(vii) Draft Report on "Conservation and Protection of Tigers in Tiger Reserves"
(Ministry of Environment and Forests) based on C&AG Report No. 18 of
2006;
(viii) Draft Report on "Procurement of Stores and Inventory Control" (Department
of Space) based on Chapter II of C&AG Report No. PA 2 of 2008;
(ix) Draft Report on "Freight and Wagon Management on Indian Railways"
(Ministry of Railways) based on Chapter I of C&AG Report No. 6 of 2007
(Railway-Performance Audit);
(x) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Development of Land by Delhi Development
Authority" (Ministry of Urban Development); and
(xi) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Eighty-third Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways"
(Ministry of Railways).
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the abovementioned Draft
Reports with some modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise these
Reports in light of the suggestions made by the Members and the consequential
changes arising out of the factual verification by the Audit and present the same to
Parliament.
4. The Chairman thanked the Members for their cooperation and active participa-
tion in the Committee's deliberations. He also thanked the PAC Secretariat and the
Audit Officers for the assistance rendered to the Committee in the examination of the
subject and finalization of the Reports.
5. The Members of the Committee thanked the Chairman for his guidance in the
smooth conduct of the meetings of the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.
GIPMRND—2516LS—06.07.2010.