SER-1/D/CDR/LOK SABHA COVER FOLDER\PAC COVER HINDI AND ENGLISH \ 1779LS
115
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF EMPLOYEES
STATE INSURANCE CORPORATION AND
SPECIAL AUDIT OF MEDICAL EDUCATION
PROJECTS OF ESIC
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2018-2019
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Sixty-Seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT
PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of AgentSl.No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz
Circle, Vasavya Nagar,
Vijaywada-520 006 (AP).
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842 002. (Bihar).
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110 001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110 009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110 024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110 001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110 052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110 002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110 002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110 054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher
Shah Road, New Delhi-110 003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110 006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110 005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110 001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110 059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service, C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110 034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462 003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2671,
Mumbai-400 002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400 002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605 001.
TAMIL  NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641 012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600 014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad
(UP).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller,
Mayfair Building Hazrat Ganj,
GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226 001.
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.

ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH
REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2018-2019)
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
PERFORMANCE  AUDIT  OF  EMPLOYEES  STATE
INSURANCE CORPORATION AND SPECIAL  AUDIT
OF  MEDICAL  EDUCATION  PROJECTS  OF ESIC
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Sixty-Seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.12.2018
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 14.12.2018
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December,  2018/Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)


PAC No.  2154
Price:  `110 .00
© 2019 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by the  Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2018-19) .............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ....................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government ................................................................... 25
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government .............................................................................. 52
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of   the   Government   have   not   been   accepted   by   the
Committee and which require reiteration .................................. 53
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of   which  the
Government have furnished interim replies ............................. 61
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the Twentieth Sitting of  the Public  Accounts
Committee  (2018-19) held on 5th December, 2018................. 76
II. Analysis  of   the  Action  Taken  by  the  Government  on the
Observations/Recommendations  of  the Public Accounts
Committee    contained    in    their    Sixty-Seventh    Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)............................................................ 79

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge—Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
3. Shri  Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
5. Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Smt. Riti Pathak
8. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
9. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
10. Shri Abhishek Singh
11. Shri Gopal Shetty
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar Chanabasappa Udasi
15. Dr. Ponnusamy Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Prof. M.V. Rajeev Gowda
17. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
18. Shri Shwait Malik
19. Shri Narayan Lal Panchariya
20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
21. Shri C.M. Ramesh
22. Shri Bhupender Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri T. Jayakumar — Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Malvika Mehta — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2018-19), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this One Hundred and Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth
Lok Sabha) on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations
of the Committee contained in their Sixty-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Performance Audit of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation and Special Audit of
Medical Education Projects of ESIC’ relating to the Ministry of Labour and Employment.
2. The Sixty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
30 March, 2017. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 3rd July, 2018. The Public Accounts Committee
considered and adopted the One Hundred and Fifteenth report at their sitting held on
5th December, 2018. Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An Analysis of  the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Sixty-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE,
12 December, 2018 Chairperson,
21 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with action taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Sixty-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Performance Audit of
Employees State Insurance Corporation and Special Audit of Medical Education
Projects of ESIC" based on two Audit reports viz. Report No. 30 of 2014 regarding
Performance Audit of Employees' State Insurance Corporation and Report No. 40
of 2015 pertaining to Special Audit of Medical Education Projects of ESIC.
2. The Sixty-seventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to the
Parliament on 31.03.2017. It contained twenty four Observations/Recommendations.
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Labour and
Employment in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and are broadly
categorised as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Para Nos. 1 to 5, 7, 9 and 12 to 22
Total: 18
Chapter II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
-NIL-
Total: Nil
Chapter III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
require reiteration:
Recommendation Para Nos. 8, 10, 11 and 23
Total: 04
Chapter IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies:
Recommendation Para Nos. 6 and 24
Total: 02
Chapter V

2
3. The detailed examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed
serious lacunae in the functioning of ESIC such as outstanding dues on account of
contribution from covered establishments, irregular availing of medical benefits
from ESIC dispensaries/hospitals without paying contribution, shortfalls in number
of meetings of Standing Committee, Medical Benefit Council, Regional Boards
and Hospital Development Committees, shortfalls in conducting surveys/inspections/
test inspections, humongous increase in expenditure of Super Speciality Treatment,
purchase of dressing items and medicines from local market despite existence of
Rate Contract etc.
4. In the case of medical education projects, the Committee had observed
incomprehensive feasibility study for selection of sites/locations conducted by the
consultant, arbitrary award of different works to different architectural and
engineering consultants, absence of due diligence to ascertain the number of colleges
required to be opened, time and cost overrun in almost all the medical education
projects taken up, and ineffective strategy adopted by ESIC to meet the shortage of
medical and paramedical staff.
5. The Committee were of the view that concrete action should have been
taken by ESIC rather than stop gap arrangements to ensure that ESIC fulfilled its
mandate of providing adequate and good quality medical care to workers and their
dependents during contingencies such as sickness, maternity and death or
disablement due to employment injury or occupational disease.
6. The Action Taken Notes were furnished by the Ministry of Labour
and Employment after a delay of more than eight months. The Committee
deprecate the undue delay in submission of Action Taken Notes by the Ministry
and desire that necessary instructions may be issued to ensure that replies to
the Committee are henceforth, submitted in time.
7. The Action Taken Notes submitted by the Ministry on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Sixty seventh Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report
in the succeeding paragraphs. The Committee will now deal with the Action Taken
by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made in the
original Report which either need reiteration or merit comments.
8. The Committee desire the Ministry of Labour & Employment
(Ministry) to furnish Action Taken Notes in respect of Observations/
Recommendations contained in Chapter I and final Action Taken Replies in
respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter V for which
interim replies have been given by the Ministry within six months of the
presentation of the Report to the House.
Expenditure vis-a-vis services being provided
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
9. The Committee had noted Audit's contention that on analysis of data of
income and expenditure indicated, inter-alia, that expenditure towards medical

3
and cash benefit was between 33 and 46 per cent of total income implying that the
expenditure on the main activity was not in proportion to collection of contributions.
It had also highlighted that the rates of contribution from employee and employers
were higher than present level of services being provided. The Committee had
observed that during 2008-09 to 2012-13, 'excess of income over expenditure' was
even more than the contribution made by employees in each of these 5 years. The
Committee had found that amid deteriorating health facilities, lack of hospitals,
scarce beds and shortage of doctors and specialists, the organisation was flush with
funds. The Committee had desired that much was needed to be done for effective
delivery of medical benefits and expediting cash benefits to the IPs and with such
huge funds, ESIC should endeavor to improve its efficiency and quality of services
tremendously. The Committee were also of the view that the ESIC may earnestly
explore fixing the rates of contribution from the employees on the basis of actuarial
valuation. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the basis of contribution to
be collected from the unorganized workers including construction workers and self
employed workers like rickshaw pullers and auto rickshaw drivers etc.
10. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in the Action Taken Notes
have submitted as under:—
1. "ESIC has enhanced the ceiling on expenditure for medical services
provided by States i.e. ESIS from Rs.2150 to ` 3000/- per Insured
Person (IP) per year from the year 2017-18 subject to submission of
Project Implementation Plan (PIP). This has led to financial liberty to
States for delivery of better medical services.
2. ESIC has granted in-principle approval for increasing hospital bed
strength of ESI hospitals by 50%, if the bed occupancy of the concerned
hospital has been consistently more than 70% in last three financial
years.
3. ESIC is running a super-speciality hospital at Sanathnagar, Hyderabad
with super specialties such as Cardiology, Neurology, Neurosurgery,
Pediatrics, Surgery, Nephrology, Urology, Dialysis etc. and also running
super-specialty services at Kollam in Kerala for Cardiology and
Nephrology.
Further, Super-Speciality Services (SST) are also provided in-house
on PPP mode.
4. Reform measures which have been taken in ESIC hospitals and
dispensaries under ESIC 2.0, are as under:
• Using VIBGYOR colour pattern, day-wise, for bed sheets in all
Hospitals of ESIC.
• Medical Helpline facility through which Insured Person can
directly talk to Doctors in case of any emergency and seek
guidance.

4
• Special OPDs in the afternoon from 3.00 PM to 5.00 PM for
senior citizens and differently-abled patients.
• Cancer detection/treatment facilities at different level of hospitals.
• Cardiology treatment facilities at different level of hospitals.
• Provision of all possible pathological facilities in all hospitals
premises by installation of required equipment either by
upgradation or outsourcing.
• Dialysis facilities in all ESIC model hospitals on PPP model.
• Queue Management System in every hospital for helping in
registration and pharmacy. Through this online registration can
also be done using mobile phones.
• Behavioral training to paramedical and other staff of the hospitals
guiding them to provide due courtesy in dealing with the patients/
attendants.
• Provision of facilities for reception and "May I Help You" in
each hospital to guide the patients/attendants.
• Electronic health records i.e. prescriptions and laboratory records
to beneficiary through internet.
• Upgradation of dispensaries into 6 bedded & 30 bedded hospital,
in a phased manner.
• Feedback system, for all indoor patients.
• Proper and attractive signages at the required places in all ESIC
hospitals for guidance and proper communication to the patients
and beneficiaries.
• Facility of yoga in ESIC hospitals.
• Tele-medicine facilities for the beneficiaries in a phased manner.
• Extension of AYUSH facilities up to the dispensary level.
• Tracking each and every pregnant mother and newly born child
in the families of IPs so that complete immunization as well as
safe delivery is achieved.
5. Steps taken by ESI Corporation so as to facilitate / incentivize the delivery
of medical services through various State Governments run ESIS hospitals and
dispensaries:—
• With a view to improve the functioning of State Govt. run ESIS hospitals
and dispensaries, ESIC has asked state ESI scheme to implement ESIC

5
2.0 reform measures and prescribed certain minimum facilities/
parameters to be maintained in ESIS health establishments viz.:
(i) Availability of doctors and para-medical staff as per sanctioned
strength.
(ii) Minimum number of medicines available.
(iii) Pathological and X-ray services.
(iv) Monitoring of general cleanliness and upkeep of dispensary/
hospital, bio-metric attendance and change of hospital bed sheets
as per VIBGYOR mission.
• The State ESI scheme have been asked to adhere to above mentioned
minimum standards/ prescribed norms and have been also
communicated that if ESIS medical establishment is not fulfilling
minimum level of provision of services, ESIC will take further steps
which may include deducting proportionate share of fund being given
by ESIC. It has also been communicated that this fund will be used
directly by ESIC for providing the deficient and other services which
are lacking in ESIS hospitals/ dispensaries, as mandated by ESIC 2.0.
• Regular monitoring and supervision of ESIS hospitals and dispensaries
is also being undertaken by ESIC so as to enforce the minimum standards
as per ESIC 2.0 mandate.
To further encourage the State Govt. for improving medical services in ESIS
health establishments, ESI Corporation has also proposed creation of State
Autonomous Body/ Society at State level for medical services wherein State
Govt. are to receive 100% expenditure on the ESI scheme, up to the ceiling
in perpetuity on adopting this model, against the current share of 87.5%
expenditure.
Regarding fixing the rates of contribution from the employees on the basis of
actuarial valuation it is submitted that the rate of contribution is payable
@ 6.5% of wages as per Rule 51 of ESI Central Rules, 1950. This rate
applicable since 26th August, 2004 is employers contribution @ 4.75% and
the employees share @1.75%.
A new Rule 51B has been inserted w.e.f. 06.10.2016, whereby contribution
@4% of wages is payable in respect of new areas where the ESI Scheme is
implemented for the first time, for an initial period of 24 months, after which
regular rate of contribution of 6.5% shall be payable. Out of the 4%, the
employer share is 3% and employee share is 1% of wages.
Further, As per Section 73A to Section 73F, Medical scheme for other
beneficiaries can be framed on payment of user charges in respect of
underutilized ESI hospitals in consultation with Central Govt. under the above
provision, scheme for auto-rickshaw drivers and domestic workers on pilot

6
basis were started on 01.04.2016 and 01.10.2016 respectively in cities of
Delhi and Hyderabad on payment of user charges @ 250/- per month for
auto-rickshaw drivers and  @ 200/- per month for domestic workers. No
scheme for other category of self employed workers has so far been launched.
Construction workers working in construction agencies in implemented areas
employing 10 or more persons are covered under the ESI Act and are entitled
to all benefits as Insured Persons."
11. Audit, in their vetting comments have submitted the following:—
"No explanation has been furnished for the low expenditure on medical and
cash benefits."
12. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in the Action Taken Notes have
further submitted as under:—
"Expenditure on medical services under ESI Scheme is under the
administrative decision of respective State Government running ESI Scheme.
ESI Corporation reimburses the State Governments' medical expenditure
under ESI Scheme as per agreed ratio and ceiling.
Some of the reasons for low expenditure by the State Government are:
• Posting of inadequate manpower.
• Relative lack of up gradation of medical services.
• Lengthy procedures for procurement of various services/equipments.
Further, ESI Corporation has taken various measure for better fund
utilization as under:
• No. of dispensaries being increased on the basis of proposals of State
Governments.
• Introduction of modified Employers' Utility Dispensaries (EUD) with
helpdesk facility for which budget of  500 Crore for the year 2018-19
has been approved by Corporation in its 173rd meeting held on
16.02.2018.
• New ESI hospitals are being constructed to increase the outreach of
ESI medical facilities.
• New Branch Office cum Dispensaries are being planned for which
100 crore has been provided in Budget for 2018-19.
• To encourage various State Governments for improving medical
services under ESIS system, State Governments have been requested
to form ESI Society at State level so that fund may be allocated directly
to State ESI Scheme without passing through State Treasury.
• ESI Corporation has also suggested a number of new initiatives to State
ESI Schemes for improving/upgrading medical services.

7
• State Government has been asked to submit Project Implementation
Plan (PIP) under specific heads of medical expenditure.
• Ceiling on medical expenditure has also been enhanced from 2,150/-
to 3,000/-.
In respect of low cash benefit expenditure, it is submitted that
disbursement of cash benefits depends upon certification by doctor in
respect of illness, employment injury. Since medical services
particularly the dispensaries are inadequate consequently it may happen
that IPs face difficulty in obtaining certificates for availing cash benefits.
To improve expenditure on cash benefits the following steps have been taken:
• Upgradation of medical services.
• The IPs who require absence from work on medical ground are only
eligible for cash benefits. Since the cash benefits are directly linked
with the medical services, adequate and effective medical services may
gain trust of the Scheme into our stakeholders and consequently may
improve the cash benefits expenditure.
• Setting up of Dispensary-cum-Branch office to cater the medical
services in all the implemented districts.
• To increase the number of dispensaries / empanelled doctors in those
areas where IP strength is high.
• To curb the lengthy procedures for disbursement of cash benefits.
• Linking of Aadhaar will access the genuineness of the case for early
disposal of cash payments.
Regarding, scheme for Autorickshaw Drivers & Domestic workers
under the "Scheme for other beneficiaries" under Section 73A it is
submitted that this scheme was initiated on Pilot basis in Delhi and
Hyderabad for a period of one year w.e.f. 1.4.2016 & 1.10.2016
respectively. The User contribution proposed for the Scheme for Auto-
rickshaw drivers in the pilot phase was 250/- per month, payable
quarterly, after the registration. The per capita expenditure on medical
care, excluding super speciality treatment, was about 3,150/- per IP for
the year 2013-14. Accordingly, an amount of  250/- per month was
proposed for pilot phase, subject to reassessment.
Both the pilot scheme were not able to elicit participation from intended
beneficiaries. Both the schemes have since been ended & MOL&E has
been informed."
13. The Committee had noted the deteriorating health facilities, lack of
hospitals, scarce beds and shortage of doctors and specialists, and desired
that ESIC, due to no dearth of funds should have endeavoured to improve its
efficiency and quality of services tremendously. The Committee acknowledge

8
that ESIC has undertaken various reform measures in their hospitals and
dispensaries to facilitate the delivery of medical services to the Insured Persons
(IPs). The Committee observe however, that for various reasons namely, posting
of inadequate manpower, relative lack of upgradation of medical services,
lengthy procedures for procurement of various services/equipment etc., State
Governments are not spending adequately for the welfare of IPs. The
Committee desire that ESIC may impress upon States, especially those that
are spending less quantum of funds to expend requisitely for IPs. The
Committee further desire to be apprised of the details of the proposed ESI
Societies and the response of the State Governments thereon.
Further, ESIC in their reply have stated that the rates of contribution
are fixed as per Rule 51 of the ESI Act, but still the basis for fixing the rate of
contribution has not been clarified. Reiterating its earlier observation that
the main activity i.e. providing medical and cash benefits is not in proportion
to collection of contributions, the Committee exhort the ESIC/Ministry to fix
the rates of contribution on sound, logical and scientific principles. The
Committee, therefore, stress upon their earlier recommendation that the option
of actuarial valuation be explored for fixing the rate of contribution from the
employers and employees.
Need for effective Recovery of arrears
Recommendation  (Para No. 8)
14. The Committee had noted that the total arrears outstanding as on
31st March, 2014 were 1754.14 crore, out of which 630.79 crore fall under the
category of recoverable arrears and an amount of 
 1123.35 crore under the category
of non- recoverable arrears for the present due to claims disputed in the Courts,
factories having gone into liquidation, factories registered with BIFR, amount
pending with Claims Commissioner, closure of the factories and whereabouts of
the defaulting employers in certain cases not known. The Committee had observed
that when asked why the recovery officers were not able to recover the pending
dues, whether any accountability had been fixed and what action had been taken to
enforce greater accountability on defaulting contributing organisations and recovery
officers, the Ministry had replied that the recovery of such amounts becomes difficult
and also depends on factors beyond the control of ESIC. The Committee had noted
that the Recovery Officers of the Corporation recovered 186.07 crore from defaulting
employers in 2013-14 against the target of 
 175.00 crore. A target of  192.06 crore
towards recovery of arrears was fixed for the year 2014-15 and an amount of 198.13
crore had been recovered against this target. While appreciating the efforts made
by ESIC to recover the arrears due, the Committee had desired that stringent penal
action may be taken against defaulters. The Committee were of the strong view that
the contribution collection mechanism should be such that the SSOs invariably
carry out the inspection of quarterly financial statements of the employers/
organizations after 2 months of continuous default in order to ascertain their financial
health and malafide intentions, if any, for taking suitable action thereon. The

9
Committee had desired that ESIC should take effective steps to ensure timely
collection of contributions from the employers so as to minimize the arrears.
15. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in the Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:—
"The recovery mechanism is already in place for Recovery of dues in the
corporation. The recovery targets are given every year to regions to recover
ESI dues and the same is closely monitored for every region. The performance
of recovery for the past three years is as under:
(` in crore)
Year Target Actual Recovery
2014-15 192.06 198
2015-16 218.98 205.8
2016-17 292.97 251.88
/circle6All cases having dues above 10 lakhs are closely  monitored and
reviewed.
/circle6Where the amounts are not found recoverable despite all possible efforts,
waiver actions are initiated.
/circle6Re-conciliation of all pending dues is done to ascertain correct figure
of recoverable dues.
However a big chunk of outstanding dues of recovery/non-recoverable
dues is as under :
(i) Factories/ Establishment having gone into liquidation.
(ii) Stay granted by Courts.
(iii) Factories / Establishments registered with BIFR.
(iv) Factories / Establishments closed and whereabout of the Principal
Employers not known."
16. Audit in their vetting comments on the matter have stated as under:—
"No reply furnished in respect of the Hon'ble Committee's suggestion that
the SSOs invariably carry out the inspection of quarterly financial statements
of the employers/organizations after two months of continuous default.
Nothing has been said about the penal action being taken against the defaulters.
Cases of dues above 10 lakh and number of cases where waiver actions are
initiated and the figures of recoverable dues may be included in the final
reply."
17. The Ministry have further replied as under:—
"It is submitted that no case of waiver action in respect of dues above
10 lakhs is under consideration at present."

10
18. The Committee had observed that around 70% of the total
arrearsoutstanding i.e. 1754.14 crore as on 31st March, 2014 were non-
recoverable to claims disputed in the Courts, factories having gone into
liquidation, factories registered with BIFR, amount pending with Claims
Commissioner, Closure of the factories and whereabouts of the defaulting
employers in certain cases not known. They, therefore, desired stringent penal
action against defaulters in contribution, Social Security Officers (SSOs) to
carry out inspection of quarterly financial statements of employers after
2 months of continuous default to take suitable action and ESIC to ensure
timely collection of contribution from employers to minimize arrears. The
Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that there has been substantial
recovery of arrears in the last few years and that a recovery mechanism is in
place for recovery of dues in the Corporation. However, the Committee find
that the ESIC have not been even able to achieve the yearly targets in respect
of recoveries that were to be made in 2015-16 and 2016-17. The Committee
desire that a detailed statement containing the Recoverable dues, the Targets,
the Actual Recoveries, the Amounts Waived Off, the Amounts Pending in
Courts etc. for each of the last five years be furnished within three months of
Presentation of the Report to the Parliament. The Committee exhort the
Ministry/ ESIC to take earnest efforts to recover the dues urgently in a time
bound manner. The Committee are of the opinion that a robust and systematic
contribution collection mechanism be evolved to restrict the arrears to the
minimum and desire that punitive action may be taken against the officers
who are unable to achieve their targets. The Committee are shocked to observe
that the Ministry have not taken any action on their earlier recommendation
that SSOs should carry out inspection of quarterly financial statements of
employers after 2 months of continuous default to take suitable action to obviate
any instance of default in contribution. The Committee, therefore, deprecate
the incalcitrant attitude of the Ministry and desire that a detailed action plan
on the above recommendation be submitted to them within three months.
Need for urgent recovery of dues from Delhi Government
Recommendation  (Para No. 10)
19. The Committee had noted that after administration of ESIS was transferred
from Delhi Government to ESIC in 1962, with the condition for reimbursement of
1/8th share of expenditure by Delhi Government to the ESIC, a total of 785.10
crore was outstanding from Government of Delhi as on 31 March, 2013. The
Committee had observed that ESIC did not take up the matter with the Ministry to
pursue with Delhi State Government for recovery of arrears. ESIC had replied that
the matter was being constantly pursued with Delhi State Government. The
Committee had noted that ESIC was regularly discussing the matter with the Ministry
of Labour & Employment on the issue of pending dues from the Delhi Government
and that ESIC could receive only an amount of 71.29 crores from Delhi Govt. since
1991. The pending dues from Delhi Govt. amounted to 1409.56 crores  i.e.

11
145.18 crore (within ceiling) and 1264.38 crore (outside ceiling). The Delhi Govt.
had agreed in principle to pay 1/8th share and last such payment was made by them
in March, 2011, however, Government of Dethi had categorically stated that they
would not share the expenses incurred by ESIC outside the ceiling. While observing
the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry in recovering the regular payments/dues
from the Delhi Government since 1990, the Committee had earnestly desired the
Ministry to engage proactively with the representatives of Delhi Government to
resolve the issue and recover at least 1/8th share from them at the earliest. The
Committee had further desired that the Ministry may, as per Section 58(4) of ESI
Act, 1948, take necessary action in this regard and the progress made may be apprised
to the Committee.
20. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in the Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:—
"During the 207th meeting of the Standing Committee held on 31.01.2017,
the Chairman has desired a letter from Hon'ble Minister (L&E) may be written
to the Hon'ble Minister of Home Affairs, Govt. of India and Lieutenant
Governor of Delhi for seeking their intervention to resolve the issue of
Recovery of dues from Delhi Govt.
In this regard, ESI Corporation has taken up the issue with the Ministry of
Labour & Employment and accordingly, the Hon'ble Minister ( Labour &
Employment ) vide letter dated 11.07.2017 has requested the Lieutenant
Governor of Delhi and Hon'ble Minister of Home Affairs for their kind
intervention to expedite the payment dues pending toward the Government
of Delhi, so that ESI Scheme in Delhi continue to run smoothly."
21. Audit have submitted their vetting comments on the matter as follows:—
"Ministry has not indicated that it has initiated any action as per Section
58 (4) of ESI Act 1948. It has been intimated that Hon'ble LG (Delhi) and
Minister of Home Affairs had been requested to intervene to get the payment
dues pending with the Government of Delhi. The outcome may be included
in the final reply."
22. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in the Action Taken Notes have
further submitted as under:—
"Despite regular pursuance, Delhi Government is yet to release payment. In
this regard, reminder letter is being written from Hon'ble Minister of Labour,
Government of India to Chief Minister of Delhi to release the payment dues
pending with the Government of Delhi.
Subsequently, Delhi Government informed ESIC that ‘if Govt. of India want
GNCT to make payment to ESIC, it must categorically say that GNCT is
State Government of transferred subject’.
In this regard the Govt. of NCT, Delhi has been asked by ESIC to take up the
aforesaid issue separately with Govt. of India and the arrears payable to ESIC
may not be subjected to such condition."

12
23. The Committee had in their original recommendation inter alia desired
that the Ministry may take necessary action as per Section 58(4) of ESI
Act, 1948 to resolve the deadlock with the Government of Delhi for recovery
of pending dues. The Committee observe from the reply of the Ministry that
the Minister (Labour and Employment) vide letter dated 11.07.2017 had
requested the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi and Minister of Home Affairs,
Government of India for their intervention to expedite the payment of dues
pending with the Government of Delhi so that the ESI scheme in Delhi continues
to run smoothly. The Committee opine that since a long time has elapsed without
any outcome and on the basis of the reply of the Delhi Government in the
matter, the Ministry may take action in accordance with section 58(4) of the
ESI Act, 1948 whereby an arbitrator be appointed to resolve the issue. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made in this regard within
two months of presentation of this report.
Budget
Recommendation (Para No.11)
24. The Committee had observed that the Ministry approved the budget
proposal as submitted by the ESIC without exercising any oversight role during all
five years under review. The Committee had also noted that significant deviations
were found, such as excess varying from 20% to 196% and savings ranging from
20% to 69%. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the steps taken by the
Ministry and ESIC to frame adequately balanced budget estimates.
The Committee had observed that Rule 31 of ESIC (Central) Rules, 1950
enjoined that the Budget Estimates of the Corporation shall be prepared in the
format prescribed by the Central Government, approved by the Standing Committee,
passed by the Corporation and, again, approved by the Central Government and
finally, placed before the Parliament, after necessary review by Government and
that Ministry of Finance is required to open separate fund under the relevant major
head in Public Account. The Committee had desired the Ministry of Finance to
examine this issue for suitable clarification on the procedure to deal with excess
expenditure from public fund. The Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of
Finance had clarified that they had no objection for creation of separate reserve
fund and the procedure for opening a new fund in the Public Account required the
Department concerned to examine the issue in detail and send the detailed accounting
procedure to the office of Controller General of Accounts (CGA) who would process
the same while taking concurrence of Budget Division and C&AG. The Committee
had desired that Ministry/ESIC take appropriate action in this regard under intimation
to the Committee.
25. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in the Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:—
"As desired by the Hon'ble Committee to be apprised regarding steps taken
to frame adequately balanced budget, it is submitted that steps have been

13
taken for balanced budget estimates by analyzing past years expenditure from
current year 7 months expenditure, status of projects, increase in number of
beneficiaries, recruitment plans etc.
As per Sec. 26 (1) of the ESI Act,1948 "All contribution paid under this Act
and all other moneys received on behalf of the Corporation shall be paid into
a fund called the Employees' State Insurance Fund which shall be held and
administered by the Corporation for the purposes of this Act". However,
Rule 31 of the Employees' State Insurance (Central) Rules, 1950 does not
contain any provisions requiring Ministry of Finance to open separate fund
under the relevant major head in Public Account as mentioned in Report.
Further, Annual Budget Estimates are prepared as per Sec. 32 of the ESI
Act, 1948 read with Rule 31 of the ESI (Central) Rules, 1950 and submitted
to Standing Committee headed by the Secretary of the Administrative Ministry
for consideration and approval. After approval of Standing Committee, the
Budget Estimated is placed before the ESI Corporation headed by Hon'ble
Minister of Labour & Employment and member of Corporation comprising
Hon'ble Members of Parliament, Representative of Employers and Employees,
State Govts. etc. and as passed by the Corporation, the same is submitted to
Central Government to make such alterations as may be considered necessary
before according approval. The budget estimates finally adopted by the
Corporation and approved by the Central Government is placed before the
Parliament by Administrative Ministry concerned and is published in the
Official Gazette.
ESIC operates on the principle of pooling of risk and resources for which
reserve funds have been created on the basis of actuarial valuation. The excess
funds are evaluated & invested regularly and used as per the needs of the
Insured Persons. The present system of fund management is well within the
principles of ESI Act.
In ESIC, the entire budget is not released to field offices at once but is done
on monthly basis and while releasing the fund, the expenditure pattern of
units is also considered and if any unspent fund is left with field units, it is
returned to Headquarters and same is transferred to Reserve Fund maintained
by ESIC. Moreover, in case of any excess of expenditure over the sanctioned
budget; re-appropriation is done as per Rule 33 of ESI (Central) Rules, 1950
and in the case of any savings, the same is transferred to General Reserve
Fund.
In view of the above and the prevalent system, Budget preparation may be
continued as per the ESI Act."
26. Audit in this regard have given the following vetting comments:—
"Ministry has not agreed to the recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee
regarding creation of separate reserve fund under Public Accounts and has

14
suggested that the prevalent system of Budget preparation as per ESI Act
may be continued. The possibility of making changes in the ESIC Act to
implement the recommendation of PAC may also be commented upon."
27. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in the Action Taken Notes have
further submitted as under:—
"During the recent Budget preparation for the year 2018-19 various steps
have been taken to ensure that Budget Estimates are more realistic based on
actual expenditure trend, present & future policy decisions of the Corporation
and accordingly each and every items of revenue and expenditures is
adequately rationalised and justified.
Further, issues related to finance, ESI Fund, Budget Estimates, Audit
and other related issues are covered under Chapter III of ESI Act, 1948.
Section 26 and 28 of ESI Act, 1948 specifically contains the provisions related
to ESI Fund and purpose for which the Fund may be expended respectively.
In addition to above, ESIC has taken following futuristic actions:
(a) MOL&E has conveyed that ESI Scheme should be extended to entire
nation in all district by 2022 as per the decision of Cabinet Secretariat
which is being monitored through e-samiksha. Under ESIC 2.0 as on
1.1.18, the scheme has been extended to a total of 503 Districts
comprising of 325 complete District, 93 District HQs and in 85 Districts
it is partially implemented in centers. Process for meeting the
implementation targets of 2022 has been initiated.
(b) No. of dispensaries being increased on the basis of proposals of State
Governments.
(c) Introduction of modified Employers' Utility Dispensaries (EUD) with
helpdesk facility for which budget of 500 crore for the year 2018-19
has been approved by Corporation in its 173rd meeting held on
16.02.2018.
(d) New ESI hospitals are being constructed to increase the outreach of ESI
medical facilities.
(e) New Branch Office cum Dispensaries are being planned for which
100 crore has been provided in Budget for 2018-19.
To implement the present and futuristic services to the Insured Persons
(IPs) constant flow and availability of funds is required."
28. The Committee had found significant deviations in the budget
proposal as submitted by the ESIC and the Ministry approved the same without
exercising any oversight role during all five years under review. The excess
expenditure were varying from 20% to 196% and savings ranging from 20%
to 69%. The Committee had, therefore, recommended creation of an open

15
separate fund under the relevant major head in Public Account.The Committee
note that ESIC operates on the principle of pooling of risk and resources for
which reserve funds have been created on the basis of actuarial valuation.
The excess funds are evaluated & invested regularly and used as per the needs
of the Insured Persons. However, the Committee find that despite there being
a detailed procedure for budget scrutiny and fund management, instances of
huge deviations were found during all the five years under review. The
Committee while opining that such huge deviations on excess expenditure as
well as savings continuously for five years project a poor picture of the whole
budget estimation process exhort the Ministry to earnestly perform their
oversight role so as to make the budget estimation a realistic one. The
Committee desire that a mechanism be evolved whereby a scientific analysis
of the budget estimates of the ESIC be invariably carried out by the Ministry
so as to ensure that the funds are neither lying idle nor excess expenditure is
incurred on any project/programme.
Review of Sanctioned Strength
Recommendation (Para No. 23)
29. While observing vacancies in ESIC to the extent of 25.88% in Bihar to as
high as 69.09% in Himachal Pradesh, the Committee had recommended that the
Ministry/ESIC carry out a review of the existing sanctioned strength and vacancies
and based on the results of the same, amend the existing norms and thereafter take
the necessary steps to fill up the vacancies.
30. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in the Action Taken Notes have
submitted as under:—
"ESI Corporation in its 161st meeting held on 28.01.2014 & 14.02.2014
authorized its Chairman to constitute the Standing Committee and other
Sub-Committee.
Chairman, ESI Corporation then has constituted the Sub-Committee on
Organisational Restructuring of the ESI Corporation on 04.03.2014.
ESI Corporation in its 167th meeting held on 18.12.2015 approved that the
Sub-Committee on Organisational Restructuring of ESIC may be entrusted
to review the sanctioned strength of ESIC at Hqrs. Office as well as field
officers and to submit their recommendations which may be placed in the
next meeting of the Corporation.
To provide inputs and assist the said Sub-Committee, an internal committee
was constituted by the Director General.
Again, an agenda item "ORGANISATIONAL RESTRUCTURING: VISION
& ROADMAP 2021" was placed before the 171th meeting of the ESI
Corporation held on 18.02.2017. In the said meeting of the Corporation, it
was decided to get detailed proposal prepared.

16
The internal committee is yet to submit its final report to the Corporation
Sub-Committee."
31. Audit have stated the following in their vetting comments:—
"The final report of the internal committee regarding organizational
re-structuring along with action taken thereon may be included in the final
reply."
32. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in the Action Taken Notes have
further submitted as under:—
"In this connection, it is to inform that the Ministry of Labour & Employment
has conveyed the decision of the Cabinet Secretariat wherein it is desired to
extend the coverage of ESIC to the entire nation. Accordingly, an agenda
item "ESIC VISION 2022" was placed in 173rd meeting of ESI Corporation
held on 16th February, 2018. At present fine tuning of 'Vision 2022' has been
assigned to a sub-committee of the Corporation. To achieve the objective to
notify all district under ESIC in a gradual manner various strategic plan has
been initiated with regard to Medical benefits, Cash benefits, Ease of doing
business & Modernize IT services of ESIC to improve efficiency and reduce
administrative costs by way of restructuring of administrative and medical
staff.
It is also decided in the aforesaid meeting that atleast one Branch Office Cum
Dispensary may also set up in each of the covered districts."
33. On account of vacancies in ESIC ranging from around 26% to about
70% in various States, the  Committee had recommended review of the existing
sanctioned strength and measures taken to fill up vacant posts in the
organisation for optimum coverage and implementation of ESIS. The
Committee express their displeasure at the callous way in which the Ministry
have replied to the recommendation of the Committee. As per their reply, in
three separate meetings held over a period of four years, the ESIC approved
a sub-committee which would be entrusted to review the sanctioned strength
of ESIC, decided to get a detailed proposal prepared and again assigned to a
sub-committee to fine tune the ESIC Vision 2022, respectively. The Committee
are dismayed to note that instead of providing manpower urgently, the
Ministry/ESIC have deffered recruitment process till 2022. The Committee
are of the strong view that this being an essential service, the Ministry need
not wait till 2022. Further, the Committee fail to understand how ESIC expect
to achieve their vision of implementation of full coverage of ESIC in all the
districts of India without adequate staff. The Committee opine that ESIC which
is functioning on the contributions of the IPs cannot deny medical facilities to
the same IPs on the pretext of shortage of staff and exhort the Ministry to
address the issue immediately. The Committee desire to be apprised of the
concrete steps taken by the Ministry to provide staff in ESIC hospitals within
one month of the presentation of this report to the House.

17
Medical Education Projects
Recommendation at (Para No. 24)
34. While commenting on Medical education projects, the Committee had
observed that though the medical colleges were opened for giving education to the
children of Insured Persons (IPs) with their money at reasonable costs, the Ministry/
ESIC did not give a single thought to the concerns of these IPs before opting out of
the field. The Committee were of the view that Ministry/ESIC should have thought
of improving themselves instead of running away even before the first batch of
MBBS students passed out, after spending more than 10000 crore of the IPs money.
The Committee were of the considered view that Medical colleges are essential for
hospitals with super-speciality department and also, the interests of the children of
IPs are to be taken care of by the ESIC. The Committee were of the view that the
ESIC did not exercise due diligence in expending hard earned money of poor IPs
and the Ministry did not exercise adequate control over ESIC's handling of the
medical projects. The Committee had desired that, henceforth, Ministry/ESIC should
exercise due diligence while awarding contracts and issue SOPs/guidelines for
carrying out all the construction works including tendering/awarding contracts. The
Committee had noted that the selection of sites by ESIC for construction of Medical
Education Projects was arbitrary and not based on norms and due diligence to
ascertain the number of colleges required to be opened, to fulfil the future
requirement of doctors and other paramedical staff was not carried out. The
Committee had also recommended the Ministry to examine the lapses on part of
ESIC in medical project implementation and had desired that liquidated damages
may be imposed on the contractors who caused delays in completion of works and
responsibility may be fixed on concerned officials. The Committee had been
informed that a Committee under Additional Secretary had been constituted to
look into lapses for not providing documents to Audit. The Committee had desired
to be apprised of the action taken in this regard within two months. The Committee
had observed that Audit found that Medical Education Projects by ESIC were marred
by delays and cost overrun.
35. The Ministry of Labour and Employment in their action taken reply stated
as under:—
"Prima-facie, provision of MBBS seats in ESIC Medical Colleges for 'Wards
of Insured Person (IPs), was not the stated objective of setting up of medical
colleges by ESIC under Section 59B of the ESI Act, 1948. It was a benefit
which accrued later.
The decision to opt of medical education was coupled with transfer of medical
college projects under construction but not yet started, to willing State
Governments for running these colleges. The record of discussions at the
presentation made by the Secretary, L&E to the Prime Minister on 7th July,
2014 suggested that, ‘Since ESIC did not have the core competency to run
medical colleges they may be handed over to relevant agencies with capability
and mandate to run medical colleges’:

18
a. ESIC is continuing to run all medical colleges which have been started
after receipts of 'Letter of Permission' by the ESIC from the Central
Government.
b. In case of erstwhile medical college projects of ESIC transferred to
State Governments, the ownership of land and buildings constructed
thereon vests with ESIC as per MoU executed for such transfer.
c. Interests of children of IPs are being taken care of by ESIC by ensuring
provision of MBBS seats for 'Wards of IPs' in these colleges and
erstwhile ESIC medical colleges, now being run by State Governments.
The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) executed for medical
colleges projects transferred to the State Governments provided for
the same.
d. Medical Council of India (MCI) norms does not per-se mandate super-
specialty departments in medical college hospitals. Setting up and
development of such departments in a medical college/other hospital
is guided by the objectives of the organization running these colleges
and associated hospital. ESIC hospitals are gradually having in-house
super-specialty services on own/Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode.
All the medical college projects (11) have been completed except Bihta, Patna,
which is also expected to be completed by March, 2018. MBBS Courses
have already been running from as many as 8 colleges and from 1 college
situated at Mandi (H.P.), the classes are to be started from this year. Another
college at Alwar (Rajasthan) is ready in all respects and classes may start
from next year.
The final claim of the construction agencies along with extension of time in
r/o all these medical education projects are yet to be settled by ESIC. In the
Contract Agreements between ESIC and respective construction agencies
(Govt. PSUs), there exists a provision for levying liquidated damages for
delay, which will be evaluated meticulously based on hindrances for individual
project. If delay in completion of these projects is not justified, liquidated
damages would be levied to them.
In other projects, liquidated damages are being imposed by ESIC if delay is
not found justified based on analysis of hindrances. In 2 dispensary projects
at Faridabad and Murthal in the State of Haryana as much as 10% of the cost
of the project (maximum limit) was recovered as liquidated damages from
M/s NBCC. In another project of renovation of Regional Office at Lower
Parel, Mumbai, levying of liquidated damages is being contemplated. As
such, liquidated damages/penalty would be imposed to construction agencies
in terms of the Contract Agreement in case of proven delay:
(i) Under Section 28(4) of the ESI Act, Corporation has full powers to
start Medical Education Projects. Section 59 was amended to only
further amplify and focus the same. The Employees's State Insurance

19
(Amendment) Act, 2010 was passed by the Parliament, which is in
force w.e.f. 01.06.2010. There is further provision/amendment of
Section 19 ‘Validation’ which is reproduced hereunder:—
‘19. Validation
All thing done, or omitted to be done, and all action or measures taken
or not taken during the period beginning on or after the 3rd day of July,
2008 and ending immediately before the date of commencement of the
Employees' State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2010, be deemed to
have been done, or taken, or not taken, under the provision of this Act,
as amended by the Employees's State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2010
as if such provisions were in force at the time such things were done or
omitted to be done and actions or measures taken or not taken during
the said period.’
In view of the above, the action taken or initiated by the Corporation
has been already validated by the Parliament.
(ii) The work of ME projects was taken up within the existing ESIC/ESI
hospitals, inter-alia , on the feasibility (report) submitted by the
Consultant appointed for the purpose. The ESI Corporation at its 145th
meeting (05.12.08) approved 11 (eleven) medical college locations at
existing ESIC/ESI hospitals surveyed by the consultant. However, ESIC
at its 147th meeting (25.08.09) independently approved seven (07)
locations at (i) Patna (Bihar); (ii) Alwar (Rajasthan) (iii) Faridabad
(Haryana); (iv) Mandi (HP); (v) Pantnagar (Uttarakhand);
(vi) Bhubaneswar (Orissa) and (vii) Gulbarga (Karnataka). These sites
were allotted by State Governments for 'Green-field' ESIC medical
college projects largely at subsidized rates/token value/free of cost.
The ESIC appeared not to have looked into the criteria of IPs at these
locations and solely depended on land parcel availability.
The ESIC has decided, inter-alia, at its 165th meeting held on 07.04.2015
that it will not set up any new Medical College or any other Medical
Education Institution in future.
Further, ESIC has, inter-alia, decided to transfer infrastructure at locations
where medical colleges had not been commissioned, including at locations
with low IP numbers, to willing State Governments for establishment of these
colleges by the State Government.
Of the seven locations above, ESIC has already established medical colleges
at Faridabad, Haryana (2015-16); and Gulbarga, Karnataka (2013-14). The
medical college project at Mandi (HP) is under transfer to the State
Government, in phases. The projects at Patna (Bihar) & Alwar, Rajasthan
have received conditional acceptance/consent of the respective State
Governments for transfer of the said proposed colleges. The same is under

20
examination pending vacation of stay granted by the Hon'ble High Court of
Delhi in WP11837/2015, i.e. maintain status-quo regarding medical colleges
established by the Corporation under Section 59-B of the ESI Act. A separate
application for vacation of the stay order in r/o proposed ESIC colleges has
been filed by ESIC.
ESIC would take up further with the State Government regarding transfer of
the infrastructure of the proposed college and its establishment by the State
Governments depending upon the orders of the Hon'ble HIgh Court.
(iii) (a) The works of Architectural & Engineering Consultancy were awarded
on nomination basis only to those A&E firms, which were empanelled
in ESIC. As regards the criteria for allocation of work, the excerpts of
noting dated 23.02.2010 made by then Chief Engineer, ESIC, reveals:—
(i) To provide workable, efficient, cost effective and aesthetical
design solution in stipulated time.
(ii) To make design presentation before the competent authority and
user department such as Financial Commissioner, Medical
Commissioner, Dy. Medical Commissioner, Chief Engineer, RC
and other ESIC officials.
(iii) To get the completion certificate from the Municipal Authority
to get all the statutory clearances, for the project within time
frame.
(iv) To submit BOQ/Estimates to Hqrs.' for vetting/sanction.
(v) To issue goods for construction and detailed drawings at site for
execution as per construction on schedule.
(vi) To supervise the construction.
Based on the assessment of performance of the consultants on the above
parameters, competent authority i.e. Director General, ESIC awarded the
work/projects to empanelled Consultants.
The performance of the consultant firms has been evaluated on the project
basis such as time taken for 1st submission/presentation of project before the
competent authority, submission of drawings for statutory bodies, approval
getting clearances from various agencies such as Environmental clearance
and clearances from Central Water Pollution Board, Civil Aviation Authorities
(wherever applicable) etc. submission of BOQ & Tender documents in time
for construction drawing to the construction agency.
Further, all the projects have been awarded as per the direction/decision of
the Competent Authority i.e. Director General. The decision was taken at the
highest level, well within their power.

21
(b) Six projects which have been pointed out were initial projects in which
fees payable to A&E Consultant has not been capped. However, on
realizing the deficiency in the Contract Agreement, the same was
immediately modified and required clause incorporated in subsequent
Agreements and implemented. Prior to adoption of Turnkey system of
executing project, ESIC was getting executed work on Deposit Work
basis and hence, there was no in-house experience in formulating such
contracts. To ensure that such issues do not recur, Standing Committee
of ESI Corporation has approved the Standard Contract Agreement in
November, 2012 and all subsequent agreements were executed as per
the Standardized document.
It is also added that ESI Corporation in its 166th Meeting held on dated
07.08.2015 decided that the construction work (including A&E work) may be
executed by the ESIC through executing /existing agencies /Central/ State PSUs
after by following the due process. At present, the work is awarded to these agencies
after financial bidding the total Centage charges towards construction works and
A&E services have come down considerably. Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) is being signed with the executing Agency for each project.
(iv) A comprehensive report regarding a well considered time frame and
action plan for filling up the vacant posts of medical /paramedical staff
was apparently not prepared by ESIC.
(v) Since its inception in 1952 till 2007, the ESIC has adopted ‘deposit
work basis’  concept for construction of hospitals, dispensaries and
office buildings. However, later on above arrangement was not found
satisfactory and there were serious and persistent complaints from State
Governments. Corporation Members and Trade Unions about poor
quality of planning, design and workmanship in capital construction
works and extremely poor maintenance of ESIC properties.
To streamline construction of capital and other works a report was put up for
the information of the Standing Committee in its 179th meeting held in June,
2008, vide Reporting Item No. VIII. In accordance with said streamlining
measures, ESIC switched-over to turnkey system of management of projects.
Under the said system, Construction Agencies (Central/ State PSUs) which
were engaged/ empanelled by ESIC were awarded work on nomination basis.
Rule 126(2) of GFR, 2005 amended in August, 2010 provides for assigning
original works of any value to any public works organization (PWOs) such
as CPWD, State PWD, other Central Government Organization authorized
to carry out civil or electrical works such as MES, BRO etc. public sector
undertakings set up by the Central or State Government to carry out civil or
electrical works or any other Central/State Government Organization / PSU
which may be notified by the Ministry of Urban Development after evaluating
their financial strength and technical competence.

22
ESIC got executed its construction projects through Agencies such as NBCC,
UPRNNL, HSCL, UPPCL, HPL, EPI, TCIL which are public sector
undertaking set up by the Central/ State Governments. These agencies are
required to either get the work executed departmentally or tender the work.
Savings occurred after tendering was not passed on by these agencies to
ESIC as the Contract Agreement didn't contain clause to this effect.
It is also added that ESI Corporation in its 166th Meeting held on 07.08.2015
decided that the construction work may be got executed through the executing /
existing agencies/Central/State PSUs of ESIC by following the due process. At
present, the work is awarded to these agencies after financial bidding for service
charges [as per Rule 126(3) of GFR 2005]. Due to financial bidding the total
Centage charges towards construction works have been reduced. Now the benefit
of competitive rates is being availed by ESIC. Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) is being signed with the executing Agency for each project.
(vi) Initial construction cost of Medical Education Project was Rs.8611.94
crore. Most of the projects are on the verge of completion. For some of
the projects such as Dental Colleges at Nacharam and Kanpur, the scope
has been revised as new standalone Dental Colleges are not being
permitted by Dental Council of India. In case of Basaidarapur project
also, scope has been revised to the extent of excluding Medical College
and including Center of Excellence which has resulted into substantial
cost optimization. Efforts have been made to optimize the cost of the
Medical Education projects further and the expected construction cost
as on 31.03.2017 would be to the tune of Rs.10,020.37 crore (approx.).
Further efforts are being made to optimize the cost by rationalizing
and normalizing the scope without compromising with the functional
requirements. Increase in cost of projects from Rs.8611.94 crore to
Rs.10,020.37 crore (as on 31.03.2017) has resulted due to various
reasons which differs from project to project.
However, some of the common reasons for delays which resulted in
cost escalation are summarized as under:—
(i) Most of the projects are brown field projects where the renovation /up-
gradation/extension were to be carried out in existing hospitals without
interrupting the running facilities.
(ii) Building Plan approvals of brown field projects, from local municipal
authorities/statutory bodies took lot of time.
(iii) Non-availability of work front/Non-applicability of encumbrance free
land.
(iv) Changes in existing fire norms.
(v) Revision in parking area norms.
(vi) Restriction imposed for working hours in specific areas for blasting
operations for excavation to carry out foundation work in rocky strata.
(vii) Shifting of over-ground/underground existing public utilities viz. HT

23
Lines. Water Mains, Sewerage Mains, Telephone lines etc.
Beside above, addition of medical equipment & medical furniture and other
items which were not included in the original estimate but were essential for project
has led to increase in cost of projects.
To ensure that such issues do not recur, ESIC has taken following corrective
measure:—
•  Preparation of authentic detailed estimate, so as to avoid multiple
variations in future.
•  Necessary statutory approvals and encumbrance free land to be ensure
before the work is taken up on the ground, so as to avoid the time lag
and cost overruns before actual start of the work.
• Finalization of detailed project schedule in terms of Milestone Chart
before start of work, so as to keep proper control over the period of
completion of the project.
a. Audit was given access to all documents which were requested
for, formally or informally, and which were available and within
knowledge of the ESIC. There exists a distinct possibility that
documents deemed not to have been provided were either not
asked for by Audit or if available, their location was not in the
knowledge of the ESIC.
The scope of Medical College at Basaidarapur has been changed and now a
Centre of Excellence is being constructed instead. The expected construction
cost of the project with new scope after exclusion of Medical College and
inclusion of Centre of Excellence is about Rs. 823.60 crore as estimated on
31.03.2017. All actions had due approval of Competent Authority. ESIC has
handled all work of medical education 'in-house' and not used services of
consultant for medical education purpose after September 2013."
36. Audit in their vetting comments have furnished the following:—
"PAC may be apprised whether Ministry has undertaken any exercise to
examine the lapses on the part of ESIC. Further staus of all the project may
be included in the final reply to PAC."
37. The Ministry of Labour and Employment have further submitted the
following:—
"Regarding lapses in implementing the Medical Education Projects on the
part of ESIC Officers, if any, it is submitted that this issue is being examined
by CVC separately and the outcome of same will be intimated in due course."
38. The Committee were of the view that Government run medical
colleges are the only institutions in the country which are able to provide
medical education to the aspirants at most reasonable costs and these colleges

24
are being run pretty well by other Ministries also. The Committee note from
the reply of the Ministry that Secretary, Ministry of Labour & Employment
had submitted to the Prime Minister that since ESIC did not have the core
competency to run medical colleges they may be handed over to relevant
agencies with capability and mandate to run medical colleges. The Committee
find that under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana, Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare has been mandated to set up new AIIMS in various
parts of the country alongwith upgradation of the existing Government Medical
Colleges and accordingly, it is in the process of acquiring land, building new
hospitals and upgrading Government medical colleges, all over the country.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that to efficiently utilise infrastructure
already created by the ESIC and to ensure uniformity in standards of medical
education across all Government run medical colleges, Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare may be approached to take over ESIC colleges/medical
education projects and develop them like AIIMS since it has both the capability
and mandate to run them.
Further, the Committee find that the Ministry has not furnished the
report of the Committee constituted under Additional Secretary to look into
lapses for not providing documents to Audit and desire that the same may be
provided at the earliest.
The Committee are shocked to note the lack of manpower planning
resulting in vacant posts of medical/paramedical staff in ESIC hospitals and
colleges. The Committee while opining that lack of planning at every stage
and hasty decision making led to such a situation desire that henceforth big
projects should only be undertaken after analyzing every related aspect and
in active coordination with the Ministry. The Committee desire that adequate
planning may be done beforehand in respect of Centre of Excellence being set
up at Basaidarapur by the ESIC to avoid recurrence of similar issues.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
The C&AG of India examined the functioning of the Employees State
Insurance Corporation (ESIC) in their two Audit reports viz. Report No. 30 of 2014
regarding Performance Audit of Employees' State Insurance Corporation and Report
No. 40 of 2015 pertaining to Special Audit of Medical Education Projects of ESIC.
The first report is an assessment of the overall performance of ESIC and the second
report relates to analysis of an important issue of Medical Education Projects started
by ESIC. Since both the reports of the C&AG were related to ESIC, the
Committee have decided to bring out one consolidated report containing their
observations/recommendations on all the relevant issues. The C&AG had, earlier,
presented Report No. 2 of 2006 on Performance Audit of ESIC
covering 1999-2000 to 2003-04.
[Para 1, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Statement of facts/matter of record.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that most of the shortcomings pointed by Audit in their
earlier Report No. 2 of 2006 which was Performance Audit of ESIC covering
1999-2000 to 2003-04 still persist. There were shortfalls in number of meetings of
the Standing Committee and Medical Benefit Council, consistent increase in
outstanding arrears of contribution from employers, shortfall in coverage of eligible
employees working in establishments coverable in new areas, misuse of cash benefits
due to deficient internal controls, land acquired by ESIC from State Governments
for construction of hospitals, dispensaries and staff quarters not utilized for periods
ranging from two to thirty seven years; deficiencies in management of hospitals
and dispensaries—under-utilization of beds, idling of equipment, injudicious
purchase of medicines and procurement of sub-standard drugs etc.
[Para 2, Part II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
25

26
Action Taken
Compliance of the observations have been duly made and corrective actions
initiated/taken. Para-wise comments on compliances and action taken have been
elaborated in replies to Para No. 6 to 24 of the PAC Report.
Observation/Recommendation
The Performance Audit of the ESIC in Report No. 30 of 2014 was conducted
by Audit to assess whether financial management and governance was efficient;
mechanism for coverage of new establishments was effective; implementation of
scheme, including procurement of medicines/equipment was efficient and effective;
benefits provided to the insured persons/beneficiaries were as per norms; and
infrastructure development was effective and as per norms. In Report No. 40 of
2015, Audit commented upon certain aspects of Medical Education Projects. The
Committee note that the Government of India, Ministry of Labour and Employment
in November, 2014 requested the C&AG of India to conduct a special Audit of 13
ongoing Medical College Projects. It was specifically desired by the Ministry that
the special Audit may be taken up to address concerns including whether due
diligence was observed while deciding to take up medical education projects,
whether these projects were able to fulfill the objectives envisaged under Section
59(B) of ESI Act, and whether the provisions of General Financial Rules (GFRs)
were followed while implementing these projects.
[Para 3, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Statement of facts/matter of record.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee have found serious lacunae in the functioning of ESIC such
as outstanding dues on account of contribution from covered establishments,
irregular availing of medical benefits from ESIC dispensaries/hospitals without
paying contribution, shortfalls in meetings of Standing Committee, Medical Benefit
Council, Regional Boards and Hospital Development Committees, shortfalls in
conducting surveys/inspections/test inspections, humongous increase in expenditure
on Super Speciality Treatment, purchase of dressing items and medicines from
local market despite existence of Rate Contract etc. In the case of medical education
projects, the Committee observe incomprehensive feasibility study for selection of
sites/locations conducted by the consultant, arbitrary award of different works to
different architectural and engineering consultants, due diligence to ascertain the
number of colleges required to be opened not carried out, time and cost overrun in
almost all the medical education projects taken up, and ineffective strategy adopted
by ESIC to meet the shortage of medical and paramedical staff.
[Para 4, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]

27
Action Taken
Compliance of the observations have been duly made and corrective actions
initiated/taken. Para-wise comments on compliances and action taken have been
elaborated in replies to Para No. 6 to 24 of the PAC Report.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are of the view that it is now time for concrete action to be
taken by ESIC rather than stop gap arrangements in order to ensure that ESIC
fulfils its mandate of providing adequate and good quality medical care to workers
and their dependants  during contingencies such as sickness, maternity and death
or disablement due to employment injury or occupational disease. The Committee
have accordingly made their observations/ recommendations on pertinent issues in
the succeeding paragraphs.
[Para 5, Part -II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Efforts made by the ESIC and action initiated / taken to comply with the
observations made by the PAC have been enumerated in replies to Para No.6 to 24
of the PAC Report.
Observation/Recommendation
Accumulated Surplus Funds : The Committee note that during 2009-10
and 2012-13, ESIC transferred 5000 crore and 3000 crore respectively from
'Surplus' to 'Capital Construction Reserve Fund' (CCRF) which was set up to meet
the expenditure on purchase of buildings, construction of hospitals/dispensaries,
other medical institutions and offices of the Corporation together with staff quarters
attached to it. As per the approval of ESIC Corporation and Ministry of Labour
and Employment a certain percentage of income from contribution (currently one
per cent) is transferred to Capital Construction Reserve Fund. ESIC in addition to
annual transfer of one per cent also transferred 16914 crore from Surplus to
CCRF during 2009-10 to 2013-14. The expenditure on 21 Medical Education
Projects was met out of the surplus available / transfer from CCRF.
Since ESIC has decided to largely exit from medical education projects,
optimum utilisation of accumulated surplus funds including those in CRRF is
required. The Committee observe from the reply of the Ministry that the ESIC in its
166th Meeting held on 7th August, 2015 had approved expansion plans besides
measures to improve delivery of medical services under 2nd Generation Reforms
ESIC 2.0 which included expansion by ESIC to cover all the States, Union Territories
and all Districts, in full where Scheme is running in industrial clusters; to be expanded
to unorganized sector by reducing the threshold from present 10 persons in a unit;
consideration for inclusion of self-employed workers, like auto-rickshaw drivers,

28
rickshaw pullers for bringing them into the ESI ambit for medical benefit, in phases
and various measures to enhance delivery of medical services. The Committee
desire that all the districts may be covered under the Scheme within 5 years. The
Committee while appreciating that the ESIC is considering inclusion of self
employed workers like auto-rickshaw drivers and rickshaw pullers within the ambit
of ESIC desire that all unorganized/self employed workers who are not covered
under any other Act of Parliament/Scheme for medical benefits/ insurance and mining
workers (both major & minor minerals) may be brought under this scheme within a
stipulated time frame.
The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that the Corporation
has constituted a Budget and Accounts Sub Committee for monitoring and control
of ESIC funds and expenditure and scrutiny of expenditure and accounts and that
for day to day investment of ESIC funds a separate Committee already exists in
ESIC which professionally manages the ESIC funds. The Committee wish to be
apprised of the monitoring mechanism in place through these Committees to ensure
that the available funds are spent in accordance with sound financial principles to
attain the objectives of adequate and just medical care to insured persons.
[Para 7, Part - II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Committee has desired to cover all the districts under the Scheme in next
five years. In this regard it is submitted that  in the second generation reform i.e.
ESIC 2.0 it was decided to extend ESI Scheme to the whole of 393 districts where
the scheme is presently partially implemented in Centers. It has also been decided
to extend the scheme to District Headquarters in remaining non-implemented
districts initially and eventually extend the ESI Scheme to the entire country. As on
01.07.2017, the ESI Scheme has been extended fully in 325 districts. Apart from
these 325 districts, the scheme is available in 89 district Headquarters and in Centers
in 84 districts.
It was also decided to extend the scheme to all States and UTs. The scheme
has been extended to all States and UTs except Manipur, Arunachal Pradesh and
Lakshadweep Islands. Implementation in Manipur is in  advanced stage.
ESI Act, 1948 applies to factories/establishment with 10 or more person
employed and as such it does not apply to the Unorganized sector. However, under
Section 73 of the ESI Act, medical scheme can be framed for other beneficiaries on
user charges basis in order to utilize the facilities of underutilized ESI hospitals.
Under this provision, scheme has been approved to provide medical facilities to
selected category of self employed workers and their family members on pilot
basis namely Auto-rickshaw drivers and Domestic Workers on payment of user
charges of   ` 250/- pm and  ` 200/- pm respectively. At present, the scheme for
Auto-rickshaw drivers is running on pilot basis at Delhi w.e.f. 01.10.2016.

29
The ESI Act  as per Section 2 (12) does not apply to a Mine, which is subject
to the Mines Act,1952. The State Govt. is the appropriate Govt. as per Section 1(5)
of the ESI Act and they can decide to reduce the threshold below 10 in their respective
States, however, the same has not yet been done so far by any of the States.
As desired by the committee to be apprised of the monitoring mechanism in
place through Budget and Account Sub Committee (BASC) and Investment
committee, it is to submit that these committees are constituted to monitor the
Budget Estimates, Income and Expenditure, Internal Audit, Investment of surplus
funds and scrutiny of Annual Account.
The Budget and Account Sub Committee is headed by Director General,
ESIC and members comprising the Financial Commissioner, Representative from
State Govt., Employers & Employees and Additional Secretary, Ministry of Labour
& Employment, GoI.
Periodical meetings of BASC are conducted and Annual Budget Estimates,
Income & Expenditure, Audit Reports and Annual Accounts etc. are scrutinized in
the meeting. After scrutiny recommendations are submitted to the Standing
Committee (SC) which is headed by Secretary, Labour & Employment, Govt. of
India. Recommendations of BASC are implemented and action taken report is
submitted to the committee in subsequent meetings.
The Investment Committee is headed by Director General and members are
Financial Commissioner, and two senior members from finance department of ESIC.
The Investment Committee invests surplus fund as per approved Investment Policy
of ESIC. Each and every investment is reported to Standing Committee and
investments are approved.
Thus, through monitoring by these Committees it is ensured that the available
funds are spent in accordance with sound financial principles to attain the objectives
of adequate and just medical care to insured persons.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
(a) It may be specified whether any timeframe has been fixed for pan-
India coverage of all districts.
(b) How the Committees ( i.e. Budget and Accounts Sub Committee and
Investment Committee) are submitting its findings? In this regard,
reports submitted by the committees and actions taken thereon may be
provided.
Ministry's comments on Audit's observations
(a) MOL&E has conveyed that ESI Scheme should be extended to entire
nation in all districts by 2022 as per the decision of Cabinet Secretariat
which is being monitored through e-samiksha. Under ESIC 2.0 as on
1.1.18, the scheme has been extended to a total of 503 Districts
comprising of 325 complete Districts, 93 District HQs and in
85 Districts it is partially implemented in centers. Process for meeting
the implementation targets of 2022 has been initiated.

30
(b) Regarding Budget and Accounts Sub Committee which has been
constituted under Employees' State Insurance (General) Regulations,
1956, it is submitted that this Committee critically examine and
scrutinize budget in details and after detailed examination the
Committee give appropriate directions for taking further necessary
actions and also recommends annual budget with its comments to
Standing Committee/Corporation for approval and adoption.
Further, ESIC has adopted its new Investment Policy according to which
besides investment of funds in FDRs of Scheduled Commercial Banks the ESIC
funds will be deployed in AAA rated Government / PSUs Bonds through professional
Portfolio Managers under monitoring of financial experts hired as Consultant for
investment. These Investment activities will be further periodically reviewed and
monitored by new Investment Committee. Order effecting constitution of new
Investment Committee is enclosed at Annexure-3 for kind reference please.
Besides above, in order to strengthen the monitoring mechanism the following
further steps have been planned:
(a) Outsourcing of Internal Audit to Chartered Accountants firms
empanelled with C&AG of India.
(b) Enhancing terms of reference of Budget and Accounts Sub Committee
by authorizing to review and examine audit related issues and making
recommendation thereon to Standing Committee of ESI Corporation.
(c) More transparency through online processing of SST referrals under
UTI module.
(d) Scrutiny and processing of SST bills through UTI module.
(e) Creation of new Vigilance Unit in each ESIC Hospital.
Observation/Recommendation
Loss of Revenue due to time barring:  The Committee understand that
Section 45A of the Act, which empowers ESIC to determine the amount of
contribution payable by the employer, was amended in June 2010 by prescribing a
time limit of five years  for determination of contribution. Consequent to the
amendment, ESIC directed ( June 2010) all ROs / SR05, to assess all the pending
cases on priority basis so as to finalize the assessment of contribution by passing
appropriate orders before expiry of five years. However, the Committee was shocked
to find that a number of cases could not be decided within the prescribed time limit;
resulting in recoveries of ` 48.31 crore becoming time barred. The Committee
observe from the reply of the Ministry that employers pay contribution on regular
basis, on a provisional assessment by themselves on the amount, which constitute
"Wages" under the Act. The determination of contribution u/s 45A arises in case of

31
defaulters or/and as a result of inspection of records by ESIC. ESIC replied that
action for determining responsibility for violation of instruction was being looked
into. The Ministry further replied that under the Insurance Module of the Panchdeep
Project, defaulting employers can be tracked on month-to-month basis which would
help in reducing the default and enforcement of timely compliance. The Ministry
also stated that some of the employers may not have been selected by the Unified
Web Portal, which selects establishments randomly, for inspection in a period of
five years.
The Committee are of the view that the prescription of time limits makes it
imperative for ESIC to ensure determination of contributions by the employers
within that time frame rather than using the lapse of five years as an excuse for not
deciding the contribution resulting in losses. The Committee note that a committee
under the Insurance Commissioner, ESIC has been constituted to fix the
responsibility regarding time barred cases. The Committee desire to be apprised of
the present status and whether the arrear of Rs. 48.31 crore had been recovered and
if not, responsibility for the loss to the exchequer has been fixed, for delay in
determination of the amount of contribution. The Committee exhort that ESIC should
issue necessary instructions to Regional Officers / Sub Regional Officers to conduct
inspections of all organizations under them atleast once in a year to decide/verify/
confirm their contribution. The Committee also direct that accountability may be
fixed on officials for laxity in assessment of pending cases and suitable punitive
action may be taken against them.
The Committee desire to be apprised of the total number of officials against
whom action taken for violation of instructions within two months of the presentation
of this report.
The Committee are surprised to note that in spite of availability of Insurance
Module of Panchdeep Project and a Unified Web Portal, the Ministry is not able to
timely detect the defaulting employers and arrest heavy loss to the exchequer. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the Insurance Module of Project Panchdeep may
introduce a system to generate alerts for all those organisations for whom the time
limit of five years is elapsing and exemplary punishment may be awarded to the
officers failing to carry out assessments of such cases on priority basis.
[Para 9, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
A high level committee of IC (PMD), Director (Fin.) and Joint Director (Legal)
was constituted to investigate the time barred cases due to proviso to Section 45-A
(1) vide Amendment Act 2010 effective from 1st June, 2010. In view of this new
proviso, the time limit of five years is strictly to be followed in determining the
contribution. Therefore, some old pending cases became time barred. Committee
has submitted its part report for R.O. Karnataka, R.O. Puducherry, S.R.O. Ernakulam
and S.R.O Kozhikode (Kerala). Summary of Inspection/Investigation report in

32
respect of R.O. Karnataka, R.O. Puducherry, S.R.O. Ernakulam and S.R.O.
Kozhikode (Kerala) are enclosed herewith as Annexure -7 time-barred cases is
being forwarded to the Vigilance Branch, however, the committee could not complete
the task of investigation due to large no. of cases in respect of R.O. Chennai and
S.R.O. Salem ( Tamil Nadu ) (1096 cases). As such in the remaining cases of Chennai
and Salem Regional Directors have been advised to constitute team in consultation
with the Zonal Vigilance to initiate action against officers responsible for rendering
the cases time barred.
In the Insurance Module there is a provision of identifying defaulters who
have not paid contribution by the due date against whom recovery action can be
taken. Further the work of incorporating and alert System to deduct these units for
whom the time limit of 5 years is elapsing has been taken up with IT Service Provider.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
Nothing has been mentioned regarding:—
(i) recovery of arrears ` 48.31 crore,
(ii) issuing instructions to the Regional Offices to conduct inspection at
least once a year,
(iii)  fixing accountability of officials for laxity in assessment of pending
cases. Number of officials against whom action was taken for violation
of instructions may be indicated. The Ministry may also comment upon
its inability to detect the defaulting employers in spite of availability of
Panchdeep Project and a Unified Web Portal. PAC may be apprised of
these in the final reply.
Ministry's comments on Audit's observations
(i) A high level committee was constituted by the Director General,
consisting of senior Officers.
The Committee examined 1096 cases involving 39.48 crores in respect
of Chennai Region. In 1077 cases, the Committee found no lapses, one
case has been challenged in the Court, in 16 cases notices were not
served or the employer died etc., 2 cases become time barred due to
failure on the part of officials.
In respect of Salem Region, the committee examined 410 cases
involving 4.54 crores and found no lapses in any case. The matter has
been referred to Vigilance Branch for disciplinary action.
(ii) The Ministry of Labour & Employment, Government of India, has
developed a Unified Web Portal ‘Shram Suvidha' catering to four major
organizations under its aegis including ESIC. This system is governing
the inspection policy. Transparent Labour Inspection Scheme via
computerized system as per risk-based criteria and uploading of
Inspection Reports within 72 hours by Labour Inspectors. Unique

33
Labour Identification Number (LIN) allotted to units facilitating online
registration. Filling of self-certified, simplified single online return by
Industry. Units will only file a single consolidated online return, instead
of separate returns. Amendment to Rule 10 has already taken.
(iii) Action for fixing accountability of officials for laxity in assessment of
pending cases is under process. Matter has been referred to Vigilance
Division for taking further action. Further, the defaulting employers,
who fail to file monthly contribution details and/or fail to pay the
contribution for a particular month are identified through the Action
on Defaulter Module every month. Appropriate action can be taken
against them through the system generated demand letters/demand
notices by the Regional Offices and Sub-Regional Offices.
Observation/Recommendation
Payments to States without Audit certificates: The Committee note Audit's
findings that during 2008-09 to 2011-12, ESIC paid  2280.29 crore to 21 States as
90 per cent advance payment but the expenditures were not got certified from the
respective AsG even after a lapse of more than four years. The Committee also
note that Audit observed that ESIC released funds to Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat,
Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu in excess of expenditure certified by
the AsG and that the basis of making excess payments to States was not on records.
The Committee are appalled to note the Ministry's reply that the payment of
2280.29 crore to 21 States referred to the payment of 90 per cent of 7/8th share,
which was to be made in advance without Audit certificates since the funds had
been released to the States consecutively for four years i.e. 2008-09 to 2011-12 and
expenditure figures were not certified during these years.
The Committee feel that it is imperative that the ESIC must persuade the
State Governments to provide Audit certificates, which is the only proof that the
funds have been spent on the purpose that they were intended to be spent on. The
Committee are of the view that withholding only 10% of the total payment makes
the State Governments callous in their approach. The Committee are of the opinion
that a payment policy whereby that the States which have been providing the
completion certificates on the right schedules should be incentivised and allowed
to take 90% of the payment in advance and a limit be set for those States which
have not furnished any completion certificates consistently over the last years. The
Ministry/ESIC should think of withholding upto 50% of the total payments until
audited utilization certificates are submitted. The Committee desire to be apprised
of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard.
[Para 12, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As desired by the Hon'ble Committee, a committee was constituted to
formulate and recommend a payment policy whereby the State Governments which

34
have been providing the audit certificates on the right schedules should be
incentivized and allowed to take 90% on the payment in advance and a limit be set
for those States which have not furnished audit certificates consistently in the
previous years. The report of the committee is enclosed at Annexure-8.
As per the report of the committee this fund release system has been changed
from financial year 2016-17 and according to new system fund for 1st and 2nd
quarters are released on the basis of average of actual expenditure of 2nd and 3rd
and 4th quarters of corresponding previous year respectively. Thus, release of fund
to State Govt. has been linked to actual expenditure pattern of State. The State
Governments are also being perused for providing AG's certificate at the earliest
for release of balance 10 per cent.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"The Ministry may also comment upon the recommendation of the Hon'ble
Committee-Ministry/ESIC should think of withholding upto 50 per cent of
the total payments until audited UCs are submitted."
Ministry's comments on Audit's observations
Payment to State Govt. is released on account of Corporation's share towards
medical expenditure under section 58 of ESI Act. ESIC releases fund to State Govt.
in four quarterly statements based on allocated annual budget, which is prepared
on the basis of insured persons in the States. During the period under reference,
funds were released for 1st and 2nd quarters based on budget estimate only whereas
comparison of actual expenditure were done for release of 3rd and 4th quarters.
Excess release of funds, if any, to the State Govt. used to be adjusted from the
balance 10 per cent payment after getting the audit certificate from State Govt.
This fund release system has been changed from the year 2016-17 and
according to the new system fund for 1st and 2nd quarters are released on the basis
of average of actual expenditure of 2nd & 3rd and 3rd & 4th quarters of
corresponding previous year respectively. Thus, release of fund to State Govt. has
been linked to actual expenditure pattern of State. State Govts. are also being perused
for providing AG's certificate at the earliest for release of balance 10 per cent.
Thus, necessary steps have been taken to rationalize fund release to State
Govts.
Observation/Recommendation
Availing medical facilities by ESIC employees without Contribution:
The Committee note that as per Rule 51 of ESI (Central) Rules 1950, facilities
of ESIC hospitals/dispensaries and other benefits are available for eligible category
of workers/employees on payment of contribution by employee and employer both.
However, the Committee observe from the Audit report that all employees of ESIC
were availing medical facilities without payment of any contribution. The Committee
note from the reply of the Ministry that necessary orders have been issued for

35
contribution by ESIC employees at CGHS rates and the same would be deducted
from the salary with effect from April 2016. As regards recovery of the past period,
the matter is under active consideration of ESIC. The Committee desire that the
decision regarding recovery for the prior periods be also taken at the earliest under
intimation to the Committee.
[Para 13, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The matter regarding 'Availing medical facilities by ESIC employees without
Contribution has been entrusted to the General Purposes Medical Care
Sub-Committee of ESI Corporation and the same is under consideration of the
Committee.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"Ministry has not specifically stated how much time the latter will take to
arrive at conclusion. The same may be indicated in the final reply to the
PAC."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
The Standing Committee ESIC has decided to effect Recovery of contribution
at CGHS rate from 01.06.2009 to 31.03.2016 from the employees who were availing
Medical facilities from ESIC Medical Institutions.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that at present ESIC covers only about four percent of
the total work force and 67% of the organised work force. While the Committee
feel that in keeping with its mandated task of providing full medical care to worker
population and their dependants covered under the scheme, ESIC should make all
out efforts to increase coverage of the workforce, at the same time, it is extremely
important that ESIC improves its existing services and infrastructure to be able to
cater to the need of the Insured Persons. The Committee observe from the minutes
of the 160th meeting of ESIC, that it has been proposed to enhance wage ceiling for
coverage from ` 15,000/- to ` 25,000/-. The Committee also observe on persual of
minutes of various meetings of ESIC that there has been both support and opposition
to the proposal for increase in wage ceiling. On one hand it is felt that since primary
and secondary care services are inadequate, first the services begin offered need to
be enhanced and on the other hand, it is felt that enhancement of wage ceiling
would lead to better utilisation of under utilised hospitals. The Committee desire
that the wage ceiling may be raised to include maximum number of workers under
the Scheme. The Committee are of the view that given the enormous gap in coverage
of eligible workforce, ESIC should strive to create necessary infrastructure within
a given timeframe for inclusion of and providing health services to a large number

36
of workers and thereafter ESIC may also think of including workers who wish to be
covered under the Scheme and contribute voluntarily.
[Para 14, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As already stated in reply to Para 7, ESI Scheme is being expanded to all
States and districts with the objective of making it uniformly available across the
country. However the pre-requisite for the same is the availability of medical
arrangement. In the non implemented districts, initially the district headquarters'
area is being notified and subsequently the other areas shall be considered.
The ESI Corporation has enhanced the wage ceiling for coverage under the
ESI Scheme to 21,000 per month with effect from 01.01.2017. To extend coverage
to left out employers and employees, a Scheme to Promote Registration of Employers
and Employees (SPREE) was in operation from 20.12.2016 to 30.06.2017, which
alongwith other initiative resulted in registration of about 0.81 lakh new employers
and 1.20 crore new employees under the scheme during the above period.
In newly implemented areas, the medical arrangement is being provided
through as under:—
* Tagging up of IPs with the existing State health systm i.e. PHC, CHC/
District Hospital etc.
* Through Insured Medical Practitioner (IMPs) and tie up with private
hospitals/nursing homes for secondary care.
* Mobile Vans Services where IPs numbers are very less.
The provision of 96A is also available for the reimbursement of medical
expenses incurred by the IPs/beneficiaries.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"The Ministry may comment upon the recommendation of the Hon'ble
Committee 'ESIC should strive to create necessary infrastructure within a
given time frame for inclusion of and providing health services to a large
number of workers’.”
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
ESI Corporation is taking up multi-pronged action for providing health
services to a large number of workers, as under:
(a) Setting up of additional ESI dispensaries and hospitals in newly
implemented and existing areas.
(b) IMP Scheme has been made more attractive so that strengthened primary
care may be provided to a large number of workers.

37
(c) Tie-up arrangements for secondary and tertiary care services are being
strengthened in both newly and existing areas.
(d) Introduction of modified Employers' Utility Dispensaries (EUD) with
helpdesk facility for which budget of 500 Crore for the year 2018-19
has been approved by Corporation in its 173rd meeting held on
16.02.2018.
Further, new dispensaries and no. of beds have been commissioned during
2016-17:
(A) No. of beds upgraded in ESI Hospital:
Sl. Location No. of  beds increased Date of order
No. From To
1. ESI Medical 380 470 04.08.16
College & Hospital,
Gulbarga
2. ESIS Hospital, 50 100 18.08.17
Bhubaneswar
(e) Setting up of Branch Office-cum-Dispensaries of ESIC in each of the
covered District is being planned.
(B) Addition of new dispensaries:
Sl. No.   Location Particular Date of order
1. Imphal, Manipur Two doctor dispensary 05.07.16
2. Tirumala, Tirupati One doctor dispensary 24.08.16
Andhra  Pradesh
3. Jorthang, Sikkim Two doctor dispensary 24.11.16
Observation/Recommendation
Application of ESIS in North-East India: The Committee observe that the
ESI Act is implemented in the entire country except in the North Eastern States of
Manipur, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram. On being asked about the
reasons for non-applicability of ESIC in the aforementioned States, the Ministry
replied that the ESIC conducted the survey of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and
Mizoram but the numbers of employees were not found adequate to implement the
scheme. On the basis of survey, the respective State Governments were requested
to provide medical facility for making medical arrangement but the State
Governments did not respond to the request of ESIC. The Ministry further replied
that the geographical area of the states and small clusters of factory/establishment
was also a reason for non applicability/limited applicability of ESI Scheme. The

38
Committee note from the minutes of the 160th meeting of the ESIC held on
19.09.2013, that it was proposed that relaxations may be made and a 100 bedded
hospital may be set up in the north eastern region at a suitable location. The Committe
further note from the minutes of the 166th meeting of ESIC, that it has been decided,
inter-alia, to extend the ESI scheme coverage in the States of Arunachal Pradesh,
Mizoram, Manipur, and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. The Commitee desire that
locations may be searched for in the region by assessing the medical needs of the
area and if necessary by relaxing criteria so that atleast one hospital in each North
Eastern State and 6 bedded dispensaries in remote areas are set up within a given
time frame. The Committee may be apprised of the decision and action taken in
this regard. The Committee recommend that steps may be taken to cover maximum
number of establishments in the region and a status report in this regard may be
placed before the Committee.
[Para 15, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The ESI Scheme has been extended to all North Eastern States except Manipur
and Arunachal Pradesh. Implementation in Manipur is in advanced stage, whereas
talks are on with the Arunachal Pradesh for implementing the scheme in the State.
Both the States have also in-principle agreed to form the States Autonomous Body
in their States, whereby they shall become eligible for 100% expenditure born by
he ESIC upto the ceiling in Manipur, the Corporation has also decided to provide
100% expenditure in new areas upto first 5 years in NE States which is 3 years in
case of other States.
The proposal of setting up of following hospitals and dispensaries in North
Eastern States are sent to Hon'ble Chairman, ESIC for necessasry ‘in-Principle
Approval’:
Places/
State        Hospital Dispensary
Assam Amingao, North Guwahati - Mangaklai, Darrang—2 doctors
50 beds hospital
Sikhar, Cacher—50 beds Chayagaon & Satbari Kamrup
Rural-3 doctors
Bongaigaon, Assam—50 beds
Tezpur, Sontipur, Distt.-Assam—
100 beds
Tripura Agartala—30 beds
Nagaland Dimapur—30 beds

39
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"Steps taken to cover the maximum number of establishments in the region
may be included in the reply to the PAC along with the status of implementation
of the ESI Scheme in Arunachal Pradesh."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
The Scheme has been implemented in all North Eastern States except Manipur
& Arunachal Pradesh. In Manipur, it has been decided to implement the Scheme by
opening of ESIC Dispensary in Imphal. As a special case, ESIC Staff has been
sanctioned and after the completion of medical arrangement, and on the
recommendation of Regional Director, the scheme shall be implemented in Manipur.
Arunachal Pradesh has expressed financial constraint in meeting its 1/8th share of
medical expenditure due to budgetary constraint. The State was given the option of
formation of State Autonomous Body/Society under Section 58(5) vide which as a
special incentive, they shall be eligible for 100% expenditure upto the ceiling. A
revised structure of the Body as per decision of 172nd meeting of the Corporation
held in Dec., 2017 has been conveyed to State to form the society, after which the
implementation shall be taken up in Arunachal Pradesh. Pre-implementation survey
is conducted to indentify the factories & establishments which are coverable and
after implementation they are intimated to register with ESIC online and comply
with the provisions.
Observation/Recommendation
Surveys and Inspections: The Committee note from the Audit report that
the Inspection Policy framed in 2008, prescribed a target of 20 inspections and 20
surveys per month for each SSO (Social Security Officer). The Committee are
aghast to find that there were substantial shortfall in conducting surveys  i.e., in
Delhi the shortfall was 69.51%, in Assam it was 77.69% and in West Bengal it was
59.70%. There were shortfalls in conducting inspections also ranging from
22.68 to 93.16 per cent (except Himachal Pradesh). Audit observed that the shortfall
had a direct bearing on the recoverable amounts as the outstanding arrears from
defaulters had increased by 30.62 per cent from 1267.32 crore (March 2009) to
1655.42 crore (March 2013). The Committee note the ESIC's reply that reasons for
shortfalls were due to shortage of SSOs, non-production of records on fixed date of
inspection, closure of units fixed for inspections, etc. It further stated that efforts
were being made to sensitize the SSOs for showing outputs as per new inspection
policy under which the number of inspections, which were randomly selected from
the Unified Web Portal. The recruitment process of SSOs was also in progress to
meet the shortage of SSOs.
The Committee observe that since new inspection policy is based on
computerized records, many checks are being done through the computerized system.
The Committee are of the view that a system of physical inspection of 1-2% randomly

40
selected establishments by senior officers may also be evolved to minimize the
defaults. The Committee would like to be apprised of the resultant effect of the new
inspection policy in increasing coverage of establishments. The Committee further
recommend that ESIC after recruitment of the required number of SSOs, devise a
mechanism to assess the work done by these SSOs on monthly basis by offering
incentives for performers and penal action against non-performers in carrying out
surveys.
[Para 16, Part - II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
For conducting Inspection of the units, the Ministry of Labour & Employment
has developed a unified Web Portal 'Shram Suvidha'. Transparent Labour Inspection
of the employer are marked via computerized system as per risk-based criteria
through the Portal. To encourage employees to register their units/employees as
Scheme to Promote Registration of Employers and Employees (SPREE) was
introduced and is intended to extend the social security benefits to all eligible under
the Act, who have till now been kept out of the ESI coverage, and is open for the
period from 20.12.2016 to 31.03.2017, which has been extended up to 30.06.2017.
In the scheme Employers were treated as covered from the date of registration or as
declared by them and the newly registered employees were treated as covered from
their date of registration.
For investigation of specific complaints including cases where survey is
required a Central Analysis & Intelligence Unit (CAIU) has been setup by the ESI
Corporation. The CAIU has a mandate to order for inspection of units (factories &
establishments) on the basis of evidence based inputs, secondary sources of data
and set criteria and also based on the complaints received in any office of ESIC for
default in compliance by factories/establishments.
The performance of each SSO is closely monitored and reviewed and if the
performance is not satisfactory administrative and disciplinary actions are taken
against the SSO by scrutinizing the Inspection/survey reports of the SSO and action
is recommended against him in case lapse is found in the inspection/survey report.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"Resultant improvements, if any, of the new inspection policy on increasing
coverage of establishments may be included in the final reply to the PAC."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
As a result of liberalized Inspection Policy, grievances of the employers have
been reduced and improvement in over all voluntary compliance. The number of
Employees and Insured Persons has been increased by 966280 and 1017350
respectively. The number of Employers has been increased by 60030 during the
year 2015-16. However, this cannot be attributed to single factor.

41
Observation/Recommendation
Reconstitution of Regional Boards in time and coverage of new areas/
establishments: The Committee note from the Audit report that respective State
Governments may, in consultation with the ESIC and with the approval of the Central
Government, extend the provisions of the ESI Act to any establishment, wherein
the Regional Board of the State shall decide on extension of the scheme to new
areas. The Committee are disconcerted to find that many coverable areas in different
States were left uncovered under the scheme such as Gujarat, West Bengal, Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka etc. on account of non-issuance of notification by State
Governments for ten years to extend the benefit of the ESIS, non-issuing of no-
objection to ESIC by the State Government for setting up of medical facilities,
delay by ESIC in covering employees despite issue of no objection certificates,
delays in pre-implementation survey, non-availability of survey reports, proposal
pending with State Governments, non-issuance of notification, non-identification
of rented buildings to house the dispensaries etc.
While according to the existing mechanism, ESI Scheme may be implemented
in non-implemented areas in a phased manner after approval by the Regional Boards,
the Committee feel that excessive delays in re-constitution of Regional Boards in
States becomes a handicap in coverage of hitherto uncovered areas. The Committee
accordingly recommend that henceforth, ESIC may take necessary steps in engaging
with State Governments aggressively to ensure that Regional Boards of all States
are reconstituted well in time before their expiry and also to vigorously pursue the
matter with State Governments to extend the scheme to newer establishments under
them. The Committee exhort that the ESIC may take sincere efforts to mitigate
delays in covering employees despite issue of no objection certificates as well as
delays in conducting pre-implementation surveys.
[Para 17, Part -II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The ESI Scheme is fully implemented in entire Karnataka w.e.f. 01.06.2016.
In West Bengal, the scheme is fully implemented in 14 out of 20 districts and the
process is underway to implement in 2 complete districts for which the medical
arrangements are being made. The State Govt. is yet to decide regarding four other
non-implemented districts. In Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, after much persuasion, the
State Government has given consent for implementing the scheme in all Districts
where the scheme is partially implemented and District HQ areas where it is not
implemented. The process of medical arrangement is underway.
Regional Board is set up under Section 25 and Regulation 10 of ESI (General)
Regulation 1950 of the ESI Act, 1948, which monitors the functioning of ESI Scheme
in the respective States through Boards Meetings and recommends to the ESI
Corporation in policy framing.

42
Reconstitution of Regional Board in 11 States is pending for last one to twelve
years. Hon'ble Chairman of ESIC has bestowed personal attention to send proposals
for reconstitution of the Regional Board and send D.O letter to the Chief Ministers
of concerned States on 21.07.2017. The ESI Corporation has enhanced the wage
ceiling for coverage under the ESI Scheme to 21,000 per month with effect from
01.01.2017. To extend coverage to left out employers and employees, a Scheme to
Promote Registration of Employers and Employees (SPREE) was in operation from
20.12.2016 to 30.06.2017, which alongwith other initiative resulted in registration
of about 0.81 lakh new employers and 1.20 crore new employees under the scheme
during the above period.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"Status in respect of Reconstruction of Regional Board in 11 States and
coverage of new areas/establishments may be included in the final reply to
PAC."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
The reconstitution of Regional Board in 11 States is at different stages of
approval. Regulation 10(4)(i) of the ESI (General) Regulation, 1950 stipulates term
of office of the members for the three years, with provision that they shall continue
to hold office until the nomination of their successor is notified. The State-wise
status of formation/reconstitution of Regional Boards is enclosed at Annexure-9
for kind information please.
Further, under ESIC 2.0, as on 1.1.18, the scheme has been extended to a
total of 503 Districts comprising of 325 complete Districts, 93 District HQs and in
85 Districts it is implemented in parts of the districts. The S tate-wise status of
coverage of new areas is enclosed at Annexure - 10 for kind information please.
Observation/Recommendation
Delays in settlement of claims of cash benefits: The Committee are aghast
to note that there were several delays in settlement of claims under various categories
such as disablement, maternity, sickness benefit ranging from 1 day to 36 months
in the States of Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and
West Bengal including delay to the extent of 199 days for payment of cash benefit
for funeral expenses in the capital city of Delhi. The Committee observe that under
Project Panchdeep, a separate module called ICT Project has been completed and
commissioned to monitor settlement of cash benefit claims within the prescribed
time line. The Committee note that in their reply to Audit, ESIC stated that in some
cases, the claims were settled late due to incomplete documents submitted with the
claims and that respective Regional Directors had since been advised to ensure
timely payment to the IPs. The Committee expect the ESIC to deal compassionately
with employees or their dependants who are either sick or disabled or have lost
their income earners in times of need. The Committee while cautioning ESIC against
making excess payments to employees, desire that the employers may be made

43
responsible for completing formalities in cases of dire need. The Committee are
shocked to find the long delays in payment of cash benefits for funerals and desire
that ESIC should evolve a mechanism whereby these payments can be made
immediately. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of pendency
of claims settlement after the commissioning of ICT project under Project
Panchdeep.
[Para 18, Part - II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is stated that the statement of total claims, total pending claims and percentage
(%) of delayed claims year-wise against the above noted States are given below:—
Name of 2015-2016 2016-2017
States
Total No. of % of Total No. of Total No. % of Pendency
claimes paid Pendency Pending Claims Claims paid
Andhra Pradesh 77329 1.98 1896 101168 1.88
Assam 12554 2.1 331 12645 2.62
Chhattisgarh 29977 2.55 593 33514 1.77
Jharkhand 28988 0.89 222 24703 0.89
West Bengal 125226 8.95 12536 395922 3.16
Karnataka 247854 2.21 5703 238986 2.38
Delhi 156598 4.02 8641 314842 2.75
It may kindly be seen that the percentage of delay varies from an average of
about 1% to 2% except West Bengal in the year 2015-16 which is a bit higher but
contained considerably in the succeeding year 2016-17.
Further, the Controlling Officers of Regions have been advised to ensure
timely payment as per time frame of Citizen's Charter of ESIC.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"Ministry may also comment on the PAC recommendations regarding—
(i) making employers responsible for completing formation in dire need,
and
(ii) evolving a mechanism to provide cash benefits of funerals immediately.
Efforts may be made to further reduce the pendency. Further, status may be
included in final reply."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
In this regard, it is humbly submitted that the Employers are responsible for:

44
(a) (Online) Registration before taking any person in the employment.
(b) Filing of accident report (Online/Offline) within 24 hours of the accident
due to employment injury.
(c) Extending full co-operation in investigation of the accident case.
Further, from time to time Employers are sensitized through various awareness
programme (including print and electronic media).
It is submitted that funeral expenses are paid on same day of claim by the
eldest surviving family member/dependant or any person who actually incur the
expenditure on funeral on production of death certificate.
Further, the following steps have been taken to reduce the pendency and to
ensure prompt settlement of benefit claims:
•  The Regional Directors/Director In-charge have been instructed to
expedite all delayed cases and ensure that no claim settlement is
remained pending for more than 1 month.
• The  Regional Directors/Director In-charge have been directed to advise
Branch Managers to expedite investigation in all such cases. It is also
directed to advise Branch Managers to exercise their powers of
accepting the death cases on the floor of factory as employment injury
and settle the claim of dependant benefit urgently.
The Regional Directors/Director In-charge have been advised to monitor
Branch Managers to contact the IPs on their available address or phone
and advise them to come for laying their claim.
Observation/Recommendation
Bed availability: With respect to secondary and tertiary care, India lags behind
most other countries in the number of hospital beds per thousand population, despite
having a higher absolute number of hospital beds than most other countries.
According to the World Health Statistics, India ranks 6th among the lowest in this
regard, with 0.9 beds per 1000, far below the global average of 2.9 beds. According
to the latest National Health Profile (2010), India has a current public sector
availability of one bed per 2012 persons available in 12,760 Government hospitals,
which is approximately 0.5 beds per 1000. This includes Community Health Centre
(CHC) beds, but excludes Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and medical colleges.
The Committee also find that percentage of occupancy during the year 2012-13 in
Naroda, Gujarat is 26 per cent; in Baroda where there is a 100-bed hospital, it is
35 per cent; in Surat it is 35 per cent; in Rajkot it is 30 per cent and in Bhavnagar it
is 22 per cent. In Jharkhand, in one ESI hospital it is only 8 per cent of occupancy
during the year in the hospital of 110 beds. There is one hospital in Bhilwara which
has 10 per cent occupancy. In Pali, Rajasthan, a 50 bed hospital has occupancy of
0.2 per cent. The Committee would like the ESIC to make a detailed analysis of the
availability of beds in its hospitals including discipline-wise/speciality-wise
availability of beds and their utilisation.

45
The Committee find that ESIC is planning to upgrade 1/3rd of its dispensaries
into 6 bedded hospitals. The Committee would like to be apprised of the detailed
strategy of ESIC to atleast equal the global average of 2.9 beds per 1000.
The Committee while understanding that ESIC is dependent on the respective
State Governments to improve the health care services in the states, recommend
that ESIC should persistently engage with State Governments to complete
construction of the new hospitals that have been approved and are at various stages
of completion to increase availability of beds wherever required and help
Government of India in bringing availability of beds according to international
standards. A status report in this regard may be furnished to the Committee within
2 months of the presentation of this report.
[Para 19, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
ESI Corporation in its 167th meeting has accorded in-principle approval for
increasing Hospital Bed Strength of ESIC Hospitals by 50% if the Bed Occupancy
of the concerned ESIC Hospital has been consistently more than 70% in last three
financial years.
Further, ESIC has in place, internal Monitoring Committee for recommending
increasing hospital bed strength of ESI Hospitals wherever required.
ESIC is having 152 hospitals with more than 22600 beds and has tie-up
arrangements with more than 1000 public/private hospitals for specialized care.
This arrangement has ensured that ESIC has sufficient beds to cater the needs
of its beneficiaries.
Also, under expansion plan, ESIC is considering establishing 65 new hospitals
in new implemented areas.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"PAC may be apprised if the detailed analysis of availability of beds and
their utilization has been done by ESIC.
Further, the status report regarding efforts made to bring availability of beds
according to international standards, as desired by PAC may also be included."
Ministry's comments on Audit's observations
The details regarding beds and their utilization is enclosed at Annexure-11
for kind reference please. The following efforts are being made to improve the bed
availabilities under ESI Scheme:
(a) Setting up of new hospitals in both newly implemented and existing
areas.

46
(b) Tie-up arrangements in Government/Private Hospital for providing
required Secondary and Tertiary care services.
(c) 50 percent increase in bed strength of ESIC Hospitals having more
than 70 percent bed occupancy for last 3 years.
Further, following steps have been taken to improve the utilization rate of
beds available:
• Regular monitoring and supervision of ESIS hospitals and dispensaries
is also being undertaken by ESIC so as to enforce the minimum standards
as per ESIC 2.0 mandate.
• Formation of Subsidiary Corporation at State level so that all decision
can be taken at the State level.
• All hospitals of ESIC/ESIS using VIBGYOR pattern day-wise, the
colored bedsheets to maintain cleanliness and better hygiene.
• Medical helpline facilities 24X7 through which Insured Person can
directly talk to Doctors in case of any emergency.
• Facility for Reception and 'May I Help You' in each hospital to guide
the patients/attendants.
Special OPD in afternoon from 3:00 PM to 5:00 PM for Senior Citizens
and differently-abled patients.
Observation/Recommendation
Model Hospitals, Super Speciality Services: A. The Committee note that
the ESI Corporation in its meeting held on 16.02.2001 had approved the setting up
of one Model Hospital in each State. A number of Hospitals were taken over by
Corporation with consent of the concerned State Governments for setting up of
ESIC Model hospitals.
The entire expenditure on these hospitals was to be borne by the ESI
Corporation outside the ceiling limit. At present, the ESI Corporation is directly
running 36 Model ESI Hospitals. The Committee note from the list of hospitals
directly run by ESIC that 17 out of 36 hospitals are yet to be developed into model
hospitals. The Committee desire that ESIC take urgent steps to develop these
remaining hospitals into model hospitals and apprise the Committee about the
progress made within two months of presentation of this report.
B. The Committee further observe that ESIC has set up various Super-
Speciality Services at hospitals in five States, i.e. Sanathnagar in Hyderabad, Kollam
in Kerala, Rajaji Nagar in Bangalore, Karnataka, Andheri in Maharashtra and Basai
in Delhi. The Committee feel that super speciality services such as nephrology,
urology, dialysis, cardiology, neurology, oncology, neuro surgery, paediatric surgery,
endocrinology, gastro enterology and plastic surgery are essential services that should
be available in at least all the model hospitals. The Committee, therefore, recommend

47
that ESIC take necessary steps to ensure the setting up of the above-mentioned
super-speciality services in all the model hospitals and engaging consultant super-
specialists for these services within a specified time frame. The Committee further
recommend that ESIC may also make a comparative analysis of financial impact of
employing super-specialist doctors or engaging consultant super-specialists
vis-a vis the expenditure incurred on referral cases for super-specialty treatment.
[Para 20, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Initially, as a policy decision, it was decided to take-over one State run ESIS
Hospital in each State to be run as model hospital, subsequently, more and more
State run ESIS hospitals were taken over by ESI Corporation.
Though nomenclature of ESIC run hospitals as one model hospitals and other
as directly ESIC hospital persisted, there is no difference between the two type of
hospitals as far as operational policies or availability of medical care services is
concerned. Further, development of modern treatment facilities & various SST
services, as per requirement, are being considered in all ESIC run hospitals without
discriminating model/ non-model hospital.
There is overall shortage of medical manpower in the country particularly
Specialists and Super-Specialists. In view of this, ESIC is in the process of
establishing in-house super-speciality on PPP mode. However, patients are being
referred to tie-up hospitals for super-speciality services which are not available
in-house in ESIC/ESIS hospitals. A comparative financial analysis of having in-
house Super-Speciality vis-a-vis referral to tie-up hospitals is being done.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"It has been intimated that ESIC is in the process of establishing in-house
super-specialty on PPP mode and comparative analysis is also being done
between ESIC own super-specialty facilities and referral tro tie-up hospital.
The final outcome and steps taken to implement the same may be included in
the final reply."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
Implementation of in-house super-speciality treatment services under PPP
mode was initiated in the year 2015 under ESIC 2.0.
In this regard, a number of tenders were floated to start ICU, Dialysis, Cath
Lab., CT/MRI and other services on PPP mode.
Response of private parties in many of these tenders have been poor.
A comparative analysis of the Super-Speciality services (Dialysis) provided
through in-house PPP mode was done with one provided tie-up arrangement, utilizing
UTI module data for one such facility at ESIC Hospital, Jaipur.

48
As per the data, it emerged that average per patient expenditure in in-house
PPP mode Dialysis services was less than the one provided through tie-up
arrangements with private hospital.
Observation/Recommendation
Advances paid to hospitals for super-speciality treatment: The Committee
observe that the Senior State Medical Commissioners/State Medical Commissioners/
Directorates (Medical), were authorized to make tie up arrangements with reputed
governmental/non-governmental private hospitals for getting super-speciality
treatment by in-patients. In such cases, the patients were not required to make any
payment and instead, would get cashless treatment from such super-speciality
hospitals. In exceptional circumstances, an advance could also be paid by ESIC to
such hospitals, to be adjusted in the final bills. ESIC is appeared to have paid
advance payments to the extent of  20.13 crore to such super-speciality hospitals in
eight States. Out of the total unadjusted amount of  20.13 crore, as much as
3.5 crore remains unadjusted, as of August, 2016. The Committee are of the view
that such large amount of advances remaining unadjusted reveals total lack of control
over financial matters by the ESIC. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
Ministry should take up the matter vigorously to ensure that all advances paid to
the hospitals are adjusted within a given timeframe and the officers responsible for
this laxity are punished.
[Para 21, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
 (16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Advance paid to Hospitals for Super-Specialty Treatment the listed eight
units namely, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Chandigarh, Rajasthan, Kerala, Gujarat,
Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in respect of the unadjusted of Rs.3.485 crore,
Rs.1.945 crore have been adjusted till August 2016 the details are as under:
Sl. No Name of State Amount as on Adjusted Amount as
24.06.16 (Rs. in Crore ) on  August 16
(Rs. in Crore )
1. Himachal Pradesh 1.12 0.05
2. Haryana 0.56 0.71
3. Chandigarh 1.55 1.09
4. Rajasthan 0.005 0.005
5. Kerala 0.19 0.09
6. Gujarat 0.06 0
Total 3.485 1.945

49
The remaining Rs.1.54 crore, steps are being taken by the concerned units
for adjusting the remaining amount.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"Final position in respect of remaining unadjusted advances may be intimated.
PAC may also be apprised if any action has been taken against officers
responsible for laxity."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
As desired, the latest position of recovery of remaining unadjusted advance
is as under.
Sl. No Name of State Un-Adjusted amount as Adjusted further amount
on August 16 (Rs. in Crore) as on date (Rs.  in Crore )
1. Himachal Pradesh 0.05 0.05
2. Haryana 0.71 0.00
3. Chandigarh 1.09 0.99
4. Rajasthan 0.005 0.005
5. Kerala 0.09 0.00
6. Gujarat 0 0.00
Total 1.945 1.045
The remaining Rs. 0.90 crore, steps are being taken by the concerned units
for adjusting the remaining amount. It is further submitted that warning letter have
been issued to field offices about the laxity in adjustment of advances given.
Observation/Recommendation
Excess avoidable payment on procurement of medicines and surgical
items: The Committee observe that certain hospitals incurred extra expenditure of
2.25 crore on purchase of medicines and dressing material which could have been
procured through rate contracts. The reply of ESIC that the local purchase was
resorted to since the rate contracted suppliers failed to supply the medicines on the
existing rates because of the significant rise in prices in a short span of time, is not
tenable. It is to be noted that the suppliers were bound to supply the medicines till
the validity of rate contract, irrespective of escalation in prices. In case of non-
supply, the extra expenditure involved in procuring supplies through local purchase
was liable to be recovered from the suppliers. The Committee are surprised to note
that no such recovery of extra expenditure was made. This indicates that the
provisions of the rate contracts were not enforced sincerely.
Further, on being asked to state whether the contract for procurement of
medicines was given to the same company before, what were the conditions of the

50
contract in case the company was not able to provide the requisite medicines and
what action was taken against the company for not providing the required medicines,
the Ministry/ESIC in their reply simply stated the action that could be taken and
not what was actually done. The Committee had asked specific questions and had
expected specific replies. While cautioning the Ministry to not mislead the august
Committee in replying to their questions, the Committee recommend that when
finalizing rate contracts, liquidity damages may be specified therein. The Committee
desire that accountability for such callous and unscrupulous attitude be fixed and
exemplary action against the officers responsible may be initiated at the earliest.
[Para 22, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In this connection it is stated that as per the Terms & Conditions of DG-ESIC
Rate Contract, it is stated that: "If the articles are not supplied by the schedule date
(as indicated above or by the extended date) full or in part, the order in respect of
the quantity not supplied is liable to be cancelled at the contactor's risk and expense.
The extra expenditure involved in procuring supplies from elsewhere will, in that
case, is recoverable from the contractor in full at the discretion of Direct Demanding
Officers. The recoveries thus due will be deducted from any sum due to him from
the Direct Demanding Officer or which at any time thereafter may become due to
him under this contract or any other contract placed with him by the Direct
Demanding Officers. He will be deemed to be exercising the powers of Director
General, ESI Corporation in case any such contingency arises. Apart from risk
purchase action, the firm's earnest money deposit /the security deposit may be
forfeited and shall invite other penal action like debarring from participating in
DG-ESIC Rate Contract present and future for a period not less than two years.
However, no action for non supply can be initiated in the following conditions:
1. during the extension of the Rate Contract.
2. during the validity period of Supply order.
The ESI Headquarter also issued warning letters to the firm in the event of
non-supply.
Local Purchase has to be done in the following conditions:
1. NR items like anti cancer / Immunosuppressant's /Super-Specialty Drugs
etc.
2. Not available medicine as Non supply by the firm.
3. Emer gency requirement of Drugs.
Regarding making provisions of rate contracts more enforceable the following
compliance are made:
1. Rate contract has all the provision in the relevant clause for risk purchase
& recoveries.

51
2. Hqr. office takes the status of recoveries before releasing the EMD of
RC holder.
3. DDO to intimate the amount to be recovered from EMD/Security
Deposits.
Further a Circular was circulated vide No.U-15/15/2006-Med.I(MS) on
29/09/2015 by DMC(MS-I) in which instructions has been given to ESI institutions
that:—
(i)  Medicine to the patient is to be prescribed from valid DGESIC rate
contract/Local RC/Drug Formulary.
(ii) In case it becomes essential to prescribe medicine outside the
DGESICRC/Formulary for the sake of saving the life of patients, the
prescribing doctor should certify that why this medicine should be
prescribed.
(iii) The drugs prescribe outside from the valid DGESIC must be written in
standard generic.
(iv) If any drug prescribed in brand name only, outside the valid
RC/ formulary will not be taken into cognizance and no sanction will
be made for local purchase.
(v) The medicine prescribed outside the RC/formulary by the treating doctor
will be counter signed by the reporting officer to counter check.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"PAC may be apprised whether any action has been taken against any firm. If
yes, details any be provided in the final reply."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
It is submitted that risk purchase/ recoveries for late supply has to be recovered
from the ensuing bills of the firm. Further, before releasing of EMD / security of
the firm, any amount which is required to be recovered is ascertained and the same
is deducted from EMD. So far an amount of Rs. 10,29,016/- has been recovered
from the defaulting firms.
Besides, other penal action are also been taken like debarring the firms is
also available.

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM THE  GOVERNMENT
— NIL —
52

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation
Need for effective Recovery of arrears: The Committee note that the total
arrears outstanding as on 31st March, 2014 were 1754.14 crore, out of which 630.79
crore fall under the category of recoverable arrears and an amount of
1123.35 crore under the category of non-recoverable arrears for the present due to
claims disputed in the courts, factories having gone into liquidation, factories
registered with BIFR, amount pending with Claims Commissioner, closure of the
factories and whereabouts of the defaulting employers in certain cases not known.
The Committee observe that when asked why the recovery officers were not able to
recover the pending dues, whether any accountability had been fixed and what
action had been taken to enforce greater accountability on defaulting contributing
organisations and recovery officers, the Ministry replied that the recovery of such
amounts becomes difficult and also depends on factors beyond the control of ESIC.
The Committee note that the Recovery Officers of the Corporation recovered
186.07 crore from defaulting employers in 2013-14 against the target of 175.00
crore. A target of 192.06 crore towards recovery of arrears was fixed for the
year 2014-15 and an amount of 198.13 crore had been recovered against this target.
While appreciating the efforts made by ESIC to recover the arrears due, the
Committee desire that stringent penal action may be taken against defaulters. The
Committee are of the strong view that the contribution collection mechanism should
be such that the SSOs invariably carry out the inspection of quarterly financial
statements of the employers/organizations after 2 months of continuous default in
order to ascertain their financial health and malafide intentions, if any, for taking
suitable action thereon. The Committee earnestly desire that ESIC should take
effective steps to ensure timely collection of contributions from the employers so
as to minimize the arrears.
[Para 8, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The recovery mechanism is already in place for Recovery of dues in the
corporation. The recovery targets are given every year to regions to recover ESI
53

54
dues and the same is closely monitored for every region. The performance of
recovery for the past three years is as under :
Year Target ( ` in crore) Actual Recovery ( ` in crore)
2014-15 192.06 198
2015-16 218.98 205.8
2016-17 292.97 251.88
* All cases having dues above `10 lakhs are closely monitored and
reviewed.
* Where the amounts are not found recoverable despite all possible efforts,
waiver actions are initiated.
* Re-conciliation of all pending dues is done to ascertain correct figure
of recoverable dues.
However a big chunk of outstanding dues of recovery non-recoverable dues
is as under:
(i) Factories/Establishment having gone into liquidation.
(ii) Stay granted by Courts.
(iii) Factories/Establishments registered with BIFR
(iv) Factories/Establishments closed and whereabout of the Principal
Employers not known.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"No reply furnished in respect of the Hon'ble Committee's suggestion that
the SSOs invariably carry out the inspection of quarterly financial statements
of the  Employers/organizations after two months of continuous default.
Nothing has been said about the penal action being taken against the defaulters.
Cases of dues above '10 lakh and number of cases where waiver actions are
initiated and the figures of recoverable dues may be included in the final
reply."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
The details of penal action taken against the defaulters during the year 2015-16 &
2016- 17 are enclosed. The detail of arrears as on 31.03.2017 is also enclosed.  Further, it
is also submitted that no case of waiver action in respect of dues above 10 lakhs is under
consideration at present.
Observation/Recommendation
Need for urgent recovery dues from Delhi Government: The Committee
note that administration of ESIS was transferred from Delhi Government to ESIC

55
in 1962, with the condition for reimbursement of 1/8th share of expenditure by
Delhi Government to the ESIC. Delhi Government had been making payment
regularly till 1989-90, but subsequently payments became irregular. A total of
 ` 785.10 crore was outstanding from Government of Delhi as on 31 March, 2013.
The Committee observe that ESIC did  not take up the matter with the Ministry to
pursue with Delhi State Government for recovery of arrears. ESIC replied that the
matter was being constantly pursued with Delhi State Government.
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that ESIC was regularly
discussing the matter with the Ministry of Labour & Employment on the issue of
pending dues from the Delhi Government. The ESI Scheme in Delhi was transferred
to the ESIC on the sanction of Ministry of Labour and Employment, Govt. of India.
The ESIC could receive only an amount of  `71.29 crores from Delhi Govt. since
1991. The pending dues from Delhi Govt. now amounts to `1409.56 crores i.e.
`145.18 crore (within ceiling) and `1264.38 crore (outside ceiling). The Delhi
Govt. has agreed in principle to pay 1/8th share and last such payment was made by
them in March, 2011, however, Government of Delhi has categorically stated that
they would not share the expenses incurred by ESIC outside the ceiling. A number
of correspondence has been made by the Director General of ESIC with the Chief
Secretary/CMO Govt. of NCT of Delhi to discuss the matter and action for payment
of outstanding dues and the matter is still being pursued. While observing the
lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry in recovering the regular payments/dues from
the Delhi Government since 1990, the Committee earnestly desire that the Ministry
to engage proactively with the representatives of Delhi Government to resolve the
issue and recover at least 1/8th share from them at the earliest . The Committee
further desire that the Ministry may, as per Section 58(4) of ESI Act, 1948, take
necessary action in this regard. The progress made in this regard may be apprised
to the Committee within two months of presentation of this report to the Parliament.
[Para 10, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
During the 207th meeting of the Standing Committee held on 31.01.2017,
the Chairman has desired a letter from Hon'ble Minister (L&E) may be written to
the Hon'ble Minister, Govt. of India for seeking his intervention to resolve the issue
of Recovery of dues from Delhi Govt.
In this regard, ESI Corporation has taken up the issue with the Ministry of
Labour & Employment and accordingly, the Hon'ble Minister ( Labour &
Employment ) vide letter dated 11.07.2017 has requested the Lieutenant Governor
of Delhi and Hon'ble Minister of Home Affairs for their kind intervention to expedite
the payment dues pending toward the Government of Delhi, so that ESI Scheme in
Delhi continue to run smoothly.

56
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"Ministry has not indicated that it has initiated any action as per Section 58
(4) of ESI Act, 1948. It has been intimated that Hon'ble LG (Delhi) and
Minister of Home Affairs had been requested to intervene to get the payment
dues pending with the Government of Delhi. The outcome may be included
in the final reply."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
Despite regular pursuance, Delhi Government is yet to release payment. In
this regard, reminder letter is being written from Hon'ble Minister of Labour,
Government of India to Chief Minister of Delhi to release the payment dues pending
with the Government of Delhi.
Subsequently, Delhi Government informed ESIC that "if Govt. of India want
GNCT to make payment to ESIC, it must categorically say that GNCT is State
Government of transferred subject".
In this regard the Govt. of NCT, Delhi has been asked by ESIC to take up the
aforesaid issue separately with Govt. of India and the arrears payable to ESIC may
not be subjected to such condition.
Observation/Recommendation
Budget :The Committee observe that the process of approval of budget in
the Ministry revealed that the Ministry approved the budget proposal as submitted
by the ESIC i.e. without exercising any oversight role during all five years under
review. The Committee also note that Audit analysed budgeting for ESIC field
offices and significant deviations were found, such as excess varying from 20% to
196 % and savings ranging from 20% to 69%. The Ministry replied that they issued
instructions to factor trend of expenditure, division level variance analysis and
considering 7 months actual expenditure for preparing the budget. The Committee
note from the evidence tendered by the officers of the Ministry and ESIC that ESIC
is a self-financing autonomous body under Government of India and all money
received by the Corporation by way of contribution, interest on investment, rent/
tax on the buildings, etc., are deposited in the fund called "Employees State Insurance
Fund" and that all expenditure towards provision of medical benefits, cash benefits,
administrative expenses, etc., are incurred from this Fund. The Corporation is not
in receipt of any grants-in-aid or any financial assistance from the Government
and, therefore, the expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India does not arise,
as such, the fund is outside the Government account. The Committee feel that gross
difference between the Budget Estimate and Actual Expenditure points towards
flaws in the estimation process of the ESIC and the Ministry.The Committee desire
that ESIC may frame the budget estimates with due care and the Ministry may
scrutinize the budget proposals carefully before according sanction. The Committee
also desire that they may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry and ESIC to
frame adequately balanced budget estimates.
The Committee observed that Rule 31 of ESIC (Central) Rules, 1950 enjoins
that the Budget Estimates of the Corporation shall be prepared in the format

57
prescribed by the Central Government, approved by the Standing Committee, passed
by the Corporation and, again, approved by the Central Government and finally,
placed before the Parliament, after necessary review by Government and that
Ministry of Finance is required to open separate fund under the relevant major
head in Public Account. On a related reference made on an Audit finding, Ministry
of Law and Justice clarified that all funds received by the autonomous bodies are
public money and all public money received on behalf of the Government would
be part of Public Fund, as defined in Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The
Committee desired the Ministry of Finance to examine this issue for suitable
clarification on the procedure to deal with excess expenditure from public fund.
The Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance has clarified now
that they have no objection for creation of separate reserve fund and the procedure
for opening a new fund in the Public Account requires the Department concerned
to examine the issue in detail and send the detailed accounting procedure to the
office of Controller General of Accounts(CGA) who will be processing the same
and taking concurrence of Budget Division and C&AG. The Committee desire that
Ministry/ ESIC take appropriate action in this regard under intimation to the
Committee.
[Para 11, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As desired by the Hon'ble Committee to be apprised regarding steps taken to
frame adequately balanced budget, it is submitted that steps have been taken steps
for balanced budget estimates by analyzing past years expenditure from current
year 7 months expenditure, status of projects, increase in number of beneficiaries,
recruitment plans etc.
As per Sec.26 (1) of the ESI Act,1948 "All contribution paid under this Act
and all other moneys received on behalf of the Corporation shall be paid into a
fund called the Employees' State Insurance Fund which shall be held and
administered by the Corporation for the purposes of this Act". However, Rule 31 of
the Employees' State Insurance (Central) Rules,1950 does not contains any
provisions requiring Ministry of Finance is to open separate fund under the relevant
major head in Public Account as mentioned in Report.
Further, Annual Budget Estimates are prepared as per Sec 32 of the ESI
Act, 1948 read with Rule 31 of the ESI (Central) Rules, 1950 and submitted to
Standing Committee headed by the Secretary of the Administrative Ministry for
consideration and approval. After approval of Standing Committee , the Budget
Estimated is placed before the ESI Corporation headed by Hon'ble Minister of
Labour & Employment and member of Corporation comprising Hon’ble Members
of Parliament, Representative of Employers and Employee, State Govts etc. and as
passed by the Corporation, the same is submitted to Central Government to make
such alterations as may be considered necessary before according approval. The

58
budget estimates finally adopted by the Corporation and approved by the Central
Government is placed before the Parliament by Administrative Ministry concerned
and is published in the Office Gazette.
ESIC operates on the principal of pooling of risk and resources for which
reserve funds have been created on the basis of actuarial valuation. The excess
funds are evaluated & invested regularly and used as per the needs of the Insured
Persons. The present system of fund management is well within the principals of
ESI Act.
In ESIC, the entire budget is not released to field offices at once but is done
on monthly basis and while releasing the fund, the expenditure pattern of units is
also considered and if any unspent fund is left with field units, it is returned back to
Headquarters and same is transferred to Reserve Fund maintained by ESIC.
Moreover, in case of any excess of expenditure over the sanctioned budget; re-
appropriation is done as per Rule 33 of ESI (Central) Rules, 1950 and in the case of
any savings, the same is transferred to General Reserve Fund.
In view of the above and the prevalent system, Budget preparation may be
continued as per the ESI Act.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"Ministry has not agreed to the recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee
regarding creation of separate reserve fund under Public Accounts and has
suggested that the prevalent system of Budget preparation as per ESI Act
may be continued. The possibility of making changes in the ESIC Act to
implement the recommendation of PAC may also be commented upon."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
During the recent Budget preparation for the year 2018-19 various steps have
been taken to ensure that Budget Estimates are more realistic based on actual
expenditure trend, present & future policy decisions of the Corporation and
accordingly each and every items of revenue and expenditures is adequately
rationalised and justified.
Further, issues related to finance, ESI Fund, Budget Estimates, Audit and
other related issues are covered under Chapter III of ESI Act, 1948. Section 26 and
28 of ESI Act, 1948 specifically contains the provisions related to ESI Fund and
purpose for which the Fund may be expended respectively.
In addition to above, ESIC has taken following futuristic actions:
(a) MOL&E has conveyed that ESI Scheme should be extended to entire
nation in all districts by 2022 as per the decision of Cabinet Secretariat
which is being monitored through e-samiksha. Under ESIC 2.0 as on
1.1.2018, the scheme has been extended to a total of 503 Districts
comprising of 325 complete Districts, 93 District HQs and in 85 Districts
it is partially implemented in centers. Process for meeting the
implementation targets of 2022 has been initiated.

59
(b) No. of dispensaries being increased on the basis of proposals of State
Governments.
(c) Introduction of modified Employers' Utility Dispensaries (EUD) with
helpdesk facility for which budget of 500 crore for the year 2018-19
has been approved by Corporation in its 173rd meeting held on
16.02.2018.
(d) New ESI hospitals are being constructed to increase the outreach of
ESI medical facilities.
(e) New Branch Office cum Dispensaries are being planned for which
`100 crore has been provided in Budget for 2018-19.
To implement the present and futuristic services to the Insured Persons (IPs)
constant flow and availability of funds is required.
Observation/Recommendation
Review of sanctioned strength: The Committee note from the reply of the
Ministry that vacancies in ESIC in all States as against the sanctioned strength
ranged from 25.88% in Bihar to as high as 69.09% in Himachal Pradesh. The
Committee are of the view that large number of vacancies in ESIC would lead to
ineffective coverage and implementation of ESIC. While being aware that manpower
requirements in any organisation change with time, the Committee desire that the
Ministry/ESIC carry out a review of the existing sanctioned strength and vacancies
and based on the results of the same, amend the existing norms and thereafter take
the necessary steps to fill up the vacancies. The Committee may be apprised in this
regard.
[Para 23, Part - II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
ESI Corporation in its 161st meeting held on 28.01.2014 & 14.02.2014
authorized its Chairman to constitute the Standing Committee and other
Sub-Committee.
Chairman, ESI Corporation then has constituted the Sub-Committee on
Organisational Restructuring of the ESI Corporation on 04.03.2014.
ESI Corporation in its 167th meeting held on 18.12.2015 approved that the
Sub-Committee on Organisational Restructuring of ESIC may be entrusted to review
the sanctioned strength of ESIC at Hqrs. Office as well as field officers and to
submit their recommendations which may be placed in the next meeting of the
Corporation.
To provide inputs and assist the said Sub-Committee, an internal committee
was constituted by the Director General.

60
Again, an agenda item "ORGANISATIONAL RESTRUCTURING:
VISION & ROADMAP 2021" was placed before the 171st meeting of the ESI
Corporation held on 18.02.2017. In the said meeting of the Corporation, it was
decided to get detailed proposal prepared.
The internal committee is yet to submit its final report to the Corporation
Sub-Committee.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"The final report of the internal committee regarding organizational
re-structuring along with action taken thereon may be included in the final
reply."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
In this connection, it is to inform that the Ministry of Labour & Employment
has conveyed the decision of the Cabinet Secretariat wherein it is desired to extend
the coverage of ESIC to the entire nation. Accordingly, an agenda item "ESIC
VISION  2022" was placed in 173rd meeting of ESI Corporation held on
16th February, 2018. At present fine tuning of 'Vision 2022' has been assigned to a
sub committee of the Corporation. To achieve the objective to notify all districts
under ESIC in a gradual manner various strategic plan has been initiated with regard
to Medical benefits, Cash benefits, Ease of doing business & Modernize IT services
of ESIC to improve efficiency and reduce administrative costs by way of
restructuring of administrative and medical staff.
It is also decided in the aforesaid meeting that atleast one Branch Office Cum
Dispensary may also set up in each of the covered districts.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation
Expenditure vis-a-vis services being provided: The Committee note Audit's
contention that on analysis of data of income and expenditure indicated inter-alia
expenditure towards medical and cash benefit was between 33 and 46 per cent of
total income implying that the expenditure on the main activity was not in proportion
to collection of contributions. It also indicated that the rates of contribution from
employee and employers were higher than present level of services being provided.
The Committee observe that during 2008-09 to 2012-13, 'excess of income over
expenditure' is even more than the contribution made by employees in each of
these 5 years. The Committee find that amid deteriorating health facilities, lack of
hospitals, scarce beds and shortage of doctors and specialists, the organisation is
flush with funds. The Committee desire that much needs to be done for effective
delivery of medical benefits and expediting cash benefits to the IPs and with such
huge funds, ESIC should endeavor to improve its efficiency and quality of services
tremendously. The Committee are also of the view that the ESIC may earnestly
explore fixing the rates of contribution from the employees on the basis of actuarial
valuation. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the basis of contribution to
be collected from the unorganized workers including construction workers and self
employed workers like rickshaw pullers and auto rickshaw drivers etc.
[Para 6, Part-II of 67th report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
1. ESIC has enhanced the ceiling on expenditure for medical services
provided by States i.e. ESIS from Rs. 2150 to Rs. 3000/- per Insured
Person (IP) per year from the year 2017-18 subject to submission of
Project Implementation Plan (PIP). This has led to financial liberty to
States for delivery of better medical services.
2. ESIC has granted in-principle approval for increasing Hospital Bed
Strength of ESI Hospitals by 50%, if the Bed Occupancy of the
concerned Hospital has been consistently more than 70% in last three
financial years.
3. ESIC is running a super-speciality hospital at Sanathnagar, Hyderabad
with super specialties such as Cardiology, Neurology, Neurosurgery,
Pediatrics, Surgery, Nephrology, Urology, Dialysis etc. and also running
61

62
Super-speciality Services at Kollam in Kerala for Cardiology and
Nephrology.
Further, Super-Speciality Services (SST) are also provided in-house
on PPP mode.
4. Reform measures which have been taken in ESIC hospitals and
dispensaries under ESIC 2.0, are as under:
• Using VIBGYOR colour pattern, day-wise, for bed sheets in all
Hospitals of ESIC.
• Medical Helpline facility through which Insured Person can
directly talk to Doctors in case of any emergency and seek
guidance.
• Special OPDs in the afternoon from 3.00 PM to 5.00 PM for
senior citizens and Differently-abled Patients.
• Cancer detection/treatment facilities at different level of hospitals.
• Cardiology treatment facilities at different level of hospitals.
• Provision of all possible pathological facilities in all hospitals
premises by installation of required equipment either by
upgradation or outsourcing.
• Dialysis facilities in all ESIC Model Hospitals on PPP Model.
• Queue Management System in every hospital for helping in
registration and pharmacy. Through this online registration can
also be done using mobile phones.
• Behavioural training to paramedical and other staff of the hospitals
guiding them to provide due courtesy in dealing with the patients/
attendants.
• Provision of facilities for reception and "May I Help You" in
each hospital to guide the patients/attendants.
• Electronic Health records i.e. prescriptions and laboratory records
to beneficiary through internet.
• Upgradation of dispensaries into 6 bedded & 30 bedded hospital,
in a phased manner.
• Feedback system, for all indoor patients.
• Proper and attractive signages at the required places in all ESIC
Hospitals for guidance and proper communication to the patients
and beneficiaries.

63
• Facility of yoga in ESIC hospitals.
• Tele-medicine facilities for the beneficiaries in a phased manner.
• Extension of AYUSH facilities up to the dispensary level.
• Tracking each and every pregnant mother and newly born child
in the families of IPs so that complete immunization as well as
safe delivery is achieved.
5. Steps taken by ESI Corporation so as to facilitate / incentivize the
delivery of medical services through various State Government
run ESIS hospitals and dispensaries:
• With a view to improve the functioning of State Government run
ESIS hospitals and dispensaries, ESIC has asked State ESI scheme
to implement ESIC 2.0 reform measures and prescribed certain
minimum facilities/ parameters to be maintained in ESIS health
establishments viz.:
(i) Availability of doctors and para-medical staff as per
sanctioned strength.
(ii) Minimum number of medicines available.
(iii) Pathological and X-ray services.
(iv) Monitoring of general cleanliness and up keep of
dispensary/ hospital, biometric attendance and change of
hospital bed sheets as per VIBGYOR mission.
• The State ESI scheme have been asked to adhere to above
mentioned minimum standards/prescribed norms and have been
also communicated that if ESIS medical establishment is not
fulfilling minimum level of provision of services, ESIC will take
further steps which may include deducting proportionate share
of fund being given by ESIC. It has also been communicated that
this fund will be used directly by ESIC for providing the deficient
and other services which are lacking in ESIS hospitals/
dispensaries, as mandated by ESIC 2.0.
• Regular monitoring and supervision of ESIS hospitals and
dispensaries is also being undertaken by ESIC so as to enforce
the minimum standards as per ESIC 2.0 mandate.
To further encourage the State Government for improving medical services
in ESIS health establishments, ESI Corporation has also proposed creation of State
Autonomous Body/Society at State level for medical services wherein State
Government  are to receive 100% expenditure on the ESI scheme, up to the ceiling
in perpetuity on adopting this model, against the current share of 87.5% expenditure.

64
 Regarding fixing the rates of contribution from the employees on the basis
of actuarial valuation it is submitted that the rate of contribution is payable @ 6.5%
of wages as per Rule 51 of ESI Central Rules, 1950. This rate applicable since
26th August, 2004 is employers contribution @ 4.75% and the employees share
@1.75%.
A new Rule 51B has been inserted w.e.f. 06.10.2016, whereby contribution
@4% of wages is payable in respect of new areas where the ESI Scheme is
implemented for the first time, for an initial period of 24 months, after which regular
rate of contribution of 6.5% shall be payable. Out of the 4%, the employer share is
3% and employee share is 1% of wages.
Further, as per Section 73A to Section 73F, Medical scheme for other
beneficiaries can be framed on payment of user charges in respect of underutilized
ESI hospitals in consultation with Central Government under the above provision,
Scheme for Auto-rickshaw Drivers and Domestic Workers on pilot basis were started
on 01.04.2016 and 01.10.2016 respectively in cities of Delhi and Hyderabad on
payment of user charges @ Rs. 250/- per month for Auto-rickshaw Drivers and
@ Rs. 200/- per month for Domestic Workers. No scheme for other category of self
employed workers has so far been launched. Construction workers working in
construction agencies in implemented areas employing 10 or more persons are
covered under the ESI Act and are entitled to all benefits as Insured Persons.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"No explanation has been furnished for the low expenditure on medical and
cash benefits."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
Expenditure on medical services under ESI Scheme is under the administrative
decision of respective State Government running ESI Scheme. ESI Corporation
reimburses the State Governments' medical expenditure under ESI Scheme as per
agreed ratio and ceiling.
Some of the reasons for low expenditure by the State Government are:
• Posting of inadequate manpower.
• Relative lack of upgradation of medical services.
• Lengthy procedures for procurement of various services/equipments.
Further, ESI Corporation has taken various measures for better fund utilization
as under:
• No. of dispensaries being increased on the basis of proposals of
State Governments.
• Introduction of modified Employers' Utility Dispensaries (EUD) with
helpdesk facility for which budget of  500 crore for the year 2018-19
has been approved by Corporation in its 173rd meeting held
on 16.02.2018.

65
• New ESI hospitals are being constructed to increase the outreach of
ESI medical facilities.
• New Branch Office cum Dispensaries are being planned for which
100 crore has been provided in Budget for 2018-19.
• To encourage various State Governments for improving medical
services under ESIS system, State Government have been requested to
form ESI Society at State level so that fund may be allocated directly
to State ESI Scheme without passing through State Treasury.
• ESI Corporation has also suggested a number of new initiatives to
State ESI Schemes for improving/upgrading medical services.
• State Government has been asked to submit Project Implementation
Plan (PIP) under specific heads of medical expenditure.
• Ceiling on medical expenditure has also been enhanced from  2,150/-
to  3,000/-. In respect of low cash benefit expenditure, it is submitted
that disbursement of cash benefits depends upon certification by doctor
in respect of illness, employment injury. Since medical services
particularly the dispensaries are inadequate consequently it may happen
that IP's face difficulty in obtaining certificates for availing cash benefits.
To improve expenditure on cash benefits the following steps have been
taken :
• Upgradation of medical services.
• The IPs who require absence from work on medical ground are only
eligible for cash benefits. Since the cash benefits are directly linked
with the medical services, adequate and effective medical services may
gain trust of the Scheme into our stakeholders and consequently may
improve the cash benefits expenditure.
• Setting up of Dispensary-cum-Branch office to cater the medical
services in all the implemented districts.
• To increase the number of dispensaries/empanelled doctors in those
areas where IP strength is high.
• To curb the lengthy procedures for disbursement of cash benefits.
• Linking of Aadhaar will access the genuineness of the case for early
disposal of cash payments.
Regarding, scheme for Auto-rickshaw Drivers & Domestic workers under
the "Scheme for other beneficiaries" under Section 73A it is submitted that this
scheme was initiated on Pilot basis in Delhi and Hyderabad for a period of one year
w.e.f. 1.4.2016 & 1.10.2016 respectively. The User contribution proposed for the
Scheme for Auto-rickshaw drivers in the pilot phase was  250/- per month, payable
quarterly, after the registration. The per capita expenditure on medical care,

66
excluding super speciality treatment, was about ` 3,150/- per IP for the
year 2013-14. Accordingly, an amount of  ` 250/- per month was proposed for
pilot phase, subject to reassessment.
Both the pilot schemes were not able to elicit participation from intended
beneficiaries. Both the schemes have since been ended & MOL&E has been
informed.
Observation/Recommendation
With a view to improve the quality of services, the ESI Act was amended in
May, 2010 to provide for the establishment of medical colleges, nursing colleges
and training institutes. The Committee note that the Ministry of Labour and
Employment in November, 2014 requested the C&AG of India to conduct a special
Audit of 13 ongoing Medical College Project. It was specifically desired by the
Ministry that the special Audit may be taken up to address the following concerns
of whether due diligence was observed while deciding to take up medical education
projects, whether these projects were able to fulfil the objectives envisaged under
Section 59(B) of ESI Act and whether the provisions of General Financial Rules
(GFRs) were followed while implementing these projects. The Committee note
from the submission made during the evidence that the core function of ESIC is to
provide social security i.e. cash benefit and medical benefit to the Insured Persons
under the ESI Scheme. It was felt that it would help the ESIC in concentrating at its
core function if the ESIC exited from the field of Medical Education. Accordingly,
the ESI Corporation in its 163rd meeting took a decision to exit from the field of
Medical Education. ESIC in its 165th meeting decided that "ESIC will neither set
up any other new medical college nor any other new medical institution in future".
In addition, ES1C decided to run the existing ongoing ESIC medical educational
institutions.
The Committee are of the view that the ESIC has been taking decisions in
haste since 2009-10. In 2009, ESIC, even before formal approval of the provision
for entering medical education field, engaged consultants for preparing project
reports and then selected locations for setting up of medical colleges by disregarding
the established criteria. The Committee are surprised to find that an organization
which claims to be inexperienced in a field took up setting up of 21 colleges in no
time. Further, in 2014 when not even the first batch of MBBS students had graduated,
ESIC decided to leave the field. The Committee note with surprise that Secretary,
Ministry of Labour & Employment in his submission before the Committee stated
that "we do not have the core competence to run these medical colleges". However,
the Committee find that nowhere in the submissions of Ministry, any problems
relating to running the colleges have been pointed out and MCI has also been giving
approvals to the colleges proving that they must have fulfilled all the criteria. All
but one Audit observations also point to flaws in tendering, awarding of contracts,
pre-assessments and activities related to construction of buildings. The Committee
observe that though these medical colleges were opened for giving education to the
children of Insured Persons (IPs) with their money at reasonable costs, the Ministry/

67
ESIC did not give a single thought to the concerns of these IPs before opting out of
the field. As for retaining of doctors in ESIC hospitals, the Committee are of the
view that this is a problem being faced by all the Government run medical Colleges
all over India and interestingly, these Government run medical colleges are best in
the country. The Committee feel that since Government run medical colleges are
the only institutions in the country which are able to provide medical education to
the aspirants at most reasonable costs and these colleges are being run pretty well
by other Ministries also. The Committee are of the view that Ministry/ESIC should
have thought of improving themselves instead of running away even before the
first batch of MBBS students have passed out, after spending more than 10000
crores of the IPs' money. The Committee are of the considered view that Medical
colleges are essential for hospitals with super-speciality department and also, the
interests of the children of IPs are to be taken care of by the ESIC. The Committee
recommend that the entire issue be placed before a Committee of Empowered
Secretaries for consideration and deciding future course of action.
The Committee found that Audit has made following observations regarding
these Medical college projects:
(i) The Corporation had sanctioned 17 out of 21 medical projects and
started the construction of 16 medical colleges and incurred an
expenditure of 1021.72 crore prior to the amendment of the Act.
(ii) The feasibility study for selection of sites/locations conducted by the
consultant was not comprehensive and the selection of sites by ESIC
for construction of Medical Education Projects was also arbitrary and
not based on norms.
(iii) Award of different works to different architectural and engineering
consultants was carried out in an arbitrary manner. Further as per CVC
directives the consultant fees should be pegged to the original contract
value payable. Due to non-inclusion of this clause in 6 out of 21
agreements, ESIC was liable to pay extra consultancy fees of 24.68
crore.
(iv) Due diligence to ascertain the number of colleges required to be opened,
to fulfil the future requirement of doctors and other paramedical staff
was not carried out.
(v) Due to award of works on nomination basis to construction agencies,
the ESIC could not avail the benefit of competitive rates.
(vi) All medical education projects taken up, except two, were behind
schedule. The total cost of all the projects was revised from  8611.94
crore to 11997.15 crore resulting into cost overrun of  3385.21 crore.
The Committee note that the audit was not given the required documents and
records for scrutiny containing: ( i) the reasons for selection of sites which were not
recommended by the Consultant; (ii) the documents relating to the assessment of

68
work of the Consultant; and (iii) justification for the selection of different sites for
medical education projects. The Committee have been informed that a Committee
under Additional Secretary has been constituted to look into lapses for not providing
documents to Audit. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken in this
regard within two months.
The Committee note that prior to the amendment of the Act, the Corporation
had sanctioned 17 out of 21 medical education projects and even started construction
of 16 medical colleges and incurred a whopping expenditure of  1,021.72 crores
which includes mobilization advance given to executing agencies, however, the
ESIC records did not show any administrative or financial approval of the Ministry
in this regard. The Committee further note from the reply of the Ministry the ESI
Act was amended in 2010 but the effect was retrospective. Further, the audit observed
that the Advisor who was engaged only for six months continued to work for four
years and his tenure was extended nine times. The honorarium of the Advisor was
also raised from 20,000/- to 50,000/- per month in four years without any assessment
of his performance and the approval of Standing Committee was also not obtained,
either at the time of appointment or at the time of revision of honorarium. The
Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry, that the Advisor was appointed
initially for 6 months for 20000 p.m and his term was extended for 6 months seven
times based on performance appraisal. Subsequently, the post was filled by an open
advertisement wherein the same person was selected for one year at 50000 p.m.
and DG, ESIC had approved the appointment and the matter was not put up before
the Standing Committee.
Audit found that Medical Education Projects by ESIC were marred by delays
and cost overrun. All the Medical Education Projects taken up were behind schedule
except for two projects at Rohini and Ayanavaram. Extensions ranging from one
year & two months to four years & nine months were granted to these projects.
Further, on financial impact of Medical Education Projects, Audit observed that
capital commitment on 21 Medical Education Projects had increased from
8611.49 crore to 11997.15 crore (as on 31 March, 2015) resulting into cost overrun
of  3385.21 crore due to delays caused by various reasons. Against the revised cost
of  11997.15 crore, the ESIC has incurred expenditure of 5955.03 crore on
21 projects as on 31 March, 2015. Out of the 21 Medical Education Projects, it is
seen that six projects have a cost overrun of more than 200 crore, the important
being PGIMSR & Medical College at Basaidarapur, Delhi with an original estimate
of 730.82 crore and a revised cost of  1470 crore (as on 31.03.2015) indicating a
cost overrun of  739.18 crore .
The Committee are of the view that the ESIC did not exercise due diligence
in expending hard earned money of poor IPs and the Ministry did not exercise
adequate control over ESIC's handling of the medical projects. The Committee are
unhappy to note that ESIC incurred expenditure even before amendment to the
Act, awarding of contracts on nomination basis and payment of extra consultancy
fee due to non inclusion of clauses as per the directives of CVC. The Committee
desire that, henceforth, Ministry/ESIC should exercise due diligence while awarding

69
such contracts and issue SOPs/ guidelines for carrying out all the construction works
including tendering/ awarding contracts. The Committee recommend the Ministry
to examine the lapses on part of ESIC in medical project implementation and desire
that liquidated damages may be imposed on the contractors who caused delays in
completion of works and responsibility may be fixed on concerned officials.
[Para 24, Part-II of 67th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(16th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Prima-facie  provision of MBBS seats in ESIC Medical Collages for 'Wards
of Insured Person (IPs)' was not the stated objective of setting up of medical colleges
by ESIC under Section 59B of the ESI Act, 1948. It was a benefit which accrued
later.
The decision to opt out of medical education was coupled with transfer of
medical college projects under construction but not yet started, to willing State
Governments for running these colleges. The record of discussions at the presentation
made by the Secretary, L&E to the Prime Minister on 7th July, 2014 suggested that,
"Since ESIC did not have the core competency to run medical colleges they may be
handed over to relevant agencies with capability and mandate to run medical
colleges"
a. ESIC is continuing to run all medical colleges which have been started
after receipts of 'Letter of Permission' by the ESIC from the Central
Government.
b. In case of erstwhile medical college projects of ESIC transferred to
State Governments, the ownership of land and buildings constructed
thereon vests with ESIC as per MoU executed for such transfer.
c. Interests of children of IPs are being taken care of by ESIC by ensuring
provision of MBBS seats for 'Wards of IPs' in these colleges and
erstwhile ESIC medical colleges, now being run by State Governments.
The Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) executed for medical
colleges projects transferred to the State Governments provided for
the same (Annexure- 14).
d. Medical Council of India (MCI) norms does not per-se mandate super-
specialty departments in medical college hospitals. Setting up and
development of such departments in a medical college/ other hospital
is guided by the objectives of the organization running these colleges
and associated hospital. ESIC hospitals are gradually having in-house
super-specialty services on own/Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode.
All the medical college projects (11) have been completed except Bihta, Patna,
which is also expected to be completed by March, 2018. MBBS Courses have
already been running from as many as 8 colleges and from 1 collage situated at

70
Mandi (H.P), the classes are to be started from this year. Another college at Alwar
(Rajasthan) is ready in all respects and classes may start from next year.
The final claim of the construction agencies along with extension of time in
r/o all these medical education projects are yet to be settled by ESIC. In the contract
agreements between ESIC and respective construction agencies (Govt. PSUs), there
exists a provision for levying liquidated damages for delay, which will be evaluated
meticulously based on hindrances for individual project. If delay in completion of
these projects is not justified, liquidated damages would be levied to them.
In other projects, liquidated damages are being imposed by ESIC if delay is
not found justified based on analysis of hindrances. In two dispensary projects at
Faridabad and Murthal in the State of Haryana as much as 10% of the cost of the
project (maximum limit) was recovered as liquidated damages from M/s NBCC. In
another project of renovation of Regional office at Lower Parel, Mumbai levying
of liquidated damages is being contemplated.
As such, liquidated damages/penalty would be imposed to construction
agencies in terms of the contract agreement in case of proven delay.
(i) Under section 28(4) of the ESI Act , Corporation has full powers to
start Medical Education Projects. Section 59 was amended to only
further amplify and focus the  same. The Employees' State Insurance
(Amendment) Act, 2010 was passed by Parliament, which is in
force w.e.f. 01.06.2010. There is further provision / amendment of
Section 19 "Validation" which is reproduced hereunder:—
"19. Validation
All things done, or, omitted to be done, and all actions or measures
taken or not taken during the period beginning on or after the 3rd day
of July, 2008 and ending immediately before the date of commencement
of the Employees' State Insurance (Amendment) Act, 2010, be deemed
to have been done, or taken, or not taken, under the provision of this
Act, as amended by the Employees' State Insurance (Amendment)
Act, 2010 as if such provisions were in force at the time such things
were done omitted to be done and actions or measures taken or not
taken during the said period”. In view of the above, the action taken or
initiated by the Corporation has been already validated by the
Parliament.
(ii) The work of ME projects was taken up within the existing ESIC/
ESI hospitals, inter-alia , on the feasibility (report) submitted by
the Consultant appointed for the purpose. The ESI Corporation at its
145th meeting (05.12.08) approved 11 (eleven) medical college
locations at existing ESIC/ ESI hospitals surveyed by the Consultant
(Annexure-15 ; 15A). However, ESIC at its 147th meeting (25.08.09)
independently approved seven (07) locations at (i) Patna (Bihar);
(ii) Alwar (Rajasthan); (iii) Faridabad (Haryana); (iv) Mandi (HP);

71
(v) Pantnagar (Uttarakhand); (vi) Bhubaneswar (Orissa) and
(vii) Gulbarga (Karnataka). These sites were allotted by State
Governments for 'Green- field' ESIC medical college projects largely
at subsidized rates/token value/free of cost. The ESIC appeared not to
have looked into the criteria of  IPs at these locations and solely
depended on land parcel availability.
The ESIC has decided, inter-alia , at its 165th meeting held on
07.04.2015 that it will not set up any new Medical College or any other
Medical Education Institution in  future.
Further, ESIC has, inter-alia, decided to transfer infrastructure at
locations where medical colleges had not been commissioned, including
at locations with low IP numbers, to willing State Governments for
establishment of these colleges by the State Government.
Of the seven locations above, ESIC has already established medical
colleges, at  Faridabad, Haryana (2015-16); and Gulbarga, Karnataka
(2013-14). The Medical college project at Mandi (HP) is under transfer
to the State Government, in phases. The projects at Patna (Bihar) &
Alwar, Rajasthan have received conditional acceptance/consent of the
respective State Governments for transfer of the said proposed colleges.
The same is under examination pending vacation of stay granted by
the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in WP11837/2015, i.e. maintain status-
quo regarding medical colleges established by the Corporation under
Section 59-B of the ESI Act'. A separate application for vacation of the
stay order in r/o proposed ESIC colleges has been filed by ESIC.
ESIC would take up further with the State Government regarding
transfer of the infrastructure of the proposed college and its
establishment by the State Governments depending upon the orders of
the Hon'ble High Court.
(iii) (a) The works of Architectural & Engineering Consultancy were awarded
on nomination basis only to those A&E firms, which were empanelled
in ESIC. As regards the criteria for allocation of work, the excerpts of
noting dated 23.02.2010 made by the then Chief Engineer, ESIC,
reveals:—
(i) To provide workable, efficient, cost effective and aesthetical
design solution in stipulated time.
(ii) To make design presentation before the competent authority and
user department such as Financial Commissioner, Medical
Commissioner, Dy. Medical Commissioner, Chief Engineer, RC
and other ESIC officials.
(iii) To get the completion certificate from the Municipal Authority
to get all the statutory clearances, for the project within time
frame.

72
(iv) To submit BOQ/ Estimates to Hqrs. for vetting / sanction.
(v) To issue goods for construction and detailed drawings at site for
execution as per construction on schedule.
(vi) To supervise the construction.
Based on the assessment of performance of the consultants on the above
parameters. Competent Authority i.e. Director General, ESIC awarded the
work/ projects to empanelled Consultants.
The performance of the consultant firms has been evaluated on the project
basis such as time taken for 1st submission / presentation of project before
the competent authority, submission of drawings for statutory bodies, approval
getting clearances from various agencies such as Environmental clearance
and clearances from Central Water Pollution Board, Civil Aviation Authorities
( wherever applicable) etc., submission of BOQ & Tender documents in time
for construction drawing to the construction agency.
Further, all the projects have been awarded as per the direction/ decision of
the Competent Authority i.e Director General. The decision was taken at the
highest level, well within their power.
(b) Six projects which have been pointed out were initial projects in which
fees payable to A&E Consultant has not been capped. However, on
realizing the deficiency in the Contract Agreement, the same was
immediately modified and required clause incorporated in subsequent
agreements and implemented. Prior to adoption of turnkey system of
executing project, ESIC was getting executed work on Deposit Work
basis and hence, there was no in-house experience in formulating such
contracts. To ensure that such issues do not recur, Standing Committee
of ESI Corporation has approved the Standard Contract Agreement in
November, 2012 and all subsequent agreements were executed as per
the Standardized document.
It is also added that ESI Corporation in its 166th Meeting held on
dated 07.08.2015 decided that the construction work (including A&E
work) may be executed by the executing /existing agencies /Central/
State PSUs of ESIC by following the due process. At present, the work
is awarded to these agencies after financial bidding the total Centage
charges towards construction works and A&E services have come down
considerably. Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) is being signed
with the executing Agency for each project.
(iv) A comprehensive report regarding a well considered time frame and
action plan for filling up the vacant posts of medical /paramedical staff
was apparently not prepared by ESIC.

73
(v) Since its inception in 1952 till 2007, the ESIC has adopted "deposit
work basis" concept for construction of hospitals, dispensaries and office
buildings. However, later on above arrangement was not found
satisfactory and there were serious and persistent complaints from State
Governments. Corporation Members and Trade Unions about poor
quality of planning, design and workmanship in capital construction
works and extremely poor maintenance of ESIC properties.
To streamline construction of capital and other works a report was put
up for the information of the Standing Committee in its 179th meeting
held in June, 2008, vide Reporting Item No. VIII. In accordance with
said streamlining measures, ESIC switched-over to turnkey system of
management of projects. Under the said system, Construction Agencies
(Central/ State PSUs) which were engaged/ empanelled by ESIC were
awarded work on nomination basis. Rule 126(2) of GFR, 2005 amended
in August, 2010 provides for assigning original works of any value to
any public works organization (PWOs) such as CPWD, State PWD,
other Central Government Organization authorized to carry out civil
or electrical works such as MES, BRO etc. public sector undertakings
set up by the Central or State Government to carry out civil or electrical
works or any other Central/State Government Organization / PSU which
may be notified by the Ministry of Urban Development after evaluating
their financial strength and technical competence.
ESIC got executed its construction projects through Agencies such as
NBCC, UPRNNL, HSCL, UPPCL, HPL, EPI, TCIL which are public
sector undertakings set up by the Central/State Government. These
agencies are required to either get the work executed departmentally
or tender the work. Savings occurred after tendering was not passed on
by these agencies to ESIC as the Contract Agreement didn't contain
clause to this effect.
It is also added that ESI Corporation in its 166th Meeting held on
dated 07.08.2015 decided that the construction work may be got
executed through the executing/existing agencies/Central/State PSUs
of ESIC by following the due process. At present, the work is awarded
to these agencies after financial bidding for service charges (as per
Rule 126(3) of GFR 2005. Due to financial bidding the total Centage
charges towards construction works have been reduced. Now the benefit
of competitive rates is being availed by ESIC. Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) is being signed with the executing Agency for
each project.
(vi) Initial construction cost of Medical Education Project was ` 8611.94
crore. Most of the projects are on the verge of completion. For some of
the projects such as Dental Colleges at Nacharam and Kanpur, the scope
has been revised as new standalone Dental Colleges are not being

74
permitted by Dental Council of India. In case of Basaidarapur project
also, scope has been revised to the extent of excluding Medical College
and including Centre of Excellence which has resulted into substantial
cost optimization. Efforts have been made to optimize the cost of the
Medical Education projects further and the expected construction cost
as on 31.03.2017 would be to the tune of  `10,020.37 crore ( approx.).
Further efforts are being made to optimize the cost by rationalizing
and normalizing the scope without compromising with the functional
requirements. Increase in cost of projects from ` 8611.94 crore to
`10,020.37 crore (as on 31.03.2017) has resulted due to various reasons
which differs from project to project.
However, some of the common reasons for delays which resulted in
cost escalation are summarized as under:—
(i) Most of the projects are brown field projects where the renovation
/up-gradation /extension were to be carried out in existing
hospitals without interrupting the running facilities.
(ii) Building Plan approvals of brown field projects, from local
municipal authorities/statutory bodies took lot of time.
(iii) Non-availability of work front/Non-applicability of encumbrance
free land.
(iv) Changes in existing fire norms.
(v) Revision in parking area norms.
(vi) Restriction imposed for working hours in specific areas for
blasting operations for excavation to carry out foundation work
in rocky strata.
(vii) Shifting of over-ground/underground existing public utilities viz.
HT Lines. Water Mains, Sewerage Mains, Telephone lines etc.
Besides above, addition of medical equipment & medical furniture and
other items which were not included in the original estimate but were
essential for project has led to increase in cost of projects.
To ensure that such issues do not recur, ESIC has taken following
corrective measures:
• Preparation of authentic detailed estimate, so as to avoid multiple
variations in future.
• Necessary statutory approvals and encumbrance free land to be
ensure before the work is taken up on the ground, so as to avoid
the time lag and cost overruns before actual start of the work.
• Finalization of detailed project schedule in terms of Milestone
Chart before start of work, so as to keep proper control over the
period of completion of the project.

75
a. Audit was given access to all documents which were requested
for, formally or informally, and which were available and within
knowledge of the ESIC. There exists a distinct possibility that
documents deemed not to have been provided were either not
asked for by Audit or if available, their location was not in the
knowledge of the ESIC.
The scope of Medical College at Basaidarapur has been changed and now a
Centre of Excellence is being constructed instead. The expected construction cost
of the project with new scope after exclusion of Medical College and inclusion of
Centre of Excellence is about ` 823.60 crore as estimated on 31.03.2017. All actions
had due approval of Competent Authority (copy of Noting sheets at ESIC has handled
all work of medical education 'in-house' and not used services of consultant for
medical education purposes after September 2013.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
"PAC may be apprised whether Ministry has undertaken any exercise to
examine the lapses on the part of ESIC. Further status of all the projects may be
included in the final reply to PAC."
Ministry's comments on Audit's Observations
As desired, the latest position of all 22 Medical Education projects is enclosed
at Annexure- 20 for kind perusal and record please.
Regarding lapses in implementing the Medical Education Projects on the
part of ESIC Officers, if any, it is submitted that this issue is being examined by
CVC separately and the outcome of same will be intimated in due course.
N
EW DELHI; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE,
12 December, 2018 Chairperson,
21 Agrahayana, 1940 (Saka)   Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2018-19) HELD ON 5TH DECEMBER, 2018
The Public Accounts Committee (2018-19) sat on Wednesday, the
5th December, 2018 from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Room "53, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Mallikarjun Kharge  —   Chairperson
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
3. Smt. Riti Pathak
4. Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
5. Shri Janardhan Singh Sigriwal
6. Shri Abhishek Singh
7. Shri Gopal Shetty
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Bhupender Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Kumar Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri T. Jaya Kumar — Director
3. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Director
4. Shri Paolienlal Haokip — Additional Director
5. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja — Deputy Secretary
6. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Mamta Kundra — ADAI (O/o ADAI)
2. Shri Deepak Anurag — DG (RC)
3. Shri A.K. Jha — Dy. Director
76

77
4. Ms. Subhashini Srinivasan — DAI (CRA)
5. Shri Sanjay Kumar — PD (DT)
6. Shri N.K. Sah — PD (DT)
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution (Department of Food and Public Distribution)
1. Shri Ravikanth — Secretary
2. Shri Dharmendra — AS & FA
3. Shri Edwin Kulbhushan Majhi — AS (Storage)
4. Shri P.K. Tiwari — JS (Policy)
5. Shri S. Jagannathan — JS (PD)
2.**** **** **** ****
3.**** **** **** ****
4.**** **** **** ****
5.**** **** **** ****
6.**** **** **** ****
The witnesses then withdrew.
PART-II
**** **** **** ****
PART-III
7. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for adoption:
(a)**** **** **** ****
(b)**** **** **** ****
(c)Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
of the Committee contained in their 67th Report (16th Lok Sabha) on "Performance
Audit of Employees State Insurance Corporation and Special Audit of Medical
Education Projects of ESIC";
(d)**** **** **** ****
(e)**** **** **** ****
(f)**** **** **** ****
(g)**** **** **** ****
(h)**** **** **** ****

78
(i)**** **** **** ****
(j)**** **** **** ****
8. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the above-
mentioned draft Reports. After discussion Reports were adopted with minor
modifications and Members authorised the Chairperson to present the same in the
ensuing session of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR SIXTY-SEVENTH REPORT
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 24
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee Total: 18
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage: 75%
Para Nos. 1 to 5, 7, 9 and 12 to 22.
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Total: 00
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage: Nil %
the reply of the Government:
Para Nos. Nil.
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: 04
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage: 16.66%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 8, 10, 11 and 23.
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total: 02
which the Government have furnished  interim Percentage: 8.33%
replies:
Para Nos. 6 and 24.
MGIPMRND—1779LS—12.03.2020.
79

SER-1/D/CDR/LOK SABHA COVER FOLDER\PAC COVER HINDI AND ENGLISH \ 1779LS
115
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF EMPLOYEES
STATE INSURANCE CORPORATION AND
SPECIAL AUDIT OF MEDICAL EDUCATION
PROJECTS OF ESIC
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2018-2019
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTEENTH REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Sixty-Seventh Report (16th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT
PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of AgentSl.No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz
Circle, Vasavya Nagar,
Vijaywada-520 006 (AP).
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842 002. (Bihar).
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110 001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110 009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110 024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110 001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110 052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110 002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110 002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110 054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher
Shah Road, New Delhi-110 003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110 006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110 005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110 001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110 059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service, C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110 034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462 003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2671,
Mumbai-400 002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400 002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605 001.
TAMIL  NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641 012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600 014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad
(UP).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller,
Mayfair Building Hazrat Ganj,
GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226 001.
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.