6
SERVICE TAX ON BANKING AND
OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Seventy-ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF  FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2014-2015
SIXTH  REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SIXTH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
SERVICE TAX ON BANKING AND
OTHER FINANCIAL SERVICES
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Seventy-ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 25th November, 2014
Laid  in  Rajya   Sabha  on  25th  November, 2014
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)

P.A.C.  No. 2034
Price:  `  112.00
© 2014  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2014-15)........................ (iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2013-14)........................ (v)
INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... (vii)
CHAPTER I Report ........................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 11
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government..................................................... 86
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration................. 87
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
the Government have furnished interim replies ............. 103
APPENDICES
I. Minutes  of  the Seventh Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2014-15) held on 19.11.2014........................ 104
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on   the   Observations/Recommendations   of   the
Public Accounts C ommittee contained in their
Seventy-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) ............... 106

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2014-2015)
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
*10. V acant
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
†12. V acant
13. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
14. Shri Anurag Thakur
††15. V acant
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
4. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Under Secretary
* V acant vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f. 9th November,
2014.
† V acant vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed as Minister w.e.f. 9th November, 2014.
†† V acant vice Dr. M. Thambidurai who has been chosen as Hon’ble Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha
and has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.
(iii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
3. Dr. Baliram
4. Shri Ramen Deka
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Dr. M. Thambi Durai
7. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan
8. Shri Jayaprakash Hegde
9. Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal
10. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
12. Shri Sanjay Brijkishorlal Nirupam
13. Shri Ashok Tanwar
*14. Shri Ajay Maken
15. Shri Dharmendra Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri Prakash Javadekar
†18. Shri Ashwani Kumar
19. Shri Satish Chandra Misra
††20. Dr. V . Maitreyan
21. Shri N.K. Singh
22. Smt. Ambika Soni
* Elected w.e.f. 14th August, 2013 vice Dr. Girija V yas appointed as Minister of Housing,
Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. V . Maitreyan ceased to be a Member upon his
retirement as a Member of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 24th July, 2013.
†† Elected w.e.f. 3rd September, 2013 vice Dr. E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan appointed as Minister
of State for Commerce and Industry w.e.f. 17th June, 2013.
(v)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2014-15), having been authorized
by the Committee, do present this Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action Taken
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Seventy-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Service Tax on Banking and
Other Financial Services’ relating to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
2. The Seventy-ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2013.
Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Report were received on 6th March, 2014. The Public Accounts Committee considered
and adopted this Report at the Sitting held on 18th November, 2014. Minutes of the
Sitting are given at Appendix I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventy-ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is
given at Appendix II.
N
EW DELHI; PROF.  K.V. THOMAS
24 November, 2014 Chairperson,
03 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(vii)

REPORT
PART I
Introductory
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with the Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations and Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Seventy-ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "Service tax on Banking and other
Financial Services" based on C&AG Report No. 15 of 2011-12, Union Government
(Indirect Taxes-Service Tax and Customs), relating to Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue).
2. The Seventy-ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok Sabha/
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2013, contained 18 Observations and
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations and
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) and are broadly categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Para Nos. 1-9 and 12-18
Total: 16
Chapter-II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Para Nos. NIL
Total: NIL
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Para Nos. 10 & 11
Total: 2
Chapter-IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
Total: NIL
Chapter-V

2
3. The Service Tax on the Banking and other Financial Services (BFNs) levied with
effect from 1st July, 2001 is a major contributor to Service Tax revenue. Its contribution
to total Service Tax collected during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 was 7.09 per cent
(` 3634.94 crore out of ` 51,301.79 crore) and 6.15 per cent (` 3747.65 crore out of
` 60,940 crore) respectively. The Committee's examination of Service Tax on Banking
and other Financial Services revealed several procedural deficiencies in registration of
assessees, receipt of returns and scrutiny of returns. Instances of non-compliance
with rules and provisions on valuation, incorrect/excess availment and utilization of
cenvat credit, non-remittance of Service Tax etc. had resulted in revenue leakage of
` 251.38 crore. Furthermore, Service Tax of  ` 1.41 crore was collected but not remitted
to the Government. The various irregularities/deficiencies noted by the Committee
were: (i) 1142 service providers who had provided Banking and other Financial Services
were not on the departmental registration lists. 65 of these potential assessees were
liable to pay Service Tax of ` 92.12 crore; (ii) 6 per cent of Service Tax returns were
received late and 14 per cent of the returns were not received at all; (iii) There were
instances of evasion of Service Tax totalling to 28.93 crore; (iv) Department had not
imposed penalty of  ` 4.35 crore on defaulting assessees; (v) No system existed in the
Department to co-relate the taxable income as shown in the Income-Tax return with the
ST-3 return etc. The Committee had accordingly given their Observations and
Recommendations in their Seventy-ninth Report (15th Lok Sabha).
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have
been reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal
with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations made in the Seventy-ninth Report, which need reiteration or merit
comments.
Registration  of  Eligible  Service  Providers
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
5. While scrutinizing the subject in detail, the Committee in their Seventy-ninth
Report (15th LS) noted that in 26 out of 60 Commissionerates, there were 1142 service
providers, who, though liable to pay Service Tax did not figure in the Departmental
registration lists. The Committee were appalled to note that out of these 1142 assessees,
65  potential assessees had not paid service tax to the extent of  ` 92.12 crore with
additional penalty upto ` 92.12 crore and further interest liability of  ` 21.35 crore.
Noting that in respect of 19 Audit objections (involving Service Tax of  ` 36.47 crore)
necessary remedial measures were taken by the Department to recover Government
revenue and 17 cases involving Service Tax of  ` 5.34 crore were pending investigation,
the Committee in para 2 of their 79th Report (15th LS) had called for the latest status of
the cases that were pending investigation.
6. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in its Action Taken Note has
stated as under:—
"Consolidated list of 17 cases, which were pending investigation, detailing the
further proceedings/present status of the cases is enclosed as Annexures 'D-I (P)' &

3
'D-II (P)'. Of these, in 3 cases it was found that there was no service tax liability
on account of SSI exemption, foreign services, non-taxable interest income, etc.
In the remaining cases, Show Cause Notices have been issued & demand
confirmed in 10 cases. In one case, the party could not be located at the given
address."
7. The Committee note that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
issued Show Cause Notices in respect of 7 cases out of 17 cases which were pending
investigation and confirmed demand in all the cases. However, the reply is lacking
details with regard to date of issue of the Show Cause Notices, date of adjudication and
the amount of demand confirmed thereon. The Committee need to be apprised of the
same and also the latest position with respect  to the recovery of demand confirmed in
all these cases.
Reliability  on  Voluntary  Compliance  for  Registration  of  Eligible  Service
Providers
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
8. The Committee had observed that for registration of eligible service providers,
the Government had relied largely on 'voluntary compliance'. Thus, an entity, though
liable to pay Service Tax, could evade tax by not applying for registration. The Committee
had felt that with proper focus on non-intrusive but penetrating methods of collecting
data through the instruments like returns and surveys, the Government could widen
the tax base and ensure better tax compliance. Thus, the Committee had urged the
Ministry to make all-out efforts to ensure that while the Government remains assessee-
friendly, tax evaders are dealt with stringently entailing that Non-compliance be made
a costly proposition. The Ministry had also been directed that if need be, measures
taken in respect of Central Excise and Customs assessees, also be taken with regard to
Service Tax assessees i.e. for registration of eligible BFNs.
9. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in its Action
Taken Note, submitted as under:—
"Stringent penal provisions exists to deal with non-compliance. Under
section 76 of the Finance Act, 1994 a penalty of  ` 100 per day during which the
failure to pay service tax continues or the amount calculated at the rate of 1% per
month on the tax due, whichever is higher, in case of failure to pay the tax due is
leviable. Similarly, failure to take registration under section 69 of the Act ibid
invites penalty of  ` 200 per day of failure from the due date till the date of actual
compliance or ` 10,000, whichever is higher. Further, a provision has been
introduced in the Finance Act, 2013 whereby in cases where a service provider is
liable for prosecution and the amount involved is more than ` 50 lakh, he is liable
for arrest. Further if he collects service tax and does not deposit it with the
Government and the amount involved is more than ` 50 lakh, the offence has
been made cognizable."

4
10. The Committee note that the Ministry has mainly elaborated upon the existing
penal provisions for non-compliance which were provided in the Finance Act, 1994. It
is evident from the Action Taken Reply that the provisions were revised so far only
once in 2013 after having been pointed out by the C&AG regarding the Service Tax
evasion by the Banking and other Financial Services(BFNs) in their Report. The
Committee recommend the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) to have a
re-look at the amount of penalty stipulated in Section 76 of the Finance Act, 1994. The
Committee be apprised of the effectiveness of the new provisions introduced in the
Finance Act, 2013.
Non/Late Receipt  of  Service  Tax  Returns
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
11. The Committee found that for the period September 2004 to March 2009, out of
2,37,593 returns due, as many as 18,684 were not received. The Committee further
found that out of ` 60.32 lakh of penalties levied, penalties of  ` 25.22 lakh had not been
recovered. While emphasizing the need for effective monitoring of Service Tax returns
and timely recovery of penalties imposed, the Committee had desired to be apprised
about the current position with regard to recovery of outstanding penalties of  ` 25.22
lakh. Apart from recommending stringent action against the defaulters, the Committee
had also urged the Ministry of have a re-look at the penalty provisions as the present
penalty was insufficient to act as a deterrent with regard to non-submission of returns.
12. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in its Action Taken Note,
made the following submission:—
"With regard to recovery of outstanding penalties of  ` 25.22 lakh due to delayed/
non submission of ST-3 returns, ` 8.28 lakh has already been recovered and in
rest of the cases necessary action has been initiated.
Regarding re-look at the penalty provisions, the maximum late fee for non-filing
of returns under Section 70 of the Finance Act, 1994 has been increased to
` 20,000/- w.e.f. 08.04.2011 for non-submission of returns in time.
Further, in the Budget 2013, the Government has introduced the Service Tax
V oluntary Compliance Encouragement Scheme 2013, according to which,
non-filers have been given an opportunity to make payment of Service Tax dues
under declaration as per the provisions of Sub-section (1) of Section 97 of the
Finance Act, 2013."
13. Regarding recovery of outstanding penalties the Committee note that only
` 8.28 lakh has been recovered out of  ` 25.22 lakh. Apparently the Ministry seems
to be slow on recovery of penalties from the defaulters. Taking note of the Service Tax
Voluntary Compliance Encouragement Scheme, 2013 aiming to give an opportunity
to the non-filers to make payment of Service Tax dues under declaration as per the
provisions of Sub-Section(1) of Section 97 of the Finance Act, 2013, the Committee
recommend the Ministry to have a close and effective monitoring of the scheme.

5
Absence  of  Vital  Database  of  the Actual  Number  of  BFNs  Filing  Returns
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
14. The Committee had observed that the vital database of the actual number of
BFNs filing returns and those who have failed to do so, was not available with the
Department. The Ministry had informed that such a data base was not being developed
by the Directorate General of Service Tax. Further, the assessees who were not filing
service tax return were issued Show Cause Notices. Expressing concern that the
Department could not function effectively and monitor their collection of Service Tax
from BFNs in the absence of vital data base, the Committee had urged the Department
of Revenue to put in place an effective mechanism to facilitate monitoring of the
progress of revenue receipts and processing of returns on a periodical basis.
15. In its Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) has
stated as under:—
“The database of assessees who have filed/not filed ST-3 returns in Automation
in Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES), including those pertaining to BFNs, is
available in the Directorate of Systems.
Further, the Customs and Central Excise Department, Principal Controller of
Accounts, Controller General of Accounts and the Reserve Bank of India with
the participation of 28 commercial banks introduced the Electronic Accounting
System in Excise and Service Tax (EASIEST) in April 2007 with the GAR 7 challan.
This system provides for the facility for online verification of the status of tax
payment using a unique Challan Identification Number(CIN).
In order to develop a vital database, the Directorate General of Service Tax
(DGST) as a one-time exercise, had asked the field formations to approach RBI
office under their jurisdiction and obtain the list of NBFCs registered with them.
Accordingly, the list of Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs) obtained
was compared with NBFC already registered with the Department. For
non-registered NBFCs, appropriate action was taken by the field formations for
getting them registered.
Further, in the Budget 2013, the Government has introduced the Service Tax
V oluntary Compliance Encouragement Scheme 2013, according to which,
non-filers have been given an oportunity to make payment of Service Tax dues
under declaration as per the provisions of Sub-Section (1) of Section 97 of the
Finance Act, 2013.”
16. In their 79th Report the Committee had observed that the Department did not
have the vital database of the actual number of BFNs filing returns and those who had
failed to do so. The Ministry had submitted that such database was not being developed
by the Directorate General of Service Tax. However, in its Action Taken Notes, the
Ministry has stated that the database of assessees who have filed/not filed ST-3 returns
in Automation in Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES), including those pertaining
to Banking Financial Companies (BFNs) is available in the Directorate of Systems.
Furthermore, the Ministry has also stated that in order to develop a vital database, the
5

6
Directorate General of Service Tax (DGST) as a one-time exercise had taken
appropriate action for getting the non-registered NBFCs registered. The Ministry
need to explain how incorrect information was submitted at the outset. Furthermore
the reply of the Ministry is devoid of details regarding the date/period during which
this exercise was undertaken, number of BFNs registered as a result thereof, the
amount of penalty imposed/recovered from the defaulting assessees etc. The Committee
recommend that Electronic Accounting System in Excise and Service Tax introduced
in April 2007 be made effective.
Scrutiny  of   Returns
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
17. The Committee were concerned to note that during the year 2008-09 (i) in 67
Commissionerates 12.38 per cent returns received were pending preliminary verification/
scrutiny; (ii) in 22 Commissionerates, there were 99 cases in which Department failed to
detect irregularities like payment of Service Tax at lower rate, non-levy of interest and
penalty, short payment of interest, etc. leading to short levy of Service Tax totalling
` 7.02 crore and interest of ` 1.56 crore; (iii) there was no system in place to Co-relate
the taxable income as shown in the Income Tax return with the ST-3 return; and (iv) 116
assessees had shown lower figures in ST returns which had Service Tax implication of
` 21.91 crore and interest of ` 2.94 crore during the period from September 2004 to
March 2009. While deploring the failure of the Ministry in ensuring timely verification/
scrutiny of returns, the Committee had exhorted the Ministry to have a comprehensive
review for identification of bottlenecks, if any, in the present system of scrutiny of
returns and overcome the same through appropriate policy intervention.
18. In its Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) has
stated as under:—
"At present, preliminary scrutiny is done by the system while detailed scrutiny
is undertaken by the Range Officers. Further, based on certain well-defined
parameters, the system throws up some returns for Review and Correction (R&C)
by the Range Officers. As per the Scrutiny Manual for ST-3  Returns, the
mechanism of scrutiny involves two stages namely Preliminary and Detailed
Scrutiny. The preliminary scrutiny has been designed to check completeness of
the information provided, timeliness, arithmetic accuracy etc. The detailed scrutiny
will ensure correctness of classification, exemption availed, valuation, availament
of CENVAT credit etc.
Efforts are being made to ensure timely scrutiny. The bottlenecks relate to staff
shortage, as well as certain technical problems including internet connectivity.
The department has already appointed a Committee to solve these technical
problems. As regards, manpower, the expansion of services under the service tax
ambit was not commensurate with staff strength available. The issue is being
addressed through cadre re-structuring proposal.

7
It is also mentioned that the present system of preliminary scrutiny has been
examined by a Committee set up by CBEC and the Committee has submitted their
report for major changes in the system to avoid large number of returns for R&C.
Once the recommendations of the Committee are accepted and implemented, it is
expected that this may result in minimization of returns thrown for R&C. After
the said changes, it is expected that officers may get time to carry out detailed
scrutiny.
The data regarding the amount of revenue detected and amount recovered as
a result of scrutiny of returns is as under:
(` in lakh)
Revenue detected as a result of Amount recovered as a result thereof
scrutiny of ST-3 Returns filed
under BFNs
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
13128.90 17167.75 53591.39 4918.36 9977.17 15539.58
The major policy decision would be to augment the staff strength on priority.
There may not be other effective/corrective policy measures to overcome such
huge pendency of ST-3 returns as well as other areas of service tax functioning."
19. In order to ensure timely scrutiny of ST-3 returns, the Committee note that
present system of preliminary scrutiny was examined by a Committee set up by CBEC,
which in its report recommended major changes in the system in order to avoid large
number of returns for Review and Correction (R&C). The Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) expect that once the recommendations of that Committee are
accepted and implemented, this would minimize the number of returns requiring R&C.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the latest position in this regard.
Co-relating  the data of  various departments
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
20. The Committee had noted that no system existed in the Department to Co-relate
the taxable income as shwon in the Income Tax Return with the ST-3 Returns to identify
cases for further scrutiny. Expressing concern over the fact that cross verification of a
few ST returns with Income-tax returns had revealed Service Tax implication of  ` 21.91
crore and interest of ` 2.94 crore during the period September 2004 to March, 2009, the
Committee had recommended that a suitable but effective system for correlating the
data of various Departments be devised and also ensure that the revenue due to the
Government is collected without remiss.
21. While submitting the Action Taken Notes, the Ministry stated as under:
"Both for audit purposes and return scrutiny, there is a mandatory requirement
to examine documents such as balance sheet, profit & loss account, income tax
audit report u/s 44AB of Income Tax Act, 1961. (These documents are normally
submitted to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and the Income Tax Department).

8
The Service Tax Return Scrutiny Manual (issued in 2008) prescribes a checklist
for reconciling the figures of income contained in the financial records of the
assessee viz., balance sheet/profit & loss account with the taxable income shown
in the service tax return. Data sharing between CBEC and CBDT is being
examined."
22. With regard to devising a suitable and effective system for co-relating the data
of taxable income, as shown in the income tax returns with the ST-3 returns of
various Departments, the Ministry has not come up with any concrete action and has
merely submitted the existing procedure available with them. No efforts seem to have
been made by the Ministry in this regard apart from submitting that data sharing
between CBEC and CBDT was being examined. The Committee exhort the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) to expedite interlinking of database of taxable
income of all the Departments concerned so as to avoid losing of revenues on account
of lack of coordination and discrepancy. The Committee would like the Ministry to be
apprised of the concrete steps taken in this direction within six months of the
presentation of this Report.
Revenue  Leakage  due  to  wrong  utilization  of  CENV AT  Credit
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
23. As per the provisions, the assessee was liable to restrict the utilization of cenvat
credit to 20 percent of the Service Tax payable during the period 2006-07 and 2007-08. Out
of the 24 months in 2006-07 and 2007-08, the assessee paid Service Tax of ` 1198.04 lakh
in 12 months. While the utilization of cenvat credit to make these payments should have
been restricted to ` 239.61 lakh (20 percent) the actual utilization was ` 626.65 lakh. This
led to excess utilization of credit of ` 387.04 lakh which was recoverable with interest of
` 95.84 lakh. The assessee had also not maintained separate accounts for receipt,
consumption and inventory of input services used for taxable and exempted services.
Since adjudication in respect of Show Cause Notices (SCNs) of ` 5.52 crore
(period 2005-06 to September, 2009) including ` 387.04 lakh issued in March 2010 was
pending, the Committee had desired to be apprised about the latest position in this
regard.
24. While furnishing details in this regard, the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) in its Action Taken Note has submitted as under:
"It is reported that a Show Cause Notice involving an amount of ` 5.52 crore
(period 2005-06 to September 2009) including ` 387.04 lakh raised by the C&AG
had been issued in March, 2010, which is pending adjudication.
It is further reported that neither EA-2000 Audit nor detailed scrutiny was done
for the period 2006-07 to 2007-08 of M/s. Infrastructure Development Finance
Corporation Ltd. due to acute shortage of staff, as existing staff in the Audit
Section and Divisions is not adequate. Presently, there are only 3 Divisions to
look after more than 1 lakh assessees. Further, shortage of staff in Audit Section
has also been acknowledged by C&AG in their report and they feel that at least
4 to 5 times more staff is required to cope up the audit work in the Mumbai ST-I
Commissionerate."

9
25. The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry is conspicuously silent
on the issue of irregular utilization of CENVAT Credit. The Committee need
explanation up to their satisfaction. Further, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry examine other cases wherein CENV AT Credit has been availed to ensure
that such irregularities have not occurred. The Committee would also like to be
apprised about the details of SCNs awaiting adjudication and the ones already
adjudicated.
Service  Tax  collected  but  not  remitted  to  the  Government
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
26. The Committee in their 79th Report (15th LS) had found that during the years
2007-08 to 2010-11 there were 2111 cases in which service providers had collected the
Service Tax to the tune of ` 1134.82 crore but had not deposited the same in the
Exchequer. During the same period, recovery of ` 560.07 crore involving 1343 cases
had been effected. Further, out of the 2111 cases, 1065 cases pending realization are
under litigation and the revenue involved was to the extent of ` 1043.20 crore. Noting
that the amount involved in the SCNs issued, constituted nearly 90% of the total
amount that was collected by service providers from the consumers but not deposited
with exchequer, the Committee had expected that the adjudication process be expedited
and recoveries be made at the earliest.
27. In its Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
has submitted as under:
"It is reported that all out efforts are being made to liquidate the pendency of
adjudication cases and recover the amount at the earliest. In this regard, necessary
instructions have been issued to the field formations to expedite the adjudication
process.
Further, Board vide F. No. 137/155/2012-Service Tax dated 21.12.2012 has stated
"Adjudication: Adjudication pendency was reviewed, especially the cases
pending for more than 1 year and cases involving more than ` 1 crore. Member,
Service Tax emphasized the need for Chief Commissioners to closely monitor the
disposal at all levels and fix targets at each level. The targets would be different
for combined Commissionertes and exclusive Service Tax Commissionerates.
For the latter a suggested target was 10-15 per month for Commissioners, 20 per
month for ADCs and 40-50 per month for DCs/ACs. Chief Commissioners were
advised to montior, officer-wise, every fortnight and to ensure that targets were
met each month. The progress would be reviewed in the first week of January,
2013.”
28. In pursuance of the Committee's recommendation, the Department has issued
necessary instructions to the field formations to expedite the adjudication process
and to recover the amounts due at the earliest. The Chief Commissioners have been
asked to closely monitor the disposal and fix targets at each level, and to also ensure
that targets were met each month and the 'progress be reviewed in the first week of

10
January 2013'. Noting the steps taken by the Ministry for expediting the adjudication
process the Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the review and
subsequent corrective action taken by the Ministry. The Committee would also like to
implore the Ministry to examine whether the Non-credit of the collected money can be
treated as a criminal offence, warranting prosecution.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
The Banks and other Financial Services accept deposits and channels those
deposits into lending activities, either directly or through capital markets and connect
customers with capital deficits to customers with captial surpluses by acting as Financial
Intermediary. The Service Tax on the Banking and other Financial Services (BFN) was
levied with effect from 1 July, 2001 and it is a major contributor to Service Tax revenue.
Its contribution during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 was 7.09 per cent (` 3634.94)
crore out of ` 51,301.79 crore) and 6.15 per cent (` 3747.65 crore out  of ` 60,940 crore)
respectively. Audit conducted a comprehensive review of the performance of this
sector with a view to (i) seek assurance that the mechanism to identify and bring in
potential assessees to tax net is effective enough; (ii) examine the rules, regulations
and procedures to identify ambiguities and lacunae therein; and (iii) to identify instances
of non-compliance with rules leading to loss of revenue. The Committee's examination
of Service Tax on Banking and other Financial Services revealed several procedural
deficiencies in registration of assessees, receipt of returns and scrutiny of refturns.
Further, instances of non-compliance with rules and provisions on incorrect valuation,
incorrect/excess availment and utilization of  CENV AT credit, non-remittance of Service
Tax, etc. had resulted in revenue leakages. Furthermore, Service Tax of Rs. 1.41 crore
was collected but not remitted to the Government. These issues along with the related
issues have been examined in detail by the Committee and commented upon suitably
in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 1 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
No comments required.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
No comments
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
No comments.
Sd/-
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]
11

12
Observation/Recommendation
2. While the law clearly envisages that every person liable to pay Service Tax has to
apply for registration within a period of 30 days from the date of commencement of
businesses, the Committee note that, in 26 out of 60 Commissionerates, there were
1142 service providers, who, though liable to pay Service Tax, were not available on
the departmental registration lists. Out of these 1142 assessees, 65 potential assessees
had not paid Service Tax to the extent of  ` 92.12 crore with additional penalty upto
` 92.12 crore and further interest liability of  ` 21.35 crore. The Committee were apprised
that out of 65,17 cases involving Service Tax of  ` 46.12 crore have not been accepted
by the Government. In repect of 19 Audit objections involving Service Tax of  ` 36.47
crore, necessary remedial measures have been taken to recover Government revenue.
17 cases involving Service Tax of  ` 5.34 crore were pending  investigation. While
deploring the belated remedial measures being taken by the Department, the Committee
should like to be apprised of the latest status of cases that are pending investigation
within 03 months of the presentation of this Report and also the detail of the 17 cases
not accepted by the Government and the reasons therefor.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 2 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Consolidated list of 17 cases, which were pending investigation, detailing   the
further proceedings/present status of the cases is enclosed as Annexures 'D-I (P)' &
'D-II (P)'. Of these,  in 3 cases it was found that there was no service tax liability on
account of SSI exemption, foreign services, non-taxable interest income, etc. In the
remaining cases, Show cause notices have been issued and demand confirmed in
10 cases. In 1 case, the party could not be located at the given address.
Also, List of 17 cases in which Audit objection was not accepted by the Department
specifying justifications/reasons for non-acceptance of Audit objection is enclosed
as Annexures 'D-I'& 'D-II'
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
Details in respect of each item and further remarks if any, are given in the respective Annexures.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
Ministry's further comments on further proceedings/present status of 17 cases
mentioned in the enclosed Annexures 'D-I (P)' & 'D-II (P)' are given in the last
Column of the said Annexures.
Similarly, Ministry's further comments on justifications/reasons given for non-
acceptance of Audit objection in the 17 cases  mentioned in enclosed Annexures
'D-I (P)' & 'D-II (P)' are given in the last Column of the said Annexures.
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]

13
Observation/Recommendation
3. The Committee are concerned to note that out of 1074 cases of non-registration
pointed out in Audit, only 370 cases had been verified by the Ministry, 21 cases were
under investigation and in case of 188 service providers verification report was yet to
be received as on 31.07.2012. In case of Bangalore Service Tax Commissionerate, out of
725 cases only 208 service providers had been verified and the verification of remaining
517 cases was underway but obviously hamstrung due to paucity of staff. Furthermore,
while admitting the problem of non-registration of Service Tax assessees, the Secretary,
Department of Revenue testified before the Committee that till 2010, they had no
means to find out as to which of the assessees were effectively into the system and
underlined the need for building up a good electronic system and engagement of
additional manpower to deal with the problem. The Committee are concerned to note
that though Service Tax was levied with effect from  1 July, 2001, no whole-hearted and
sustained efforts have been made by the Ministry either to build up a good eletronic
system for this purpose and engage the additional manpower. Apparently, the Service
Tax was levied without working out the methodology for its effective implementation
even after having realized the immense revenue potential of Service Tax and its rampant
evasion. The Committee would like to be apprised about the efforts made by the
Dapartment during the last 11 years to ensure that the work of collection of Service
Tax from Banking and other Financial Services does not suffer for want of manpower
and introduction of good electronic system. The Committee further recommend that
the verification of 517 cases be expedited and they be apprised of the same.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 3 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Regarding deployment of sufficient manpower, Department is acutely aware of the
staffing requirements of Service Tax administration. While formulating the Cadre
Restructuring Proposal 2010, the Department has taken into account the existing and
anticipated workload of all the three streams, i.e. Service Tax, Central Excise & Customs
and consequent staff requirements of these streams. The proposal projected the staffing
requirements in various Groups 'A', 'B' & ‘C’ grades of 95168 personnel. The said
proposal was approved with minor changes by the Department of Expenditure in
May, 2011. Thereafter, the proposal was sent to the Department of Personnel & Training,
who after serveral rounds of discussions and written submissions/clarifications by
the CBEC, suggested slashing (without going into the functional requirement of the
Department ) of the projected staff strength by 8300 posts at various levels in March,
2012. DoP&T again raised some questions in August, 2012. The queries mainly pertained
to post-CR structure of IRS (C&CE) and austerity measures taken by the Government.
Reply to these queries was sent to the DoP&T in December, 2012. Meanwhile, the
proposal was submitted to the Hon'ble Finance Minister seeking grant of exemption to
the Cadre Restructuring Proposal from the austerity measures of the Government,
presently in force, as the proposal is a revenue earning proposal that seeks to garner
additional revenue of Rs. 68,000 crore over and above budgetary estimates for the
current fiscal. Hon'ble Finance Minister has not only granted the requisite exemption

14
to the proposal from austerity measures, but also approved the proposal except the
proposal at the level of DC/AC, as agreed upon between the then FM and MoS (PP) on
1.3.2012. In case of DC/AC level, the Hon'ble FM approved creation of additional 568
posts at DC/AC level, over and above 3600 posts agreed upon at Ministerial level on
1.3.2012, to meet the requirement of additional workload (introduction of 24x7 Customs
Clearance Operations, introduction of Negative List of Service etc.) of the Department
generated after March, 2012.
CBEC has already developed and implemented a robust electronic system for
registration of assessees, both in Central Excise and Service Tax. The application is
known as Automation of Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES) and has been rolled
out w.e.f. 23.12.2009 in all the 104 Central Excise, Service Tax Commissionerates and
LTUs. The application provides for online registration of the assessees, which is PAN-
based   and the PAN is verified online with the Income Tax database. In case of Service
Tax, there is no physical verification of premises but the officer verifies the documents
before issuing the Registration Certificate.
The verification report of 725 cases (including 517 cases mentioned above) in
respect of Bangalore Service Tax Commissionerate is as under:
No. of units No. of units located
not existing/ Out of units Out of units located, no. of units not required to
not traceable located, no. of take registration due to threshold limit/not
units registered providing taxable service
593 58 74
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
(a) PAC desired to be apprised about the efforts made by the Department during
the last 11 years to ensure that the work of collection of Service Tax from
Banking and other Financial Services does not suffer for want of manpower
and introduction of good electronic system. The Ministry's response does
not indicate specific details pertaining to the effects in this direction during
this period. However, efforts in recent years to improve staffing  requirements
and operationalise ACES have been elaborated.
(b) As the department has carried out the verification in respect of the cases
pointed out by Audit, the response may be accepted.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
No comments required.
Sd/-
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]

15
Observation/Recommendation
4. Notably, the Government have largely relied on "V oluntary Compliance" for
registration of eligiable service providers. The Committee have been informed that to
make the service  providers aware of the registration, the Department has been running
a media campaign by issuing a number of advertisements in the print/electronic media,
displaying outdoor hoardings, etc. Further, help desks have been set up in the
Commissionerates for answering the tax payers queries and the problems faced by
them. Seminars have been organized in Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata,  Delhi, Ahmedabad,
Hyderabad, Jaipur, Chandigarh and Bangalore. While Voluntary tax compliance is a
laudable objective, the considered view of the Committee is that the results have been
far from encouraging. The Committee feel that with proper focus on non-intrusive but
penetrating methods of collecting data through the instruments like returns and surveys,
the Government would be able to widen the tax base and ensure better tax compliance.
The Committee urge the Ministry to make all out efforts to ensure that while the
Government remain assessee-friendly, tax evaders are dealt with stringently and that
non-compliance becomes a costly proposition. The Committee are also of the opinion
that if need be, measures taken in respect of Central Excise and Customs assessees
also be taken with regard to Service Tax assessees i.e. for registration of eligible BFNs.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 4 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Stringent penal provisions exist to deal with non-compliance. Under section 76 of
the Finance Act, 1994 a penalty of  `100 per day during which the failure to pay service
tax continues or the amount calculated at the rate of 1% per months on the tax due,
whichever is higher, in case of failure to pay the tax due is leviable. Similarly, failure to
take  registration under section 69 of the Act ibid invited penalty of  ` 200 per day of
failure from the due date till the date of actual compliance or Rs. 10,000 whichever is
higher. Further, a provision has been introduced in the Finance Act, 2013 whereby in
cases where a service provider is liable for prosecution and the amount involved is
more than  ` 50 lakhs, he is liable for arrest. Further if he collects service tax and does
not deposit it with the Government and the amount involved is more than ` 50 lakhs,
the offence has been made cognizable.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
With the introduction of provisions relating to prosecution and cognizable offences
vide Finance Act 2013, the laws have become more stringent.
One method of impressing on the public that non-compliance is a costly proposition
would be to issue show causes and take further action as warranted in cases identified
as stop-filers and non-filers through the facility of ACES. Follow-up in this direction
may be monitored stringently .

16
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
No comments required.
Sd/-
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
5. As per the action plan issued in May, 2003 by the Director General of Service Tax,
Mumbai, field surveys had been identified as one of the important mechanisms to
identify and broaden the tax base. The Committee are disappointed that none of the
60 Commissionerates test checked in Audit had fixed any targets for surveys during
2007-08 to 2008-09 and no surveys were conducted in 27 out of 60 Commissionerates.
Out of 32  Commissionerates, where surveys were conducted, in 9 Commissionerates
154 new service providers of BFNs were registered. However, no new service provider
could be registered through surveys for this service in remaining 23 Commissionerates.
In 32 Commissionerates where surveys had taken place, the outcome was not monitored
as prescribed in the DGST circular. Moreover, during the years 2009-10 and 2010-11
although the number of surveys conducted was 113 and 87 respectively, no assessees
were registered thereafter. Again, during the year 2011-12, out of 1003 surveys conducted
only 90 assessees were registered realizing Rs. 0.44 crore only as a Service Tax. The
Committee deplore that field surveys, construed as an important mechanism for widening
the tax net have not been carried out with right earnestness by the Commissionerates.
The Committee are dismayed that the Department was devoid of any mechanism to
assess, monitor and enhance the efficiency of survey operations. Though instructions
have been issued to field formations on 23.11.2011 to create special cell in each
Commissionerates mandated with the task of identifying potential assessees, the
Committee find the reply of the Ministry silent regarding the status of creation of these
cells in all the Commissionerates, the number of cells created so far and the number of
service providers that were brought to the tax net as a result thereof. The Committee
believes that these survey operations, if conducted methodically and efficiently, would
discover new assessees and bring additional tax revenue to the Government. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the present position of creating these cells
Commissionerate-wise and the outcome thereof.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 5 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It may be stated that at the time of initial instructions, the number of taxable services
and number of assessees were less, which increased substantially during subsequent
years. Staff crunch is also one of the main hurdles to implement instructions strictly.
Further, it was apprehended that the extensive field surveys have potential to cause
hardship and harassment to the trade which may lead to allegations against the
departmental officers. The Circular of 2003 issued by the Directorate General of Service
Tax (DGST) was accordingly reconsidered and withdrawn. In supersession of the

17
earlier instructions, the revised instructions (vide F.No. 137/151/2011-Service Tax) dated
23.11.2011 have been issued by CBEC. The Commissionerates have been directed to
create a special cell mandated with the task of identifying potential assessees. The cell
should collect list of service providers from the various service providers' associations,
yellow pages, local publications, advertisements appearing in the newspapers, regional
registration authorities, websites, regulatory bodies, State Government Departments,
Income Tax Department and Reserve Bank of India and identify unregistered service
providers and get them registered. Also surveys in the local markets, malls may be
carried out if deemed necessary.
The present position regarding creation of special cells in the Commissionerate-
wise and the outcome thereof is enclosed as Annexure-'A'. For ease of reference,
Chief Commissionerate-wise details of creation of special cells and outcome is as
under:
Sl. Chief No. of Special Total No. of assessees Out of (iv), No. of
No. Commissionerate Cells created so brought to tax net as assessees falling
Zone far a result thereof under the BFNs
(registered) category
1. Ahmedabad 2 860 4
2. Bangalore 5 25 0
3. Bhopal 2 6 2
4. Bhubaneshwar 2 80 0
5. Kolkata 8 150 1
6. Chandigarh 6 176 46
7. Chennai 12 26 3
8. Cochin 5 44 44
9. Coimbatore 11 368 24
10. Hyderabad 8 96 51
11. Jaipur 2 352 0
12. Lucknow 11 1448 15
13. Meerut 6 220 219
14. Mysore 3 78 4
15. Mumbai-zone-I 4 223 9
16. Mumbai-zone-II 1 0 0
17. Nagpur 5 102 0
18. New Delhi 9 47777 1004
19. Ranchi 6 184 11
20. Pune 3 9 5
21. Shillong 5 227 5
22. V adodara 6 70 1
23. Vishakhapatnam 13 489 360
Total 135 53010 1808

18
In pursuance of Board's instruction to field offices vide F. No. 137/151/2011-ST
dated 23.11.2011, a total of 135 special cells, to identify the potential assessees, have
been created till date. As a result of which, 53010 assessees have been brought to tax
net (registered) and out of these assessees, 1808 belong to the category of Banking
and Other Financial Services.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
Special Cell is yet to be created in some Commissionerates (Annexure-A). It is an
ongoing process and periodical monitoring is to be ensured. In the CC's jurisdiction of
Bhopal and Pune, Special Cells have identified only 6 & 9 assessees respectively.
Chennai having 12 cells has identified 26 assessees and Mumbai Zone-II has identified
none. Reasons may be analysed for such poor performance.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
Regarding creation of Special Cells and assessees brought to tax net thereof, reasons
for modest performance of 4 Chief Commissionerates Zones, i.e., Bhopal, Pune, Chennai
and Mumbai Zone-II, are as follows:
Bhopal Chief Commissionerate Zone
It is reported that a substantial progress has been made in the zone since the
furnishing of earlier figures. The further progress and present position of creating
special cell is as below:
Commissionerate No. of special No. of assessee No. of assessee
cell created brought to tax net registered under BFN
Bhopal 03 112 0
Indore 01 0 1
Raipur 01 01 1
Total 05 113 2
Pune Chief Commissionerate Zone
It is reported that during the material period, surveys were conducted by all the four
Commissionerates falling under the Zone for verification of records of various assessees
to find out potential assessees coming under service tax net. Special Cells were created
in three Commissionerates. However, due to staff shortage, sufficient manpower could
not be deployed for survey and in special cells in all the Commissionerates. Further,
during the survey, it was also noticed that many of the Banking and Financial Institutions
falling under the Zone were Centrally registered under Mumbai and other
Commissionerates.
Necessary instructions and guidelines are issued by the Commissionerates to the
field formations to conduct surveys methodologically and efficiently. They have also
been asked to keep watch for identification of the service providers from various
Service Provider Associations, yellow pages, and local publications, advertisement

19
appearing in the Newspapers, website, regulatory bodies, State Government
Departments and Reserve Bank of India.
Chennai Chief Commissionerate Zone
The Chennai Chief Commissionerate has reported that the Commissionerates
administering Service Tax of the Zone has conducted a detailed survey over the
assessees who are providing the taxable service and brought into tax net about
26 assessees providing the said service of Banking & Other Financial Service. Hence,
there is no further action pending on the subject matter and accordingly no further
comments in this regard.
Mumbai Chief Commissionerate Zone-II
It is reported that as per the instructions issued on the subject, a Special Cell has
been created in the Service Tax Division of Raigad Commissionerate.
During the survey conducted, it was found that the most of the Banking and other
Financial Services providers in the jurisdiction have their main office located in Mumbai
City having Centralized Registrations.
In view of the above, number of assessees brought to tax net under Banking &
other financial services category was reported as NIL. Presently, there are only 126
such service providers who have already obtained registration and no un-registered
service providers in respect of BFN Services have been noticed in the Chief
Commissionerate Zone.
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX. 7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
6. The Committee find that a large number of returns for Service Tax by BFNs were
either not received or received late by the Department. During the period September
2004 to March 2009, about six per cent of the returns were received late and 14 per cent
of the returns were not received at all. Surprisingly, the Commissionerates had not
followed any monitoring mechanism to ascertain the reasons for non-submission of
returns. The Committee note that amongst the returns not received, 301 service
providers, whose annual receipts had exceeded ` four lakh during the year 2005-06 had
not submitted the returns for the year 2006-07. Further, 440 service providers whose
annual receipts had exceeded ` eight lakh during the year 2006-07 had not submitted
the annual returns for the year 2007-08. Similarly, 513 service providers whose annual
receipts had exceeded ` ten lakh during the year 2007-08 had not submitted the returns
for the year 2008-09. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the Department
had not initiated any action to ascertain the reasons for not filing annual returns. The
Committee further find that the Department had not levied penalty on defaulting
assessees which constituted about 97 percent of the total amount leviable
(` 4.50 crore). Apparently, the defaulting assessees are either allowed to go scot-free

20
or let off with lighter punishment. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry devise a foolproof system so as to ensure that all the BFN assessees, taxable
under Service Tax Rules file their returns regularly. The Committee should be informed
within 3 months about the system so desired. Further, defaulting assessees be suitably
penalized to act as a deterrent.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 6 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per Service Tax Rules, 1994, every assessee is under obligation to file their
ST-3 returns periodically on the given dates. On failure to do so, the penal provisions
are provided in the law. Further, to verify proper discharge of Service Tax liability by
the assessee, the same is verifiable through scrutiny of ST-3 returns in terms of
guidelines issued under Return Scrutiny Manual.
The Department has undertaken measures to educate and promote the tax payer for
discharging their tax liabilities and filing the return timely by use of print and electronic
media, as well as by conducting seminars at the field level to educate the tax-payer for
filing of returns. Further, the jurisdictional officers are closely monitoring the late
filing/non-filing of returns by the BFN's. Information about stop-filers and non-filers,
service-wise, can be generated from the Database. A facility is provided in ACES to
generate a report on assessee-wise details so that the non-filers of ST-3 returns can be
identified. DG Systems has also circulated a process note requesting the Commissioners
to make use of this facility. DG Systems has also prepared Commissionerate-wise lists
of stop-filers and non-filers of ST-3 returns for the year 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12
and sent to all the Commissionerates for taking necessary action. In the event of any
default, persuasive action is initiated, failing which they resort to action available
under the Act to collect the late fee as well as to initiate penal action on the defaulters.
Further, for monitoring of stop-filers, the field formations were directed to identify
the non/stop-filers of ST-3 returns. A special exercise was undertaken in 2011-12 in
which the field formations were directed to identify non/stop-filers as on 31.03.2011
and take necessary corrective action by way of ascertaining the reasons for non-filing
of ST-3 returns. It was revealed that some assessees did not file ST-3 returns due to
reasons such as turnover below exemption limit, closure of business, opting for
centralised registration but failed to surrender other registrations etc.
As a result of this exercise, around 25000 assessees started filing ST-3 returns
regularly and approximately ` 133 crores were recovered from them by way of late fee/
penalty, interest and service tax.
It may further be stated that in the Budget 2013, the Government has introduced-
Service Tax Voluntary Compliance Encouragement Scheme 2013, according to which,
non-filers have been given an opportunity to make payment of Service Tax dues under
declaration as per the provisions of sub-section (1) of Section 97 of the Finance Act,
2013.

21
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
(a) As details of the foolproof system sought by PAC have not been furnished,
the Ministry may clarify on this aspect.
(b) Field Commissionerates should have the authority to extract lists of non-
filers and stop-filers in ACES and should not need to rely each time on DG
(System) to forward the list to them. From the response of the Ministry, it
appears that the Commissionerates have the report generating facility only in
respect of non-filers but not stop-filers.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
(a) As long as returns had to be filed manually, keeping track of non/stop-filers
was difficult. Audit's study appears to have been in the period when returns
had to be field manually. Vide notification 43/2011-Service Tax dated
25.8.2011, w.e.f. 1-10-2011, all returns are filed electronically. This itself is
foolproof inasmuch as there is an electronic trail of whether or not a return
has been filed. This itself has enabled the department to keep a better track of
stop/non-filers. Thereafter it is a question of monitoring and follow-up, subject
to constraints of staff.
(b) The facility of generating lists is not limited to non-filers. The usage of the
phrase "non-filers" in the earlier reply was referring to assessees who were
not filing returns. It should not be interpreted to mean that lists can be
generated only of non-filers and not stop-filers. It must be also understood
that there is no standard interpretation of these two phrases. Every non-filer
is, in one sense, a stop-filer and vice versa.
The DG (Systems) has modified the existing Assessee-wise detailed report under
Report Module with enhanced features. In this report, jurisdiction-wise
(Commissionerate/Division/Range) and financial year-wise details of Assessees are
given viz., REG No., Name, Address, e-mail ID, Date of Registration, Return filing
status (filed/not filed), Date of filing of return (original/revised) and period of return.
Stop-Filer is one who has filed return atleast once in ACES and has stopped filing
thereafter. This means for a particular return filing period, one may be both a Non-Filer
and a Stop-Filer. It will  now be possible to generate list of Non-Filers at the Range
level. Since the date of filing of the return is shown in the Assessee-wise detailed
report, the list of Late-Filers can also be ascertained from the data. By importing the
data from ACES in excel format to the personal folder of the officer in ACES or to
another computer and by analyzing the same, list of Stop-Filers/Late-Filers can be
culled out by the Range officers without depending on the Directorate General of
Systems.
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]

22
Observation/Recommendation
7. The Committee further observe that 7 assessees in Nagpur Commissionerate had
not filed their Service Tax returns but they had continued to provide services which
were subjectable to tax during the period of non-filing. This resulted in non-payment
of Service Tax of  ` 20.33 lakh and interest of  ` 4.97 lakh. It was submitted before the
Committee that protective Show Cause Notices have been issued on 13.10.2011 in
respect of all the said 7 cases and that instructions have been issued to field formations
on 14th and 27th July, 2011 to create special cell in each Commissionerate mandated
with the task of identifying potential assessees and stop filers. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that field Commissionerates should periodically monitor the cases where
assessees have stopped filing returns and the Committee be apprised by the Ministry
about the latest position with regard to Show Cause Notices issued, within 03 months
of the presentation of this Report.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 7 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The 7 protective demand-cum-Show Cause Notices all dated 13.10.2011 had been
issued to the assessee and are lying in the Call Book. It is further reported that, the para
was not found acceptable for which detailed reasoning was provided to Audit. It was
found that in most instances, value related to amounts like interest on loans and
investment, profit on securitization, risk mitigation charges, profit from sale of vehicles,
etc. had been taken into account, which do not form part of the taxable value under the
Service Tax category of Banking & Financial Services. In one instance, the value was
found to be below the threshold limit, and hence not liable for payment of Service Tax.
As regards monitoring of stop-filers, the field formations were directed to identify
the non/stop-filers of ST-3 returns. A special exercise was undertaken in 2011-12 in
which the field formations were directed to identify non/stop-filers as on 31.3.2011 and
take necessary corrective action by way of ascertaining the reasons for non-filing of
ST-3 returns. It was revealed that some assessees did not file ST-3 returns due to
reasons such as turnover below exemption limit, closure of business, opting for
centralised registration but failed to surrender other registrations etc.
As a result of this exercise, around 25000 assessees started filing ST-3 returns
regularly and approximately  ` 133 crores were recovered from them by way of late fee/
penalty interest and service tax.
Further, in the Budget 2013, the Government has introduced the Service Tax V oluntary
Compliance Encouragement Scheme 2013, according to which, non-filers have been
given an opportunity to make payment of Service Tax dues under declaration as per
the provisions of sub-Section (1) of Section 97 of the Finance Act, 2013.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
The Ministry may clarify about the periodicity and method (through MTRs or
otherwise) whereby it proposes to monitor the action by field Commissionerates in
respect of stop-filers. Though the Ministry has elaborated measures recently taken,

23
these appear to be a one-time exercise rather than ensuring a system to monitor
periodically the progress.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
It is not a one-time exercise. In the current financial year, the progress is reviewed
regularly by the Commissioners and monitored on a quarterly basis by the Ministry.
After the filing of returns electronically was made compulsory with effect from October
2011, there has been a relatively better monitoring of stop/non-filers. CBEC has, from
time to time, issued instructions in this regard.
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M.No.238/03/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
8. Every individual liable to pay Service Tax has to assess and voluntarily pay the
tax. Further, half-yearly returns are to be furnished to the Department. An assessee
failing to furnish timely returns is liable to pay a penalty subject to a maximum of
`1000. The information furnished by the Ministry relating to BFN for the period
September 2004 to March 2009, reveals that out of 2,37,593 returns due during the said
period as many as 18,684 were not received. The Committee further note that out of
` 60.32 lakh of penalties levied, penalties of  ` 25.22 lakh has not been recovered. While
emphasizing the need for effective monitoring of Service Tax returns and timely recovery
of penalties imposed, the Committee would like to be informed about the current
position with regard to recovery of outstanding penalties of ` 25.22 lakh, and the
efforts made by the Ministry to ensure timely recovery of outstanding dues within
03 months of the presentation of this Report. The Committee also strongly express the
need for taking stringent action against the defaulters and also have a re-look at the
penalty provisions as the present penalty is insufficient to act as a deterrent with
regard to non-submission of returns.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 8 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
With regard to recovery of outstanding penalties of ` 25.22 lakh due to delayed/
non submission of ST-3 returns, ` 8.28 lakh has already been recovered and in rest of
the cases necessary action has been initiated.
Regarding re-look at the penalty provisions, the maximum late fee for non-filing of
returns under Section 70 of the Finance Act, 1994 has been increased to ` 20,000
w.e.f. 08.04.2011 for non-submission of returns in time.
Further, in the Budget 2013, the Government has introduced the Service Tax V oluntary
Compliance Encouragement Scheme, 2013, according to which, non-filers have been
given an opportunity to make payment of Service Tax dues under declaration as per
the provisions of sub-Section (1) of Section 97 of the Finance Act, 2013.

24
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
The Ministry may apprise the PAC about number of cases in which action has been
initiated based on the revamped provisions on penalty (Finance Act 2011). It may also
clarify whether this is being monitored through MTRs or otherwise.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
Action has been initiated based on the revamped provisions on penalty ( vide
Finance Act, 2011) against late filers of ST-3 returns under Section 70 read with Rule 7C
of the Service Tax Rules 2. Zone-wise number of cases in which action has been
initiated, report for the years 2011-12, 2012-13 & 2013-14 (upto August, 2013) is enclosed
as Annexure B.
Late filing of ST-3 returns is monitored through MTR on monthly basis and also
through ACES.
Sd/-
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
9. The Committee are shocked to learn that the vital database of the actual number
of BFNs filing returns and those who have failed to do so, is not available with the
Department. The Committee was informed that such data base is not being developed
by the Directorate General of Service Tax. Further, the registered assessees who were
not filing Service Tax returns are issued Show Cause Notices. Obviously, the Department
cannot function effectively and monitor their collection of Service Tax from BFNs in
the absence of vital database. The Committee would, therefore, urge the Department of
Revenue to put in place an effective mechanism to facilitate monitoring of the progress
of revenue receipts and processing of returns on a periodical basis.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 9 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The data base of assessees who have filed/not filed ST-3 returns in ACES, including
those pertaining to BFNs, is available in the Directorate of Systems.
Further, the Customs and Central Excise Department, Principal Controller of Accounts,
Controller General of Accounts and the Reserve Bank of India with the participation of
28 commercial banks introduced the Electronic Accounting System in Excise and Service
Tax (EASIEST) in April 2007 with the GAR 7 challan. This system provides for the
facility for online verificaton of the status of tax payment using a unique Challan
Identification Number (CIN).
In order to develop a vital database, the Directorate General of Service Tax (DGST)
as a one-time exercise, had asked the field formations to approach RBI office under

25
their jurisdiction and obtain the list of NBFCs registered with them. Accordingly, the
list of NBFCs obtained was compared with NBFC already registered with the Department.
For non-registered NBFCs, appropriate action was taken by the field formations for
getting them registered.
Further, in the Budget 2013, the Government has introduced the Service Tax V oluntary
Compliance Encouragement Scheme 2013, according to which, non-filers have been
given an opportunity to make payment of Service Tax dues under declaration as per
the provisions of Sub-Section (1) of Section 97 of the Finance Act, 2013.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
(a) DG (Sys.) has the data of assessees filing/not filing returns through ACES.
The same should however, be available with DGST on a periodic basis also as
DGST is the authority responsible inter alia, for monitoring the collection of
revenue receipts which would involve aspects such as monitoring action
taken in respect of non-filers etc. In the alternative, if this task of monitorng at
an All India level. such activities has been assigned to any other authority,
this may be clarified.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
It is reported that Lists of non-filers/stop filers are being given by the DG (Systems)
to DGST on regular basis. Moreover, DGST has also been given direct access to EDW
Data Base. Using this, DGST can prepare the list of non-filers/stop filers of ST-3
returns. Further, DGST can also be given access to ACES Data Base on request.
Further, with adequate manpower and infrastructural support along with proper software,
DGST would be able to monitor number of stop filers/non-filers at all India level.
Sd/-
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M.No. 238/03/2013-CX. 7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
12. As per Rule 5(2) of Service Tax Rules, 1994, every assessee shall furnish to the
superintendent of Central Excise at the time of filing his return for the first time, a list of
books of accounts maintained by the assessee in relation to Service Tax Despite clear
statutory provision, the Committee note that 26 per cent of service providers had not
given the list of books of accounts maintained by them. During the period from April
2007 to March, 2009, in 10 Commissionerates, not a single assessee had submitted the
list of books of accounts at the time of filing of returns for the first time in respect of
BFN. The Committee are surprised that the Commissionerates did not pursue these
cases to ascertain the reasons for non-submission of these details. The Ministry
attributed staff crunch and lack of proper training to the available staff  of Service Tax
Department as the main hurdles in the implementation of the Service Tax Rules. Since
effective scrutiny of relevant books of accounts is imperative for ensuring proper
assessment of Service Tax, the Committee urge the Ministry to the urgent measures to

26
augment the staff strength and also to them the Service Tax staff for developing a
better understanding of the various books of accounts maintained by BFN assessees.
The Committee should like to be apprised of the necessary follow-up action taken in
this direction and the outcome thereof. Further, as regards the strategy formulated to
obtain list of books of accounts alongwith the returns from defaulters, the Department
reported that non-compliance with the Rule 5(2) of the Service Tax Rules 1994 invites
penal action and a letter has been issued to field formations to ensure compliance to
the said Rule. The Committee would like to be apprised about the number of defaulters
prosecuted so far as a result thereof.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 12 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The staffing requirements of Service Tax administration is a prominent area of concern
for the Department. While formulating the Cadre Restructuring Proposal 2010, the
Department has taken into account the existing and anticipated workload of all the three
streams, i.e., Service Tax, Central Excise & Customs and consequent staff requirements
of these streams. The proposal projected the staffing requirements in various Groups 'A',
'B' & ‘C’ grades of 95168 personnel. The said proposal was approved with minor changes
by the Department of Expenditure in May, 2011. Thereafter, the proposal was sent to the
Department of Personnel & Training, who after several round of discussions and written
submissions/clarifications by the CBEC, suggested slashing (without going into the
functional requirement of the Department) of the projected staff strength by 8300 posts
at various levels in March, 2012. DoP&T again raised some questions in August, 2012.
The queries mainly pertained to post—CR structure of IRS (C&CE) and austerity measures
taken by the Government. Reply to these queries was sent to the DoP&T in December,
2012. Meanwhile, the proposal was submitted to the Hon'ble Finance Minister seeking
grant of exemption to the Cadre Restructuring Proposal from the austerity measures of
the Government, presently, in force, as the proposal is a revenue earning proposal that
seeks to garner additional revenue of ` 68,000 crore over and above budgetary estimates
for the current fiscal. Hon'ble Finance Minister has not only granted the requisite
exemption to the proposal from austerity measures, but also approved the proposal,
except the proposal at the level of DC/AC, as agreed upon between the then FM and
MoS (PP) on 1.3.2012. In case of DC/AC level, the Hon'ble FM approved creation of
additional 568 posts at DC/AC level, over and above 3600 posts agreed upon at Ministerial
level on 1.3.2012, to meet the requirement of additional workload (introduction of 24x7
Customs Clearance Operations, introduction of Negative List of Services etc.) of the
Department generated after March, 2012.
As regards training, due emphasis is being placed on training of officers, both in-
house and through the Training Academy and the regional training institutes. Specific
training was imparted, on financial analysis, in collaboration with the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India, in October 2012 in New Delhi. Similar training has
been organized on a smaller scale in various Commissionates.
As regards defaulters, non-compliance under Rule 5(2) of Service Tax Rules, 1994
invites penal action under the provisions of Finance Act, 1994, as amended. Penal action

27
has been initiated in the matter. Till date, 77 Show Cause Notices have been adjudicated
imposing penalty amounting to ` 2,54,500/- which has been fully recovered.
Further, in the Ministry's Advance Action Taken Notes (ATN) submitted to the
Hon'ble PAC vide letter F.No. 238/03/2013-CX-7 dated 17th June, 2013, data regarding
non-filing of List of Books of Account was submitted. The report in respect of
2438 cases pointed out by Audit where List of Books of Accounts were not submitted
at the time of filing the service tax return for the first time depicted that 110 assessees
have taken Centralised registration and in 849 cases, proceedings such as issuance of
Show Cause Notices, persuasion etc. were in progress.
In this regard, it is reported that the verification/investigation in respect of
110 cases of centralised registration and 849 cases under investigation has been
completed and the revised report of 2438 cases pointed out by Audit where List of
Books of Accounts were not submitted at the time of filing the service tax return for the
first time, is as under:
No. of cases where Cases where details Registration Show Cause Proceedings
details of List of of List of Books of surrendered/ Notices issued initiated
Books of Accounts not Accounts has now units and
received at the time of been received closed down subsequently
filing first return adjudicated
2305* 2092 6 77 130
*The Audit has originally pointed out 2438 assessees who have not submitted the List of Books of
Accounts. However as reported earlier, the Belgaum Commissionerate has informed that out of
158 cases pointed out by the Audit, in respect of Gulbarga Division, inadvertently 111 cases were
shown instead of 13 cases and in respect of Hubli Divisions, 47 cases were shown instead of
12. Hence, in total 133 (98+35) cases were inadvertently shown which were actually not existing.
Out of 2305 (2438-133) cases where List of Books of Accounts was not received at
the time of filing first return, in 2092 cases, i.e., in 90.7 percent of the cases, the List of
Books of Accounts have now been received whereas in 6 cases, either registration has
been surrendered or units have been closed down and in remaining 130 cases necessary
proceedings have been initiated in the concerned Commissionerate.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
Data on number of cases in which prosecution has been initiated since introduction
of provision for prosecution in 2011 is yet to be furnished.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
Data on number of cases in which prosecution has been initiated since introduction
of provision for prosecution for the number of defaulters prosecuted (upto August,
2013) for violation of Rule 5(2) of Service Tax Rules, 1004 may be treated as NIL as all
the zones/LTUs have furnished NIL report.
It may be noted that Service Tax Rule 5(2) which was introduced in the year 2008
and put an obligation on the part of the assessee to furnish List of Books of Accounts
to the Superintendent of Central Excise, while Section 89 was introduced subsequently
in 2011 without any retrospective effect. Further, the provisions  of Section 89(1)(c)

28
specify that-failure to supply any information which the assessee is required to supply
under this Chapter or Rules made thereunder, is an offence. Thus, C&AC appears to
have understood that contravention of Rule 5(2) is an offence under Section 89(1)(c).
However, after the introduction of Section 89, the Board has issued a Circular vide
letter F. No. 354/45/2011-TRU dated 12.5.2011 where under para 8 it has been clarified
that—"Clause (c) of Section 89(1) of Finance Act, 1994, is based on similar provision in
the Central Excise Law. It should be noted that offence in relation to maintenance of
false Books of Accounts or failure to supply required information or supplying of false
information, should be in material particulars have bearing on the tax liability. Mere
expression of opinions shall not be covered by the said clause. Supplying false
information, in response to summons, will also be covered under this provision".
The matter has been examined and Ministry is of the view that if an assessee is
substantially complying with the provisions of Finance Act, 1994 and Rules made
thereunder but contravenes the provisions of Rule 5(2) of Service Tax Rules, 1994,
then in such cases penalty under Section 77 is to be imposed. Prosecution for
contraventions of Rule 5(2) will be launched only in cases where they have bearing on
the tax liability. Thus, cases of contravention of Rule 5(2) will not fall under Section
89(1)(c) of Chapter V of the Finance Act, 1994 since they do not have bearing on the tax
liability. Moreover, Nil reports have been received from all the Zones/LTUs.
In view of the above, the Hon'ble PAC is requested to reconsider the point as there may
not be cases of prosecution on account of mere failure to furnish List of Books of Accounts.
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
13. The Committee further find that there were 110 cases of wrong availment of
exemption or abatement during 2009-10 and 91 cases during 2010-11. The amount of
Service Tax involve therein is ` 339.47 crore and ` 250.07 crore respectively. The
Committee are concerned to note that only  ` 10.53 crore and ` 20.23 crore respectively
have been recovered by the Department. Further, zone-wise details as received from
the Ministry indicates that maximum number of wrong availment of cases have been
noticed in the Kolkata zone. While 27 cases during 2009-10 and
16 cases during 2010-11 involving Service Tax of  ` 157.64 crore and ` 204.85 crore
respectively were noticed in Delhi zone, out of which only ` 0.0019 crore has been
recovered during the year 2009-10. Similarly, 64 instances of undervaluation with short
payment of Service Tax of  ` 53.80 crore was detected in the Audit. The Committee are
concerned to note that the entire process involved has resulted in locking up of
substantial revenue for the years 2009-10 and 2010-11. The Committee, therefore, urge
the Government to revisit the extant provisions of Service Tax law and the rules framed
thereunder so as to ensure that the Service Tax dues are collected effectively and
within the given time-frame.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 13 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

29
Action Taken
The assessees are required to pay the service tax due by the 5th/6th of the following
month. To ensure that the dues are collected effectively and within the given time
frame, there are provisions for acting on intelligence, doing audit and scrutiny of
returns. These requisite tools available to the department are based on the principles
of due process of law and principles of natural justice.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
Action plan to revisit the extant provisions of Service Tax law and the rules framed
thereunder is awaited.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
Adequate provisions already exist for effective and timely payment of duty. Section
68 of the Finance Act read with Rule 6A lays down the conditions with respect to
payment of duty. There are provisions with respect to late payment of duty, interest
and penalty. In order to deal sternly with defaulters, there are provisions for provisional
attachment of property, arrest and prosecution. It must be borne in mind that w.e.f.
16.7.2001, section 70 of the Finance Act provides for self-assessment. In taxation
statutes over the years there has been a move towards self-assessment by the tax
payer and audit based compliance verification. Nevertheless, at the time of the Budget,
a review of existing legal provisions is always undertaken.
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
14. In terns of Rule 4 of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 credit of Service Tax paid on
any input service is allowed to a provider of taxable service. The Committee notice
incorrect availment and utilization of cenvat credit totaling ` 105.30 crore by providers
of banking and financial services in 75 cases including interest of ` 6.26 crore. The
Committee have been apprised that in 46 cases involving ` 52.59 crore, proceedings
have been initiated by issuing Show Cause Notices to the defaulting service providers
and 8 cases involving ` 5.47 crore are pending investigation. The Ministry has not
submitted the reasons for allowing Cenvat Credit incorrectly. Furthermore, in cases
where the Ministry has differed from Audit, no justification has been adduced before
the Committee. Merely issuing Show Cause Notices cannot be construed as action
taken by the Ministry. The Ministry needs to explain to the satisfaction of the Committee
the reasons for the same and also the initiatives taken to ensure that all such leakages
are plugged and that there are no such recurrences.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 14 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]

30
Action Taken
This observation is with regard to cases of incorrect availment and utilization of
CENV AT credit. Consolidated list of 24 cases, in which Audit objection was not accepted
by the Department, detailing justifications/reasons for non-acceptance of Audit
objection is enclosed as Annexure 'J'.
Nevertheless, it is clarified that in the era of self-assessment, the assessee avails
credit on his own and declares only the total amount of credit availed and utilized in the
returns. In case a default is observed by the department, due action is taken.
The cases of wrong availment of CENVA T credit are generally detected at the time
of scrutiny of ST-3 Returns, Audit or during Anti-evasion inquiry, and corrective
measures are initiated immediately. The Department has to follow the principles of
natural justice and hence it is mandatory to issue a SCN, grant a hearing, recover
wrongly availed credits and impose penalties only after a reasoned order. Hence the
Department has no option but to initiate corrective action by issuing a SCN.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
Out of 24, one is admitted and one is partially accepted.
Details in respect of each item and further remarks if any, are given in the respective
Annexure.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
Ministry's further comments on Audit's vetting comments on justifications/reasons
given for non-acceptance of Audit objection in the 24 cases mentioned in enclosed
Annexure 'J' are given in the last Column of the said Annexure.
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX. 7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
15. The Committee further find that as per the provisions, the assessee was liable to
restrict the utilization of cenvat credit to 20 per cent. of the Service Tax payable during
the period 2006-07 and 2007-08. Out of the 24 months in 2006-07 and 2007-08, the
assessee paid Service Tax of ` 1198.04 lakh in 12 months. While the utilization of
cenvat credit to make these payments should have been restricted to ` 239.61 lakh
(20 per cent.) the actual utilization was ` 626.65 lakh. This led to excess utilization of
credit of  ` 387.04 lakh which was recoverable with interest of ` 95.84 lakh. The assessee
also did not maintain separate accounts for receipt, consumption and inventory of
input services used for taxable exempted services. The Committee have been informed
that the field formations at the time of scrutiny of returns and while auditing the
records of the party take necessary measures to stop revenue leakages on this count.
The Committee seek explanation as to how the mechanism failed in these cases which
resulted in a considerable loss of revenue to the Government. The Department has
reported that SCN of  ` 5.52 crore (period 2005-06 to September 2009) including

31
` 387.04 lakh had been issued in March, 2010, which is pending adjudication. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the latest position in this regard.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 15 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is reported that a Show Cause Notice involving an amount of  ` 5.52 crore (period
2005-06 to September 2009) including ` 387.04 lakh raised by the C&AG had been
issued in March, 2010, which is pending adjudication.
It is further reported that neither EA-2000 Audit nor detailed scrutiny was done for
the period 2006-07 to 2007-08 of M/s Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation
Ltd. due to acute shortage of staff, as existing staff in the Audit Section and Divisions
is not adequate. Presently, there are only 3 Divisions to look after more than 1 lakh
assessees. Further, shortage of staff in Audit Section has also been acknowledged by
C&AG in their report and they feel that at least 4 to 5 times more staff is required to
cope up the audit work in the Mumbai ST-I Commissionerate.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
(a) Result of adjudication is awaited.
(b) The adequacy of norms fixed for selection of units/assessees for detailed
scrutiny and for audit may need to be re-examined even while recognizing the
manpower constraint.
Ministry's further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
(a) It is reported that a Show Cause Notice dated 12.3.2010 issued to
M/s Infrastructure Development Finance Co. Ltd. for Rs. 5, 51, 62, 731/- (which
includes an amount of  ` 387.04 lakh raised by the C&AG) is still pending for
adjudication. Further, it is also informed that a Personal Hearing (PH) was
fixed on 06.08.2013, however the assessee did not turn up for the hearing.
Subsequently, another PH has been fixed for 09.10.2013.
(b) This process has already been initiated.
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M.No. 238/03/2013-CX. 7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
16. Further, failure to consider the interest on cash credit and overdraft facility
which were exempted from Service Tax had resulted in short-payment of  ` 515.56 lakh
for the period from April 2008 to March 2009 which was recoverable with interest of
` 47.69 lakh. The SCN dated 09.02.2010 issued for the period 2008-09 is pending
adjudication. Again, incorrect reflection of cenvat credit in ST-3 returns of M/s Citi
Finance Consumer Finance India Limited in Delhi ST Commissionerate for the period
April 2006 to September 2006 resulted in excess availment of Cenvat credit to the extent
of  rupees two crore. Show Cause Notice dated 20.10.11 for a demand of ` 199.99 lakh

32
has been issued to the assessee. Having observed that in a large number of cases the
basic prerequisite i.e. proper maintenance of records is wanting, the Committee would
like the Ministry to enumerate the concrete measures taken by them to ensure
compliance with the instructions regarding maintenance of records.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 16 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Rule 5 of Service Tax Rules, 1994, provides for maintenance of records. The service
tax provider can maintain the records as required under any other law and the same are
acceptable for the purpose of service tax also. As per provision in rule 5(2), introduced
vide Notification No. 45/2007-S. Tax dt. 28.12.2007, 'every assessee shall furnish to the
Superintendent of Central Excise at the time of filing the return for the first time or the
31st of January, 2008, whichever is later, a list of records as mentioned above'. This
provision gives an option to the assessee either to submit the list of records at the time
of filing of the return for the first time or by the 31st day of January, 2008, whichever is
later.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
The measures taken by the Ministry/department to ensure compliance with the
instructions regarding maintenance of records need to be furnished as directed by the
PAC.
Ministry's further Action taken on the vetting comments of Audit
Since statutory provisions were incorporated, separate instructions were not issued.
During the course of compliance verification, the records maintained by the assessee
are verified.
Sd/-
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/2013-CX.7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
17. Section 73A of the Finance Act, 1994 (as amended w.e.f. 18th April, 2006) provides
that any person who is liable to pay Service Tax and has collected any amount in
excess of the Service Tax assessed should without fail, pay the amount so collected to
the credit of the Government. The Committee find that during the years 2007-08 to
2010-11, there have been 2111 cases in which service providers have collected the
Service Tax to the tune of  ` 1134.82 crore but had not deposited the same in the
Exchequer. During the same period, recovery of  ` 560.07 crore involving 1343 cases
has been effected. Further, out of the 2111 cases, 1065 cases pending realization are
under litigation and the revenue involved is to the extent of ` 1043.20 crore. The
Committee are perturbed to note that the amount involved in the SCNs issued constitute
nearly 90% of the total amount that was collected by the service providers from the

33
consumers but not deposited with exchequer. The Committee desire that the adjudication
process be expedited and recoveries be made at the earliest.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 17 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is reported that all out efforts are being made to liquidate the pendency of
adjudication cases and recover the amount at the earliest. In this regard, necessary
instructions have been issued to the field formations to expedite the adjudication
process.
Further, Board vide F. No. 137/155/2012-Service Tax dated 21.12.2012 has stated
"Adjudication: Adjudication pendency was reviewed, especially the cases pending
for more than 1 year and cases involving more than ` 1 crore. Member, Service Tax
emphasized the need for Chief Commissioners to closely monitor the disposal at all
levels and fix targets at each level. The targets would be different for combined
Commissionerates and exclusive Service Tax Commissionerates. For the latter, a
suggested target was 10-15 per month for Commissioners, 20 per  month for ADCs and
40-50 per month for DCs/ACs. Chief Commissioners were advised to monitor, officer-
wise, every fortnight and to ensure that targets were met each month. The progress
would be reviewed in the first week of January, 2013".
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
The progress in adjudication and recoveries as reviewed on first week of January,
2013 may be furnished.
Ministry's further Action taken on the vetting comments of Audit
Substantial progress has been made in adjudications and recoveries. Detailed report
will follow.
Sd/-
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX. 7 dt. 5.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
18. The Committee note that there is a lack of perspective planning in the matter of
deployment of staff on such a vital source of revenue collection viz., Service Tax.
Taking into consideration the amount of revenue collected from Service Tax and Central
Excise during the year 2011-12, the Committee are surprised to find that in contrast to
the deployment of nearly 40000 officers for excise, only 4000 to 5000 officers have been
deployed for Service Tax stream and that too after withdrawing from the Central Excise
stream. Apparently, Service Tax wing has been working for more than 15 years, with no
staff of its own. The Committee are dismayed to note the helplessness expressed both
by the Finance Secretary and Chairman, Central Board of Excise and Customs in this
regard especially when, Ministry of Finance is itself one of the nodal authorities for
examining and sanctioning requisite staff to Ministries. The Committee feel that the

34
staff requirement be examined on priority basis by the concerned authorities in order
to ensure that the Service Tax Collections, which have increased phenomenally from
` 407 crore in 1994-95 to  ` 97,389 crore in 2011-12 does not suffer for want of human
resource.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 18 of 79th Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Department is well aware of the staffing requirements of Service Tax administration.
While formulating the Cadre Restructuring Proposal 2010, the Department has taken
into account the existing and anticipated workload of all the three streams, i.e.,
Service Tax, Central Excise and Customs and consequent staff requirements of these
streams. The proposal projected the staffing requirements in various group 'A', 'B' &
‘C’ grades of 95168 personnel. The said proposal was approved with minor changes
by the Department of Expenditure in May, 2011. Thereafter, the Proposal was sent to
the Department of Personnel & Training, who after several rounds of discussions
and written submissions/clarifications by the CBEC, suggested slashing (without
going into the functional requirement of the Department) of the projected staff strength
by 8300 posts at various levels in March, 2012. DoP&T again raised some questions
in August, 2012. The queries mainly pertained to post-CR structure of IRS (C&CE)
and austerity measures taken by the Government. Reply to these queries was sent to
the DoP&T in December, 2012. Meanwhile, the proposal was submitted to the Hon'ble
Finance Minister seeking grant of exemption to the Cadre Restructuring Proposal
from the austerity measures of the Government, presently in force, as the proposal is
a revenue earning proposal that seeks to garner additional revenue of  ` 68,000 crore
over and above budgetary estimates for the current fiscal. Hon'ble Finance Minister
has not only granted the requisite exemption to the proposal from austerity measures,
but also approved the proposal, except the proposal at the level of DC/AC, as agreed
upon between the then FM and MoS (PP) on 1.3.2012. In case of DC/AC level, the
Hon'ble FM approved creation of additional 568 posts at DC/AC level, over and
above 3600 posts agreed upon at Ministerial level on 1.3.2012, to meet the requirement
of additional workload (introduction of 24X7 Customs Clearance Operations,
introduction of Negative List of Services etc.) of the Department generated
after March, 2012.
Audit's vetting comments on Ministry's ATN
No comments.
Ministry's further Action taken on the vetting comments of Audit
No comments required.
Sd/-
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX. 7 dt. 5.03.2014]

35
Annexure D-I (P)
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 2
17 CASES WHICH WERE PENDING INVESTIGATIONS HAVE BEEN SHOWN AS COMBINED [06 IN D-I (P) & 11 in D-II (P)
ANNEXURE]
PRESENT STATUS OF 6 OUT OF 17 PENDING CASES
Details of cases of non-registration (as per IT records)
Refer paragraph 2.1
Sl. CommissionerateName of service providerUnderMinistry’s ATN:Audit’svettingMinistry’s further comments
No. Investiga- Further proceedings/comments on vetting comments of
tionPresent status ofAudit
the  case
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Ahmedabad ST Kalawati Finance Ltd., Ahmedabad13.85 It is reported that the As the Department has No comments required.
assessee had interest verified the records of the
income only which is assessee. The reply may
not taxable. be accepted.
2. Ahmedabad III The Mehsana Urban Co-op. Bank67.74 It is reported that the No furher comments. No comments required.
Ltd., Mehsana demand of Rs. 24.48
has been confirmed
vide O-I-O dated
31.01.2013.
3. Ahmedabad III The Vadnagar Nagrik Sahkari Bank1.43 It is reported that Department has No comments required.
Ltd., Vadnagar demand was confirmed the demand
confirmed vide O-I-O and CESTAT has ordered
dated 16.09.2011.de novo proceedings
Subsequently. O-I-A subsequently. No further
dated 14.02.2013 was comments.
(Amt. in Rs. Lakh)

36
passed by the
Commr. (Appeals)
upholding the said
O-I-O. CESTAT has order
denovo proceedings.
Adjudication
proceedings are in
progress.
4. Ahmedabad III Mehsana Leasing and Finance Ltd.,1.03 It is reported that Department has It is reported that vide Finance
Mehsanademand was confirmed the demand Act, 2001, the power of
confirmed vide O-I-O and Commr. (Appeals) Commissioner (Appeals) to
dated 29.02.2012.ordered de novo remand the cases for fresh
Subsequently O-I-A proceedingsadjudication to the original
dated 08.11.2012subsequently. However,adjudicating authorities has
passed by the Commr. it may be clarified been withdrawn by amending
(Appeals) has ordered whether Commr. (Appeals) the provisions of Section 35A(3)
denovo proceedings. has powers to issue order of the Central Excise Act,
SCN vacated videof denevo adjudication1944.
O-I-O dated 29.03.2013 when his powers of
remand has been Further, while reviewing the
omitted from the Act subject Order-In-Appeal
w.e.f. 11.05.2011.passed by the Commissioner
(Appeals), the Committee of
Commissioners found that
though O-I-A is not proper, the
same has been accepted as per
the Board’s Instruction issued
under F. No. 390/Misc./
163/2010-JC dated 17.8.2011,
on monitory ground.
12 3 4 5 6 7

37
5. Delhi ST AG and Company (P) Ltd.1.52 It is reported that the Department has No Comments required.
assessee is found confirmed that the
registered in Range-VII assessee paid
instead of Range-X` 2.13 lakh.
(which deals with No further
banking and ordercomments.
financial services) of
Division-I with effect
from 04.12.2009. The
assessee has paid
` 2,12,542/- towards
service tax and interest.
6. Delhi ST Hindustan Commercial Investment Ltd.2.19 It is reported that the Further development It is reported that the status of
letter was written to may be communicated. the assessee has been got
assessee for their verified and on perusal of
compliance in the Balance Sheet of the assessee
matter. The assessee for the year 2011-12, it was
replied that they are observed that the subject
not having any amount of ` 2.19 lakhs was
business of actually the income of the
financing/banking orassessee during 2011-12 from
any other service ‘sale of shares’on which
which are covered Service Tax is not applicable.
under service tax.
Further, a letter has
been written to
assessee asking them
to furnish balance
sheet & other relevant
documents to varify
status of the assessee.
Total87.76

38
Annexure D-II (P)
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 2
PRESENT STATUS OF 11 OUT OF 17 PENDING CASES
Details of cases of non-registration (as per Secondary records)
Refer paragraph 2.1
Sl. Commiss-Name of serviceUnderMinistry’s ATN: Further Audit’s vetting Ministry’s further comments on
No. ionerate provider investi-proceedings/Present statuscommentsvetting comments of Audit
(M/s.) gation of the case
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Patna Dadiji Leasing5.21 It is reported that a demand cum As the demand has been No comments required.
Private Ltd., M-1, Show Cause Notice dated 14.10.2011 confirmed. No further
Grand Chandra amounting to ` 114449/- for thecomments.
Apartment Frazer period from 2006-07 to 2008-09 was
Road, Near B.S.F.C., issued to the assessee. The said SCN
Patna-800 001 was subsequently adjudicated vide
O-I-O dated 30.10.2011 and the
demand was confirmed.
2. PatnaGoodluck Insurance4.71 It is reported that the Service provider The department could not No comments required.
Facilators Pvt. Ltd., is not found at the given address. trace the service provider
K.G. Road, Utsaw after  putting  reasonable
Complex, 1st Floor, efforts.    No      further
Ara, Bihar-802301 comments.
3. Ahmeda- S.N.L. Fin. (I) Ltd.,219.58 It is reported that the assessee had No further comments. No comments required.
bad ST A’badexported 100% services to their parent
company located in USA and payment
of service received in foreign services.
4. Ahmeda- Satupa Finance Ltd.0.99 It is reported that, as the assessee had Further development may It is reported that in the year 2005-06,
bad ST paid an amount of ` 0.43 lakh for be communicated. the assessee has paid the service tax
the F.Y. 2005-06 and ` 0.47 lakh for within time limit, hence the question
the F.Y. 2006-07 within time limit and of interest and penalty does not arise.

39
therefore, no interest and penalty is In the year 2006-07, the assessee has
applicable. For the remaining amount, made short payment of service tax to
the matter is under correspondence the tune of ` 9360/-. Matter is being
with assessee.pursued to recover the remaining
amount. The service provider has
surrendered the Service Tax Registra-
tion.
5. Ahmeda-Jaspat Investment1.19 It is reported, as the assessee had paid Further development may It is reported that the assessee had short
bad ST and Consultancy an amount of ` 0.45 lakh for the be communicated.paid service tax to the tune of
P . Ltd., A ’bad F.Y. 2005-06 and ` 0.62 lakh for` 14,149/- (` 1798/- for the year
the F.Y. 2006-07 within the time limit 2005-06 & ` 12351/- for the year
and therefore, no interest and penalty 2006-07). Efforts are being made to
is applicable. For the remaining amount, recover the same. The service provider
the matter is under correspondence with has surrendered the Service Tax Regis-
assessee.tration.
6. RanchiRanchi Khunti CC4.39They have been contacted and directed Further reply is awaited. It is reported that the assessee applied
Bank to apply for registration immediately.for the Centralised registration on
07.02.2012 but the application was not
complete so it was returned to the
assessee on 21.04.2013 for want of rele-
vant documents. The assessee has been
reminded regularly telephonically as
well as by visit of the officers for sub-
mission of ST-1 along with relevant
documents. After obtaining the required
documents, their centralised registration
would be granted.
7. RanchiDumka CC4.25 It is reported that they are entitled to The reply of the Depart- No comments required.
Bankavail SSI exemption under Notification ment may be accepted.
No. 06/2005 dated 1.3.2005 as amended
from time to time.

40
8. RanchiDeoghar Jamtara26.83 It is reported that there is a variation in Further reply is awaited. It is reported that the assessee has
CC Bank figure  for   taxable  value  of  servicesprovided the data as detailed below:
provided by the assessee, as  given  by
the C&AG in their report and the figure
available for the same period 2004-05
to 2009-10 as per balance sheet of the
Bank. The MD of the Bank has been
contacted by the jurisdictional officers
and it is learnt that the difference is on
account of various heads like commission
exchange, provision for outstanding charges
etc. which appear to wrongly loaded into
the value of services by the C&AG. The
jurisdictional authorities are in touch with
the MD of the Bank who has assured to
furnish the breakup detail shortly.
As above figures do not tally with the
figures pointed out by the Audit. In their
report, the Audit has put the value of
taxable service as ` 2.37 crore for the
period 2005-06, 2006-07 to 2008-09.
As per the report submitted by the
assessee, commission exchange contains
commission exchange/service charges
as well as incidental charges. As
commission amount in particular
year is below threshold limit, hence
there is no tax liability.
9. RanchiGumla Simdega3.52 It is reported that a demand-cum- No further remarks as No comments required.
CC Bank Show Cause Notice dated 23.3.2012 action has been taken.
for an amount of ` 993818/- has
been issued to the assessee.
Sl. Financial As per Break-up - year wise
No. Year balance
sheet
CommissionerCommissionIncidental
exchange exchange/ charges
Service
charge
1. 2005-06 3,55,727 0 3,55,727
2. 2006-07 916783.21 94484 82229.21
3. 2007-08 930128.63 138263 791865.63
4. 2008-09 624347.72 138264 486083.72
5. 2009-10 652619.5170408 482211.5
6. 2010-11 850214.79 285490 564724.79
7. 2011-121027768.79 327939 699829.79
12 3 4 5 6 7

41
10. Jamshed.-Singhbhum CC30.35 It is reported that some demands have No further remarks as No comments required.
pur Bank Ltd., Chaibasa been confirmed vide 5 O-I-Os, all dated action has been taken.
20.3.2012 amounting to ` 0.124 lakh,
` 0.354 lakh, 1.466 lakh, 0.434 lakh
and 1.12 lakh respectively.
11. KolkataPeerless General145.28 It is reported that Show Cause Notice No further remarks. No comments required.
ST Finance and issued to the assessee has already been
Investment Co., adjudicated by the Commissioner of
Kolkata Central Excise, Kolkata-IV vide O-I-O
dated 12.02.2013 confirming the service
tax demand of ` 1,49,09,648/- (including
cess) along with appropriate interest and
imposing penalty of ` 5000/- and
` 1,49,09,648/- under Section 77 & 78
of the Finance Act, 1994. Further, Sr. Audit
Officer, CERA-Hq. Central Kolkata vide his
letter No. RA/CE/RDP-1 (BOFS)/2009-10/1298
dated 30.3.2012 has intimated “The case may
be settled”.
Total446.30

42
Annexure D-I
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 2
17 CASES WHICH WERE NOT ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT HAVE BEEN SHOWN AS COMBINED (04 IN D-I & 13 IN
D-II ANNEXURE) JUSTIFICATION/REASONS FOR NON ACCEPTANCE OF AUDIT OBJECTIONS
Details of cases of non-registration (as per IT records) Refer paragraph 2.1
(Amt. in Rs. Lakh)
Sl. Commission- Name of AmountObjectionMinistry’s A TN: Justification/Reasons forAudit’s vettingMinistry’s
No. erate service of Not non-acceptance of Audit’s objection commentsfurther
providerservice acceptedcomments on
tax notvetting
paidcomments of
Audit
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1. Vadodara I The Padra1.68 1.68 The case of M/s The Padra Nagar Sahkari Bank Ltd., Padra No further No comments
Nagar has been transferred to Call book for the reason that the comments.required.
Sehkari objection of non-registration/non-payment service tax (as per
Bank Ltd.,Income Tax records) was found not correct on verification on
Padrathe ground that a portion of the said income was interest
income which is exempted.
2. Vadodara I Atmjyoti-8.75 8.75 The Para has been closed vide letter no.-DP(CERA)/ No further No comments
nagar Co- Review/B&F/2010-11/O.W.Z. dtd. 07.04.11.comments.required.
op. Credit
Society Ltd.,
V adodara
3. Vadodara II M.S. Co-op.10.75 10.75Detailed verification has been done and there is no short levy.Department hasNo comments
Bank Ltd., The assessee had registered themselves under the category ofdone detailedrequired.
V adodara‘Banking and Other Financial Services’ after implementation verification of
of service tax w.e.f. 10.9.2004. They have filed half yearly the records, hence

43
ST-3 returns regularly till 31.3.2008. However,  w.e.f.1.4.2008, no further
they  have  surrendered  their  registration   certificate  as  their comments.
turnover  of  taxable  services  was  less  than   the   exemption
limit    prescribed    vide   Notification  No.  6/2005-ST   dated
1.3.2005.  Further,  copies  of ST-3  returns  along  with copies
of  GAR-7  challans,  Balance  Sheets  as well as Profit & Loss
Account  were  obtained  and verified and it was found that the
said service provider have paid service tax till the surrender of
their registration certificate.
4. Vadodara I The4.29 4.29 A  Show  Cause  Notice  dated  23.08.2011  was  issued andDepartment has No comments
Mercantiletransferred   to  Call  Book  till  the  settlement  of  objection.done detailedrequired.
Co-op. Bank Against  the Show Cause Notice the assessee under his written verification of
Ltd., Borsadsubmission has clarified that the value of taxable service providedthe records.
provided by them does not cross the threshold limit. Reply may be
accepted.
Total 25.47 25.47

44
Annexure D-II
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 2
17 CASES WHICH WERE NOT ACCEPTED BY THE DEPARTMENT HAVE BEEN SHOWN AS COMBINED
(04 IN D-I & 13 In D-II ANNEXURE)
JUSTIFICATION/REASONS FOR NON ACCEPTANCE OF AUDIT OBJECTIONS
Details of cases of non-registration (as per Secondary records)
Refer paragraph 2.1
(Amount in Rs. lakh)
Sl. Commis-Name of Amount Objec-Ministry’s ATN: Justification/Reasons Audit’s vetting Ministry’s further
No. sionerate service oftion Not for non-acceptance of Audit’s objectioncommentscomments on vetting
provider serviceaccep-comments of Audit
tax not ted
paid
1 234 5 6 7 8
The nature of services provided by M/s Andhra
Pradesh Urban Finance and Infrastructure
Development Corporation, Hyderabad
(APUFIDC) is neither advisory nor do they fall
under other auxiliary financial services so as to
bring them under the category of Banking &
Other Financial Services. Secondly, the assessee
is not a bank or financial institution so as to cover
them under the ambit of “Banking & Other
Financial Services”. One of the channels
identified for financing the capital infrastructure
cost of the municipalities is funding through
HUDCO. The company as per the instructions
of Government is supposed to enter into loan
agreement with HUDCO on behalf of cluster of
urban local bodies for availing the HUDCO loan
for their urban infrastructure and accordingly the
company enters into agreement from time to
Department has
verified the
records in
addition to
original records.
The reply may be
accepted based on
a consideration of
the nature of
transactions.
No comments required. 1. Hyderabad-IIAndhra269.64 269.64
Pradesh
Urban
Finance and
Infrastructure
Development
Corporation,
Hyderabad

45
time, whenever such loan is availed. The
procedure being followed is as follows:—
The urban local bodies prepare project reports
of the proposed development plans within their
notified area with detailed project cost in relation
thereto and sent it to Chief Engineer Department
of Public Health, who is responsible for
proposing the project before the Government and
obtaining an administrative approval for the
project. Thereafter, the Chief Engineer forwards
such proposal to APUFIDC Ltd. and APUFIDC
Ltd. being the channelizing agency forwards the
applications from the urban local bodies to the
HUDCO for providing assistance. As the agency
of the State Government, APUFIDC verifies
whether the application for loan by local bodies
is within the revolving guarantee of Rs. 700 crore
provided by State Government and forward the
loan application HUDCO for apprising and
sanctioning of loan required by the urban local
bodies.
The loans raised fall under a definite financing
scheme of State Government, M/s APUFIDC,
acting on behalf of all the local bodies enters into
loan agreements with HUDCO. In view of the
above, it is clear that the services provided by
M/s APUFIDC are not in the nature of advisory
or other auxiliary financial services. The 10%
A&S charges are not receipts towards services
but is part of project cost termed as
Administrative and Service charges which are
to be released to implementing agencies as
directed by Government, and hence are recorded
as liabilities/reserves in the Financial/Statements/
Books of APUFIDC. One percentage of the total
actual expenditure whichever is less is pure

46
reimbursement of expenses incurred by
APUFIDC. The balance of the amount is in the
nature of liability/reserves, which are so reflected
in the Financial Statements, pending direction
of the Government of Andhra Pradesh as to their
utilisation. Therefore, the activities of APUFIDC
are not classifiable under the category of
“Banking & Other Financial Services”.
Secondly, Banking & Other Financial Services
are defined under Section 65(12) of the Act. Such
services provided to a customer by a banking
company or a financial institution including a
non-banking financial company or any other
body corporate or any other person to a customer
are liable to service under Section 65(105)(zm).
M/s APUFIDC is not similar to bank or a
financial institution and hence does not fall
within the category of any other similar service
provider. Attention is also drawn to Board’s
Circular No. 83/1/2006-ST dt. 4.7.2006, wherein
it has been clarified by the Department that the
department of post is not liable to pay service
tax under the category of “Banking & Other
Financial Services”.
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly, protective
demand cum Show Cause  Notice was issued to
the assesse on 24.10.2011. Further, documentary
evidences furnished by the assesse revealed that
the company is receiving commission earned as
brokerage from various mutual fund/asset
management companies on account of service
provided as an agent of the said mutual fund/
asset management companies under the category
Action, if any,
taken to ensure
fulfilment of ST
liability by mutual
fund/asset
management
company under
reverse charge
may be intimated
to Audit.
It is reported that M/s Kovalam
Investment and Trading Co. Ltd.,
Ludhiana provided service to Asset
Management/Mutual Fund
Companies. None of these companies
falls under the jurisdiction of
Ludhiana Commissionerate.
However, it is been ascertained that
all these companies are duly
registered with the department for
payment of service tax vide
registration number
2. LudhianaKovalam48.58 48.58
Investment
and Trading
Co. Ltd.,
Ludhiana
1 234 5 6 7 8

47
of ‘Business Auxiliary Services’ and not
‘Banking & Finance Service’. Further, in terms
of Ruls 2(1) d(vi) of the Service Tax Rules, 1994,
the mutual fund or asset management company,
and not the assessee is liable to pay service tax
under reverse charge method. Hence para is not
admitted.
given below against each company.
S. Name (M/s) Service Tax
No. Registration
Number
1. Sundaram AAICS4257JST001
Asset
Management
Co. Limited
2. Tata AssetAAACT1458LST001
Management
Limited
3. Computer AAACT3035GST001
Age
Management
Service Pvt.
Limited
4. RelianceAAACR2668GSD0003
Capital Asset
Management
Limited
5. KotakAAACK5576CST001
Mahindra Asset
Management
Company
Limited
6. Birla Sun Life AAATB0102CST001
Mutual Fund
Further, this office is taking up
matter with the respective
jurisdiction service tax formations of
above 6 Asset Management/Mutual
Fund Companies for specific
verification of service tax payments
made by these companies under
reverse charge mechanism in respect
of services provided by M/s
Kovalam Investment and Trading
Co. Ltd., Ludhiana during the
relevant period.

48
1 234 5 6 7 8
3. Ludhiana SG Stock15.16 15.16
Services
118-G BRS
Nagar
Ludhiana
4. Ludhiana Master3.51 3.51
Portfolio
Services
SCO 19,
FG Market,
Ludhiana
5. LudhianaCity Gold24.59 24.59
Credit
Capital, 467,
Stock
Exchange
Bldg., Feroz
Gandhi
Market,
Ludhiana
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly, protective
demand cum Show Cause Notice was issued to
the assessee on 21.09.2011. Further, objection
by Audit that assessee was not registered was
incorrect, as they are already registered with the
Department under the category of ‘Stock Broker
Service’ with effect from April, 2006 i.e., much
before the Audit objection raised in 2009, and
paying service tax.
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly, protective
demand cum Show Cause Notice was issued to
the assessee on 03.08.2011. Further,
documentary evidences furnished by the assessee
revealed that they are already registered with the
Central Excise Range-II, Chandigarh under the
category of ‘Business Auxiliary Services’ and
paying service tax.
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly,
protective demand cum Show Cause Notice
was issued to the assessee on 27.09.2011.
Further, documentary evidences furnished by
the assessee revealed that the assessee has
actually engaged only in sale of shares and
securities on their own account and no taxable
Department has
verified the
records. The reply
may be accepted
as the service
provider is
registered and
paying dues under
‘Stock Broker
Services’.
Department has
verified the
records. The reply
may be accepted as
the service
provider is
registered and
paying dues under
‘Business Auxi-
liary Services’.
Department has
verified the
original records.
The reply may be
accepted.
No comments required.
No comments required.
No comments required.

49
services including ‘Banking and other Financial
Services’, appear to have been provided by the
assessee.
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly, protective
demand cum Show Cause Notice was issued to
the assessee on 27.09.2011. The assessee
however, submitted a representation to the
Chairman, CBEC on 14.01.2012 intimating that
they do not provide any taxable services. Further,
documentary evidences furnished by the assessee
revealed that the assessee has actually engaged
only in sale of shares on their own account and
no taxable services including ‘Banking and other
Financial Services’ appear to have been provided
by the assessee.
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly,
protective demand cum Show Cause Notice
was issued to the assessee on 24.10.2011.
Further, documentary evidences furnished by
the assessee revealed that the assessee is a sub
broker of LSE Securities Ltd. Ludhiana
and is registered with the Department and
paid service tax on stock brokerage commission
upto Oct., 2007, that is, well before the
objection was pointed out by AG Audit. Further
the assessee got registered as a sub-broker with
6. Ludhiana Ramsons5.89 5.89
Financial
Services,
980/10,
Daulat
Industry
Lane,
Civil lines,
Ludhiana
7. Ludhiana SRU440.05 440.05
Securities
Ltd., 110,
SC Tagore
Nagar,
Civil
Lines,
Ludhiana
Department has
verified docu-
mentary
evidence. The
reply may be
accepted.
Department has
verified
documentary
evidence. The
reply may be
accepted.
No comments required.
No comments required.

50
1 234 5 6 7 8
LSE Securities Ludhiana and as per LSE
Securities’s letter dated 18.08.2011, service tax
has been paid by them from November, 2007
onwards.
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly, protective
demand cum Show Cause Notice was issued to
the assessee on 24.10.2011. The assessee
however, submitted a representation to the
Chairman, CBEC on 14.01.2012 intimating that
they do not provide any taxable services. Further,
documentary evidences furnished by the assessee
revealed that the assessee is not a share broker.
Sale of shares and Securities has been done on
their own account and the same does not qualify
as share brokering and, is therefore, not covered
under service tax net.
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly, protective
demand cum Show Cause Notice was issued to
the assessee on 24.10.2011. The assessee
however, submitted a representation to the
Chairman, CBEC on 14.01.2012 intimating that
they do not provide any taxable services. Further,
documentary evidences furnished by the assessee
revealed that the assessee has actually engaged
only in sale of shares on their own account and no
8. Ludhiana Nirman2840.31 2840.31
Ficap Ltd.,
172-C,
Bhai
Randhir
Singh
Nagar,
Ludhiana
9. LudhianaCharu Fiscal140.87 140.87
Services
Ltd., 1st
Floor, Deol
Complex,
PNB
Civil
Lines,
Ludhiana
Department has
verified docu-
mentary evi-
dence. The reply
may be accepted.
Department has
verified docu-
mentary evi-
dence. The reply
may be accepted.
No comments required.
No comments required.

51
taxable services including ‘Banking and other
Financial Services’, appear to have been provided
by the assessee.
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly, protective
demand cum Show Cause Notice was issued to
the assessee on 26.9.2011. The assessee however,
submitted a representation to the Chairman,
CBEC on 14.01.2012 intimating that they do not
provide any taxable services. Further,
documentary evidences furnished by the assessee
revealed that the assessee has engaged only in
sale of shares and securities on their own account
and no taxable services including ‘Banking and
other Financial Services’, appear to have been
provided by the assessee.
Audit’s objection was raised without going
through the actual balance sheet or P&L
statement of the assessee. Accordingly, protective
demand cum Show Cause Notice was issued to
the assessee on 26.09.2011. Further, documentary
evidences furnished by the assessee revealed that
the assessee has undertaken the following 2
services :
(1) Sale of shares has been done by the assessee
on their own account; same does not qualify
as share brokering and is therefore not
covered under service tax net;
10. LudhianaDee Dee54.39 54.39
Securities,
2nd Floor,
City Tower,
527 R,
Model
Town,
Ludhiana
11. LudhianaGarg Capital17.54 17.54
Securities,
304, Novelty
Plaza, Bhai
Bala Chowk,
Ludhiana
Department has
verified docu-
mentary evi-
dence. The reply
may be accepted.
No further
comments.
No comments required.
No comments required.

52
1 234 5 6 7 8
12. ChennaiM/s Srivari10.15 10.15
ST Money
exchange
Private
Limited
It is reported that the taxable turnover of the
assessee for the year 2008-09 was within the
threshold limit and hence the service provider
was required to take registration only when they
crossed the threshold limit.
The activity of purchase and selling of foreign
exchange made taxable with effect from
16.5.2008 attracts service tax. If the assessees
charge and collect service charges from their
clients and the same is indicated in the invoice,
they can pay service tax at normal rate under
Section 66 of the Finance Act, 1944.
Alternatively, if they do not collect any separate
consideration [i.e. the service charges] or such
service charges are not reflected in the invoices
issued by them, they have an option to pay
service tax @ 0.25% of the total transaction value
as prescribed  under Rule 6(7B) of the Service
Tax Rules, 1994.
In the instant case, the assessee had collected
service charges @ Rs. 25/- per transaction and it
is reported that their taxable turnover for
2008-09 in respect of their branches was within
Department has
verified the facts.
No further
comments.
No comments required.
(2) Brokering fee received by the assessee in
2006-07 (Rs. 80,000/-) and in 2007-08
(
` 89,000/-) is however below the service
tax exemption limit of ` 8 lakh and hence
no registration is required nor any tax
liability arises.

53
the threshold limit exemption. Hence, the service
provider was required to take registration only
after reaching the prescribed limit of taxable
turnover. Accordingly, the assessee has taken
registration on 25.04.2011. Whereas, Audit has
arrived at the volume of turnover by clubbing
the sales and purchase of Foreign exchange
transacted during the year 2008-09 in their
branches at Chennai and Coimbatore. In view of
the above, there appears to be no service  tax
liability as contended by the Audit.
The Commissionerate has reported that as per
the Audit, the assessee has not paid service tax
amounting to Rs. 715.86 lakh on (a) Ancillary
service charges to meet out additional overheads
levied by HUDCO  and other Financial
institutions, (b) Hire purchase deposits from its
consumers purchasing house/flats on hire
purchase, (c) Interest for flats/houses allotted on
hire purchase, and (d) Administrative charges on
regularisation of transfer of Hire purchase of
Leases.
Since the matter pertains to financial services,
the issue was examined under Section
65(105)(zm) of the Finance Act, 1994 which
deals with the Banking & Other Financial
Services.
The HUDCO and other Financial institutions are
not banking company as defined under
13. Jaipur I M/s. Rajasthan715.86 715.86
Housing
Board,
Jaipur
Though
definition of
financial
institution has
not been given
in Chapter-V of
the Finance Act,
the
definition in RBI
Act would not
cover such
institutions. No
further
comments
please.
No comments required.

54
clauses (a) of Section 45A of the Reserve Bank
of India Act, 1934; the definition of financial
institution was examined as given in clause (c)
of Section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934 (2 of 1934).
From the above, it is clear that though the
assessee was engaged in financial activity
nevertheless the same is not covered under
Banking & Other Financial Services; since the
finance of immovable property is not covered
under the definition of financial institution.
Therefore other charges collected by the assessee
relating to Hire/Purchase are also not covered
under Section 65(105)(Zm) of the Finance Act,
1994. Therefore there is no service tax liability
on the assessee. However, a Show Cause Notice
has been issued to safe guard service tax liability
in the matter.
Total 4586.54 4586.54
1 234 5 6 7 8

55
ANNEXURE  J
REPLY TO VETTING COMMENTS OF AUDIT ON OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 OF THE 79TH REPORT OF
THE PAC JUSTIFICATION/REASONS FOR NON-ACCEPTANCE OF AUDIT OBJECTIONS
Details of irregular/incorrect availment of CENV AT Credit
Refer Chapter 4
(Amount in lakh of rupees)
Sl. Commiss-Name of Amount Objec-Ministry’s ATN: Justification/Reasons Audit’s vetting Ministry’s further
No. ionerate service oftion not for non-acceptance of Audit’s objectioncommentscomments on vetting
providerCENVATaccep-comments of Audit
M/s Credit ted
involved
1 234 5 6 7 8
Audit objection is not acceptable. The insurance
coverage offered by the Bank is a part of the
taxable service and hence all service obtained
by the Bank is a part of the taxable service would
become input services. The insurance service has
nexus with the provisions of output service.
Hence, credit is admissible. However, a Show
Cause Notice dated 20.08.2011 has been issued
to the assessee.
Audit has contended that the taxpayers have not
followed the proper laid down procedure.
However, Audit has not elaborated as to which
specific procedure was violated. In any case, it
is well settled that substantive benefit of Cenvat
Credit cannot be denied on the ground of
technical infractions. No credit on diesel was
taken by SBH. The contention of the Audit is
factually wrong. The contention that catering
1. Hyderabad Andhra24.68 24.68
II Bank
(Credit Card
Division),
Sultan Bazar,
Hyderabad
2. Hyderabad State Bank of16.53 16.53
II Hyderabad,
Main Branch,
Gunfoundry,
Hyderabad
No further
comments.
The reply may be
accepted.
No comments required.
No comments required.

56
1 234 5 6 7 8
service, car hiring etc., have no nexus with the
output service is not acceptable. All these are
business related activities. Tribunals have held
that the definition of the term "input service" is
very wide. The Tribunals, rejecting the contention
that insurance/catering is a welfare measure, have
held that these are essential for providing output
service. Board vide Circular No. 120/01/2010-
ST dt. 19.01.2010 has also clarfied that services
like outdoor catering or rent-a-cab for pick up
and dropping of employees to office would also
be eligible for credit as these are essential pre-
requisites to provide output service efficiently.
Reliance is also placed on the decision of
Mumbai High Court in the case of Ultratech
Cement Limited. Further, the Board vide Circular
No. 943/04/2011-CX dt. 29.04.2011 has clarified
that credit on rent-a-cab etc. for the earlier period
is allowed in case provision of that service had
been completed before 1.4.2011 and it has nexus
with output service as clarified vide the aforesaid
Board's Circular.
Audit has contended that the taxpayers have not
followed the proper laid down procedure.
However, Audit has not elaborated as to which
specific procedure was violated. In any case, it
is well settled that substantive benefit of
CENVAT Credit cannot be denied on the ground
of technical infractions. No credit on diesel was
taken by SBH. The contention of the Audit is
factually wrong. The contention that catering
service, car hiring etc., have no nexus with the
3. Hyderabad State Bank of86.47 86.47
II India, IFB
Branch,
Somajiguda,
Hyderabad
No comments required.No further
comments

57
output service is not acceptable. All these are
business related activities. Tribunals have held
that the definition of the term "input service" is
very wide. The Tribunals rejecting the contention
that insurance/catering is a welfare measure, have
held that these are essential for providing output
service. Board vide Circular No. 120/01/2010-
ST dt. 19.01.2010 have also clarified that services
like outdoor catering or rent-a-cab for pick up
and dropping of employees to office would also
be eligible for credit as these are essential pre-
requisites to provide otput service efficiently,
Reliance is placed on the decision of Mumbai
High Court in the case of Ultratech Cement
Limited. Furher, the Board vide Circular No. 943/
04/2011-CX dt. 29.04.2011 has clarified hat
credit on rent-a-cab etc. for the earlier period is
allowed in case provision of that service had been
completed before 1.4.2011 and it has nexus with
output service as clarified vide the aforesaid
Board's Circular.
The Commissionerate has reported that it was
not a case of non-registration as held by Audit.
The assessee was already registered with the
Department for payment of Service Tax. The
Audit has misinterpreted the provision contained
in Section 69 and Rule 4. These provisions
provide for registration of a service provider
within a period of 30 days from the date on which
service tax under Section 66 is levied. These
provisions related to service provider, who is not
registered with the Department and a new
assessee consequent to levy of service tax. Old
assessees who are already registered with the
4. HyderabadKarvy12.79 12.79
II Consultants
Ltd. Hyderabad
No further
comments
No comments required.

58
1 234 5 6 7 8
Department need not obtain/apply for fresh/new
registration. The belated incorporation of these
services in the registration certificate can not have
any impact on the eligibility of Cenvat Credit.
The assessee has duly discharged the service tax
liability on the output services provided by them
and has rightly taken credit of input services used
in providing output services.
The Commissionerate has reported that issue of
write-off and subsequent non-reversal of Cenvat
Credit was contested on merit. Similar issue was
raised vide DAP No. 352/07-08, in respect of
the same assessee, which has been settled vide
C.No. RACE V/DAP Cell/LDP No. 4-19/DAP
No. 352/2007-08/618 dt. 31.01.2011 of SAO/
AG (C&RA), Hyderabad.
The Commissionerate has reported the Audit has
contended  that the Insurance coverage provided
by the assessee to its employees was only in the
nature of welfare measures and it does not have
any nexus to assessee's service activity, and thus it
falls outside the scope and ambit of input service.
Audit objection is not acceptable. The Hon'ble
Tribunals, rejecting the contention that insurance
is a welfare measure, have held that these are
essential for providing output service. Just as
insurance to machinery is an input service, so is
insurance coverage of the employees, as the
employees constitute human assets of the
organisation. However, a protective Show Cause
Notice dated 15.10.2011 has been issued to the
assessee.
5. HyderabadKarvy Stock10.20 10.20
II Broking
6. HyderabadSKS Micro10.72 10.72
II Finance Pvt.
Ltd.,
Hyderabad
No further
comments
No further
comments
No comments required.
No comments required.

59
The Commissionerate has reported that the
objection has been raised vide LAR No. 165/
2009-10 dated 05.10.2009, however M/s. State
Bank of India has obtained registration under the
category of "INPUT SERVICE DISTRIBUTOR"
on 23.11.2005, i.e. prior to the date of objection.
The audit has contended that the Bank is providing
both taxable and exempted services during 2008-
09 and has taken cenvat credit on common input
services such as telephone, courier etc. but has
not reversed 8% on value of exempted services.
The objection is not admitted and reply was sent
on 22.02.2010. The Department replied that the
Bank exercised the option nder
Clause (ii) of Sub-Rule 3 of Rule 6 of Cenvat
Credit Rules, 2004. After exercising the said
option, the only obligation on the Bank was to
pay an amount equal to the formula prescribed
under Sub-Rule 3A of Rule 6 of Cenvat Credit
Rules, 2004 and interest at the prescribed rate has
to be paid in case of delayed payment, which was
paid/debited by the Bank in Oct., 2009/Jan., 2010.
However, protective demand Show Clause Notice
covering the period April, 2008 to September,
2010 for ` 11,66,35,787/-is being issued.
Audit objection is that M/s State Bank of
Travancore (SBT), Trivandrum obtained
centralized registration for payment of Service
Tax with effect from 01.07.2008 and opted to
pay Cenvat Credit proportionate to exempted
services (91% worked out by the assessee). the
amount of Cenvat Credit reversed by the assessee
was Rs. 204.24 lakhs for the period July, 2008
7. Ahmedabad State Bank of10.00 10.00
ST India
(Corporate
accounting
Branch),
Ahmedabad
8. PanchkulaSBI SCB469.74 469.74
Karnal in
Panchkula
Commissionerate
9. Trivandrum State Bank68.10 68.10
of
Travancore,
Trivandrum
No further
comments
As the assessee
exercised the
option already,
the reply may be
accepted.
The assessee
reversed higher
amount than the
required due to
erroneous
understanding
regarding
exempted
No comments required.
No comments required.
No comments required.

60
1 234 5 6 7 8
to March, 2009 (at an average of ` 22.69 lakh
per month). The Bank has 736 branches and these
banches have been paying service tax under
separate registration upto June, 2008. The
Headquarters of the bank has not intimated the
branches for the payment on proportionate basis
for the period from April, 2008 to June, 2008
under Rule 6(3A) of Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004.
The excess credit utilized amounts to ` 68.1
lakhs, which has been worked out at an average
of ` 22.7 lakhs for a month.
On verification of the records, it is seen that the
total value of exempted service rendered by State
Bank of Travancore during the year 2008-09 was
` 9.40 crores. They have opted to pay an amount
equal to the cenvat credit attributable to inputs
and input services used in or in relation to the
provision of exemped service as per Rule 6(3)
(ii) of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004.
Accordingly as per provisions of Rule 6(3A) of
the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 they reversed an
amount of ` 1.89 Crores during 2008-09 as
cenvat credit attributable to inputs and input
services used in or in relation to the provision of
exemped service which is much higher than the
amount of ` 0.75 Crores [i.e. 8% of  ` 9.40
crores] required to reversed by them; if they had
opted for Rule 6(3)(i) of the Cenvat Credit Rules,
2004.
Thus the amount of cenvat credit reversed by
State Bank of Travancore during the year is
services. There is
no revenue loss.
The reply may be
accepted.

61
substantially more than what was warranted by
the provisions of either Rule 6 (3)(i) or 6(3)(ii)
of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 and hence there
is no excess availment or utilisation of cenvat
credit by State Bank of Travancore during
2008-09.
The higher amount came to be reversed by State
Bank of Travancore on the basis of an erroneous
understanding regarding the exempted services.
The Audit has observed that M/s Canara Bank
had availed Cenvat credit on service tax paid on
services such as Life Insurance Service, Forward
contract service, Internet cafe service, Authorised
service station service, Stock broker service, TV
and Radio programming service, Construction
of residential complex service, Real Estate Agents
service, cable operator service, programme
producer service, etc. during the years 2006-07
to 2008-09. Audit has poined out that these
services have no relation to their output services
viz. Banking and other Financial service and
hence the credit availed is irregular.
An explanation as to how each of the services
are inputs to them is explained below :
1. Forward contract service: The assessee have
stated that payments made by them to
M/s Future & Options have been wrongly
classified by them while availing credit as
Forward contract service whereas the correct
classification was 'manpower recruitment
service' which is an essential input service
relating to their business activity.
10. Bangalore Canara Bank195.43 195.43
LTU
The reply may be
accepted.
No comments required.

62
2. Cable Operator Service and Internet Cafe
Service: The assessee have clarified that
entire Bank's network both technical and
commercial for establishing connectivity to
branches and officials is made through the
services provided by—leased circuit services,
internet cafe services and cable operator
services as detailed below.
Leased circuit services for BSNL & MTNL
leased line circuits, ISDN Circuits, CDMA,
MPLS VSAT Circuits.
Internet Cafe Services for internet bandwidth
circuits cable operator service for establishing
LAN connectivity/LAN Cabling.
The above services are essential input
services for carrying out the business activity
of the assessee and hence are eligible input
services for availing credit.
3. Stock Broker Service: The assessee is a Public
Sector Undertaking with public shareholding.
The shares of the assessee are traded in the
stock exchanges. They are using the services
of M/s Karvy Stock Brokers for the
following:—
a. Maintaining computer data and keeping
back up of the data.
b. Connectivity to NSDL and CSDL  and
generation of related reports on a weekly
basis.
1 234 5 6 7 8

63
c. Processing and printing of
Acknowledgement cards for transfer of
documents received through Post/
Courier/Bank.
d. Maintenance of specimen signatures.
e. Arranging and keeping all mail return
cases such as Certificates, Dividend
Warrants, etc.
f. Safe custody and reconciliation of entire
stationery including blank valuable
presigned negotiable instruments like
share certificates, dividend warrants, etc.
g. Accepting letters, documents and issuing
acknowledgements thereof.
h. Attending to day-to-day service request,
corresponding and replying to queries/
complaints.
i. Reconciliation of share capital as and
when required.
j. Generation of statistical reports.
k. Attending to Statutory auditors, Internal
Auditors and  SEBI Auditors.
1. Provide technical support to the Bank in
conducting General body meetings.
m. Arranging the dispatch of Dividend
Warrants, Annual reports and other
communication to the shareholders, etc.
The assessee have stated that the correct
classification of the input service is 'share
transfer agent' service, which is quoted by
the service provider on their bills.
Since the above services get covered under
the definition of 'input services' under

64
Rule 2(1) of Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 and
are related to the business activities of the
assessee, credit availed on the said service is
admissible.
4. Authorized service station service: This
service is availed by the assessee for servicing
and repairs of the cars belonging to the Head
Office of the assessee assigned to various
executives. Since the use of the vehicles as
claimed by the assessee is in relation to the
business activities of the company, the same
is admissible as input service eligible for
Cenvat credit.
5. Programme producers service and T.V . or
radio programme service: These services used
by the assessee for advertisement of the
Bank's products and services. Since the same
is essential for the business activities of the
assessee, the assessee is entitled to avail credit
on the said services.
All the above services are used by the assessee
in relation to their business activity and the
assessee is eligible to avail Cenvat credit on
the above services. Hence the para is
contested.
The objection is contested on the grounds that vide
Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004, w.e.f. 10.09.2004,
credit of service tax paid in respect of Mobile
Phones and telephones provided at residence of
1 234 5 6 7 8
11. BangaloreVijaya Bank36.19 36.19
LTU
No further
comments.
No comments required.

65
bank officials is admissible, provided the same is
used for providing output service. Mobile Phones
and telephone facility at residence is provided only
to top Management Executives, branch heads and
certain other designated officers. As per Vijaya
Bank (Officers') Service Regulations duly
approved by the Central Government, the officer
of the bank has to be available for Bank's duties
at any given time of the day. Banking being a
specialized industry delaing in matters having
huge financial implications, hence there is a need
for connectivity between top Management
Excutives, branch heads and other designated
officials of the Bank to address any exigencies.
These officers are provided with mobile phones
and telephones at residences, with the basic
objective of enabling them to take quick and
timely decisions concerning business matters.
Further as per the service regulations of the Bank,
these telephones are supposed to be used only for
Business purposes. Similarly the services of Real
Estate agents are used by the Bank in connection
with leasing or renting of real estate for the purpose
of banking business. Hence, the assessee is eligible
to avail Cenvat credit of service tax paid on mobile
phones, telephone provided at residence to the
bank officials who are being used for official
purposes and also on real estate services which is
related to their business.
The Audit has made observation on the ground
that interest income of the Banking company
comes under the head of exempted service as
defined in Rule 2(e) of Cenvat Credit Rules,
2004. However, it is pertinent to mention that
12. Kolkata Allahabad563.25 563.25
ST Bank
No further
comments.
No comments required.

66
the same is specifically excluded in terms of Rule
6(2)(iv) of Service Tax (Determination of Value)
Rules, 2006. Thus, Audit's observation is not
admitted. However, Department has issued a
protective Show Cause Notice dated 9.02.2010
for the period 2008-09 demanding service tax of
` 5,15,55,892/- and proposing interest and
penalty.
The Audit has made observation on the ground
that interest income of the Banking company
comes under the head of exempted service as
defined in Rule 2(e) of Cenvat Credit Rules,
2004. Notwithstanding Audit's observation, it is
pertinent to mention here that the same is also
specifically excluded in terms of rule 6(2)(iv) of
Service Tax (Determination of Value) Rules, 2006
which happens to fall after Cenvat Credit Rules,
2004 and it has been settled matter of law that
issue dealt specifically at later date has better
acceptability. Thus, Audit's observation is not
admitted. However, Department has issued a
protective Show Cause Notice dated 5.01.2010
demanding service tax of ` 1,05,19,292/- and
interest at an appropriate rate and also proposing
penalty for the period 2008-09.
The objection has been admitted and a combined
Show Cause cum Demand Notice dated
5.1.2010, demanding total service tax amount
of ` 6,47,66,017/-, interest at appropriate rate
and proposing to impose penalty. The said Show
Cause Notice included a demand of
1 234 5 6 7 8
13. Kolkata Bank of India,105.19 105.19
ST Main Branch
14. Kolkata BoI26.95 26.95
ST
No further
comments.
Admitted by the
Ministry. No
further
comments.
No comments required.
No comments required.

67
` 26,94,914/- for period from June, 2005 to
October, 2007, interest at the appropriate rate and
proposal of imposition of penalty. The Show Cause
Notice had been adjudicated by the Commissioner
of Service Tax, Kolkata vide O-I-O dated
28.6.2011 confirming the demand for recovery of
service tax of  ` 26,94,914  interest at appropriate
rate and penalty of ` 26,94,914.
The reasons for not accepting the objection is
that it is purely a procedural lapse due to which
substantive right of the assessee cannot be denied.
The basic ingredient of availment of  Cenvat
credit, the payment of service tax on input
services, utilization of input service towards
providing the output service is not challenged
by the AGMP. Hence, no credit can be denied on
this technical lapse otherwise the basic intention
of the legislature i.e. availment of Cenvat credit
to avoid the cascading effect will be defeated.
The Tribunal Ahmedabad in the case of
Commissioner of Central Excise, Vapi vs. Jindal
Photo Ltd. 2009(14) S.T.R. 812 (Tri. Ahmd.) held
that registration not taken by Head office as Input
Service Distributor—Credit availed on invoices
not containing the registration number of ISD—
Impugned order allowing credit on the ground
that receipt of services not in dispute-Credit
admissible.
In the present issue also it is the objection of the
audit that the Local Head Office of the SBI has
not taken registration for Input Distribution
Service. However, the Audit itself in the SOF No.
51/09-10 has discussed that the LHO Bhopal are
15. Indore State Bank of82.51 82.51
India,
Commercial
Branch, GPO,
Indore
Ministry
accepted the
procedural lapse.
No further
comments.
No comments required.

68
registered with the department having
STCAAACS8577KSTU4 w.e.f. 08.04.2005 for
providing services under banking only. Thus, it
is not a case that the LHO was not at all registered
with the department but the registration was not
separately taken for Input Service Distribution.
However protective SCN dated 14.09.2010 has
already been issued.
The Audit has considered interest earned as
exempted service. Interest earned on loans etc.
is excluded from the definition of Banking &
Financial Services which, inter-alia, means that
interest earned is not a service at all, there it
cannot be considered as exempted service.
Secondly, the assessee had filed intimation
required under Sub-rule 3(A) of Rule 6 of Cenvat
Credit Rules, 2004, for opting for clause (ii) of
sub-rule 3 of Rule 6 of the said Rules, with the
Range Superintendent on 23.10.2008. Therefore,
8% of exempted service cannot be charged. The
Audit has not taken into account the intimation
referred to above. In view of the above the Audit
objection is not accepted.
The Department has not accepted the objection.
The service of factoring is a single composite
service under which two types of charges viz.
factoring charges and discount charges are
collected. The discount charges are in the nature
of interest which is levied on account of pre-
payment made to the customer and are only a
1 234 5 6 7 8
16. NagpurAkola Janta461.38 461.38
Commercial
Co-opp. Bank
Ltd., Akola
17. MumbaiGlobal Trade57.07 57.07
ST Finance
No further
comments.
No further
comments.
No comments required.
No comments required.

69
part of the value of the factoring service which
is taxable service. Thus, the receipt of discount
charges cannot be treated as a receipt towards
exempted under Notification No. 29/2004. The
said exemption has the effect of only providing
exemption to discount charges and not to the
entire factoring service. Thus, the service of
factoring are not exempted services. Therefore,
the discount charges are not required to be treated
as value towards exempted service. The turnover
ratio under Rule 6(3) is required to be calculated
on the basis of the value of exempted services
and value of taxable services. However, SCN
dated 29.04.2010 has been issued to the assessee
for the said period.
The Department has not accepted the objection
as the interest on cash credit, overdraft and export
packaging credit are not value of exempted
service. The Notification 29/2004 provides
exemption only to part value of the service. In
fact, taxable service is lending and part of such
services like processing charges etc. are taxable.
Rule 6(3) is applicable only where exempted
service is provided. The definition of exempted
service means a service which is fully exempted
as such and not where part value of service is
exempted. Hence, provisions of Rule 6(3) are not
applicable for interest on cash credit, overdraft
and export packaging credit. However, a SCN
dated 29.04.2010 is issued to the assessee for
the said period.
18. MumbaiBank of312.47 312.47
ST India
Interest on loan is
excludible as per
valuation rules.
The reply may be
accepted.
No comments required.

70
The Audit objection is partially accepted. The
assessee is providing exempted and taxable
services. As they are not maintaining separate
Books of Accounts, they are liable to reverse
amount of credit as per Rule 6(3) of Cenvat
Credit Rules, 2004. Under this Rule, there are
two options. Under option 6(3)(ii), the assessee
can reverse proportionate credit and he has to
intimate the Superintendent of his option.
Whereas, the Audit has opined that the assessee
cannot get benefit of this option as they have not
intimated the Superintendent, and accordingly,
Audit calculated the reversal liability as per
Rule 6(3)(i) of the said Rules. However, the
intimation under the Rule 6(3)(ii) of Cenvat
Credit Rules, 2004 is only of procedural nature
and there are number of judgements on this issue
and hence one can extend the benefit of such
option.
The Commissionerate has reported that State
Bank of India, Commercial Branch, Jaipur falls
under the jurisdiction of  Jaipur-I
Commissionerate.
Accordingly, the Jaipur-I Commissionerate has
reported that as per amendment in Rule 6(3) of
1 234 5 6 7 8
19. MumbaiABN Amro23.71 23.71
ST Bank N.V .
20. Jaipur State Bank of201.73 201.73
II India,
Commercial
Branch,
Jaipur
Ministry accepted
procedural lapse.
However, no credit
can be denied on
this technical
lapse. No further
comments please.
However, in order
to have consis-
tency in treatment
by adjudicating
authorities across
the country and
observations raised
in audit by internal
audit and by CERA
parties, the depart-
ment may consider
issuing a clarifica-
tion on types of
technical or proce-
dural lapses which
would not impact
the availing of
Cenvat credit.
No further
comments please.
It is reported that it is not possible to
prepare an exhaustive lists of what
constitutes technical or procedural
lapses. There are many matters in
which the Department has held that
the lapse is not technical, only for
the Courts to hold later that the lapse
is indeed a technical one. The law
on the subject is constantly evolving.
No comments required.

71
Cenvat Credit Rules, 2008 w.e.f. 1.4.2008 which
is as under: Notwithstanding and thing contained
in sub-rules (1) and (2), the provider of output
service, opting not of maintain separate accounts
shall follow either of the following options as
applicable to him namely:
(i) the provider of output service shall pay
an amount equal to the eight per cent of
value of exempted service; or
(ii) the provider of output services shall pay an
amount equivalent to the Cenvat Credit
attributable to inputs and input services
used in, or in relation to, the provisions of
exempted services subject to the conditions
and procedure specified in sub rule 3(A).
The assessee availed and utilised service tax
credit both for taxable and exempted services but
did not pay an amount equal to 8% of the value
exempted services provided or not maintaning
separate accounts of input services. Failure to
do so resulted in non-payment of ` 201.73 lakh
against value of exempted services provided
during the period 2008-09.
The matter has been examined and it is observed
that the assessee has opted for a second method
for non-maintaining of separate documents and
as per Rule 6(3A) the provider or output service
shall follow the provisions laid down in rule and
while exercising the option, the provider of
output service shall intimate that:
(i) name, address and registration no. of the
manufacturer of goods or provider of
output service

72
(ii) date from which the option under this
clause is exercised or proposed to be
exercised
(iii)description etc. .....
(iv)............
(v) ............
As per the clarification method mentioned in
Rule 6(3)(b) total Cenvat Credit available with
the assessee for the year 2008-09 was ` 38,742
whereas the assessee has utilised the Cenvat
Credit on input services only of ` 8111/- in
Feb., 2009 & March, 2009 instead of ` 9542 as
per provisions mentioned in Rule 6(3)(b).
Hence, the Audit objection is not accepted in
respect of non-payment of 8% availment of input
credit of exempted services.
The issue in the instant case pertains to reversal
of Cenvat Credit under Rule 6(3) for providing
exempted service. However, as a protective
measure a Show Cause Notice in the matter is
being issued to safeguard of Service Tax liability.
The Commissionerate has reported that the Audit
objection is not admitted on the following
grounds:
The assessee is registered for providing Banking
and other Financial Services. Rule 6(3) of the
Cenvat Credit Rules provides that where a
provider of output service avails of Cenvat credit
in respect of any inputs or input services and
1 234 5 6 7 8

73
provides output services which are chargeable
to tax as well as exempt, and opting not to
maintain separate accounts shall follow either of
the following options, viz., (i) the provider of
output service shall pay an amount equal to eight
per cent of the value of the exempted services or
(ii) shall pay an amount equivalent to the Cenvat
credit attributable to inputs and input services
used in, or in relation to, the manufacturer of
exempted goods or for provision of exempted
services subject to the condition and procedure
specified in Sub-Rule 3A.
As per Rule 2(e) of the Cenvat Credit Rules,
2004, 'exempted services' means taxable services
which are exempt from the whole of service tax
leviable thereon and includes services on which
no service tax is leviable under Section 66 of the
Finance Act, 1994. Notification No. 29/2004 ST
dated 22.9.2004 exempts so much of the value
of taxable service as is equivalent to the amount
of interest on such overdraft facility, cash facility
or discounting of bills of exchange or cheques.
This exemption in only for the specified portion
of the taxable value for a particular service which
is also specified in sub-clause (zm) of clause
(105) of Section 65 of the Finance Act, 1994 and
hence the same cannot be treated as a separate
exempted service.
As long as the facilities viz., overdraft, cash credit
and discounting of bills are accepted to the
taxable ingredients with respect to 'Banking and
other Financial Services', the clarification given
in Board's letter F.No. 137/2003/2007-CX4
21. Trichy City Union1850.48 1850.48
Bank

74
dated 1.10.2007 is squarely applicable in this
case. As per the above letter, the restriction of
20% utilisation does not apply in respect of 17
specified services under Sub-Rule (5) of Rule 6
of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004, unless such
service is used exclusively in or in relation to the
manufacture of exempted goods or providing
exempted services. The Banking and Other
Financial Service which is specified under sub-
clause (zm) of clause (105) of Section 65 of the
Finance Act, 1994 is one among the above
services specified under Rule 6(5) ibid.
Interest is earned from various taxable services
provided by the assessee. Though the services
are taxable, the interest is not to be included in
the value of taxable service. Since only a part of
the value representing interest was excluded, the
service cannot be treated as an exempted service.
Notification No. 29/2004 exempts only a portion
of value of the taxable service as is equivalent to
interest. Hence the services covered under
Notification No. 29/2004 cannot be treated as
exempted services.
However, as per Board's instructions contained
in Circular No. 698/14/03 dated 3.3.2003, a
protective demand cum Show Cause Notice dated
4.8.2011 for the amount of ` 63,59,81,942
[including the amount of ` 1850.48 lakh
 (2008-09) specified in the relevant Annexure]
has been issued to the assessee.
1 234 5 6 7 8

75
From 1.4.2011 onwards, the assessee has availed
only 50% of the Cenvat credit on input/input
services as per the Sub-Rule 3B of Rule 6 [Rule
6(3B)] of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 and
hence no Show Cause Notice has been issued.
Same as for Paras 1 to 3 of Sl. No. 21. Further,
as per Board's instructions contained in Circular
No. 698/14/03 dated 3.3.2003, 2 protective
demand cum Show Cause Notices dated
24.10.2011 and 9.4.2012 for the amounts of
` 6,54,28,570/- for the period April, 2007 to
Feb., 2011 and Rs. 62,80,384/- for the period
March 2011 respectively have been issued to the
assessee.
From 1.4.2011 onwards, the assessee has availed
only 50% of the CENVAT credit on input/input
services as per the Sub-Rule 3B of Rule 6 [Rule
6(3B)] of the Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 and
hence no Show Cause Notice has been issued.
The Commissionerate has reported that Rule 6(2)
of the Service Tax (Determination of Value)
Rules, 2006, clearly states that interest on loans
do not form part of any value of taxable services.
The purpose for which interest on loans was
excluded from the valuation Rules is to recognise
the principle that the interest is compensatory in
nature and not any value addition in the nature
of services. Accordingly, interest should never
be component of valuation; the value for service
tax is only after excluding the interest portion.
Hence the Bank as availed input credit only in
accordance with the provisions of service tax
22. Trichy Lakshmi163.76 163.76
Vilas Bank
23. TriunelveliTamilnadu 111.63 111.63
Mercantile
Bank
No further
comments.
No further
comments.
No comments required.
No comments required.

76
1 234 5 6 7 8
rules concerned and the bank has not availed any
excess input credit. However, as per the Board's
instructions, to safeguard Government revenue,
protective Show Cause Notice has been issued
to M/s Tamilnadu Mercantile Bank Ltd.,
Tuticorin demanding an amount of
` 3,03,26,451 for the financial years 2008-09,
2009-10 and 2010-11.
The Commissionerate has contested the objection
on the following grounds:—
On verification of the Cenvat ledgers for the
above months, it is noticed that the assessee has
wrongly calculated the service tax liability while
filing the Original ST-3 returns. As per the
Original Returns, the Gross Value for the period
Oct., 2007 to Mar., 2008 is ` 111,35,02,610
on which Service Tax liability @12.36% works
out to ` 13,76,28,923 whereas they have
shown  the  tax  liability  as  ` 13,95,63,021
which is in excess of ` 19,34,098 and again
while showing the actual payment by cash and
Cenvat credit utilization (` 12,98,29,118 in
cash + ` 1,11,73,269 in Cenvat=Total
` 14,10,02,387) there is a difference of
` 14,39,366 which is in excess of the liability
shown in the returns. At the same when the
difference is worked out between the actual
liability and what is paid under Cash & Cenvat
the difference is  ` 33,73,464 on the higher
side. That is, as per the original returns, they have
totally shown as excess payment of
24. BangaloreICICI Venture12.76 12.76
L TU Fund
Management
Co. Ltd.
Figures given in
the original
returns had
clerical/technical
error. Ministry
confirmed there
was no short
payment. No
further comments
please.
No comments required.

77
` 33,73,464 as against the actual tax liability.
Now in the revised returns filed during the month
of Dec., 08, the total gross value has been
increased to ` 111,79,02,106 from the earlier
` 111,35,02,610 which is an increase of
` 43,99,496. Again here also the correct
service tax liability is ` 13,81,72,700 but it
has been shown as ` 13,82,67,560 thus
representing an increase of ` 94,860. The total
payments made is (` 12,98,27,118/- in cash &
` 84,36,255 in Cenvat) ` 13,82,63,373
thereby the total tax payment has come down by
` 27,39,014. But since the revised return was
submitted during the month of Dec., 08, when
already the returns for the next half was filed,
they were forced to maintain the closing balance
as was shown in the Original Return filed for
Oct'07-Mar'08. Hence in order to maintain the
closing balance the asessee has shown higher
figures as utilized just to maintain the closing
balance/opening balance as was earlier disclosed
to the department vide their Original returns for
the period Oct., 2007-Mar., 08 and Apr., 08 to
Sept., 08 respectively. Thus, in view of the above,
the payments made are in excess rather than being
short as pointed out by the Audit. Since there is
an excess payment and also the figures reflected
in the Original returns were due to clerical/
technical errors, the Para is contested by the
Department.
Total4913.74 4913.74

78
Annexure ‘A’
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 OF THE 79TH REPORT OF THE PAC
Present position of performance of Service Tax Cells and assessees brought to tax net as a result thereof
Sl. Chief  CommissionerateCommissionerate No. of Special Cells Total No. of assessees brought Out of (iv), No. of assessees
No. Zonecreated so far to tax net as a result thereof falling under the BFNs category
12 3 4 5 6
1. AHMEDABADAhmedabad-I
Ahmedabad-II
Ahmedabad-III 0 0 0
Bhavnagar 0 0 0
Rajkot 1 452 0
Ahmedabad ST 1 408 4
Total 2 860 4
2. BANGALORE Bangalore-I
Bangalore-II
Bangalore-III
Bangalore-ST 5 25 0
Total 5 25 0
3. BHOPALBhopal 0 0 0
Indore 1 6 2
Raipur 1 0 0
Total 2 6 2
4. BHUBANESHWARBhubaneshwar-I 1 5 0
Bhubaneshwar-II 1 75 0
Total 2 80 0

79
5. KOLKATAKolkata-I
Kolkata-II
Kolkata-III
Kolkata-IV
Kolkata-V
Kolkata-VI
Kolkata-VII
Bolpur 1 0 0
Haldia 1 32 0
Siliguri 1 0 0
Kolkata ST 5 118 1
Total 8 150 1
6. CHANDIGARHChandigarh-I 0 0 0
Chandigarh-II 4 0 0
Ludhiana 2 176 46
J & K
Total 6 176 46
7. CHENNAIChennai-I
Chennai-II
Chennai-III 0 0 0
Chennai-IV
Pondicherry 1 23 0
Chennai-ST 11 3 3
Total 12 26 3
8. COCHINCalicut 3 33 33
Cochin 1 1 1
Thiruvananthpuram 1 10 10
Total 5 44 44
12 3 4 5 6

80
12 3 4 5 6
9. COIMBATORECoimbatore 1 39 1
Madurai 1 21 12
Salem 3 35 0
Thirunelveh 3 54 0
Tiruchirapalli 3 219 11
Total 11 368 24
10. HYDERABAD Hyderabad-I 1 33 0
Hyderabad-II 5 50 38
Hyderabad-III 0 13 13
Hyderabad-IV 2 0 0
Total 8 96 51
11. JAIPURJaipur-I 1 0 0
Jaipur-II 1 352 0
Total 2 352 0
12. LUCKNOWLucknow 5 33 4
Allahabad 11374 4
Kanpur 5 41 7
Total 111448 15
13. MEERUTGhaziabad 0 0 0
Meerut-I 0 0 0
Meerut-II 5 3 2
Noida 1 217 217
Total 6 220 219
14. MYSORE Belgaum 0 0 0
Mangalore 2 37 3
Mysore 1 41 1
Total 3 78 4

81
12 3 4 5 6
15. MUMBAI-ZONE-I Mumbai-I
Mumbai-IV
Mumbai-V
Thane-I
Thane-II
Mumbai ST-I 3 214 0
Mumbai ST-2 1 9 9
Total 4 223 9
16. MUMBAI-ZONE-IIBelapur
Mumbai-II
Mumbai-III
Raigarh 1 0 0
Total 1 0 0
17. NAGPURAurangabad 3 33 0
Nagpur 1 33 0
Nasik 1 36 0
Total 5 102 0
18. NEW DELHI Delhi-I
Delhi-II
Gurgaon (Delhi-III)
Faridabad (Delhi-IV)
Panchkula 7 167 0
Rohtak (Delhi-V) 1 0 0
Delhi-ST 147610 1004
Total 947777 1004
19. RANCHIJamshedpur 1 22 0
Ranchi 1 151 0
Patna 4 11 11
Total 6 184 11

82
12 3 4 5 6
20. PUNE Goa 1 0 0
Pune-I 1 5 5
Pune-II (Kolhapur) 1 4 0
Pune-III 0 0 0
Total 3 9 5
21. SHILLONGDibrugarh 4 15 0
Guwahati 0 0 0
Shillong 1 212 5
Total 5 227 5
22. V ADODARADaman 1 0 0
Surat-I 0 0 0
Surat-II 4 70 1
V adodara-I 0 0 0
V adodara-II 0 0 0
Valsad (Vapi) 1 0 0
Total 6 70 1
23. VISHAKHAPATNAMGuntur 2 310 310
Visakhapatnam-I 2 131 9
Visakhapatnam-II 5 17 17
Tirupati 4 31 24
Total 13 489 360
Total No. of Special Cells Total No. of assessees brought Out of (iv), No. of assessees falling
created so far  to tax net as a result thereof under the BFNs category
135 53010 1808

83
Annexure ‘B’
RECOMMENDATION NO. 08
Proforma
Year—2011-12
(Amt. in lakhs)
2011-12 Zone V oluntary Notice issued for late filing of ST-3
Payment Returns under Section 70 of the Finance
Act, 1994 read with rule 7C of the
Service Tax Rules, 1994
Recovery
No. of Amount No. of Amount No. of Amount
cases cases cases
Ahmedabad 000000
Bangalore 0 0 5 0.06 5 0.06
Bhopal 000000
Bhubhaneshwar 0 0 1 0.005 1 0.005
Chandigarh 0 0 13 0.44 0 0
Chennai 000000
Cochin 18 0.227 13 3.51 2 0.02
Coimbatore 1 0.010 0000
Delhi 0 0 1 0.075 0 0
Hyderabad 0 0 4 0.80 0 0
Jaipur 50 2.15 100 4.06 25 1.88
Kolkata 33 4.35 18 3.49 7 0.80
Lucknow 10 5.050 05 0.350 05 0.350
Mysore 14 3.15 7 1.27 2 0.4
Meerut 11 0.22 11 1.705 2 0.155
Mumbai-I 1 0.02 0000
Mumbai-II 000000
Nagpur 000000
Pune 000000
Ranchi 21 3.2 121 6.21 36 4.64
Shillong 149 81.03 21 1.24 16 1.13
Vadodara 22 0.52 42 3.52 12 0.39
Vishakhapatnam 1 0.15 32 7.36 11 1.79
Mumbai LTU 000000
Bangalore LTU 000000
Delhi LTU 000000
Chennai LTU 000000
Total 431 100.077 394 34.095 124 11.62

84
Y ear—2012-13
(Amt. in lakhs)
2012-13 Zone V oluntary Notice issued for late filing of ST-3
Payment Returns under Section 70 of the Finance
Act, 1994 read with rule 7C of the
Service Tax Rules, 1994
Recovery
No. of Amount No. of Amount No. of Amount
cases cases cases
Ahmedabad 00804 0.04
Bangalore 0 0 10 0.1 10 0.1
Bhopal 000000
Bhubhaneshwar 0 0 34 1.19 4 0.71
Chandigarh 1 0.15 1 0.06 0 0
Chennai 000000
Cochin 16 0.548 3 0.104 2 0.094
Coimbatore 1 0.005 0000
Delhi 000000
Hyderabad 0 0 6 0.924 2 0.124
Jaipur 38 1.46 58 1.88 3 0.12
Kolkata 79 3.26 59 4.63 31 1.83
Lucknow 16 4.385 04 0.755 04 0.755
Mysore 21 9.455 0000
Meerut 2 0.015 39 0.40 0 0
Mumbai-I 6 0.52 4000
Mumbai-II 000000
Nagpur 24 3 40 2.06 40 1.03
Pune 0 0 141 0 1 0.08
Ranchi 10 3.8 177 6.145 23 2.625
Shillong 148 357.22 17 1.01 7 0.45
Vadodara 57 1.61 27 1.17 2 0.02
Vishakhapatnam 0 0 101 6.31 34 1.612
Mumbai LTU 000000
Bangalore LTU 000000
Delhi LTU 000000
Chennai LTU 000000
Total 419 385.428 729 26.678 167 9.59

85
Y ear—2013-14 (upto Aug. 2013)
(Amt. in lakhs)
2013-14 Zone V oluntary Notice issued for late filing of ST-3
Payment Returns under Section 70 of the Finance
Act, 1994 read with rule 7C of the
Service Tax Rules, 1994
Recovery
No. of Amount No. of Amount No. of Amount
cases cases cases
Ahmedabad 000000
Bangalore 0 0 3 0.2 3 0.2
Bhopal 000000
Bhubhaneshwar 000000
Chandigarh 0 0 97 0.11 3 0.11
Chennai 000000
Cochin 16 1.28 4 0.314 1 0.068
Coimbatore 000000
Delhi 000000
Hyderabad 000000
Jaipur 1 0.01 0000
Kolkata 12 2.33 7 1.93 7 0.18
Lucknow 04 00000
Mysore 2 0.02 1000
Meerut 0 0 45 0 0 0
Mumbai-I 000000
Mumbai-II 000000
Nagpur 9 3.27 0000
Pune 000000
Ranchi 14 1.15 62 4.13 16 0.28
Shillong 88 109.22 6 0.36 2 0.203
Vadodara 22 0.99 13 1.09 13 1.09
Vishakhapatnam 0 0 12 2.4 1 0.04
Mumbai LTU 000000
Bangalore LTU 000000
Delhi LTU 000000
Chennai LTU 000000
Total 168 118.27 250 10.534 46 2.171
(upto Aug. 13)

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
—Nil—
86

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation/Recommendation
Audit scrutiny of returns revealed that during 2008-09 (i) in 67 Commissionerates
12.38 per cent returns received were pending preliminary verification/scrutiny; (ii) in
22 Commissionerates, there were 99 cases in which Department failed to detect
irregularities like payment of Service Tax at lower rate, non-levy of interest and penalty,
short payment of interest, etc. leading to short levy of Service Tax totaling ` 7.02 crore
and interest of  ` 1.56 crore; (iii) there was no system in place to co-relate the taxable
income as shown in the Income Tax return with the ST-3 return; and (iv) 116 assessees
had shown lower figures in ST returns which had Service Tax implication of ` 21.91
crore and interest of  ` 2.94 crore during the period from September 2004 to March
2009. Accepting the Audit observation, the Department issued Show Cause Notices
for ` 9.43 crore in July 2010. On the issue of 12.38% of returns that were received and
were pending preliminary verification/scrutiny, the Committee have been apprised that
norms for scrutiny of returns have since been fixed and Service Tax Return Scrutiny
Manual has been prepared, guidelines have been issued for checking/verifying the
ST-3 returns. Further, electronic filing of Service Tax returns made mandatory
w.e.f. 01.10.2011, the system of Automation in Central Excise and Service Tax (ACES)
has been introduced throughout the country and instructions have also been issued
by CBEC on 21.02.2012 that the function of detailed scrutiny by implemented in all the
ranges. The Department, however, could not furnish reasons for their failure to have
timely verification/scrutiny of returns. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
revenue due and realized as a result of the various corrective measures initiated by the
Ministry and recommend a comprehensive review for identification of bottlenecks, if
any, in the present system of scrutiny of returns, and overcome the same through
appropriate policy intervention.
[Observation/Recommendation No.10 of 79th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
At present, preliminary scrutiny is done by the system while detailed scrutiny is
undertaken by the Range officers. Further, based on certain well-defined parameters,
the system throws up some returns for Review and Correction (R&C) by the Range
officers. As per the Scrutiny Manual for ST-3 Returns, the mechanism of scrutiny
involves two stages namely Preliminary and Detailed Scrutiny. The preliminary scruting
has been designed to check completeness of the information provided, timeliness
arithmetic accuracy etc. The detailed scrutiny will ensure correctness of classification,
exemption availed, valuation, availment of Cenvat Credit etc.
87

88
Efforts are being made to ensure timely scrutiny. The bottlenecks relate to staff
shortage, as well as certain technical problems including internet connectivity. The
department has already appointed a Committee to solve these technical problems. As
regards, manpower, the expansion of services under the service tax ambit was not
commensurate with staff  strenth available. The issue is being addressed through
cadre re-structuring proposal.
It is also mentioned that the present system of preliminary scrutiny have been
examined by a Committee set up by CBEC and the Committee has submitted their
report for major changes in the system to avoid large number of returns for R&C. Once
the recommendations of the Committee are accepted and implemented, it is expected
that this may result in minimization of returns thrown for R&C. After the said changes,
it is expected that officers may get time to carry out detailed scrutiny.
The data regarding the amount of revenue detected and amount recovered as a
result of scrutiny of returns in as under:
(Amt. in Rs. lakh)
Revenue detected as result of Amount recovered as a result
Scrutiny of ST-3 Returns filed thereof
under BFNs
2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
13128.90 17167.75 53591.39 4918.36 9977.17 15539.58
The major policy decision would be to augment the staff strength on priority. There
may not be other effective/corrective policy measures to overcome such huge pendency
of ST-3 returns as well as other areas of service tax functioning.
Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
A TN is silent on the aspect of any proposed comprehensive review by the Ministry
on the basis of the PAC’s recommendation for identification of bottlenecks in the
present system of scrutiny of returns. However, it identified staff shortage and technical
problems as bottlenecks.
PAC has made a recommendation vide Para No. 18 that ‘the staff requirement be
examined on priority basis’. Hence, no comments in respect of staff shortage.
Outcome of the examination by a Committee on the present system of preliminary
scrutiny is awaited. Meanwhile the report can be provided to audit also.
Corrective measures initiated to ensure timely verification/scrutiny of returns is not
stated.
Ministry’s further Action Taken on the vetting comments of Audit
It is reported that owing to the movement from a positive list of services to a
negative list based on system of taxation, there have been many legal changes. Hence,
all the earlier processes with respect to scrutiny may not have the same relevance.
Hence, the whole process of scrutiny is being reviewed. One Committee has been set
up to revise the risk parameters in ACES for service tax. These revised parameters are

89
expected to form the basis of preliminary scrutiny by the system. Once preliminary
scrutiny is done and “risky returns” are thrown up, detailed scrutiny will have to be
done by the Officers. The Scrutiny Manual of 2008 also requires to be revised in the
light of various legal changes. Another Committee has been set up to revise the
Scrutiny Manual. Once both Committees finish their assigned task, the revised scrutiny
process can be implemented.
Sd/—
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M.No. 238/03/2013-CX. 7  dt. 05.03.2014]
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are distressed to note that no system exists in the Department to co-
relate the taxable income as shown in the Income Tax Return with the ST-3 returns to
identify cases for further scrutiny. Cross verification of a few ST returns with Income-
tax returns had revealed Service Tax implication of ` 21.91 crore and interest of
` 2.94 crore during the period September 2004 to March 2009. Consequently, the
Department issued SCNs for ` 9.43 crore in July 2011. Taking note that the Ministry
had initiated steps to safeguard the revenue interest, the Committee recommend a
suitable but effective system be devised for correlating the data of various Departments
and ensuring that the revenue due to the Government is collected without remiss.
[Observation/Recommendation No. 11 of 79th Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Both for audit purposes and return scrutiny, there is a mandatory requirement to
examine documents such as balance sheet, profit & loss account, income tax audit
report u/s 44AB of Income Tax Act, 1961. (These documents are normally submitted to
the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and the Income Tax Department). The Serive Tax
Return Scrutiny Manual (issued in 2008) prescribes a checklist for reconciling the
figures of income contained in the financial records of the assessee viz. balance sheet/
profit & loss account with the taxable income shown in the service tax return. Data
sharing between CBEC and CBDT is being examined.
Audit’s vetting comments on Ministry’s ATN
(a) The Committee’s recommendation was based on the recognition of the urgent
need to correlate data in the Income Tax returns with those in ST-3 returns as
this would enable identification of cases for further scrutiny. The Ministry’s
reply however focuses mainly on the procedures at later stages (for instance,
subsequent to selection for scrutiny) i.e. during actual scrutiny at ranges or
audit at the premises.
(b) Data sharing between CBEC and CBDT is stated to be under examination.
Outcome is awaited.

90
(c) Measures initiated/envisaged concerning data sharing with other departments
such as Registrar of Companies may also be provided.
Selection of returns for scrutiny at ranges without a system for examining data in IT
returns etc. is indicative of risk in the selection process itself and particularly when
viewed in the backdrop of the fact that detailed scrutiny as per the ST Manual for
scrutiny of Returns, 2009 is envisaged only of 2 per cent of the returns.
Ministry’s further Action taken on the vetting comments of Audit
A formal institutional arrangement for data sharing may be best operationalised
through amendments in the Act. Recently CBEC has signed a MoU with the Financial
Intelligence Unit (FIU), which is under the Department of Revenue, for data sharing. A
proposal to amend the registration form so as to require the assessee to give details of
other registrations (so as to be able to link up with the database of that organization for
an online verification) is being examined.
Owing to the fact that w.e.f  1.7.2012, taxation of services is based on the concept of
taxability of all services, barring those in the negative list/exempted services, risk
parameters have to be revised. The risk parameters in ACES are under revision and
accordingly changes will be made in the Scrutiny Manual.
Circular No. 296/152/2013-CX.9 dated 18th February, 2014 regarding MoU between
CBEC and CBDT on sharing of data has been issued. Annexure-C
Special Secretary to the Govt. of India
[Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Revenue O.M. No. 238/03/2013-CX. 7 dt. 5.03.2014]

Annexure ‘C’
OBSERV ATION/RECOMMENDATION NO.11
F. No. 296/152/2013-CX. 9
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
Central Board of Excise & Customs
New Delhi, 18th February, 2014
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
(Committee No. 14/2014)
Subject: MoU between CBEC and CBDT on sharing of data—reg.
The issue of exchange of data between CBEC and CBDT has been identified to be
of paramount importance for enhancing the effectiveness of tax administration. Sharing
of information with CBDT would help in building an effective and compliant indirect
tax regime through targeted scrutiny, audit, investigations as well as arrears recovery
in Central Excise, Customs and Service Tax. With this view, CBEC intends to enter into
a formal agreement by way of an MoU with CBDT for sharing of data.
2. Based on the inputs received from the policy wings and Directorates, the list of
such data elements is enclosed as Annexure.
3. Now, it has been decided to constitute a Committee comprising of following
members for finalizing the data elements required from CBDT:—
Sl. S/Shri Designation
a. V .S Krishnan CCE, Mumbai-I (Chairman)
b. Alok Shukla ADG , CEI, Chennai
c. A.K. Singh Commissioner, LTU, Chennai
d. Vivek Chaturvedi ADG , Systems, Delhi
e. M.R.R. Reddy Additional Commissioner (Audit), Service Tax-I, Mumbai
f. G . Sreenivasa Rao Additional Director, DRI, Mumbai
In addition, the Committee may co-opt any other member as required.
4. The terms of reference of the Committee are as under:—
a. The Committee shall take into account the requirements of Customs, Central
Excise and Service Tax for, inter alia, improving revenue collection,
strengthening compliance, assessing risks, Business analytics and Tax
Recovery.
b. The Committee shall identify the data elements and also the IT documents
from which such data elements are to be taken.
91

92
c. The Committee shall review the list of data elements so identified and make
their recommendations on each data element in the list.
d. The Committee shall also specify the purposes for which the aforesaid data
elements are to be used in CBEC.
e. Any other recommendations that may be necessary for giving effect to the
above said purposes.
5. The Committee shall submit its recommendations within one months from its
constitution.
Encl.:— As above.
Sd/-
(Akhil Kumar Khatri)
OSD, CX. 9, CBEC
Tel.: 9958296888
(akhil. khatri@gmail.com)
To,
1. Chairperson, CBEC for information.
2. All the Members of CBEC for information.
3. All the Chief Commissioners/Directors General for information.
4. All the Members of the Committee for information and necessary action.
5. All the Sections/wings of CBEC for information.
6. All the Directorates for information.

93
Sl. Name of the record Purpose for which Periodicity Relevant field from the Registration Form Remarks, if any. Recommended
No. from which data is required of Data Fields Particulars by
required Exchange
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
1.1 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly Full Name Last Name/Surname DGSYS
49A First Name
Middle Name
1.2 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly Name you would like printed on DGSYS
49A the card
1.3 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly Have you ever been known by any Yes or No DGSYS
49A other name
1.4 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly If, yes, then details of other Name Last Name/Surname DGSYS
49A First Name
Middle Name
1.5 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly Residential Address Flat/Door/Block No. DGSYS
49A Name of Premises/Building/
Village
Road/Street/Lane/Post Office
Area/Locality/Taluka/Sub-Division
own/City/District
State/Union Territory
Pin
1.6 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly Of ficial Address Flat/Door/Block No. DGSYS
49A Name of Premises/Building/
Village
Road/Street/Lane/Post Office
Area/Locality/Taluka/Sub-
Division
Town/City/District
State/Union Territory
Pin
1.7 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly PAN Registration Number DGSYS
49A
1.8 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly T elephone  No./Mobile No. DGSYS
49A

94
1.9 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly Email ID DGSYS
49A
1.10 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly Date of Birth/Incorporation/ DGSYS
49A Agreement/Partnership or
Trust Deed/Formation of Body of
Individuals/Association of Person
1.11 Registration-Form Profiling an Entity Quarterly Registration Number (in case of DGSYS
49A firms, companies etc.)
2.1 Part A: Gen . from Updated personal Annual Personal I nformation Name DGSYS,
ITR4, ITR5 and Information of a PAN DGST
ITR6 taxpayer Assessment Year
Old Name (If applicable)
Flat/Door/Block No.
Name of Premises/Building/
Village
Road/Street/Lane/Post Office
Area/Locality/Taluka/Sub-Division
Town/ City/District
State/Union Territory
Pin
Telephone Number
Mobile Number
Email  ID
Date of Incorporation
Whether a Public Company Applicable only
or a Private Company for ITR6, Not
Applicable for
ITR4 and ITR5
2.2 Part A: Gen. from Understand the key Annual Key Persons Name DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and persons behind an (Particulars of key officers who Designation
ITR6 entity have held office during previous Residential Address
year) PAN
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

95
2.3 PART A: Gen. from Understand the nature Nature of Company and it’s Code If more than one DGSYS,
ITR4, ITR5 and of key business of the Business Description business or pro- DGST
ITR6 entity fession, can caputre
upto 3 main acti-
vities/products
3.1 Part A: BS from Application of funds Current assets, loans and DGST,
ITR5 advances DGCEI
Current liabilities and
provisions
(i) Current Liabilities
(ii) B Liability for leased
assets
3.2 Part A: BS from Application of funds Current assets, loans and DGST,
ITR5 advances DGCEI
Loans and advances
Loans to subsidiary
companies
4.1 Part A: P&L from Comparing against Annual Credits to Profit & Loss Account Sales/Gross receipts of business DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and data disclosed to CBEC or profession (with breakups)
ITR6 Union Excise Duties received or
receivable in respect of goods
and services sold or supplied.
Service Tax received or receivable
in respect of goods and services
sold or supplied
VA T/Sales Tax received or receiv-
able in respect of goods and services
sold or supplied
Other Income-Rent DGSYS,
Other Income-Commission DGST
Closing Stock DGSYS

96
4.2 Part A: P&L from Monthly Credits to Profit & Loss Account Other Income-Interest DGST
ITR4
4.3 Part A: P& L from Monthly Credits to Profit & Loss Account Duties, taxes and cess, received DGST
ITR6 or receivable, in respect of goods
and services sold or supplied
4.4 Part A: P&L from Comparing against Annual Debits to Profit & Loss Account Opening Stock DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and data disclosed to CBEC Purchases (net of refunds and
ITR6 duty or tax, if any)
Custom Duty paid or payable in
respect of goods and services purchased
Counter vailing Duty paid or payable
in respect of goods and services
purchased Special Additional Duty paid
or payable in respect of goods and
services purchased
Service Tax paid or payable in respect
of goods and services purchased
V AT/Sales Tax paid or payable in
respect of goods and services purchased
Profit Before Taxes
4.5 Part A: P&L from Comparing the trend Annual Provisions for Tax and Appro- Provision for Current Tax DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and against CBEC specific priations
ITR6  trend
4.6 Part A: P&L from Monthly Revenue from operations A Sales/Gross receipts of business DGST
ITR5 (net of returns and refunds and duty
or tax, if any)
Sale of services
2 Other income
(i) Rent
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

97
(ii) Commission
7 Duties and taxes, paid or payable, in
respect of goods and services purchased
22 Commission
23 Royalty
24 Professional/Consultancy fees/Fee
for technical services
36 Rates and taxes, paid or payable to
Government or any local body
(excluding taxes on income)
4.7 Part A: P&L Form Monthly Other Income 3 a Rent DGST
ITR6 3 b Commission
5 Totals of credits to
profit and loss
account (1+2e+3k+4)
12 Rents
16 Insurance
17 Workmen and staff
welfare expenses
18 Entertainment
19 Hospitality
20 Conference
21 Sales promotion
 including publicity
(other than
advertisement)
22 Advertisement
23 Commission
24 Hotel, boarding and
Lodging
25 Travelling expenses
including foreign travelling
26 Conveyance expenses

98
27 Telephone expenses
28 Guest House expenses
29 Club expenses
30 Festival celebration
expenses
31 Scholarship
32 Gift
33 Donation
34 Rate and taxes,  paid or
payable to Government or
any local body (excluding
taxes on income)
5.1 Part A: OI from Comparing against Annual Other Information Credit Outstanding in DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and CBEC Data respect of Union Excise
ITR6 Duty
Credit Outstanding in
respect of Service Tax
Credit Outstanding in
respect of VA T/Sales Tax
5.2 Part A: OI from Monthly Other Information Method of accounting DGST
ITR4, ITR5 and employed in the previous
ITR6 year
5.3 Part A: OI from Monthly Other Information Amount of Credit outstanding
ITR5 and ITR6 in the accounts in respect of
Opening stock
6.1 Part A: QD from Comparing against Annual In case of Trading concern Purchase during the previous DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and Central Excise year sales during the previous
ITR6 and VA T data year closing stock
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

99
6.2 Part A: QD from Comparing against Central Excise Annual In case of Manufacturing concern Opening Stock This is for DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and ITR6 and V AT data Purchase during the previous year Finished
Quantity Manufactured during the Previous Products/
 year By-products
Sales during the previous year
Closing Stock
7.1 Part B: TI from ITR4, Profiling an entity Annual Computation of Total Income Profits and Gains from Business or DGSYS, DGST
ITR5 and ITR6 Profession
Total Income
7.2 Part B: TI from ITR4, To identify service providers who Monthly Computation of Total Income Income from house property DGST
ITR5 and ITR6  have not registered or have Profit and gains from business or
suppressed their activities profession
7.3 Part B: TI from ITR5 Computation of T otal Income Profits and gains from business other DGST
and ITR 6 than speculative business and specified
business
8.1 Part B: TTI from Comparing the trend against Annual Computation of Tax Liability Gross Tax Liability DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and ITR6 CBEC data Net Tax Liability
8.2 Part B: TTI from Comparing the trend against Annual T axes Paid Advance Tax Paid DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and ITR6  CBEC data TDS
TCS
Self Assessment Tax
Total Taxes Paid
9.1 Schedule BP from Computation of income from DGST
ITR4 business or profession
9.2 Schedule BA from Profiling an entity Annual Bank Account Number DGSYS
ITR4, ITR5 and ITR6
9.3 Schedule OS from Annual Income from other sources Rental income from machinery, plants, DGSYS, DGST
ITR4, ITR5 and ITR6 buildings, etc.
9.4 Schedule OS from Annual Income from other sources Income other than from owning race DGST
ITR6 horse(s):—
9.5 Schedule HP from Monthly Details of Income from House DGST
ITR4, ITR5 and ITR6 Property
10.1 Details of Outward To trace instances where money is Every Form 15CA Part A DGST
month

100
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
Remittances from remitted abroad to the service (i) Remitter Column
Form 15CA provider but the remitters have not (ii) Remittee Column
paid service tax under reverse charge (iii) Remittance Column
mechanism for services received by Part B
 them in India. Section A
(iv) Remitter Column
(v) Remittee Column
Section B
Remittance Column
(vi) Column No. 6
DTAA Column No. 9
(vii) Column A
(viii) Column D(a)
10.2 Details of Outward To trace instances where money is Every Form 15CB (i) Part A DGST
Remittances from remitted abroad to the service month Full details of single column
Form 15CB provider but the remitters have not Part B
paid service tax under reverse charge (ii) sub-column No. 1
mechanism for services received by (iii) sub-column No. 2
them in India. (iv) sub-column No. 3
(v) sub-column No. 4
(vi) sub-column No. 5
(vii) sub-column No. 10
(viii) sub-column No. 12
(ix) sub-column No. 14 and
(x) sub-column No. 16.
11.1 OLT AS and TDS Comparing the trend against Quarterly Assessee Details Name of Assessee DGSYS
CBEC data PAN of Assessee
Financial Year
11.2 OLT AS and TDS Comparison against Service Quarterly Details of Tax Deducted at Source Assessment Y ear DGST
Tax data Name of Deductor
TAN of Deductor
PAN of Deductor
Section under which Deduction Made
Transaction Date
Amount Paid
Tax Deducted

101
11.3 OLT AS and TDS Comparing the trend against Quarterly Details of Tax Collected at Source Name of Collector DGST
CBEC data TAN of Collector
PAN of Collector
Section under which Deduction Made
Transaction Date
Amount Paid
Tax Collected
11.4 OLT AS and TDS Comparing the trend against Quarterly Details of Tax Paid (other than Major Head Code DGSYS
CBEC data TDS and TCS) Minor Head Code
Tax
Surcharge
Education Cess
Others
Total Tax
Date of Deposit
11.5 OLT AS and TDS Comparing the trend against Quarterly Details of Paid Refund Assessment Y ear for which Refund is Paid DGSYS
CBEC data Mode of Payment
Amount of Refund
Interest
Date on which Refund is Paid
12.1 PAN database, DGCE
Database of Annual
Returns, TIN
database, AIR
(Annual Information
Return) database
and Survey Reports
of investigation Wing
12.2 Data pertaining to DGRI
Transfer Pricing,
data pertaining to
export income &
availing tax
concessions, PAN
numbers not filling IT
returns

102
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
12.3 Data in respect of see the letter DG
International  dated 30.12.2013 V aluation
Transactions with
associated
enterprises and
Transfer Pricing
Orders in case of
related party
transactions

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-NIL-
NEW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
24 November, 2014 Chairperson,
03 Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
103

APPENDIX-I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2014-15) HELD ON 19TH NOVEMBER, 2014
The Committee sat on Wednesday the 19th November, 2014 from 1100 hrs. to
1400 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V . Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
4. Shri Nishikant Dubey
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
7. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
8. Shri Anurag Thakur
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
10. Shri Vijay Goel
11. Dr. Satyanarayan Jatiya
12. Shri Shantaram Naik
13. Shri Sukhendu Shekhar Roy
S
ACRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Director
3. Shri Jayakumar T. — Additional Director
Representatives from the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Smt. Suman Saxena — Dy. CAG
2. Shri P. Mukherjee — Dy. CAG
3. Shri P. Shesh Kumar — Director General
4. Shri S. Nandeolkar — Director General (Rlys.)
5. Shri A.M. Bajaj — Principal Director
6. Shri B.P. Yadav — Principal Director
7. Shri P. Tiwary — Principal Director
104

105
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members and the representatives of
the Office of the C&AG of India to the Committee. The Chairperson then apprised the
Members that the meeting has been convened to consider and adopt two Draft
Reports, further selection of five subjects for examination during the year and to take
oral evidence of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas on the subject 'Performance
Audit of Hydrocarbon Production sharing Contracts' based on C&AG Report No. 19
of  2011-12.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the following Draft Reports for consideration:
(i) Draft Report on the subject 'Civil Engineering Workshops in Indian Railways',
'Delay in building the new rail bridge over River Sone' and 'Signal and
Telecommunication' based on C&AG Report No. 32 of 2011-12.
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventy-Ninth Report (Fifteenth
Lok Sabha) on 'Service Tax on Banking and Other Financial Services'.
4. After some discussions, the Committee adopted the Draft Report on the subject
'Civil Engineering Workshops in Indian Railways', 'Delay in building the new rail bridge
over River Sone' and 'Signal and Telecommunication' with modifications/amendments.
The Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Seventy-Ninth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on
'Service Tax on Banking and Other Financial Services' was adopted without any
modification.
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalise the two Reports
adopted by them, in light of their suggestions and factual verifications received from
the Audit and present the same to the House on a date convenient to him.
6. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
7. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
8. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
9. * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
A copy of the verbatim proceedings was kept on record.
The Committee, then, adjourned.

Appendix  II
(Vide Para 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS  OF  THE  ACTION  TAKEN  BY  THE  GOVERNMENT  ON  THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR SEVENTY-NINTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total No. of Observations/Recommendations 18
(ii) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:
Total : 16
Para Nos. 1-9 and 12-18 Percentage — 89%
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government:
Total : 0
-NIL- Percentage — 0%
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Total : 2
Para Nos. 10 & 11 Percentage — 11%
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies:
Total : 0
-NIL- Percentage — 0%
106
GMGIPMRND—4029LS—24.04.2015.