MEMBER OF  PARLIAMENT LOCAL
AREA DEVELOPMENT SCHEME
(MPLADS)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report (15th Lok  Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2015-2016
THIRTY-FIRST  REPORT
SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
31

THIRTY-FIRST REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT  LOCAL  AREA
DEVELOPMENT SCHEME (MPLADS)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF STATISTICS AND PROGRAMME
IMPLEMENTATION
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.12.2015
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21.12.2015
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2015/Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)

PAC  No. 2063
Price:  `  100.00
© 2016  BY  LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of  India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report .............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government .......................................................... 16
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies  received from the
Government...................................................................... 51
C
HAPTER  IV Observations/Recommendations  in respect  of  which  replies
of the Government have not  been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ........................................... 59
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies...................... 69
 APPENDICES
I. Minutes of  the Sixteenth Sitting of the Public Accounts
Committee (2015-16)  held on 17th December, 2015.......... 71
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations of  the Public
Accounts Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha)....................................................... 73

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-2016)
Prof.  K.V . Thomas  —  Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
3. Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
4. Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
5. Shri Nishikant Dubey
6. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank”
9. Shri Neiphiu Rio
10. Shri Dushyant Singh
11. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
12. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
13. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
14. Shri Shivkumar Udasi
15. Dr. P. Venugopal
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
19. Shri Vijay Goel
20. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
21. Shri Shantaram Naik
22. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Smt. Tirthankar Das — Additional Director
3. Shri Deepankar Kamble — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2015-16), having been authorised
by the Committee, do present this Thirty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Action
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in their Fifty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Member of Parliament
Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS)’ relating to the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation.
2. The Fifty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 30th
March, 2012. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 3rd May, 2013. The Public Accounts Committee
considered and adopted the Thirty-first Report at their sitting held on 17th December,
2015. Minutes of the sitting are given at Appendix-I.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of  the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of  India.
5.  An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the Fifty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) is given at
Appendix-II.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
21st  December, 2015 Chairperson,
30 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained
in their Fifty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Member of Parliament Local
Area Development Scheme (MPLADS)" based on C&AG Report No. 31 of 2010-11
(Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil) relating to the Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation.
2. The Fifty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) was presented to Lok Sabha/
laid in Rajya Sabha on 30th March, 2012. It contained 33 Observations/
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/
Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation and categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which have been
accepted by the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11-13, 17-23, 25-26, 31-32 and 33
Total: 22
Chapter- II
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 15, 24, 27 and 28
Total: 04
Chapter-III
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which
requires reiteration :
Paragraph Nos. 3, 10, 14, 16, 29 and 30
Total: 06
Chapter- IV
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Paragraph No. 5
Total: 01
Chapter- V

2
3. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation to furnish the final/conclusive Action Taken Notes on the
Observation/Recommendation No. 5 of their Fifty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
in respect of which the Ministry have furnished interim reply.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Fifty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs,
the Committee have dealt with  the Action Taken by the Government on some of
their Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration or merit
comments.
I. Observation/Recommendation Para No. 3 of 55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
5. The Committee were highly concerned to note that 12 DAs of six States
inflated the figures of expenditure by ` 7.35 crore by depicting the entire advance
of ` 100.17 crore released to the Implementing Authorities as utilized. Not only
that, the DAs had reported lesser amount of interest earned in their annual
accounts and/or Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) than those reported in the
MPRs of the earlier months resulting in an understatement of interest of ` 5.60
crore in respect of 21 constituencies. Shockingly, in blatant violation of the General
Financial Rules (GFR) 2005 DAs in some States were showing money given as
advance as expenditure in the Utilisation Certificate (UC). Though the Ministry
of S&PI hold the DAs/lAs responsible for properly maintaining the accounts of
MPLADS funds as per the State/UT Governments yet they failed to obtain/examine
necessary clarifications of the DAs/States concerned on the financial irregularities.
Since the Ministry were still in the process of developing an integrated software
incorporating District-wise MPLADS accounts and collating annual accounts
and balance sheet of all the Districts and considering the importance and urgency
of developing such an integrated software, the Committee impressed upon the
Ministry to expedite development and installation of the software without further
loss of time. The Committee were sanguine that the early installation of the desired
integrated software would help capture all the relevant data and facilitate effective
management and monitoring of the MPLAD Scheme both at micro and macro
levels. The Committee also desired that the necessary explanations of the DAs
concerned be obtained and examined by the Ministry without further loss of time
so that requisite preventive and punitive measures were taken to observe strict
fiscal discipline.
6. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under: —
‘‘The District Authorities are advised from time to time to include only the
actual expenditure incurred as expenditure figure. The Ministry has already
initiated action for development of an integrated MPLADS website through
NICSI. The NICSI has already started the process of development of the
integrated website, which is likely to be put on trial during 2013.’’

3
7. The Committee in their Fifty-fifth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) had
observed that some States had inflated the expenditure figures depicting the sum
total as utilized thereby blatantly violating General Financial Rules (GFR), 2005.
The Committee had desired necessary explanations of the DAs so that requisite
preventive and punitive measures can be taken to ensure strict fiscal discipline.
However, the Ministry, in their Action Taken Note did not reply on the said enquiry
by the Committee and have stated that the DAs are advised from time to time to
include actual expenditure incurred as expenditure figures. It seems that besides
giving such advisories, the Ministry does not have any other monitoring mechanism
at place. Hence, the Ministry did not provide the relevant details about the follow-
up action taken by the concerned State Governments against malafide misreporting
or any infringement of rules/guidelines. Therefore, the Committee exhort the
Ministry to provide all the details about the action taken by the State Governments
for ensuring financial regularity. Further, the development of integrated software
for capturing relevant data for effective management and monitoring of the MPLAD
Scheme was to be put on trial during 2013. The Committee, therefore, would like
to be apprised of the status of the software likely to be developed and if developed
whether the software has been put into use across the country for monitoring
financial progress of the Scheme.
II. Observation/Recommendation Para No. 8 of 55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
8. The Committee deprecated to note that proper records were not maintained
by the Ministry to watch the progress of the receipt of the Annual Accounts and
Utilisation Certificates from the DAs. Further, the Ministry had routinely been
relaxing the conditions for submission of UCs and Audit Certificates by the DAs,
before allowing the release of the second installment of funds. The Committee were
surprised that the Ministry themselves were not maintaining proper records which
were so vital for it to review overall fund utilization but expect the State Governments/
DAs/IAs to be perfect in every respect just because Guidelines had been issued.
The Committee were of the firm opinion that the Ministry had to first put their house
in order and set an example for the State/UT Governments to emulate. They, therefore,
recommended that the Ministry should urgently start maintaining MP-wise Grants-
in-Aid Register with details of funds released, status of the receipt of the Monthly
Progress Reports, Utilisation Certificates and Audit Certificates in a computerized
format with complete data validation and place it on the official website of the
Ministry for effective monitoring of the fund utilization as well as to bring in
transparency and public scrutiny.
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:—
‘‘The Utilization Certificates and Audit Certificates are already being maintained
in the Ministry in the individual files of the MPs on the basis of which release
of funds is done. However, as advised, computerized format of Grants-in-aid
Register has been finalized and is being made operational wherein the
MP-wise details of release of funds, receipt of Utilisation Certificates (UCs)
and Audit Certificates (ACs) would be maintained.’’

4
10. The Committee note that the Ministry in their action taken notes have
stated that the Utilization Certificates and Audit Certificates are already being
maintained in the Ministry in the individual files of the MPs. They are also happy
to note that computerized format of Grants-in-aid register, as desired, by the
Committee, has been finalized and is being made operational wherein the MP-
wise details of release of funds, receipts of Utilization Certificates and Audit
Certificates would be maintained. However, the Ministry's reply is silent about
uploading the Monthly Progress Report on the official website of the Ministry
which, the Committee feel, is essential for effective monitoring of the fund
utilization as well as to bring in transparency and public scrutiny. The Committee
would, therefore, like to seek the details as to when was the computerized format
finalized and when was it made operational. Further, the Committee would like to
know whether the computerized Register has been maintained after incorporating
each and every details of the scheme and whether it has been synchronized with
the State Government's database. The Committee hope that such synchronization
will enable both the Ministry and the DAs to arrest the existing loopholes in the
implementation of MPLAD Schemes.
III. Observation/Recommendation Para No. 10 of 55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
11.The Committee were worried to observe instances of doubtful expenditure
which included non-existence of assets in West Bengal and Jharkhand, payments
made on doubtful muster roll entries in Bihar and on doubtful vouchers in Mizoram
and Jharkhand, leading to a combined financial irregularities of ` 40 lakh. Although
the State Governments of West Bengal and Mizoram had furnished certain
explanations on the matter including action taken thereon, the State Governments
of Bihar and Jharkhand did not bother to even respond to the irregularities pointed
out by Audit. The Committee desired that such indifferent attitude of the State
Governments concerned be viewed seriously by the Ministry and the matter be
taken up with utmost urgency at the Chief Minister/Chief Secretary level so that
responsibility could be fixed on the delinquent officials.
12.The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:—
"This Ministry has received replies on doubtful expenditure from State of
Bihar and Jharkhand. The replies received are given below:
(a) Bihar — State Government has informed the following on concerning
audit paras:—
(i) Excess/avoidable expenditure — Keeping in view the conditions at
the location, during the execution of work, more payment was made
than the scheduled rate due to increased compaction of Brick Bat,
Balu, soil etc. for technical reasons. Besides, after work estimates,
the additional payment was also made due to increase in the rates of
wages by the Government. It has also been informed that action is
being taken as per the audit provision and that it will be ensured that
such lapses is not repeated in future However, provision for increase
in payment is being made in the estimates.

5
(ii)Procedural lapses in the execution of works — Taking cognizance
of the Audit para, wages are being paid only after preparing the
Muster Roll. It has also been informed that the payment under labour
item is now being made on the basis of Muster roll for the projects in
progress. In Compliance Report of RWD Masaurhi, it has been stated
that in future, procedure would be followed and maintained and the
material will be purchased by quotations and that Labour will be
paid on Muster Roll.
(b) Jharkhand — State Government has replied the following on the
concerning audit paras as given below:—
(i) Unfruitful expenditure on Works —  Work construction of Bharat
Mata Kalyan Mandap has been completed. However, the same could
not be transferred due to matter being sub-judice.
(ii)Non-existence of assets — In respect of work for installation of two
solar water pump sets, FIR has been lodged against the firm
M/s Kiran Energy Solution Private Ltd., Dhanbad.
(iii)Payment made on doubtful voucher— As regards installation of
four high level tube well is concerned, it has been clarified that no
irregularities were committed and payments were made on the basis
of actual work. Rather the work was completed by incurring ` 1601
less than the estimated cost of work.
This Ministry has been requesting the concerned State Governments to take
action against the concerned erring officials".
13. The Committee note that although the Ministry has received the replies
on doubtful expenditure from the State of Bihar and Jharkhand, they find that the
Ministry has not taken any concrete actions to see that responsibility could be
fixed on the delinquent officials. They have simply requested the concerned State
Governments to take action against the erring officials. The response of the State
Government of Bihar, as furnished by the Ministry, states that more payment was
made than scheduled rate due to increased compaction of Brick Bat, Balu, soil,
etc. for technical reasons. The Committee have also came to understand that even
after work estimates, the additional payment was also made due to increase in the
rates of wages by the Government. The Committee are of the considered view that
before finalization of works, either proper estimates were not prepared by taking
into account various pragmatic considerations or due diligence was not followed
for which additional payment was made. Therefore, the Committee desire that the
respective State Governments prepare a proper estimate and conduct due diligence
before finalizing works under the scheme so as to minimize additional payments
and get the works completed within the scheduled time. Furthermore, the reply of
the State Government of Jharkhand reveals varieties of irregularities such as
unfruitful expenditure due to matter being sub-judice, non-existence of assets in
respect of installation of two solar water pump sets and payment made on doubtful

6
voucher. The Committee view this phenomenon as a serious lapse in the past of the
DAs thereby implying questionable conduct on their part. The Committee,
therefore, exhort the Ministry and the State Governments to conduct proper survey
of the land/project where work has been sanctioned under the scheme and should
follow a more rigorous selection process for finalising the contractors to execute
the works. The Committee may be apprised of the actions taken by the Ministry for
ensuring the same.
IV . Observation/Recommendation Para No. 11 of 55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
14. The Committee found that the above said doubtful expenditure occurred
due to grossly inadequate monitoring of the projects by both the District Authorities
and the Implementing Agencies, as corroborated by the Ministry in evidence. The
Committee were of the considered view that mere lodging of an FIR against the
Head Master of a particular school or the local head of the implementing agency
would not suffice to check financial fraud and irregularities, unless supervisory
officers, including those who check and sign the Utilization Certificates were held
primarily responsible for any doubtful expenditure. The Committee, therefore, urged
the Ministry to prevail upon the State Governments where such irregularities had
been reported to further investigate the matter with a view to finding out whether
there were larger conspiracies involved in the fraud and depending upon the findings,
exemplary action be taken against the officers concerned. The Committee also
desired that the practice of submitting vouchers on plain paper by the Implementing
Agencies, as happens in some States, be discarded forthwith so that instances of
payments on doubtful vouchers did not reoccur.
15. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:—
"The FIR lodged by the Nodal District, South 24 Parganas in West Bengal
have been received. It has been informed that the District Authority is already
pursuing the case to recover the fund spent on irregular works and disciplinary
action is being initiated. The Ministry is in the process of development of an
integrated software for MPLAD Scheme for monitoring funds release and
expenditure both at Macro and Micro level which is expected to bring in more
fiscal control and transparency in the system. Instructions have already been
issued to all the concerned states/UTs administrators separately in each case
to adhere to the provisions of GFR and state procedure while making payment
to the contractor".
16. The Committee find that the Ministry, in their reply, have submitted that
the FIR lodged by the Nodal District, South 24 Parganas in West Bengal have been
received and the matter is being pursued by the District Authority to recover the
fund spent on irregular works and disciplinary action is being initiated. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the developments that have taken place in this
matter. They would also like to know the present status of the developments of
integrated software for MPLAD scheme. The Committee desire the Ministry to
make all out efforts to impress upon the State Governments to carry out proper

7
investigation where cases of embezzlement of money come to their notice and
prosecute the guilty so that an example can be set, which would act as a deterrent
for such lapses in future.
V . Observation/Recommendation Para No. 14 of 55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
17. The Committee were shocked to note that nine DAs in eight States executed
700 works costing ` 9.45 crore without formal recommendations of the MPs
concerned. In addition, three DAs in three States executed 150 works amounting to
` 2.44 crore, recommended by the representatives of the MPs. It was really
incomprehensible that on the plea of urgency of work and assurance of the local
MLA to make available funds from the MPLAD Scheme, the District Authorities
had sanctioned the work in anticipation of the MP's recommendation. As per the
provisions of para 3.12 of the Guidelines, the implementation of the works under the
MPLAD Scheme should start only after the receipt of the recommendation of work
from the MPs. This was to be scrupulously followed by the District Authorities and
if any deviation occured, the State Government could take disciplinary action against
the DAs. But the Committee were perturbed to observe that no disciplinary action
had been taken against the erring DAs even after a lapse of five/six years and the
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, though
submitted before the Committee that the Ministry did not support such kind of
action on the part of the DAs and it called for disciplinary action, the Ministry had
not taken up the matter at the appropriate level. In view of the fact that award/
implementation of works without formal recommendation from the MPs was a clear
violation of the provisions of the MPLADS Guidelines and tantamount to gross
irregularities, the Committee urged the Ministry to bring the irregularities committed
by the DAs concerned immediately to the notice of the Union Department of
Personnel and Training and also to the Chief Secretary of the State Government
concerned for initiating disciplinary action against the defaulting officers. The
Committee were of the firm opinion that such an action on the part of the Ministry
was imperative so as to convey in unambiguous terms that irregularities of such
nature would not be brooked or allowed to go unpunished. The Committee further
desired that as soon as the MPs recommended a particular work, the same should
have be intimated by the IAs to the beneficiaries.
18.The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:—
"As and when any irregularities committed by the District Authorities would
be brought/come to the notice of the Ministry, the same would be taken up
with the Chief Secretary of the State Government/Administrator of the UT on
case to case basis for taking appropriate action against the defaulting officers.
In case of All India Service Officers, after taking up with Chief Secretary and
obtaining his replies, the serious irregularities will be brought to the notice of
DoPT for appropriate action if felt necessary. Regarding intimation by IAs to
the beneficiaries, it is mentioned that as per the prescribed procedure, the
implementing agencies are assigned works only after sanction is accorded by
the district authorities of the works recommended by the MPs. Therefore it is

8
not feasible for the IAs to intimate details of recommended works to the
beneficiaries. However, in the new software being developed by the Ministry,
the details of the works recommended by an MP will be reflected. This
information will be available in the public domain and can be viewed by one
and all."
19. The Committee find that the reply of the Ministry does not have any
specific reference to the issues raised by them in their recommendation. The
Committee are surprised to note that instead of mentioning about concrete steps
taken by them in pursuance of the Committee's recommendation, the Ministry
have just intimated about the general principles of law. Issues such as execution of
MPLAD works by the DAs without the formal recommendations of the MPs or
sanction of work by DAs in anticipation of the MPs recommendation or even
execution of work recommend by representatives of the MPs speak eloquently of
an unholy nexus between the DAs and the vested interests. The Committee are of
the considered view that instances of such lapse should be taken seriously by the
Ministry. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and
desire that the Ministry make concerted efforts to pursue the matter with the
concerned State Governments and take punitive action against the erring officials.
They also hope that the Ministry will also take preventive steps to safeguard
against such lapses in future.
VI. Observation/Recommendation Para No. 16 of 55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
20.The Committee noted that in 10 States, ` 14.40 crores were sanctioned and
released for works pertaining to 34 Trusts/Societies, which exceeded the ceiling of
` 25 lakh per Trust/Society as fixed under the Scheme Guidelines. The Committee
further noted that in seven States, the DAs sanctioned ` 5.94 crore to 145 Trusts/
Societies which were either not eligible as per the Guidelines or whose eligibility
were not verified by the DAs. The Ministry had attributed reasons like non-obtaining
of declarations from the Trusts/Societies by the DAs, lack of interaction amongst
the DAs and lack of transparency due to non-availability of records of the Trusts/
Societies online, for the above cited irregularities in the States of West Bengal,
Meghalaya and Jharkhand whereas no response had been received from other
States like Jharkhand, Goa, Maharashtra and Rajasthan. The Committee deplored
the sorry state of affairs leading to blatant violation of the provisions of the
Guidelines and the resultant siphoning away of public funds. They desired that the
Ministry expeditiously obtain the clarifications from those States which had not yet
responded to the lapses, examine the explanations of all the States concerned and
prevail upon them to investigate the matter for initiating necessary and appropriate
action against the erring officials and the Committee be apprised of the specific
measures taken in this regard. The Committee also desired that a Central database
containing district-wise list of all the eligible Trusts/Societies be maintained by the
Ministry so as to avoid recurrence of lapses and to facilitate timely recoupment of
funds.

9
21. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:—
"It is informed that clarifications have been received from all the concerned
States, except Jharkhand, which is reminded periodically. With regard to
Central-database of Trusts/Societies, it may be mentioned that it will not be
possible to maintain Central database. However, Ministry is asking the District
Authorities to maintain district-wise data base in respect of Trusts/Societies
to whom work is allocated".
22. The Committee express their displeasure over the Ministry's response
with regard to the non-committal attitude of State Government of Jharkhand for
furnishing reply about the exceeding of ceiling by Trusts/Societies. The Committee
view this as a serious lapse on part of the Jharkhand Government and feel that the
State Government has little interest in the prosecuting the guilty. Moreover, the
Committee are also surprised to note the Ministry's submission regarding their
inability to maintain a central database. The Committee wonder when a central
database is not available in the Ministry, how it can monitor, review and implement
the scheme as per the mandate of the Ministry. As per the Ministry's reply, DAs
are being asked to maintain district- wise data base in respect of Trust/Societies
to whom works is allocated. Thus, the Committee exhort the Ministry to maintain
a central data base as well as direct the states to built comprehensive, all
encompassing data base so that the review and monitoring of the works under the
Scheme could be more transparent and could render much more efficiency in
terms of execution of the works within the prescribed time frame.
VII. Observation/Recommendation Para No. 18 of 55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
23. Although the MPLADS Guidelines stipulated that the time limit for
completion of works should generally not exceed one year, the Committee noted
that percentage of works remaining incomplete ranged from 48.23 percent in
2004-05 to 59.28 percent in 2006-07 reportedly due to various reasons which
inter alia included late receipt of recommendation of work from the MPs, selection
of inadmissible work, non- identification of land, local disputes, delay in tendering
procedure, imposition of election code of conduct and shortage of staff in DRDA/
Nodal Agency in the District. The Committee were also unhappy to note that
33 States/UTs had not yet reported the action taken against the Implementing
Agencies who failed to complete the work within the stipulated time mentioned in
the sanction letter. To make the matter worse, the Ministry were not in a position to
effectively monitor the incomplete works as according to their own admission they
did not get the reports about the completion or non- completion of the projects due
to insufficient updation of the information by the DAs. Even then, the Ministry
were just in the thinking stage of developing a single portal whereby they could get
the status of work on real time basis. The Committee felt that it was high time the
Ministry rose to the occasion and considered setting up of an effective institutional
mechanism for regular and concurrent monitoring of the ongoing works in view of
the fact that the cumulative number of works is increasing every year. Needless to
stress that the upkeep of data on the implementation of the MPLAD Scheme required

10
tremendous improvement. In fact, the implementation process, right from sanction
of works till their completion must be IT enabled and a comprehensive software
portal was an absolute must for effective data compilation, management and
monitoring. The Committee, therefore, emphasized that urgent centralized efforts at
the level of the Ministry be made to develop a single portal, if required by
outsourcing reputed IT firms, for streamlining the data base management system
and obtaining data on real time basis so that not only the assets created under the
scheme were highlighted for public awareness and scrutiny but also requisite
corrective measures were taken as and when warranted. The Committee further
desired that the Ministry should appropriately take up with the State Governments
the matters of procedural impediments like non-identification of land, local disputes,
delay in tendering procedure etc. so that timely action was taken and delay in
implementation/execution of works was avoided. It was also imperative on the part
of the Ministry to unfailingly bring to the notice of the Chief Secretaries of those
States who had not yet clarified the delays on their part in the execution of MPLADS
works. Even after that, if the State Governments concerned failed to comply, the
matter should be brought to the notice of the Chief Ministers so that responsibility
was fixed on the errant officials and action taken against the defaulting Implementing
Agencies.
24. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:—
"From the replies received from the State Nodal Authorities/UTs Authorities,
it has been seen that most of works were pending either have been completed
or cancelled except those cases who are held up due to court cases. Ministry
is aware about the undue delay on the part of the State Government/UTs and
have directed all the States/UTs to look into matter and investigate and initiate
disciplinary cases against the erring officials of District Authorities found
responsible for irregular sanction and further invoking the penalty clause
against the Implementing agencies who failed to complete the work in time as
stipulated in the Guidelines. The Ministry of Statistics & Programme
Implementation has already initiated the process of development of an
integrated MPLAD Scheme system for monitoring MPLAD Scheme funds
release, funds monitoring, Monitoring of expenditure incurred at Macro and
Micro level through NICSI. The proposed system will be a dynamic user
friendly web application and will be a single portal of reference for all the
stake holders. The portal will ensure Micro (works), Macro (release and
expenditure level) reporting and monitoring of timely utilization of funds".
25. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have directed all the
State Governments to look into the matter with respect to undue delay on their part
and investigate and initiate disciplinary cases against the erring officials of District
Authorities found responsible for irregular sanction and to invoke the penalty
clause against the implementing agencies who failed to complete the work in time
as stipulated in the Guidelines. However, the reply is silent about the action taken
by the States/UTs against the erring officials. The Committee, therefore, exhort

11
the Ministry to pursue the matter with the State Government authorities to see
that the erring officials be identified and suitable punitive steps be taken against
them. Besides, anticipating the successful development of the integrated software
for monitoring the MPLAD scheme, the Committee also request the Ministry for
early implementation of the software related programmes for monitoring release
of funds, expenditure incurred and timely utilization of funds. They would also
like to be apprised of the development in this regard.
VIII. Observation/Recommendation Para No. 29 of  55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
26. The Committee observed that the State level Monitoring Committee headed
by the Chief Secretary/Divisional Commissioner, which was to hold annual meeting
with DAs & MPs to review the progress of implementation of MPLADS, had not
even been constituted in three States/UTs. In other States, the Monitoring Committee
either failed to meet annually or never held any meeting. The Committee expressed
their serious displeasure on this pathetic state of affairs and recommended that the
Monitoring Committee at the State level under the Chairmanship of the Chief
Secretary/Divisional Commissioner/Additional Chief Secretary be constituted
expeditiously and the meetings of such Committees be convened at least once in a
year with wider participation of MPs to enhance the accountability of the DAs. The
Ministry should ask for regular compliance reports in this regard in their biannual
meetings with the State authorities so that corrective measures were taken as and
when required. As assured in evidence, the Committee would like the Ministry to
involve the Minister to write to the Chief Ministers so that the officers responsible
for dereliction of duty could be taken to task.
27. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:—
‘‘As per para 6.3 (i) of the Guidelines, meeting under the Chairmanship of
Chief Secretary/Development Commissioner should be held to review
implementation of the MPLAD Scheme with District Authorities and MPs at
least once in a year. District Authority is required to review and monitor the
Progress of the Scheme on quarterly basis in which MPs are also to be called.
However, during the recently held Bi-annual Review Meetings on MPLADS,
the District Authorities informed that despite their repeated requests to the
MPs to attend such meetings, some of the MPs are not attending the review
meetings nor do they send any reply to the notice of the meeting. The District
Authorities have however been asked to continue to invite the MPs in the
meetings. All the State Government/UTs administration have been advised to
hold Monitoring Committee Meetings at least once in a year and furnish the
Minutes to the Ministry.’’
28. The Committee had observed that the Monitoring Committee either
failed to meet annually or never held any meetings. The Ministry in their reply,
quoting Para 6.3 (i) of the Guidelines, have stated that a review meeting is to be
held at least once in a year and on a quarterly basis by DAs. The Committee desire
to be apprised about the number of sittings held till date State-wise and Minutes of
such meetings, since the MPs are also required to attend these meetings. The

12
Committee find that the reply of the Ministry is silent about asking for periodic
compliance reports from the State Governments. The Committee are of the view
that such compliance reports will enable the Ministry to evaluate the progress of
the MPLAD works and take corrective measures as and when required. They hope
that the Ministry will take necessary steps in this regard without further loss of
time under intimation to the Committee.
IX. Observation/Recommendation Para No. 30 of  55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
29. The Committee were concerned to note that in 18 States/UTs, only
13.69 percent of MPLADS funds were sanctioned for areas inhabited by the SC/ST
community against the requirement of 22.5 percent as per the Guidelines. It shall be
the responsibility of the DAs to enforce the provisions of the Guidelines in this
regard. Although the Guidelines had recently been amplified to give ample flexibility
to the MPs to go beyond the list of shelf of Projects in order to meet the needs of the
SC/ST people, the Ministry had not collated the data on expenditure under the
Scheme for the benefit of the SC/ST people on the plea of inadequate manpower.
The Committee were not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. They desired that
the Ministry must compile and collate on an annual basis the expenditure under the
MPLADS for SC/ST population, either utilizing the available resources or by
augmenting them, so that any aberrations/slippages on the part of the DAs were
rectified. The Committee specifically desired that in case a constituency does not
have ST inhabited area, the 22.5 percent earmarked funds may be utilized in SC
inhabited areas and vice-versa, in consonance with the provisions contained in the
Guidelines.
30. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:—
"The works are recommended by the Hon'ble MPs to the District Authorities.
As per para 2.5 of the Guidelines, the MPs are expected to recommend every
year works costing at least 15% of MPLADS fund for areas inhabited by
Scheduled Caste population and 7.5% for areas inhabited by Scheduled Tribe
population. Provision already exists in the Guidelines that in case, a
constituency does not have ST inhabited area, such fund may be utilized in
SC inhabited areas and vice-versa. It is the responsibility of the District
Authority to enforce this provision of the Guidelines. The Guidelines have
recently been amplified to include para 3.27 which provides availability of
Shelf of Projects including projects for SC/ST inhabited areas to MPs. Though
the Shelf of Projects is only suggestive, it gives ample flexibilities to the MP
to go beyond the list in order to meet the needs of the people."
31. While the Committee, in their Report, had observed that in 18 States/
UTs, only 14 percent of MPLADS funds were sanctioned for SC/ST inhabited
areas as against the requirement of 22.5 percent as per the Guidelines, the Ministry
in their reply, however, quoted Para 2.5 and Para 3.27 of the guidelines but did not
provide any relevant data in connection with the Committee's observation. The
Committee reiterate that the guidelines on MPLAD Scheme are quite clear but

13
much is desired to be enforced by the nodal Ministry and the implementing DAs.
The Committee desire that the Ministry provide a comprehensive data about the
funds allocation, implementation and completion of works under the Scheme in
SC/ST inhabited areas so that a comprehensive and a pragmatic view can be taken
in this regard.
X. Observation/Recommendation Para No. 31 of  55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
32. The Committee were shocked to note that neither the Ministry nor
17 States/UTs had made any arrangements for an internal audit of the MPLAD
Scheme. Much to the chagrin of the Committee, the internal audit wing of the
Ministry had submitted that internal audit of the Scheme had never been conducted
since the inception of the Scheme. In view of the fact that internal and concurrent
audit was an integral part of a strong internal control and monitoring system, the
Committee impressed upon the Ministry to put in place forthwith a robust internal
auditing mechanism and ask the State/UT Governments to engage the office of the
C&AG of India at the State level for periodically auditing the MPLADS account of
each individual MP. In this context, the Committee would like the Ministry to take
into consideration the suggestions of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
India regarding changes in the Guidelines relating to Accounting procedures,
improvements in quality of audit, guidance note on the conduct of audit on MPLADS
funds etc. which have already been communicated to the Ministry by the ICAI.
33.The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:—
"In order to consider changes in regard to audit accounts related matters
under MPLADS, a committee was constituted in the year 2008. The report
was received in the Ministry and was to be discussed in the presence of the
representative from the Ministry of Finance (D/o Expenditure). The report
was forwarded to Ministry of Finance, JS (PF-II) on 03.02.2012. The
representative was also invited to the meeting held on 07.03.2012 and 12.4.2012
but no one attended the meeting from the Ministry of Finance nor their
comments received. The Internal Audit Division of the Ministry in the meeting
informed that as per Rule 6 (1) and (2) of the GFR, any change in these
procedures/formats should have the approval of the M/Finance
(D/o Expenditure). The Comments of the Ministry of Finance (D/o Expenditure)
is still awaited. At present, 'Internal Audit Wing' of Principal Accounts Office
is conducting internal audit of two Ministries i.e. Planning and Statistics &
Programme Implementation. However, it has been requested to the Office of
the CGA to create 27 posts (01 DCA, 02 Sr. AO, 06 A.A.O, 12 Accountant,
03 LDC and 03 MTs) in Internal Audit Wing to strengthen the internal Audit
in the Ministry of Planning, Statistics and Programme Implementation. As
soon as the posts are created and the staff are positioned, the work on the
Internal Audit for the scheme as MPLAD etc. will be taken up. The Ministry
has also separately moved a proposal for creation of posts in the MPLADS
Division as well as for posts for MPLADS accounts work. However, recently,
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has issued Economy

14
Instructions wherein ban has been imposed on creation of new posts and the
proposal of this Ministry was returned with advice to resubmit after the ban
is lifted. However, this Ministry had requested Department of Expenditure to
consider the proposal for creation of post of this Ministry as a special case."
34. The Committee express their displeasure regarding the reported absence
of Ministry of Finance during the meetings held on 07.03.2012 and 12.04.2012
scheduled to discuss the report of the Committee constituted to consider changes
in regard to audited accounts relating to matters under MPLAD. The Ministry in
their reply have stated that the comments of Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure are still awaited on the issue. The Committee would therefore desire
the Ministry to seek the comments at the earliest and provide them to the
Committee. The Ministry have stated that Internal Audit Wing of Principal
Accounts office is conducting audit of Ministry of Planning and Statistics and
Programme Implementation. As per the Ministry's submission, the Committee
would like to be apprised about the present status regarding the creation of 27
posts in Internal Audit Wing to strengthen the internal audit where the Ministry
had requested the Department of Expenditure to consider the proposal as a special
case. Also, the Committee desire to know the actions taken by the Controller of
Accounts regarding the internal audit of the concerned Ministries. Also, the
Committee would like to be apprised about the response of Chief Secretaries of the
States/UTs regarding C&AG audit of the said scheme. Further, the Committee
also desire about the implementation of the recommendations as suggested by the
special Group of ICAI. The Committee also desire to know the status of seven posts
created for accounts as requested by Controller of Accounts.
Xl. Observation/Recommendation Para No. 32 of  55th Report (15th Lok Sabha)
35. The Committee noted that many of the systemic weaknesses affecting the
implementation of the MPLAD Scheme were brought to the notice of the Ministry
by the C&AG in two earlier performance Audit Reports in 1998 and 2001. Based on
the suggestions of the C&AG for devising a robust monitoring mechanism,
strengthening internal controls and impose greater financial discipline for the release
and expenditure of MPLADS funds, the Ministry had reportedly modified the
Release and Expenditure Guidelines in August, 2011 in consultation with the
Department of Expenditure. What, however, concerned the Committee was the
inordinate delay on the part of the State/UT Governments in furnishing Action
Taken Notes to the Audit observations. For example, while partial replies to the
Audit comments contained in their Report of 2010 had been received from most of
the States/UTs, a single reply had not yet been received from eight States/UTs i.e.
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala
and Nagaland. The Ministry, on their part, were just sending reminders. In view of
the fact that Audit observations were meant to plug the loopholes and foster good
governance, they ought to be taken with the seriousness they deserved. The
Committee, therefore, desired that the Ministry should take up the matter at the
Chief Secretary/Chief Minister level so that the State/UT authorities resort to

15
adequate and timely preventive and punitive measures on the Audit observations
in their own interest.
36.The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have submitted as under:—
"The Ministry has already taken up the with the Hon'ble Chief Minister of the
concerned State. This has resulted in receiving the reply from the States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and Nagaland. However reply from UT of
Dadra & Nagar Haveli is still awaited despite following up the matter
vigorously with the Administrator, UT of DNH. Suitable action will be taken
against the concerned in case of non-compliance."
37. In their Report, Committee had noted many systemic weaknesses in
implementation of MPLAD scheme as brought out by the C&AG . The Ministry in
their reply have stated that replies from Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and
Nagaland Governments have been received. The Ministry further have stated that
the reply from the UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli is still awaited and is being
pursued with the Administrator, UT of Dadra & Nagar Haveli. In this regard, the
Committee desire to be apprised of the status of the receipt of replies from Dadra
& Nagar Haveli. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note had stated that suitable
action would be taken against the concerned States in case of non-compliance. The
Committee would like to know the measures taken/proposed to be taken in this
connection and would like to be apprised of the replies received from the State
Governments/UTs.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
21st December, 2015 Chairperson,
30 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
THE GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations
1. The Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS),
introduced on 23 December 1993 to enable the Members of Parliament (MPs) to
identify small works of capital nature to meet local needs in their constituencies,
is a Plan Scheme fully funded by the Government of India. The funds released
under the Scheme are non-lapsable. The Scheme provides that a Member of
Lok Sabha may select works for implementation in his/her constituency while a
Member of Rajya Sabha may select works for implementation in one or more
districts of his/her choice in the State from which he/she has been elected. The
Scheme is administered by the Union Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, which is responsible for policy formulation, release of funds and
also for prescribing a monitoring mechanism for its implementation. At the State
level, a Department is designated as the Nodal Department with the overall
responsibility for supervision, monitoring and coordination of MPLADS
implementation with the districts and other line Departments. Decision making
powers in regard to technical, financial and administrative sanctions to be accorded
under the Scheme vest in the district level functionaries, viz. the District
Authorities (DAs). The Audit had earlier reviewed the scheme in 1998 and also in
2001 wherein it had pointed out several weaknesses/lapses in the implementation
of the Scheme. Based on the current review of the scheme by the C&AG for the
period between April 2009 and December 2009, through test check of records of
the Ministry, States/UTs and DAs, covering the period 2004-05 to 2008-09, the
examination of the subject by the Committee has revealed several deficiencies in
sanction and execution of work, utilization of funds, maintenance of various
records and monitoring of the implementation of MPLAD Scheme at both Central
and State levels as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Serial No. 01, Para 01 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
This is an introductory para on guidelines on the Member of Parliament Local
Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) and requires no comments.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
16

17
Observations/Recommendations
2. The Committee note that the Government of India released Rs.19,425.75
crore between 1993-94 to 2008-09 towards the MPLAD Scheme. Against a total
fund of Rs. 19,845.91 crore available with the DAs including Rs. 420.16 crore
accrued as interest, an expenditure of Rs 18,057.91 crore (91 per cent) was
incurred. On scrutiny of the budget allocation, funds released and previous
years funds available with the DAs during the years 2004-05 to 2008-09 the
Committee find that an amount of Rs. 17891.15 crore was available with the DAs
whereas the actual expenditure incurred in all these years combindly was to the
tune of Rs. 8084.53 crore, depicting significant shortfalls in the utilization of
funds each year. The Ministry's explanation that in non-lapsable schemes they
look at the expenditure on cumulative basis is untenable in view of less than 50
per cent cumulative expenditure during the above said five years. Further, the
non-lapsable character of a particular Scheme and the resultant carry forward of
the unspent balances to the next fiscal cannot be a ruse for non-completion of
the projects/works within a given financial year and the given time lines. On the
contrary, non-completion of projects and non-utilization of the earmarked funds
defeats the very purpose for which the Scheme was conceived and funds allotted
annually. Similarly, though it is a fact that the funds were released to different
Lok Sabha constituencies and Rajya Sabha MPs at different points of time and
unspent balances are bound to exist at any given point of time, the trend of
fund utilization during each of the five years 2004-05 to 2008-09 is deplorable.
As merely making provision in the guidelines would not be sufficient to maximize
the funds utilization, the Committee urge the Ministry to take appropriate steps,
including effective monitoring to ensure optimum utilization of the annual
earmarked funds by the State Government/DAs so that the unspent balances
are reduced to the barest minimum and the avowed objectives of the MPLAD
Scheme are well served. The Committee hardly need to emphasize that the need
for taking such pro-active measures on the part of the Ministry assumes far
greater significance in view of the enhancement of the annual entitlement of an
MP from Rs. 2 crore to Rs. 5 crore w.e.f. the financial year 2011-12.
[Serial No. 02, Para 02 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Under the MPLAD Scheme, incurring of expenditure and concomitant
release of funds, takes place continuously, throughout the year on meeting the
eligibility criteria as per provision of the Guidelines. Whenever the unspent
balance in respect of a constituency/Rajya Sabha MP reduces below a certain

18
limit as per eligibility criteria, the second installment of funds is released to the
concerned Nodal District. Thus, in view of the nature and dynamics of the
scheme unspent balances would exist at any given point of time. However, in
order to optimally utilize the funds by the District Authorities all the States/UTs
have been requested to issue sanction and start work on eligible
recommendations of the MPs without waiting for funds in view of non-lapsable
nature of the scheme. This is likely to enable District Authorities to initiate more
number of works by increasing the spread and likely to reduce unspent balance
with District Authorities. The Ministry is also monitoring the progress of the
implementation of the Scheme and constantly urging the Secretaries of State/
UT nodal departments to take effective steps for increasing utilization of funds.
Further the Guidelines stipulate review of the implementation of the works at
the level of Chief Secretary/Nodal Secretary and also at District Authority level.
Apart from the above, Ministry also undertakes Bi-Annual Review Meeting
with the Nodal Secretaries of the States/UTs usually chaired by Hon'ble Minister
of Statistics and Programme Implementation where the utilization of funds by
the States and the UTs are reviewed. The scope of the Scheme has now been
widened to cover more works in the scheme. With the enhancement of the
annual entitlement of the MP from Rs. 2 crore to Rs. 5 crore under MPLADS
from the financial year 2011-12, Para 4.3 of the Guidelines have been amended in
consultation with Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance to tighten
the fund release mechanism for achieving faster utilization of funds and to
reduce the unspent funds with the District Authorities. As per amendment, the
first installment of Rs. 2.5 crore will be released in the beginning of the first
financial year without condition. But in the remaining years even the first
installment will be released subject to the condition that the second installment
of the previous year was released for the MP concerned and also subject to
furnishing of the provisional Utilization Certificate of previous year covering at
least 80% of the expenditure of the first installment of the previous year.
Vetting Comments
Reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as making provision in the
Guidelines would not be sufficient to minimize the unspent balance with the
DAs. Criteria mentioned in paragraph 4.3 of the revised Guidelines could lead to
substantial unspent balance. As per revised Guidelines, the first installment of
Rs. 2.5 crore will be released in the beginning of the financial year at the time of
constitution of Lok Sabha or election of Rajya Sabha. Second installment will
be released if the unspent fund with the MP is less than Rs.2.50 crore. In the
remaining years, the first installment will be released in the beginning of the
financial year subject to the condition that the second installment of the previous
year was released for the MP concerned and also subject to furnishing of the
provisional Utilization Certificate of previous year covering at least 80% of the
expenditure of the first installment of the previous year. This could lead to

19
availability of unspent balance of anything less than Rs. 5.50 crore with an MP
at a point of time.
Comments of the Ministry
The extant criteria for release of funds in the Guidelines of Members of
Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) are as below :—
Para 4.1 :The annual entitlement of Rs. 5 crore shall be released, in two equal
installments of Rs. 2.5 crore each, by Government of India directly to the
District Authority of the Nodal District of the Member of Parliament
concerned.
Para 4.2 :At the time of the constitution of Lok Sabha, and election of a Rajya
Sabha Member, the first installment of Rs. 2.5 crore shall be released to
the District Authority without the documents stipulated under para 4.3
below. The subsequent installments of the continuing Members of
Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha will be released as per eligibility criteria
indicated in Paragraph 4.3.
Para 4.3 :The first installment of Rs. 2.5 crore at the time of constitution of Lok
Sabha or election of Rajya Sabha Member will be released in the beginning
of the financial year. In the remaining years, the first installment will be
released in the beginning of the financial year subject to the condition
that the second installment of the previous year was released for the MP
concerned and also subject to furnishing of the provisional Utilization
Certificate of previous year covering at least 80% of the expenditure of
the first installment of the previous year. The second installment of the
MPLADS funds will be released subject to the fulfillment of the following
eligibility criteria:—
(i) the unsanctioned balance amount available in the account of the
District Authority after taking into account the cost of all the work
sanctioned is less than Rs.1 crore;
(ii) the unspent balance of fund of the MP concerned is less than
Rs. 2.5 crore; and
(iii) Utilization Certificate and Audit Certificate of the immediately
concluded financial year ending 31st March have been furnished
by District Authority (in format at Annexure viii & ix of the guidelines
respectively).
The above stipulations will be calculated from the Monthly Progress
Report for each sitting and former MP term-wise separately. The Monthly
Progress Report is to be sent by the District Authorities in the format at
Annexure.
The above provisions (Paras 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3) were incorporated in August
2011, with the concurrence of Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure).

20
Para 4.13 : The District Authority can sanction works up to the entitlement of the
MP for that year without even physical availability of funds. Funds
will be released by the Government as per the eligibility criteria stipulated
in paragraphs 4.2, 4.3 and 4.5 above.
Para 4.15 : Release of Funds to Implementing Agency : The District Authority
shall release funds to the Implementing Agency in accordance with
the State Government rules/guidelines applicable for the purpose.
The scheme is presently operating as per the above-mentioned provisions.
The Ministry regularly emphasises upon the State Governments/District Authorities
on the need for timely and regular utilization of funds and submission of necessary
documents and certifications. In the review of MPLADS with State Government
officers and District Magistrates held on 26.02.2013, also, it was inter alia emphasized
as below:—
"Slow releases and slow utilization: It was emphasized that timely and regular
utilization of funds is an essential requirement, the importance of which cannot
be over emphasized. Implementation of the scheme is with the State
Governments; it has to be ensured by them that the implementation is
undertaken in a time-bound manner and that the necessary documents and
certifications for release of funds are forthcoming in a regular manner.
The State Governments were requested to optimize the (a) utilization and
(b) submission of necessary documents and certifications for further releases."
Vetting Comments
Ministry may inform PAC about the steps taken by the Ministry to maximize
the utilization of funds under the Scheme under the revised Guidelines:
(i) Whether the Ministry monitors the impact of inclusion of Para 4.13
allowing the sanction of works upto the entitlement of the MP for
that year without even physical availability of funds.
(ii) Whether improvements in funds utilization has been noticed after
the revision of Guidelines, and status of funds utilized vis-à-vis
funds available under the Scheme during 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12
and 2012-13.
Comments of the Ministry
MPLADS funds are non-lapsable funds; they are released by the Ministry on
receipt of all requisite documents and certifications from the District Authorities/
State Governments. Guidelines of the Scheme are such that unspent balances (which
also include interest accrued on the funds released) are bound to exist at any given
point of time. When the unspent balance in a constituency accounts falls below
Rs. 2.5 crore, the funds are released subject to receipt of required documents and
certifications. The number of accounts are quite large (presently about 1775). The

21
District Authorities/State Governments are regularly requested by the Ministry for
ensuring timely utilisation of funds and furnishing the required documents viz.
MPRs, Utilization Certificates and Audit Certificates. Regarding Para 4.13 allowing
the sanction of works upto the entitlement of the MP for that year without physical
availability of funds, the State Government/District Authorities are regularly
requested by this Ministry to process sanction/implementation of works upto the
entitlement of the MP for the concerned year without waiting for physical availability
of MPLADS funds. Status of funds utilized vis-a-vis funds available under the
Scheme during 2009-10, 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 is given below:—
Financial Year Funds Funds Unspent % unspent 
Released utilized funds over  release
(Rs. in Cr) (Rs. in Cr) (Rs. in Cr)
(i) 2009-10 828.00 128.22 699.78 84.51
(ii) 2010-11 985.31 645.77 339.54 34.46
(iii) 2011-12 1170.69 1119.21 651.48 36.79
(iv) 2012-13 2618.00 2205.82 412.18 15.74
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
4. The Committee are dismayed to note that the unspent balances of the
present and former Rajya Sabha MPs stood at Rs. 3186.75 crore as on
30th September, 2011, as per the Monthly Progress Reports received by the Ministry.
It is a matter of serious concern that although there was a time line i.e. 31st December,
2010 for the States to complete the accounting process, some States had not
distributed the unspent balances nor closed the accounts, even by the end of
October, 2011. The Ministry admitted before the Committee that it happens a number
of times that distribution of unspent balances does not take place on a regular basis
and the Ministry are not sure whether the accounts have formally been closed or
not in case of those States which have initiated the distribution process. It is a
matter of little consolation that the Ministry keep on reiterating through circulars
and review meetings for timely distribution of the unspent balances. In view of the
huge proportion of the outstanding unspent balances as on 30th September, 2011,
it is obvious that the Ministry's efforts are grossly inadequate. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should intensify their monitoring mechanism,
tighten the related provisions in the Guidelines and prescribe a definite time limit for
the distribution of unspent balances of the Members of Parliament as well as for the

22
timely closure of the accounts. The Committee specifically desire that a sunset
clause be incorporated in the Guidelines making it mandatory that if the States are
unable to distribute the unspent balances within the prescribed time line, the funds
would revert to the Centre.
[Serial No. 04, Para 04 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As stipulated in the Guidelines the District Authorities are required to
distribute the unspent amount of the former MPs, which is a continuous process.
The Guidelines stipulate the provision of distribution of unspent balance of former
Rajya Sabha MPs. Ministry also issues instructions to the District Authorities from
time to time to ensure timely distribution of unspent amount. The position is also
reviewed in the Bi-Annual Review Meetings with the States/UTs Government and
during Review Meeting with the States/UTs. Defaulting states have been asked to
complete the exercise and to take action against the officials who do not adhere to
the instructions of the Ministry regarding distribution of unspent balance. With
regard to prescribing the time limit of distribution of uncommitted/unspent MPLADS
funds in respect of RS (MP) is concerned, this Ministry has already made provision
in the new guidelines (Para 4.10.1) that the works of MPLADS shall be completed
within 18 months from the date of demitting office in case of Rajya Sabha MPs or
dissolution of the Lok Sabha. District Authorities shall settle and close the account
of the concerned MP after completing all other formalities in another 3 months time,
under intimation to Government of India and with detailed information in the Monthly
Progress Report (MPR). If the District Authorities does not finish the projects
within 18 months of demitting of an MP or dissolution of Lok Sabha, the District
Authorities will be required to complete the balance work out of State/District
funds. In no case, any extension will be given and District Authorities shall be held
responsible in case of any lapse in this regard.
Vetted Comments
Ministry's reply is silent about the recommendation of the Committee regarding
incorporation of "sunset clause in the Guidelines thereby making it mandatory for
the States to revert the funds to centre in the event of their inability to utilize the
unspent balances within prescribed time limit."
Comments of the Ministry
The extant provisions in the Guidelines are as below:—
Para 4.4 : Funds released to the District Authority by the Government of India
are non- lapsable. Funds left in the district can be carried forward for
utilization in the subsequent years. Further, the funds not released
by the Government of India in a year will be carried forward for
making releases in the subsequent years subject to the fulfillment of
criteria stipulated in Paragraph 4.3.

23
Para 4.7 : In respect of elected Members of Lok Sabha, the balances of MPLADS
funds left by the predecessor MP in a Lok Sabha constituency (funds
not committed for works of the predecessor MP) would be passed on
to the successor MP from that constituency. (In case of fresh
delimitation, separate orders will be issued).
Para 4.8 :  In respect of elected Members of Rajya Sabha, the balance of funds
(funds not committed for the recommended works) left in the Nodal
District by the predecessor Member in a particular State on his demitting
office will be equally distributed by the State Government among the
successor elected Rajya Sabha Members in that State. The unspent
balance of even earlier elected Rajya Sabha MPs if not already distributed,
will be equally distributed among the sitting Rajya Sabha Members of
the States concerned by the State Government.
Para 4.9: The balance of funds (funds not committed for the recommended
and sanctioned works) left by the nominated Members of Rajya Sabha
in the Nodal District will be equally distributed amongst the successor
nominated Members of Rajya Sabha by the State Government with
the approval of Government of India.
Para 4.10: The balance of funds (funds not committed for the recommended
and sanctioned works) left by Anglo-Indian nominated Lok Sabha
MPs will be equally distributed among the successor Anglo-Indian
nominated Lok Sabha MPs by the State Government with the
approval of Government of India.
Para 4.10.1: The work of MPLADS shall be completed within 18 months from the
date of demitting office in case of Rajya Sabha MPs or dissolution of
the Lok Sabha. District Authorities shall settle and close the account
of the concerned MP after completing all other formalities in another
3 months time, under intimation to the Govt. of India and with detailed
information in the Monthly Progress Report (MPR). If the District
Authority does not finish the projects within 18 months of demitting
of an MP or dissolution of Lok Sabha, the District Authority will be
required to complete the balance work out of State/District funds. In
no case, any extension will be given and District Authority shall be
held responsible in case of any lapse in this regard.
Para 4.10.1 was incorporated in January 2012 in the Guidelines.
The scheme is presently operating as per the above-mentioned provisions.
It would be seen that the flow of funds is non-lapsable and continuous (the
basic intent and purpose of a 'sunset clause' are largely met).
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]

24
Observations/Recommendations
6. Although the MPLADS Guidelines stipulate that the Implementing
Agencies shall refund to the District Authorities the savings including interest, if
any, at their disposal within one month and close the Bank Account opened for the
purpose, the Committee find that in 24 States/UTs, unspent balances of Rs. 1.98 crore
arising due to completion of works at lower than the sanctioned cost and interest
accrued on balances of Rs. 4.71 crore have not been refunded by the IAs to the
DAs after the completion of the works. The Ministry's statement that there are
minimal chances of the unspent amount is left with the IAs is self-contradictory in
view of their own admission that an amount of Rs. 127.50 lakh was the balance
unspent amount lying with the IAs in various States/UTs. Needless to say, the two
statements need to be reconciled by the Ministry. Although it is the responsibility
of the DAs to coordinate and supervise the work being executed under MPLADS
and ask the IAs to refund the unspent amount, yet if the DAs are found wanting in
the effective discharge of their assigned duties, prudence warrants that the Ministry
intervene appropriately. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to monitor
the expenditure closely and take up the matter with the State/UT Governments so
that the IAs refund promptly the unspent amount including interest to the DAs as
per the procedure laid down in the MPLADS Guidelines.
[Serial No. 06, Para 06 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Para 6.5 (iv) of the Guidelines stipulate that the Implementing Agencies shall
refund to the District Authority the savings including interest, if any, at their disposal
within one month and close the Bank Account opened for the purpose. Therefore,
it is the responsibility of the District Authority to co-ordinate and supervise the
work being executed under MPLADS and ensure that Implementing Agencies refund
the unspent amount as the District has the direct control over the Implementing
Agencies. District Authorities have reported that most of the unspent balances
have been recovered or Instructions have been issued for refunding the unspent
amount or have been adjusted in the sanction issued subsequently. No case of
misappropriation of funds with regard to uncommitted and unspent balance lying
with the Implementing Agencies has been reported to this Ministry.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]

25
Observations /Recommendations
7. The Committee note that in 13 States/UTs, 35 DAs utilized an amount of
Rs 1.30 crore on inadmissible items like payment of honorarium/wages/travelling
expenses of staff, fuel for official vehicles, purchase of laptops etc. Further, six DAs
in five States incurred excess expenditure on contingencies than the prescribed
limit of 0.5 per cent of the amount spent on the completed project. The Ministry's
statement that the DAs are expected to ensure that the expenses remain within the
prescribed limit does not satisfy the Committee, as mere expectation without any
preventive or punitive action, would not deter the DAs from incurring excess
expenditure on contingencies. Now that the Administrative Expenses have been
increased to 2 per cent of the amount spent on the completed project w.e.f. the
financial year 2011-12, commensurate with the enhancement of the MPLAD fund
allocation, the Committee recommend that a separate account for such expenditure
incurred during a financial year be maintained and the MP concerned be informed in
accord with the provisions stipulated in the Guidelines. Any deviations in this
regard be viewed seriously and stringent action taken against the DAs in the event
of incurring expenditure on inadmissible items or beyond the prescribed limit. The
Committee would also like the Ministry to explore the feasibility of extending
necessary assistance to the MPs for monitoring works recommended by them.
[Serial No. 07, Para 07 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Para 4.17 of the latest Guidelines (August, 2012) now stipulate that a
separate account for such expenditure incurred during a year under MPLAD Scheme
shall be maintained and MP concerned shall be kept informed besides making
available the details for scrutiny by Audit. District Authority is expected to take
action as per this provision and ensure that the expenses remain within the prescribed
limit. After the decision to allow administrative expense of 2% of the MPLADS
funds outlay, the Ministry has clearly laid down the items on which the administrative
expenses be incurred.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
8. The Committee deprecate to note that proper records are not maintained
by the Ministry to watch the progress of the receipt of the Annual Accounts and
Utilisation Certificates from the DAs. Further, the Ministry have routinely been
relaxing the conditions for submission of UCs and Audit Certificates by the DAs,
before allowing the release of the second installment of funds. The Committee are
surprised that the Ministry themselves are not maintaining proper records which

26
are so vital for it to review overall fund utilization but expect the State Governments/
DAs/IAs to be perfect in every respect just because Guidelines have been issued.
The Committee are of the firm opinion that the Ministry have to first put their house
in order and set an example for the State/UT Governments to emulate. They, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should urgently start maintaining MP-wise Grants-in-
aid Register with details of funds released, status of the receipt of the Monthly
Progress Reports, Utilisation Certificates and Audit Certificates in a computerized
format with complete data validation and place it on the official website of the
Ministry for effective monitoring of the fund utilization as well as to bring in
transparency and public scrutiny.
[Serial No. 08, Para 08 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Utilisation Certificates and Audit Certificates are already being maintained
in the Ministry in the individual files of the MPs on the basis of which release of
funds is done. However, as advised, computerized format of Grants-in-aid Register
has been finalized and is being made operational wherein the MP-wise details of
release of funds, receipt of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) and Audit Certificates
(ACs) would be maintained.
Vetting Comments
Ministry's reply is silent regarding upload of complete data relating to receipt
of UC, AC and MPR on the official website of the Ministry for effective monitoring
of the fund utilization as well as to bring in transparency and public scrutiny.
Comments of the Ministry
The computerized format of Grants-in-aid Register has been finalized and
made operational wherein the MP-wise details of release of funds and receipt of
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) and Audit Certificates (ACs) are being regularly
updated. The uploading of data on the Ministry's website is a continuous exercise.
So that data is regularly uploaded by the Districts, the District Authorities have
been authorized to engage Data Entry Operators from the Administrative Expenses
admissible under Para 4.17 of the Guidelines. It is required and expected of the
District Authorities that they load and maintain up-to-date data on the website.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/ 2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I.

27
Observations/Recommendations
9. The Committee take due note of the explanation of the Ministry that the
decision to relax the conditions for submission of UCs and ACs by the DAs was
taken on the basis of review of release position to ensure that the works
recommended by the MPs and sanctioned by the Districts did not suffer for want of
funds. While appreciating the concern of the Ministry, the Committee would,
however, like to caution that such relaxations in the conditions for submission of
UCs must be discouraged so that proper fiscal discipline is maintained while ensuring
smooth progress of the Scheme. Having said that, the Committee are of the view
that timely furnishing of the UCs by the DAs/IAs should be ensured so that
subsequent release of installment of funds do not get delayed.
[Serial No. 09, Para 09 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
This Ministry did not relax the condition of UC/AC after constitution of 15th
Lok Sabha (i.e. 2009-10 onwards). The primary condition of unsanctioned balance
being less than Rs. 50 lakh and unspent balance being less than Rs. 1 crore for
release of the 2nd installment of the funds was never relaxed, while only relaxing the
condition of furnishing of the Utilization Certificates and Audit Certificates at the
fag end of the financial years during 2006 to 2009. However, this was further subject
to condition that the next installment i.e. 1st installment of the succeeding year
would be released only on receipt of these Utilisation Certificates and Audit
Certificates. In no case the 1st installment of the succeeding year was released
without obtaining the Utilisation Certificate and Audit Certificate required for release
of previous installment. Thus in a true sense, the furnishing of Utilization Certificates
and Audit Certificates was only deferred and not waived. This decision too was
taken by the Ministry to ensure that the works recommended by the MPs and
sanctioned by the Districts do not suffer for want of funds. The Ministry has been
regularly emphasizing the need to furnish the Audit Certificates and Utilisation
Certificates in the bi-annual Review Meeting on MPLADS and other various
meetings as well as during training programme. Now in consultation with Department
of Expenditure more stringent financial discipline has been put in place through the
amendment of Para 4.3 of the guidelines. As per amendment of the Guidelines, the
first installment of Rs. 2.5 crore will be released in the beginning of the financial year
subject to the condition that the second installment of the previous year was
released for the MP concerned and also subject to furnishing of the provisional
Utilization Certificate of previous year covering at least 80% of the expenditure of
the first installment of the previous year which is in line with the GFR. Utilisation
Certificates are received, duly signed/certified by the ADC/PD, DRDA/Collector,
by the Ministry. Funds are released only after receipt of complete documents.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]

28
Observations/Recommendations
11. The Committee find that the above said doubtful expenditure occurred
due to grossly inadequeate monitoring of the projects by both the District Authorities
and the Implementing Agencies, as corroborated by the Ministry in evidence. The
Committee are of the considered view that mere lodging of an FIR against the
Head Master of a particular school or the local head of the implementing agency
would not suffice to check financial fraud and irregularities, unless supervisory
officers, including those who check and sign the Utilization Certificates are held
primarily resonsible for any doubtful expenditure. The Committee, therefore, urge
the Ministry to prevail upon the State Governments where such irregularities have
been reported to further investigate the matter with a view to finding out whether
there are larger conspiracies involved in the fraud and depending upon the findings,
examplary action be taken against the officers concerned. The Committee also
desire that the practice of submitting vouchers on plain paper by the Implementing
Agencies, as happens in some States, be discarded forwith so that instances of
payments on doubtful vouchers do not re-occur.
[Serial No. 11, Para 11 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The FIR lodged by the Nodal District, South 24 Parganas in West Bengal
have been received. It has been informed that the District Authority is already
pursuing the case to recover the fund spent on irregular works and disciplinary
action is being initiated. The Ministry is in the process of development of an
integrated software for MPLAD Scheme for monitoring funds release and
expenditure both at Macro and Micro level which is expected to bring in more fiscal
control and transparency in the system. Instructions have already been issued to
all the concerned States/UTs administrators separately in each case to adhere to
the provisions of GFR and state procedure while making payment to the contractor.
Vetting Comments
DA has confirmed (October 2009) the misappropriation of funds by the
Secretary Talidi-1 and In-charge of Rajapur Free Primary School, against whom, the
FIR was lodged. No further action/investigation has been reported by the Ministry
after lodging of FIR.
Comments by the Ministry
In the review of MPLADS with State Government officers and District
Magistrates held on 26.02.2012 it was inter alia directed as below:—
"Pending CAG audit paras: Attention was specifically drawn to one important
aspects that many of the CAG audit paras enumerate facts that points towards

29
malafide violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance. It bears emphasis
that in such cases the CAG has already seen the record and also given
opportunity to explain before recording such facts. It therefore becomes
important to immediately examine such reports for appropriate action, which
could include action in any or all of the following three domains—(a) criminal
culpability, (b) departmental action and (c) civil action for recovery. Delaying
or diluting action in such cases has to be avoided.
"The State Governments were requested to expedite (a) necessary action to
get the paras settled as per rules and (b) in case of facts pointing towards
malafide violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance, to take appropriate
action under law and report on action taken in a time-bound manner.
In the said review, it was inter alia also emphasized as under:—
"FIRs: It was mentioned by West Bengal (24 Parganas South) and Uttar
Pradesh (Auraiya) that they have registered/ordered FIRs in respect of criminal
culpability in implementation of the Scheme. It was emphasized that the matter
could not end with registering of FIRs; the next steps, of investigation and
prosecution, etc., should also be undertaken on time-bound priority."
The minutes were sent to all State Governments for necessary action. (The
minutes had been approved by Hon'ble Minister for Programme Implementation,
Government of India.)
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I
Observations/Recommendations
12. The Committee note that the objective of the MPLAD Scheme is to
enable the MPs to recommend works of developmental nature with emphasis on
the creation of durable community assets based on the localy felt needs in their
constituencies. As per the provisions of the Guidelines, the Panchayati Raj
Institutions are the preferable Implementing Agencies and according to the
Ministry it is expected that an MP during his constituency tour should consult
the PRIs. But the Committee feel that the design of the Scheme itself should
specify the mechanism to be adopted by the MPs to ensure participation of
various constituents like active resident forums, local bodies and NGOs in
determining and recommending the works responsive to locally felt needs and

30
according to the priority of the MP's constituency. With a view to involving the
local bodies/communities effectively in the planning and implementation of the
Scheme, the Committee recommend that the Implementing Agencies should be
advised/counselled to involve local people/bodies while conceiving, designing
and implementing works/projects under the MPLADS so that a sence of belonging
and participatory approach is generated.
[Serial No. 12, Para 12 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per the Guidelines, the Scheme is so designed to give complete freedom to
MPs to choose location and projects subject to the basic objective and provision
of the Guidelines. The objective of the scheme is to enable MPs to recommend
works of developmental nature with enphasis on the creation of durable community
assets based on the locally felt needs in their Constituencies. The MP during his
tours of his constituency contact the people of his constituency about the work to
be executed for the welfare of the public at large in a particular area. It is open to the
MPs to consult the constituents of his locality. However, in order to facilitate MPs,
the District Authorities have been asked to provide shelf of projects based on local
needs. The Ministry has also circulated an illustrative list of projects/works.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I
Observations/Recommendations
13. One of the peculiar characteristics of the MPLAD Scheme is that it is
unlike other Centrally Sponsored Schemes where action plan is made in the early
part of the financial year. As the MPs frequently tour their constituencies and make
recommendations, sometimes as late as February and March of the financial years,
based on the locally felt needs, the Ministry have amended para 2.6 of the guidelines
to enable the MPs to make recommendations throughout the financial year. In this
context, the Committee find that in respect of 34,023 works pertaining to 64 DAs in
15 States/UTs, recommendations were furnished by the MPs with delays beyond
the prescribed limit of 90 days from the commencement of the financial year and
such recommendations continued upto the end of the financial year, thus extending
the period of utilization of funds. The Committee appreciated the concerns and
steps taken by the Ministry in enabling the MPs to continue recommending works
throughout the financial year, as funds do not lapse at the end of the fiscal under

31
the Scheme. But, in view of the urgency of the projects in some sectors like education,
drinking water supply, health and family welfare, drainage etc. which have a direct
utility impact on the people and a greater outreach for long term sustainable benefits,
the Committee desire that the Ministry may advise the MPs to timely recommend as
far as practicable, the works pertaining to such sectors so that both short term and
long term benefits are extended to the people and time and cost overrun is avoided.
The Committee also desire that a system needs to be evolved wherein the DAs,
after evaluating the locally felt needs of the people, can suggest comparatively lead
activities to be taken up at the beginning of the financial year so as to facilitate the
timely recommendation of works by the MPs. The Committee would further like the
Ministry to explore the feasibility of the provision of issuance of structural safety
certificate by the local/competent authority for very old aided school buildings,
where building plans are not available, with a view to enabling the MPs to recommend
works for such educational institutions.
[Serial No. 13, Para 13 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per Para 2.6 of the MPLADS Guidelines, each MP will recommend works up
to the annual entitlement during the financial year in the format at Annex-III to the
concerned District Authority. Para 3.12 also stipulates that all recommended eligible
works should be sanctioned within 75 days from the date of receipt of the
recommendation, after completing all formalities, the District Authority shall, however,
inform MPs regarding rejection, if any, within 45 days from the date of receipt of
recommendations, with reasons thereof. These provisions have been made in order
to facilitate MPs to recommend works at any time during the financial year depending
upon the felt needs of the public at large, whereas the DAs are bound to examine such
recommended works within a maximum period of 75 days. With regard to the suggestion
of the Committee to advise MPs to timely recommend as far as practicable, the works
pertaining to sectors like education, drinking water supply, health and family welfare,
drainage etc. so that both short term and long term benefits are extended to the people
and time and cost overrun is avoided, it may be mentioned that it is prerogative of the
MPs to recommend works based on the locally felt needs of the people and therefore
it may not be desirable to put some restrictive time frame in view of the spirit of the
guidelines. In Addition, it may be stated that the guidelines have been recently
amended to require the District Authority to maintain a suggested "Shelf of Projects"
which will be only suggestive and not binding (Para 3.37 of the Guidelines) and may
be of help to the MP in choosing useful projects as per local demand. Regarding
exploring the feasibility of the provision of issuance of structural safety certificate by
the local/competent authority for very old aided school buildings, where building
plans are not available, it would be for departments of the State Govt./UT to take
necessary action in this regard.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]

32
Observations/Recommendations
17. The Committee recommend that the ceiling of Rs. 25 lakh per Trust/Society
as per the Scheme Guidelines should be doubled commensurate with the increase
of the MPLAD fund from Rs. 2 crore to Rs. 5 crore per MP. They also desire that in
view of the highly commendable works done by some Trusts/Societies of national/
international repute, the allocation of the prescribed MPLAD fund to them should
not be a onetime affair. In other words, based on the periodic assessment of the
performance of the Trusts/Societies, they may be allocated funds at regular intervals,
say every five/six years.
[Serial No. 17, Para 17 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Under the existing guidelines on the MPLAD Scheme, Para 3.21 deals
with the issue pertaining to registered societies/trust. Till recently not more than
Rs. 25 lakhs could be spent from MPLADS funds for one or more works of a
particular societies/trust. If a society has however availed of MPLADS funds up
to Rs. 25 lakhs no more work could be recommended to that society/trust under
the scheme. This particular provision has recently been modified retaining the
limit of Rs. 25 lakhs but authorizing MPs to recommend funds only up to Rs. 50
lakhs in a financial year from the MPLADS funds in consultation with both the
Committees of Parliament on MPLADS. Several MPs have also represented to
remove the ceiling of 50 lakhs that an MP can recommend in a financial year. The
matter was examined in consultation with both the Committees of Parliament on
MPLADS. Both the Committees have suggested to remove the ceiling of Rs. 50
lakhs that an MP can recommend to trusts/societies in a financial year. However,
the Ministry has solicited comments of the Committees on Para 60 and 71 of the
report of the Committee to inquire into the allegation of improper conduct of some
members in implementation of MPLADS. The comments are still awaited from Lok
Sabha Committee. On receipt of the same from them, the Ministry will like to
examine the matter further.
Vetting Comments
Further progress may be mentioned in the ATN.
Comments by the Ministry
This Ministry has amended para 3.21.2 of the Guidelines of MPLADS vide
this Ministry's Circular No. RG 9/12 dated 30.11.2012 wherein it has been stipulated
that: "Not more than Rs. 50 lakh can be spent from MPLADS Funds for one or more

33
works of a particular Society/Trust in the lifetime of that Society/Trust. If a society
has already availed of MPLADS funds upto Rs. 50 lakh, no more funds can be
recommended for that Society/Trust under the Scheme. From the financial year
2012-13, an MP can recommend funds only upto Rs. one crore in all in a financial
year from MPLADS funds for works to Societies/Trusts. The recommendation
made by Hon'ble MPs for the period prior to the financial year 2012-13 is to be
regulated as per the guidelines existing during that period."
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
18. Although the MPLADS Guidelines stipulate that the time limit for
completion of works should generally not exceed one year, the Committee note that
percentage of works remaining incomplete ranged from 48.23 percent in 2004-05 to
59.28 percent in 2006-07 reportedly due to various reasons which inter-alia include
late receipt of recommendation of work from the MPs, selection of inadmissible
work, non-identification of land, local disputes, delay in tendering procedure,
imposition of election code of conduct and shortage of staff in DRDA/Nodal Agency
in the District. The Committee are also unhappy to note that 33 States/UTs have not
yet reported the action taken against the Implementing Agencies who failed to
complete the work within the stipulated time mentioned in the sanction letter. To
make the matter worse, the Ministry are not in a position to effectively monitor the
incomplete works as according to their own admission they do not get the reports
about the completion or non-completion of the projects due to insufficient updation
of the information by the DAs. Even then the Ministry are just in the thinking stage
of developing a single portal whereby they could get the status of work on real time
basis. The Committee feel that it is high time the Ministry rose to the occasion and
considered setting up of an effective institutional mechanism for regular and
concurrent monitoring of the ongoing works in view of the fact that the cumulative
number of works in increasing every year. Needless to stress that the upkeep of
data on the implementation of the MPLAD Scheme requires tremendous
improvement. In fact, the implementation process, right from sanction of works till
their completion must be IT enabled and a comprehensive software portal is an
absolute must for effective data compilation, management and monitoring. The
Committee, therefore, emphasize that  urgent  centralized efforts at the level of the
Ministry be made to develop a single portal, if required by outsourcing reputed IT
firms, for streamlining the data base management system and obtaining data on real
time basis so that not only the assets created under the scheme are highlighted for
public awareness and scrutiny but also requisite corrective measures are taken as
and when warranted. The Committee further desire that the Ministry should
appropriately take up with the State Governments the matters of procedural

34
impediments like non-identification of land, local disputes, delay in tendering
procedure etc. so that timely action is taken and delay in implementation/execution
of works is avoided. It is also imperative on the part of the Ministry to unfailingly
bring to the notice of the Chief Secretaries of those State who have not yet clarified
the delays on their part in the execution of MPLADS works. Even after that, if the
State Governments concerned fail to comply, the matter should be brought to the
notice of the Chief Ministers so that responsibility is fixed on the errant officials
and action taken against the defaulting Implementing Agencies.
[Serial No. 18, Para 18 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
From the replies received from the State Nodal Authorities/UTs Authorities, it
has been seen that most of works were pending either have been completed or
cencelled except those cases who are held up due to court cases. Ministry is aware
about the undue delay on the part of the State Government/UTs and have directed
all the States/UTs to look  into matter and investigate and initiate disciplinary cases
against the erring officials of District Authorities found responsible for irregular
sanction and further invoking the penalty clause against the Implementing agencies
who failed to complete the work in time as stipulated in the  Guidelines. The Ministry
of Statistics & Programme Implementation has already initiated the process of
development of an integrated MPLAD Scheme system for monitoring MPLAD
Scheme funds release, funds monitoring, Monitoring of expenditure incurred at
Macro and Micro level through NICSI. The proposed system will be a dynamic user
friendly web application and will be a single portal of reference for all the
stake holders. The portal will ensure Micro (works), Macro (release and expenditure
level) reporting and monitoring of timely utilization of funds.
Vetting Comments
Ministry's reply is silent about the action taken by the States/UTs against the
erring officials. Ministry has initiated the process of development of an integrated
system for the Scheme. However, no time-frame has been intimated by the Ministry
by which time the work is expected to be completed and by which time data in
respect of completion/non-completion of the projects is expected to be uploaded
on the portal.
Comments of the Ministry
The works under MPLADS are executed by the State Government/District
Authority through the Implementing Agency. The extant guidelines in this regard
are as below:—
Para 3.12: All recommended eligible work should be sanctioned within 75 days
from the date of receipt of the recommendation, after completing all
formalities. The District Authority shall, however, inform MPs

35
regarding rejection, if any, within 45 days from the date of receipt of
recommendations with reasons thereof.
In case of time limits mentioned in the section falling with the period
of operation of model code of conduct notifying by the Election
Commission, then such period as notified by model code of conduct
will be included in the reckoning of time limits.
Para 3.13: The sanction letter/order shall stipulate a time limit for completion of
the work to the Implementing Agency. The time limit for completion of
the work should generally not exceed one year. In exceptional cases,
where the implementation time exceed one year, specific reasons for
the same shall be incorporated in the sanction letter/order. The sanction
letter/order shall also include a clause for suitable action against the
Implementing Agency in the event of their failure to complete the
work within the stipulated time as per the State Government Procedure.
A copy of the sanction letter/order shall be sent to the MP concerned.
In case of delays, the State Government/District Authority have to
take action against the District Authority/Implementing Agency,
including action against the erring officials. In case any specific case
of undue/gross delay comes to notice of the Ministry, the Ministry
take-up and follows-up the matter with the State Government/District
Authority concerned and monitors that appropriate action is taken
by the State Government/District Authority. Till the necessary
appropriate action is taken by the State Government/District Authority,
the matter is not treated as settled by the Ministry. The work on the
new integrated MPLADS Software is progressing, and some of the
modules developed are at testing stage. The Ministry is taking steps
to put in place the new software at the earliest.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I.
Observations/Recommendations
19. The Committee are concerned to note that 391 works at an estimated cost
of Rs. 18.08 crore, already released by the DAs, could not be commenced during the
period 2004-09 in 10 States/UTs. Further, 2006 works amounting to Rs. 279.99 crore
in 16 States/UTs remained incomplete for periods ranging from one year to five
years and in some cases even upto 15 years. Not only that, 307 works on which
Rs. 13.90 crore was spent were abandoned or at stand still in 11 States/UTs. Such a

36
large number of works involving huge sum of money remaining incomplete, non-
starters and stand still belie the Ministry's assurance that they do review the physical
and financial performance of the MPLAD Scheme in their biannual and monitoring
meetings with the State Governments/DAs. In fact, as per their own admission
before the Committee, the Ministry initiate action and give appropriate directions
only on receipt of specific complaints, if any, in a particular District. The Committee
are of the considered opinion that in a Centrally Sponsored Scheme like MPLADS,
the Ministry cannot and should not remain content by merely issuing the Guidelines
and expecting the State Governments/DAs to perform according to the provisions
contained therein. As an ounce of practice is worth more than tonnes of preachings,
the Ministry ought to strengthen their own monitoring mechanism, take serious
note of the inordinate delays in the commencement and completion of the projects
under the Scheme and resort to corrective measures viz. stopping further release of
funds and bringing the non-performance of the Officers/Agencies concerned to
the notice of the Central/State Government Authorities for initiating necessary
disciplinary action.
[Serial No. 19, Para 19 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
 (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
This Ministry monitors the MPLADS work through Monthly Progress reports,
Utilisation Certificates and the Audit Certificates submitted by the District Authorities.
Physical and financial progress is reviewed in Biannual Review Meetings wherein
State Nodal Secretaries of the States/UTs participate. Senior Officers of the Ministry
from time to time visit States/UTs to review MPLADS works and provide the training
to the States/UTs Government Officials for better utilization and effective monitoring.
The State/UT Nodal Authorities/District Authorities are instructed to strictly adhere
to the provisions of the guidelines to avoid recurrence of  lapses. The major handicap
in effective monitoring at the Ministry level is lack of staff for monitoring. The case
has been taken up with Ministry of Finance, Department of  Expenditure for creation
of posts for a Monitoring Cell in MPLADS. As regard incomplete works is concerned,
it has been ascertained from the reply received from the States/UTs, the works have
either been completed or in case the work is abandoned due to one reason or the
other, the funds have been recouped.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
20. The Committee find that one of the main reasons for a substantial number
of projects, ecpecially immovable, remaining incomplete is that a large sum cannot

37
be sanctioned at one go under MPLAD Scheme and projects like school buildings
cannot be normally completed in one season. The Committee would, therefore, like
the Ministry, as also assured by the Secretary in evidence, to examine the feasibility
of obtaining commitment from the MPs that the subsequent amount would also
follow for completion of the projects. To be fair to the District Authorities who are
primarily responsible for execution of works under the MPLADS, a mechanism
should be devised whereby the DAs could get written assurance from the MPs
regarding timely and subsequent release for funds so that they can take into account
the cost of the projects, the pattern of release of funds, the tenure of the MPs
concerned etc. for smooth completion of the projects within a definite time-frame.
The Committee also desire that a concurrent monitoring  mechanism for the ongoing
projects may be interoduced in the guidelines to resolve various issues including
delay in release of instalment of funds so that time and cost overrun in the execution
of projects are avoided.
[Serial No. 20, Para 20 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
 (15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per Para 3.9 of the MPLADS guidelines, the work should be sanctioned
and executed only if the MP concerned has allocated the full estimated cost of the
work in the year. If the commitment for the full estimated amount is not forthcoming
and the amount recommended by the MP is less than the estimates for the work and
there are not other sources from which the deficit can be made good, then the work
should not be sanctioned, as in such an eventuality, the project will remain
incomplete for want of sufficient funds. The shortfall in the estimated cost vis-a-vis
the one recommended by the MP should be intimated to the MP as early as possible
but not later than 45 days of the receipt of the proposal and the district authority is
not supposed to sanction any work for which financial clause is not complete, i.e.
total resources are not tied up. In view of the clear provision already available in the
guidelines, there is no need to further amend the guidelines.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 5 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
21. Although the guidelines stipulate the time-frame for sanction and
completion of eligible works under the MPLADS, the Committee note that there has
been no provision for the completion of abandoned/suspended works. The Ministry
have clarified that as the implementation of the Scheme is the  responsibility of the
DAs, the State Governments are expected to complete the abandoned/suspended
works from their own funds. The Committee desire that a suitable provision to this
effect be incorporated in the guidelines so that if it becomes mandatory for the

38
State/UT Governments to complete the abandoned/suspended projects from their
own funds, they would certainly take action against the DAs/IAs who abandon
works after incurring expenditure on them.
[Serial No. 21, Para 21 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry has incorporated a provision, as per Para 3.3.1 of the Revised
Guidelines that in case there is still any abandoned/suspended MPLADS work
under the Scheme, it shall be completed by the State Government from their own
funds. The Government will also fix responsibility and take necessary disciplinary
action against of the erring officials. District Authority (DA) may ensure that the
funds must have been utilized as sanctioned earlier so that duplication of allocation
of funds does not arise.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of  Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
22. The Committee note that the Ministry themselves  have not assessed the
adverse impact of the delay in execution of works under the MPLAD Scheme. They
have, however, assigned to NABARD Consultancy Service Pvt. Ltd. (NABCONS)
the job of having an independent/ monitoring review of the works completed under
the MPLADS, the NABCONS accordingly carried out its study  in three phases in
the years 2007-08 to  2009-10 covering 30, 43 and 60 Districts respectively. The
Committee's perusal of the NABCONS 2009-10 report covering 60 Districts in 24
States/UTs has revealed that the Consultancy Service has given some very useful
suggestions/recommendations in the effective implantation of the MPLAD Scheme.
The Committee desire that the Ministry should  appropriately consider the
suggestions made by the NABCONS for implementation in the smooth functioning
of the Scheme. They also recommend that more Agencies like the NABCONS be
engaged in such independent assessment of the Scheme so that more and more
Districts are covered and corrective action taken to make the Scheme fruitful.
[Serial No. 22, Para 22 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Based on reports received from the NABCONS, this Ministry has already
taken up the issue of irregularities/shortcomings observed with the concerned
Districts and the States/UTs Governments and the corrective action that needs to
be taken in this regard. The Ministry also takes up these issues in the Biannual

39
Review meetings held with the State Nodal Secretaries of all States/UTs. Besides,
the monitoring meetings are also held with State/District Authorities concerned
during the visit of senior officials of the Ministry. Training is also imparted to the
States/Districts officials on the MPLADS Guidelines for effective implementation
and monitoring of the Scheme. As far as the suggestion of the PAC for engaging
more agencies like NABCONS for independent assessment through physical
monitoring is concerned, it is mentioned that the Ministry has now assigned the
physical monitoring third party physical monitoring work of 50 districts each in
North and West Zones to independent agency viz. Agriculture Finance Corporation
(AFC). The selection of agencies for East and South Zone (50 districts each Zone)
is under process.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
23. The MPLADS Guidelines provide that all the eligible works under the
Scheme are to be sanctioned within 45 days of the receipt of the recommendations
from the MPs. But, the Committee note that there were delays, in many cases even
upto one year, in according sanction by the DAs in respect of 28,135 works in 104
Districts of 28 States/UTs. The Ministry have furnished reasons for the inordinate
delay in sanction of works which inter-alia include delay in administrative and
tendering procedures, non-submission of the estimates from the IAs in time,
non-identification of land and work place, dependency on engineering/other officers
for technical estimates of the recommeded works, non-fulfillment of formalities by
the IAs, lack of additional infrastructure and manpwer, imposition of model code of
conduct of elections and change in design on the recommendation of the MPs as
per demand of the public. Taking into account the reasons given by the
State Governments, the Ministry have reportedly emphasized that rejection of the
works, if any, has to be made within 45 days from the date of receipt of the proposal
and approval has to be accorded after obtaining all the clearances within 75 days.
The Committee are unhappy with the reasons adduced for the delay in sanction of
works and they are not convinced with the rationale on which the Ministry have
given 30 days more to the State Governments for sanction of work when the
Guidelines clearly stipulate that all the eligible works under the Scheme are to be
sanctioned within 45 days of the receipt of the recommendations from the MPs. The
Committee, therefore, stress that the timeline prescribed between the recommendation
and sanction of works under the Scheme be strictly adhered to and the DAs be
impressed upon to resolve the administrative impediments in coordination with the
other departments concerned so as to timely overcome the procedural shortcomings
like dealy in tendering process, non-identification of land/site, non-fulfillment of
formalities by the IAs etc. The Committee specifically emphasise that no work

40
should be awarded wothout requisite administrative approval or without following
proper tendering procedure as any deviations in this regard would lead to
irregularities. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should take up with the
State Governments the matter of strengthening the staff position at the DA level,
who are primarily responsible for the overall implementation of the MPLADS. In
fact, there is an urgent need for and assessment of the ideal staffing pattern and
redesigning of job specifications of the staff at the DA level with a view to facilitating
creation of dedicated cell for MPLADS in each DA's office with  appropriate staff
and adequate infrastructure for effective inspection and implementation of the
Scheme.
[Serial No. 23, Para 23 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The time period for sanction of the recommended works was raised to 75 days
from 45 days taking into account that the district authorities were finding it difficult
to complete various requirements like obtaining of technical estimates, clearances
from various authorities, identification of land/site, ascertaining of title deeds in
respect of land in question, etc. within the stipulated 45 days. However, in case of
rejection, the time period of 45 days was retained in the guidelines. With regard to
the suggestion of the Committee that no work should be awarded without
administrative approval and without proper tendering process, it may be mentioned
that the provisions of the MPLADS guidelines are very clear as district authorities
are required to follow the established work scrutiny, technical work estimation,
tendering and administrative procedure of State/UT Government in matter of
execution. As and when any deviation is brought to Ministry's notice, appropriate
disciplinary action including recoupment of fund is suggested to the State
Government. For creation of dedicated cell in the DA's office for MPLADS a provision
has been made under administrative expenses of 2% for hiring of service/consultants
for handling accounts, data entry, uploading of data on website. As far as inspection
of works is concerned, provision also exists in Paras 6.3 and 6.4 of the MPLADS
guidelines.
Vetting Comments
Reply of the Ministry is silent about disciplinary action taken by it and about
the amount of recoupment of fund suggested to the State Government.
Comments of the Ministry
 Implementation of the works under the MPLADS is to be undertaken by the
State Governments/District Authorities, in accordance with the MPLADS' guidelines
and the State Government's administrative, financial and technical rules. The State
Government/District Authorities are required and expected to take appropriate action
in case of infringements of rules, guidelines and norms. The action taken may
include disciplinary action, wherever required/appropriate. In case of infringements

41
of guidelines or rules, which come to notice from time to time (including through
CAG reports), the Ministry takes-up and follows-up the matter with the State
Government/District Authority Concerned and monitors that appropriate action is
taken by the State Government/District Authority. Till the necessary appropriate
action is taken by the State Government/District Authority, the matter is not treated
as settled by the Ministry.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
25. The Committee are highly concerned to note some instances of the MPs
recommending the names of the Implementing Agencies along with their
recommendations for works, although the Guidelines debar the MPs from making
such recommendations. Worse, in some cases the recommended IAs were found to
be the used agencies, to whom the funds, were released. Explaining the position,
the Ministry have clarified that wherever the DAs, who shall identify the IAs under
the provisions of the Guidelines, deviate from the prescribed procedure, the Ministry
writes to the States for taking necessary action against the officials concerned. In
this context,  the Committee feels that the Ministry should periodically advise and
remind the MPs not to recommend the names of the IAs which is strictly prohibited
under MPLADS guidelines. However, before identifying the IAs to carry out the
works, the DAs may have informal consultations with the MPs, to short list IAs
having done exemplary work in specific areas and have expertise in certain types of
works. Thereafter, the DAs should exercise due diligence in scrutinizing the
suggestions of the MPs, in accord with the provisions contained in the Guidelines,
failing which responsibility be fixed on the DAs for non-adherence to the prescribed
procedure.
[Serial No. 25, Para 25 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
A free hand has been given in Guidelines to the District Authority to identify
the agency through which a particular work recommended by the MP should be
executed. The executing agency so identified by the District Authority is the
implementing agency. District Authorities are required to adhere to the Guidelines
while selecting the Implementing Agencies. Wherever District Authorities are found
responsible for non-adherence of Guidelines in this regard, Ministry writes to the
States for taking necessary action against the concerned officials. In order to obviate
any irregularities, this Ministry hold meetings in the States and also at the centre at
least twice in a year to review the implementation of MPLAD Scheme. Besides, this

42
Ministry conducts training of district officers on MPLADS at regular intervals for
effective implementation and execution of Guidelines. It is expected that the State
Government will make all efforts to implement the scheme in letter and spirit. The
District Authorities have been requesting in writing to the Hon'ble MPs for desisting
from the practice of nominating the Implementing Agency while recommending the
works. This measures help and make aware the MPs regarding the provision of the
Guidelines in the area of selection of Implementing agencies. The advice of the PAC
in this regard is being communicated to Hon'ble MPs.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
26. As per the Guidelines the District Authorities are required to maintain
Works Register indicating the position of each work recommended by the MPs.
They are also required to maintain the Assets Register showing the assets created
under the Scheme funds. But, much to the consternation of the Committee, cases of
either non-maintenance or incomplete Work and Asset Registers have come to the
notice. The Ministry have reportedly been requesting the State/UT nodal authorities
to direct all the DAs to ensure maintenance of Work and Asset Registers. Even after
that, there are slippages for which the Ministry is planning to have an integrated
system to monitor the maintenance of such Registers. Since non-maintenance of
Work and Asset Registers is a serious flaw, as also agreed to by the Ministry in
evidence, which greatly impedes proper inspection and effective monitoring of the
ongoing works and assets created, the Committee urge the Ministry to expeditiously
develop a comprehensive integrated system, as under their consideration, so that
scrupulous maintenance of the Registers by the DAs is effectively monitored and
appropriate action taken in case of aberrations.
[Serial No. 26, Para 26 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per paras 6.4 (iii) & (iv) of the Guidelines, the District Authority shall
maintain the work-registers indicating the position of each work recommended by
the MPs. The District Athority shall also maintain a register of assets created with
the Scheme funds. It is, therefore, mandatory to maintain the work Register and
asset Register indicating the position of the work recommended by the MPs and
record of assets created with funds scheme. This will facilitate the process of
monitoring of MPLADS work. Maintenance of Work & Asset Register was also
discussed in the Bi-annual Review Meeting held on 06 February, 2012 and the need
for effective monitoring of works created under MPLADS was emphasised. All the
States/UTs have again been urged to maintain the Assets and Works Registers at
the District leve as well as Implementing Agencies level. In the replied recieved from

43
the State Government/UTs Authorities, it has been mentioned that Work Register
and  Assets Registers are being maintained at the District level as well as
Implementing Agencies level. The States/UTs who were not maintaining the assets
registers at the district leve have intimated that directions have been issued for
maintenance of Work and Asset Register at the district level and ensured compliance.
Vetting Comments
Ministry's reply is silent regarding development of a comprehensive integrated
system. Ministry has not mentioned as to how many States/UTs DA's are
maintaining/not maintaining the work and assets register.
Comments of the Ministry
The 'Integrated MPLADS computer software' for monitoring implementation
of the MPLADs Scheme is under development by NICSI. The system will also
include information maintained through works and assets registers, that is, it will
give the position of the works  recommended by the MPs and have a record of the
assets created under the MPLAD Scheme. Work on the software is progressing
Well. Some modules are at testing stage. The Ministry is taking all possible steps to
put in place the new software at the earliest. Works and Assets registers are provided
for in paras 6.4 (iii) and (iv) of the Guidelines of MPLADS:—
Para 6.4 (iii): The District Authority shall maintain the work-registers indicating
the position of each work recommended by the MPs and shall
furnished work details along with a photograph of each work costing
Rs. 5 lakh or more, to the Ministry in the prescribed format and
hoist the same on MPLAD Website.
Para 6.4 (iv): The District Authority shall also maintain a register of all the assets
created with the Scheme funds and subsequently transferred to the
User Agencies. Implementation of the work under the MPLADS is
undertaken by the State Governments/District Authorities. The State
Governments/District Authorities are required and expected to
adhere to the Guidelines. The Ministry regularly emphasises upon
the State Governments/District Authorities to adhere to the
provisions of the Guidelines, including  those relating to works and
assets registers. In cases of infringements coming to notice, the
Ministry takes up and follows up the matter with the State
Government/District Authority concerned and monitors that
appropriate action is taken by the State Government/District
Authority. Till the necessary appropriate action is taken by the
State Government/District Authority, the matter is not treated as
settled by the Ministry.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]

44
Observations/Recommendations
31. The Committee are shocked to note that neither the Ministry nor 17 States/
UTs have made any arrangements for an internal audit of the MPLAD Scheme.
Much to the chagrin of the Committee, the internal audit wing of the Ministry have
submitted that internal audit of the Scheme has never been conducted since the
inception of the Scheme. In view of the fact that internal and concurrent audit is an
integral part of a strong internal control and monitoring system, the Committee
impress upon the Ministry to put in place forthwith a robust internal auditing
mechanism and ask the State/UT Governments to engage the office of the C&AG of
India at the State level for periodically auditing the MPLADS account of each
individual MP. In this context, the Committee would like the Ministry to take into
consideration the suggestions of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
regarding changes in the Guidelines relating to Accounting procedures,
improvements in quality of audit, guidance note on the conduct of audit on MPLADS
funds etc. which have already been communicated to the Ministry by the ICAI.
[Serial No. 31, Para 31 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In order to consider changes in regard to audit accounts related matters
under MPLADS, a Committee was constituted in the year 2008. The report was
received in the Ministry and was to be discussed in the presence of the representative
from the Ministry of Finance (D/o Expenditure). The report was forwarded to Ministry
of Finance, JS (PF-II) on 03.02.2012. The representative was also invited to the
meeting held on 07.03.2012 and 12.04.2012 but no one attended the meeting from the
Ministry of Finance nor their comments received. The Internal Audit Division of the
Ministry in the meeting informed that as per Rule 6(1) and (2) of the GFR, any
change in these procedures/formats should have the approval of the M/O Finance
(D/o Expenditure). The Comments of the Ministry of Finance (D/o Expenditure) is
still awaited. At present, 'Internal Audit Wing' of Principal Accounts office is
conducting internal audit of two Ministries i.e. Planning and Statistics and Programme
Implementation. However, it has been requested to the Office of the CGA to create
27 posts (01 DCA, 02 Sr. AO, 06 A.A.O., 12 Accountant, 03 LDC and 03 MTs) in
Internal Audit Wing to strengthen the Internal Audit in the Ministry of Planning,
Statistics and Programme Implementation. As soon as the posts are created and the
staff are positioned, the work on the Internal Audit for the scheme as MPLAD etc.
will be taken up. The Ministry has also separately moved a proposal for creation of
posts in the MPLADS Division as well as for posts for MPLADS accounts work.
However, recently, Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has issued
Economy Instructions wherein ban has been imposed on creation of new posts and
the proposal of this Ministry was returned with advice to resubmit after the ban is
lifted. However, this Ministry had requested Department of Expenditure to consider
the proposal for creation of post of this Ministry as a special case.

45
Vetting Comments
Ministry may mention after getting the comments on report submitted to
M/o Finance (Department of Expenditure) regarding the changes related to matters
on audit and accounts under MPLADS.
Comments of the Ministry
A meeting was taken on 10.06.2013 by Secretary, S&PI to discuss the
recommendations contained in para 31 of the Fifty-fifth Report of PAC, 2011-12,
15th Lok Sabha, on MPLADS, and the following decisions were taken:
"Internal Audit
3. For conducting internal audit, there is a constraint of staff with the Controller
of Accounts Wing. The Ministry has already sent a proposal for creation of additional
posts in the Accounts Wing, which is under consideration in Department of
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.
3.1 It was, however, decided that Controller of Accounts will immediately
start Internal Audit as feasible with the available staff. If required, the Controller of
Accounts may also engage consultants for providing assistance in Internal Audit,
for which the funds will be provided by the Ministry. If and when a decision is taken
to create additional posts in the Accounts Wing, the volume/frequency of Internal
Audit will be correspondingly enhanced.
3.2 To facilitate the Controller of Accounts in taking informed decision on
selection of the districts/constituencies of carrying out Internal Audit, a copy of
the Report of C&AG of India, Union Government (Civil) No. 31 of 2010-11 on
Performance Audit of Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme and
copies of all unsettled complaints on corruption, irregularities, malpractices, financial
malfeasance, etc. will be sent to the Controller of Accounts by MPLADS Division.
Complaints received during subsequent months will also be forwarded to the
Controller of Accounts by the first week of the following month. These would inter
alia be considered by the Controller of Accounts while selecting the districts for
Internal Audit."
"C & AG Audit
4. It was also decided that the observations of the Public Accounts Committee
will be sent to the C&AG for taking necessary action.
4.1 They will also be sent to all the Chief Secretaries with request to engage
the office of the C&AG/State AGs at the State Level for the audit of the MPLADS
and to develop a mechanism for periodic, regular audit of MPLADS in each
constituency/district.
4.2 Secretary (S&PI) would write to C&AG of India and to all Chief Secretaries
in this regard."

46
"Action on ICAI Recommendations relating to Accounting Procedure
5. Special Group of ICAI has recommended the following changes in the
MPLADS Guidelines relating to Accounting Procedures:
Chapter V of the Guidelines 'Accounting Procedures' may be amended to
include the following:
(a) To prescribe Books of Account and Registers to be maintained on uniform
basis.
(b) To prescribe formats for financial statements, Auditor's Report and
Utilization certificate (UCs)
(c) To prescribe procedures, contents and certification of the works done
by the DAs/IAs.
(d) To prescribe certification of compliance by the Nodal District Authority."
5.1 The report on review of Guidelines of the MPLADS Scheme relating to
accounts and audit submitted by the Special group of ICAI was sent to Internal
Finance Division of the Ministry as well as to the Department of expenditure,
Ministry of Finance. Their comments are as under:—
Integrated Finance Division of the Ministry: "It is stated that in general
terms, the recommendations of the Special Group are agreed by the IFD of this
Ministry but specific formats/procedures need to be worked out."
Department of Expenditure: "The suggestions made by the special Group
are indeed well taken. Detailed books of accounts/registers formats for financial
statement etc. have been prescribed. The format for balance sheet, receipt and
payments accounts. Income and expenditure statements, Auditors' Report, work
completion report have been drawn up. The Ministry may carry out an internal
assessment of the modification considered desirable and depending on the changes
in the accounting procedure and documentation that are finally decided upon, the
proposed system may be forwarded for vetting by D/Expenditure."
5.2 The changes in the accounting procedures and firming up of the formats
of various accounting documents suggested by the Special Group of ICAI are
required to be duly examined by the Controller of Accounts Wing, which has
specialized knowledge, and to be duly acted upon, with or without amendments.
5.3 It was decided that the Controller of Accounts will take necessary action
in this regard.
5.4 If required, he may engage consultants with domain knowledge, for which
funds will be provided by the Ministry.
5.5 It was also decided that action on developing the formats/accounting
procedures will be taken up immediately and the formats/accounting procedures
will be included in the Guidelines of MPLADS after vetting by Department of
Expenditure and approval of the Competent Authority on time-bound priority."

47
Action is being taken accordingly.
D/o. letter dated 27.06.2013 has been issued to C&AG as per para 4.
D/o. letter dated 27.06.2013 have been issued to all Chief Secretries, as per
para 4.1
Vetting Comments
As regards "Internal Audit", the Ministry may share annual audit plan
depicting number and percentage of District Authority State Nodal Departments to
be covered by internal audit during the year 2013-14.
Comments of the Ministry
In line with the decision taken in the meeting held on 10.06.2013, the Controller
of Accounts has been requested to taken immediate action to start internal audit of
MPLADS. The Controller of Accounts has also been requested to take immediate
steps to fill up the newly created seven (07) posts for accounts unit as conveyed
recently by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, vide ID No. 91493/
ECI/2013 dated 27.06.2013.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 34 of Chapter I.
Observations/Recommendations
32. The Committee note that many of the systemic weaknesses affecting the
implementation of the MPLAD Scheme were brought to the notice of the Ministry
by the C&AG in two earlier performance Audit Reports in 1998 and 2001. Based on
the suggestions of the C&AG for devising a robust monitoring mechanism,
strengthening internal controls and impose grater financial discipline for the release
and expenditure of MPLADS funds, the Ministry have reportedly modified the
Release and Expenditure Guidelines in August, 2011 in consultation with the
Department of Expenditure. What, however, concerns the Committee is the inordinate
delay on the part of the State/UT Governments in furnishing Action Taken Notes to
the Audit observations. For example, while partial replies to the Audit comments
contained in their Report of 2010 have been received from most of the States/UTs,
a single reply has not yet been received from eight States/UTs i.e. Arunachal Pradesh,
Bihar, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala and Nagaland. The
Ministry, on their part, are just sending reminders. In view of the fact that Audit
observations are meant to plug the loopholes and foster good governance, they
ought to be taken with the seriousness they deserve. The Committee, therefore,

48
desire that the Ministry should take up the matter at the Chief Secretary/Chief
Minister level so that the State/UT Authorities resort to adequate and timely
preventive and punitive measures on the Audit observations in their own interest.
[Serial No. 32, Para 32 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry has already taken up the with the Hon'ble Minister of the
concerned state. This has resulted in receiving the reply from the state of Arunachal
Pradesh, Jharkhand and Nagaland. However reply from UT of Dadra & Nagar
Haveli is still awaited despite following up the matter vigorously with the
Administrator, UT of DNH. Suitable action will be taken against the concerned in
case of non-compliance.
Vetting Comments
Ministry may mention about the steps taken or proposed to be taken to avoid
such lapses in future. Ministry may also mention about the efforts taken to getting
the replies from remaining state governments and the status thereon.
Comments of the Ministry
The implementation of works under the Members of Parliament Local Area
Development Scheme (MPLADS) is undertaken by the State Governments/District
Authorities, in accordance with the State Government's administrative, technical
and financial rules. The State Governments have been asked to furnish action taken
notes/replies to the CAG audit paras, and the matter in being regularly followed - up
at various levels. The matter was also taken up in the review of MPLADS with State
Government officers and District Magistrates held on 26.02.2013, wherein it was
inter alia directed as below:—
"Pending CAG audit paras: Attention was specifically drawn to one important
aspects that may of the CAG audit paras enumerate facts that points towards
malafide violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance. It bears emphasis
that in such cases the CAG has already seen the record and also given
opportunity to explain before recording such facts. It therefore becomes
important to immediately examined such reports for appropriate action, which
could include action in any or all of the following three domains— (a) criminal
culpability, (b) departmental action, and (c) civil action for recovery. Delaying
or diluting action in such cases has to be avoided.
The State Governments were requested to expedite (a) necessary action to
get the paras settled as per rules and (b) in case of facts pointing towards
malafide violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance, to take appropriate
action under law and report on action taken in a time-bound manner.
A copy of these minutes may be sent to all State Government for necessary
action."

49
These minutes have been approved by Hon'ble Minister for Programme
Implementation, Government of India."
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 37 of Chapter I.
Observations/Recommendations
33. To sum up, the Committee find that many basic flaws and fundamental
weaknesses have been plaguing the MPLAD Scheme primarily due to inadequate
monitoring of the Scheme at various levels. As regular monitoring at all the three
levels i.e. Central, State and District is a powerful tool and an essential sine qua non
for overcoming the shortcomings that bedevil the proper and effective
implementation of the Scheme, the Committee exhort the Ministry to take note of
their considered suggestions/recommendations, as highlighted in the preceding
paragraphs.
[Serial No. 33, Para 33 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry has taken note of the various suggestions/recommendations of
the Committee. Regular monitoring at all three levels i.e. Central, State and District
of MPLADS works is a priority with the Ministry. At the Central level the Ministry
is in the process of developing an integrated MPLADS website through which
micro and macro level monitoring of all releases, expenditure, work status will be
monitored. The Ministry also has taken steps to strengthen third party physical
monitoring through independent agencies. The Department of Expenditure, Ministry
of Finance has also been requested to sanction posts for creation of a dedicated
monitoring cell in the MPLADS Division of the Ministry to enable exhaustive and
extensive monitoring of MPLADS works at Central level. In addition the Ministry
organizes bi-annual review meetings of Nodal Secretaries on implementation of
MPLADS. The senior officers of the Ministry also undertake field visits from time
to time to review proper implementation. At the State level provision of monitoring
has been prescribed in the MPLADS Guidelines and the Nodal Departments in the
State Governments have also been allowed to use 2% administrative expenses
amount for undertaking third party inspection, physical audit, quality checks etc.
At the district level various items of expenditure have been allowed to be incurred

50
out of 2% of MPLADS funds earmarked for administrative expenses to facilitate
monitoring of MPLADS works.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations
15. The Committee note that the Ministry have issued the illustrative list of
eligible works under the MPLAD Scheme to all the States/UTs. Despite that, the
Committee note that during the period from 2004 to 2009, an expenditure of Rs. 73.76
crore was incurred on 2340 works which are prohibited as per the Scheme Guidelines.
It is the responsibility of the DAs to examine and sanction only eligible works
recommended by the MPs. Therefore, the explanation of the Ministry that sometimes
due to compelling circumstances the DAs have to act on the recommendations of
the MPs for one reason or the other beyond their control, resulting in execution of
prohibited works is not acceptable to the Committee. Though the Ministry have
reported that they have been taking action wherever such irregularities are pointed
out and asking for recoupment of funds. Yet the exact amount of funds recouped
from the defaulting authorities in the States/UTs concerned is yet to be known to
the Ministry. Since award of prohibited works is illegitimate under the Guidelines,
the Committee impress upon the Ministry to urgently take up the matter with the
State Governments concerned so that funds are recouped with interest, wherever
prohibited works have been awarded/implemented, as per the provisions contained
in the Guidelines. The Committee wish to emphasize that it is incumbent upon the
DAs to bring to the notice of the MPs the distinction between the eligible and
prohibited works in terms of the Guidelines and to stand firm to ensure that under
no circumstance or condition prohibited works are executed. It also need to be
made abundantly clear that responsibility shall be fixed on the DAs and exemplary
action taken against them if any deviation is made by them from the approved
Guidelines.
[Serial No. 15, Para 15 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is the responsibility of District Authority to examine and sanction only
eligible works recommened by the Hon'ble MPs. In cae of violation of the Guidelines,
States/UTs Government are requested to investigate the matter for initiating
necessary disciplinary action against the District Authorities/officials found
responsible and for recoupment of funds for irregular works. In order ot have better
appreciation and implmentation of Guidelines, the Ministry provides regular training
to the State/District officials. This Ministry has also been regularly requesting the
51

52
State/UT Governments to adhere to the provisions of the Guidelines to avoid
recurrence of such lapses. The chief Secretaries/Administrators UTs have been
requested to send the details of the District Officials, who were responsible for the
irregular implementation of MPLADS works in violation of the Guielines and
corrective measures taken to avoid recurrence of irregularities including necessary
action taken against the erring officials found responsible and recoupment of funds
spent for irregular/prohibited works. From the replies received from the State
Government/UTs, it has been observed that the work has been completed and the
assets have been handed over to the user agencies. Action against the erring
officials found responsible for executing irregular/prohibited works are being
initiated. The Ministry has been emphasizing the concerned States Government/
UTs through letters to State Nodal Authorities to direct all the district authorities to
recoup the funds incurred on the prohibited works.
Vetting Comments
The Ministry have reported that they have been taking action wherever such
irregularities are pointed out and asking for recoupment of funds. Yet, the exact
amount of funds recouped from the defaulting authorities in the States/UTs
concerned is yet to be known to the Ministry.
Comments by the Ministry
The implementation of works under the Member of Parliament Local Area
Development Scheme (MPLADS) is undertaken by the State Governments/
District Authorities, in accordance with the State Government's administrative,
technical and financial rules. State Governments/District Authorities are required
and expected to take appropriate action in case of infringements of rules,
guidelines and norms, including utilization of funds for ineligible works: in case
of  utilization for funds for ineligible works, the action would include restoration
of funds back to the MPLADS and action against the erring officers. In case of
infringements of rules, guidelines and norms, including utilization of funds for
ineligible works, which come to notice from time to time ( including through
CAG reports), the Ministry takes-up and follows-up the matter with the State
Government/District Authority concerned and monitors that appropriate action
is taken by the State Government/District Authority. Till the necessary
appropriate action is taken by the State  Government/District Authority, the
matter is not treated as settled by the Ministry. It may be mentioned that in the
review of MPLADS  on 26.02.2013 with State Government officers and District
Magistrates, on the one hand it was inter-alia directed that; "Pending CAG
audit paras": Attention was specifically drawn to one important aspects that
many of the CAG audit paras enumerate facts that points towards malafide
violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance. It bears emphasis that in
such cases the CAG has already seen the record and also given opportunity to
explain before recording such facts. It therefore becomes important to
immediately examined such reports for appropriate action, which could, include
action in  any or all of the following three domains— (a) criminal culpability

53
(b) departmental action and (c) civil action for recovery. Delaying or diluting
action in such cases has to be avoided.
"The State Governments were requested to expedite (a) necessary action to
get the paras settled as per rules, and (b) in case of facts pointing towards
malafide violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance, to take appropriate
action under law and report on action taken in a time-bound manner."
On the other hand, however, it was also inter-alia directed that: "Bonafide
Infrigement of guidelines in public good/interest":  It was pointed out that there
are certain specific instances in which State Government/district administration
officers had acted in a bonafide manner in public good/interest but there has been
some infringements of the guidelines.
"It was felt that if the action taken is (a) on the recommendation of the Hon'ble
MP concerned, (b) in a bonafide manner, without any malafide, (c) in public
good/interest, where, (d) there has been no financial malfeasance or corruption,
and (e) relevant State Government financial and administrative rule have
have been followed in the implementation, it could be examined whether the
infringement of MPLADS  guidelines needs to be condoned ex-post facto
(or not)."
"It was thus felt that wherever the State Government feel that a justified case
is accordingly made out, they may send their speaking recommendation, from
the level of Chief Secretary, for the Ministry to consider ex-post facto
condonation of the infringement."
"It was exphasized that the afore should not be taken as a standing permission
to violate guidelines in future and to then request for ex-post facto
condonation. It is only meant to settle earlier actions undertaken in good
faith and the in public interest/good where the facts and situations are such
that the infringements merit to be condoned ex-post facto. And, as already
stated earlier, such requests have to be made from the level of Chief Secretary,
and the Ministry would consider such requests on a case-to-case basis, on
merit, in consultation with Internal Finance, for an appropriate decision at the
competent level."
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
24. Instances of sub-standard works under the MPLAD Scheme in Delhi and
Uttar Pradesh have come to the notice of the Committee during the course of the
examination of the subject. While the Delhi Government have explained the position

54
i.e. difference in specification in the scheduled  items and the job mix formula
leading to a financial implication of Rs. 66 lakh, the report from the UP Government
is still awaited in the Ministry. In order to maintain the quality and credibility of the
assets created  out of MPLAD funds, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to
introduce and operationalise an effective quality control mechanism for the
MPLADS, in line with other CPWD/PWD works, the Committee also recommend
that the DAs should carry out regular and surprise monitoring of the ongoing and
completed  projects so that in case of any quality compromise action could be taken
against the Implementing Agencies. The Ministry/State Government authorites
should also take periodic stock of the position during their field visits so that
appropriate action could be initiated against the District Authorities, if found wanting
in their assigned roles and responsibilities. The Committee further recommend that
the Ministry should obtain and compile periodical reports/returns from the DAs
indicating the total number of works undertaken in their respective Districts and the
number of inspections carried out by them as per the provisions of the Guidelines
so that effective checks and corrective measures, wherever needed, could be initiated
concurrently.
[Serial No 24, Para 24 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per MPLADS guidelines, the district authorities are mandated to inspect
at least 10% of the works under implementation every year, involving MPs in the
inspection of projects to the extent feasible. Additionally the State Nodal department
are also required to inspect a minimum of 1% of the MPLADS work in a district
every year. An Inspection Register is required to be maintained at State level and
Follow  up Action is required to be taken on the findings during these inspections.
With regards to obtaining reports regarding number of works undertaken and number
of inspections carried out form the district authorities, a column No. III (k) already
exist in the MPR under which, the district authorities are required to indicate the
number of inspections undertaken during the month as well as the cumulative
number. Senior officer of the Ministry also from time to time make field visits.
Vetting Commments
Ministry's reply is silent about the data compilation received in respect of
number of inspection made by the DAs. there is provision of inspection of work in
the guidelines and DAs are required to send data to the Ministry through MPR.
However, in a test check of 86 DAs (out of sample 128), 23 States/UTs had not
inspected any work during 2004-09. Ministry may mention about  the appropriate
action that has been taken against erring DAs.
Comments of the Ministry
The 'Integrated MPLADS computer software' for monitoring the
implementation of the MPLAD Scheme is under development by NICSI. The system

55
will also include monitoring of inspection of works by State Governments/District
Authorities. Work on the software is progressing well. Some modules are at testing
stage. The Ministry is taking all possible steps to put in place the new software at
the earliest. Inspections on the part of the State Governments/District Authorities
are provided for in paras 6.3 (vi) and 6.4(i), (v) and (vi) of the Guidelines of the
MPLADS:—
Para 6.3(vi)—State/UT Government may authorize its officers not below the
rank of Deputy Secretary/Executive Engineer to inspect MPLADS works as and
when they make official fields visits. It may also check and review the number of
MPLADS works inspected by the District Authorities. The Districts Authority shall
mandatorily maintain inspection registers. One for details of inspections of works
carried out by trusts/societies under para 3.21 and the second for showing details
of works given to other implementing agencies, including NGOs as implementing
agencies. State Nodal Officials should inspect a minimum of 1% of the MPLADS
works in a District every year and an inspection register should be maintained at
State Level and follow up action should also be taken on the findings during those
inspections.
Para 6.4: Roles of District Authority—The role of the District Authority on
Coordination and Supervision is indicated below:—
(i) The District Authority would be responsible for overall coordination
and supervision of the works under the Scheme at the district level,
and inspect at least 10% of the works under implemention every year.
The District Authority should involve the MPs in the inspections of
projects to the extent feasible.
(ii) The District Authority will inspect all works executed by/for societies
and trusts under MPLADS  and ensure that the agreement conditions
are being complied with. In case of violation of any of the provisions
of the agreement, action as per the agreement shall be taken by the
District Authority.
(iii) the District Authority shall review every months and in any case at
least once in every quarter MPLADS works implementation with the
Implementing Agencies. The District Authority shall invite the MPs
concerned to such review meetings, and send a report of such a review
meetings to Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.
A column No. III (k) exists in the MPR under which the District Authorities are
required to indicate the number of work inspections undertaken during the month
as well as the cumulative number of inspections during the year. Implementation of
the works under the MPLADS is undertaken by the State Governments/District
Authorities. State Governments/District  Authorities are required and expected to
adhere to the Guidelines. The Ministry regularly emphasizes upon the State
Governments/District Authorities to adhere to the provisions of the Guidelines,
including those relating to inspections of works. The Government of India in the

56
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation has also put into place a
system of third  party physical monitoring of MPLADS works. Follow-up action is
duly taken on the findings of the inspections/physical monitoring reports. In case
of infringements of guidelines or rules  covering to notice, the Ministry takes up
and follows up the matter with the State Government/District Authority concerned
and monitors that appropriate action is taken by the State Government/District
Authority. Till the necessary appropriate action is taken by the State Government/
District Authority, the matter is not treated as settled by the Ministry.
Sd/-
(S. S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 September, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
27. The DAs are expected to get in advance a firm commitment about the
operation, upkeep and maintenance of the proposed assets from the user agency
concerned before the execution of the work is sanctioned. But, the Committee
observe that in practice many cases on non-use or  misuse of the assets are there.
Although, based on the replies received from some of the States concerned, the
Ministry have informed that no case of misuse has been reported so far, the
Committee desire the Ministry to investigate the reported cases of misuse of assets
in view of the Audit observation with photographic evidences in some cases.
Based on the findings of such investigation, action should be initiated against the
persons responsible for misuse of assets. They also desire that documentation in
respect of handing over of assets created under MPLAD be streamlined at the DA
level by effective supervision and monitoring.
[Serial No. 27, Para 27 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Para 3.6 of the Guidelines stipulates that the District Authority should get in
advance a firm commitment about the operations, unkeep and maintenance  of the
proposed assets from the User Agency concerned before the execution of the work
is sanctioned. Once the assets are created under the MPLAD Scheme, these are
handed over to the User Agencies. It is the responsibility of the User Agency for
unkeep, maintenance and use of the purpose for which it was created. The Ministry
also undertakes the third party independent monitoring of the scheme under which
proper utilization of the assets created is being examined and reported. The State
Nodal Authorities/UTs Administrator have intimated that instructions have been
issued to all the District Authorities to adhere to the Guidelines and unkeep and
maintenance  of the assets created is ensured by the User Agencies. This Ministry
has already taken up the issue  with the State Nodal Authorities with a copy to
Nodal District for entering into agreement with the User Agencies for unkeep and

57
maintenance of the assets. The replies received from the State Nodal Authorities
indicate that instructions have been issued to all the Nodal Districts  for proper
implementation of the provision of the Guidelines. Nodal District Authorities have
indicated in their replies that they have started taking agreement from the User
Agencies ensuring proper implementation of the scheme.
Vetting Comments
Ministry's reply is silent  regarding committee's recommendation to investigate
the reported cases of misuse of assets in view of the audit observations.
Comments of the Ministry
Para 3.6 of the Guidelines of MPLADS provides for advance commitment of
operation, unkeep and maintenance of the proposed assets from the User
Agencies:—
Para 3.6: The District Authority should get in advance a firm commitment
about the operation, upkeep and maintenance of proposed asset
from the User Agency concerned before execution of the work is
sanctioned. Implementation of the works under the MPLADS is
undertaken by the State Governments/District Authorities. State
Governments/District Authorities are required and expected to
adhere to the Guidelines. The Ministry regularly emphasizes upon
the State Governments/District Authorities to  adhere to the
provisions of the Guidelines, including those relating to operation,
upkeep and maintenance of assets. In cases of infringements of
Guidelines or rules coming to notice, including disuse/misuse of
assets, the Ministry takes-up and follows-up the matter with the
State Government/District Authority concerned and monitors that
appropriate action is taken by the State Government/District
Authority. Till the necessary appropriate action is taken by the
State Government/District Authority, the matter is not treated as
settled by the Ministry.
Sd/-
(S.S.Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated 05 Septemper, 2013]
Observations/Recommendations
28. The Committee note that the assets created by utilizing the MPLADS
funds are handed over to User Agency and thereafter it is the responsibility of the
User Agency to maintain/upkeep these assets. The Committee are, however, informed
that there is no provision under the Scheme for use of MPLADS funds for the
maintenance or replacement of assets created under the Scheme. In view of the  fact
that some assets such as vehicles, ambulances, medical equipments or machines
have a limited life span after which such assets wear away and maintenance of
these assets cannot be done or may not be economical, the Committee feel that in

58
such cases, existing Guidelines of the Scheme is not helpful in replacement of such
assets. The Committee are of the view that the Guidelines should be suitably reviewed
by the Ministry with a view to re-examining the  existing provisions of the
maintenance of assets so that adequate provisions are incorporated which would
allow the MPLADS funds to be utilized for maintenance, repair and replacement of
the assets. T he Committee would also like the Ministry to explore that Public
Private Partnership model for the maintenance of assets like roads created under
the MPLADS.
[Serial No. 28, Para 28 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The main objective of the MPLAD Scheme is to enable MPs to recommended
works of developmental nature with emphasis on the creation of durable community
assets based on the locally felt needs to be taken up in their  Constituencies.
Accordingly, right from inception of the Scheme, durable assets of national priorities
viz. drinking water, primary education, public health, sanitation and roads, etc. are
being created. Maintenance, repair and replacement of the assets created under the
MPLADS are not permissible. If we allow such activities under the MPLADS, the
very purpose for which the scheme has been concived will be defeated. It may,
however, be stated that for maintenance, the responsibility rests with the State
Authority  to whom the assets have been handed over. For replacement of assets,
it may be stated that once useful life of assets is over as per State rules, then, new
assets can be created under the MPLADS if so recommended afresh by any MP out
of his/her MPLADS funds. The condemned vehicles are required to be auctioned
as per State procedure and the proceeds remain with the  State Authorities.
Vetting Comments
Ministry's reply is silent on exploring the Public Private Partnership model for
the maintenance of assets like roads created under the MPLADS.
Comments of the Ministry
There is no provision in the Guidelines of  MPLADS for maintenance of
assets. The responsibility of maintenance rests with the State Government
department/organisation/agency for whom the assets have been created and to
whom the assets have been handed over. In case of support to trusts/societies for
community infrastructure and public utility buildings works, the maintenance is the
responsibility of the trust/society concerned. The various mechanisms for
maintenance, including exploring Public Private Partnership models, have to be
considered by the State Government concerned.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No.  C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated  5 Septemper, 2013]

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN  RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
 Observations/Recommendations
3. The Committee are highly concerned to note that 12 DAs of six States
inflated the figures of expenditure by Rs. 35 crore by depicting the entire advance of
Rs. 100.17 crore released to the Implementing Authorities as utilized. Not only that,
the DAs had reported lesser amount of interest earned in their annual accounts
and/or Monthly Progress Reports (MPRs) than those reported in the MPRs of the
earlier months resulting in an understatement of interest of Rs. 5.60 crore in respect
of  21 constituencies. Shockingly, in blatant violation of the General Financial Rules
(GFR), 2005 DAs in some States are showing money given as advance as expenditure
in the Utilization  Certificate (UC). Though the Ministry of S&PI hold the DAs/IAs
responsible for properly maintaining the accounts of MPLADS funds as per the
State/UT Governments yet they failed to obtain/examine necessary  clarifications
of the DAs/States concerned on the financial irregularities. Since the Ministry are
still in the process of developing an integrated software incorporating District-wise
MPLADS accounts and collating annual accounts and balance sheet of all the
Districts and considering the importance and urgency of developing such an
integrated software, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to expedite
development and installation of the software without further loss of time. The
Committee are sanguine that the early installation of the desired integrated software
would help capture all the relevant data and facilitate effective management and
monitoring of the MPLAD Scheme both at micro and macro levels. The Committee
also desire that the necessary explanations of the DAs concerned be obtained and
examined by the Ministry without further loss of time so that requisite preventive
and punitive measures are taken to observe  strict fiscal discipline.
[Serial No. 03, Para  03 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The District Authorities are advised from time to time to include only the
actual expenditure incurred as expenditure figure. The Ministry has already initiated
action for development of an integrated MPLADS website through NICSI. The
NICSI  has already started the process of development of the integrated website,
which is likely to be put on trial during 2013.
59

60
Vetted Comments
Ministry's reply is silent regarding the action taken to obtain/examine
necessary clarifications of the DAs/States concerned on the financial irregularities.
The work for development of integrated MPLADS website is not completed yet.
Comments of the Ministry
Implementation of the works under the MPLADS is undertaken by the State
Government/District Authorities, in accordance with the State Government's
administrative, financial and technical rules. This Ministry continuously monitors
financial progress, including utilization certificates, audit certificates and monthly
progress reports. In case of any clerical errors, etc. in tabulation/reporting, the State
Governments/District Authorities correct the errors by sending revised statements
(this is normal and routine in all schemes, including MPLADS). In  case, however,
any deliberate (malafide) misreporting or wrong certification, etc. or any infringement
of the guidelines/rules comes to notice, the Ministry takes-up and follows-up the
matter with the State Government/District Authority concerned and monitors that
appropriate action is taken by the State Government/District Authority. Till the
necessary appropriate action is taken by the State Government/District Authority,
the matter is not treated as settled by the Ministry. The work on the new integrated
MPLADS software is progressing, and some of the modules developed are at
testing stage. The Ministry is taking steps to put in place the new software at the
earliest.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated  05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I.
Observations/Recommendations
10. The Committee are worried to observe instances of doubtful expenditure
which include non-existence of assets in West Bengal and Jharkhand, payments
made on doubtful muster roll entries in Bihar and on doubtful vouchers in Mizoram
and Jharkhand, leading to a combined financial irregularities of Rs. 40 lakh. Although
the State Governments of West Bengal and Mizoram have furnished certain
explanations on the matter including action taken thereon, the State Governments
of Bihar and Jharkhand did not bother to even respond to the irregularities pointed
out by Audit. The Committee desire that such indifferent attitude of the State
Government concerned be viewed seriously by the Ministry and the matter be
taken up with utmost urgency at the Chief Minister/Chief Secretary level so that
responsibility could be fixed on the delinquent officials.
[Serial No. 10, Para 10 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

61
Action Taken
This Ministry has received replies on doubtful expenditure from State of
Bihar and Jharkhand. The replies received are given below:—
(a)Bihar—State Government has informed the following on concerning audit
paras:—
(i) Excess/avoidable expenditure—Keeping in view the conditions at
the location, during the execution of work, more payment was made
than the scheduled rate due to increased compaction of Brick Bat,
Balu, soil etc. for technical reasons. Besides, after work estimates,
the additional payment was also made due to increase in the rates of
wages by the Government. It has also been informed that action is
being taken as per the audit provision and that it will be ensured that
such lapses is not repeated in future However, provision for increase
in payment is being made in the estimates.
(ii) Procedural lapses in the execution of works—Taking congnizance
of the Audit para, wages are being paid only after preparing the
Muster Roll. It has also been informed that the payment under labour
item is now being made on the basis of Muster roll for the projects in
progress. In Compliance Report of RWD Masaurhi, it has been stated
that in future, procedure would be followed and maintained and the
material will be purchased by quotations and that Labour will be
paid on Muster Roll.
(b) Jharkhand —State Government has replied the following on the
concerning audit paras as given below:—
(i) Unfruitful expenditure on Works—Work construction of Bharat Mata
Kalyan Mandap has been compelted. However, the same could not
be transferred due to matter being sub-judice
(ii) Non-existence of assets—In respect of work for installation of two
solar water pump sets, FIR has been lodged against the firm
M/s Kiran Energy Solution Private Ltd., Dhanbad.
(iii) Payment made on doubtful voucher —As regards installation of
four high level tubewell as concerned, it has been clarified that no
irregularities were committed and payments were made on the basis
of actual work. Rathar the work was completed by incurring Rs. 1601
less than the estimated cost of work.
This Ministry has been requesting the concerned States Governments to
take action against the concerned erring officials.

62
Vetting  Comments
Bihar
Ministry may mention about the action taken/responsibility fixed by
the state government against the delinquent officials.
Jharkhand
1. Unfruitful expenditure on works  — Results of matter which is
sub-judice may be mentioned.
2. Non-existence of asset — Result of FIR against the firm M/s Kiran Energy
Solution Private Ltd., Dhanbad may be mentioned.
3. Payment made on doubtful voucher  — Reply of the Ministry is not
tenable as IA reported to DA that Rs. 0.22 crore was incurred, however,
only Rs. 0.20 crore was actually spent on these works.
Comments of the Ministry
The implementation of works under the Members of Parliament Local Area
Development Scheme (MPLADS) is undertaken by the State Governments/District
Authorities, in accordance with the State Government's administrative, technical
and financial rules.
The State Governments have been asked to furnish action taken notes/replies
to the CAG audit paras, and the matter is being regularly followed-up at various
levels. Specifically, the matters relate to Bihar and Jharkhand are also being
regularly followed-up.
The matters are not treated as settled till the State Governments/District
Authorities take the necessary appropriate action that is warranted and essential in
the cases (including in the cases of Bihar and Jharkhand).
This subject was also taken up in the review of MPLADS with State
Government officers and District Magistrates held on 26.02.2013, wherein it was
inter alia directed as below:—
"Pending CAG audit paras: Attention was specifically drawn to one important
aspects that many of the CAG audit paras enumerate facts that points towards
malafide violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance. It bears emphasis
that in such cases the CAG has already seen the record and also given
opportunity to explain before recording such facts. It therefore becomes
important to immediately examined such reports for appropriate action, which
could include action in any or all of the following three domains—(a) criminal
culpability, (b) departmental action and (c) civil action for recovery. Delaying
or diluting action in such cases has to be avoided.
The State Governments were requested to expedite (a) necessary action to
get the paras settled as per rules and (b) in case of facts pointing towards

63
malafide violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance, to take appropriate
action under law and report on action taken in a time-bound manner."
The minutes were sent to all State Governments for necessary action (the
minutes had been approved by Hon'ble Minister for Programme
Implementation, Government of India).
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated  05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I.
Observations/Recommendations
14. The Committee are shocked to note that nine DAs in eight States executed
700 works costing Rs 9.45 crore without formal recommendations of the MPs
concerned. In addition, three DAs in three States executed 150 works amounting to
Rs 2.44 crore, recommended by the representatives of the MPs. It is really
incomprehensible that on the plea of urgency of work and assurance of the local
MLA to make available funds from the MPLAD Scheme, the District Authorities
had sanctioned the work in anticipation of the MP's recommendation. As per the
provisions of para 3.12 of the Guidelines, the implementation of the works under the
MPLAD Scheme should start only after the receipt of the recommendation of work
from the MPs. This is to be scrupulously followed by the District Authorities and if
any deviation occurs, the State Government can take disciplinary action against the
DAs. But the Committee are perturbed to observe that no disciplinary action has
been taken against the erring DAs even after a lapse of five/six years and the
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, though
submitted before the Committee that the Ministry do not support such kind of
action on the part of the DAs and it calls for disciplinary action, the Ministry have
not taken up the matter at the appropriate level. In view of the fact that award/
implementation of works without formal recommendation from the MPs is a clear
violation of the provisions of the MPLADS Guidelines and tantamount to gross
irregularities, the Committee urge the Ministry to bring the irregularities committed
by the DAs concerned immediately to the notice of the Union Department of
Personnel and Training and also to the Chief Secretary of the State Government
concerned for initiating disciplinary action against the defaulting officers. The
Committee are of the firm opinion that such an action on the part of the Ministry is
imperative so as to convey in unambiguous terms that irregularities of such nature
would not be brooked or allowed to go unpunished. The Committee further desires
that as soon as the MPs recommend a particular work, the same should be intimated
by the IAs to the beneficiaries.
[Serial No. 14, Para 14 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]

64
Action Taken
As and when any irregularities committed by the District Authorities would
be brought/come to the notice of the Ministry, the same would be taken up with the
Chief Secretary of the State Government/Administrator of the UT on case to case
basis for taking appropriate action against the defaulting officers. In case of All
Indian Service Officers, after taking up with Chief Secretary and obtaining his
replies, the serious irregularities will be brought to the notice of DoPT for appropriate
action if felt necessary. Regarding intimation by IAs to the beneficiaries, it is
mentioned that as per the prescribed procedure, the implementing agencies are
assigned works only after sanction is accorded by the district authorities of the
works recommended by the MPs. Therefore it is not feasible for the IAs to intimate
details of recommended works to the beneficiaries. However, in the new software
being developed by the Ministry, the details of the works recommended by an MP
will be reflected. This information will be available in the public domain and can be
viewed by one and all.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated  05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I.
Observations/Recommendations
16. The Committee note that in 10 States, Rs 14.40 crores were sanctioned and
released for works pertaining to 34 Trusts/Societies, which exceeded the ceiling of
Rs. 25 lakh per Trust/Society as fixed under the Scheme Guidelines. The Committee
further note that in seven States, the DAs sanctioned Rs. 5.94 crore to 145 Trusts/
Societies which were either not eligible as per the Guidelines or whose eligibility
were not verified by the DAs. The Ministry have attributed reasons like non-
obtaining of declarations from the Trusts/Societies by the DAs, lack of interaction
amongst the DAs and lack of transparency due to non-availability of records of the
Trusts/Societies online, for the above cited irregularities in the States of West
Bengal, Meghalaya and Jharkhand whereas no response has been received from
other States like Jharkhand, Goa, Maharashtra and Rajasthan. The Committee deplore
the sorry state of affairs leading to blatant violation of the provisions of the
Guidelines and the resultant siphoning away of public funds. They desire that the
Ministry expeditiously obtain the clarifications from those States which have not
yet responded to the lapses, examine the explanations of all the States concerned
and prevail upon them to investigate the matter for initiating necessary and
appropriate action against the erring officials and the Committee be apprised of the
specific measures taken in this regard. The Committee also desire that a Central

65
database containing district-wise list of all the eligible Trusts/Societies be maintained
by the Ministry so as to avoid recurrence of lapses and to facilitate timely recoupment
of funds.
[Serial No. 16, Para 16 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is informed that clarifications have been received from all the concerned
States, except Jharkhand, which is reminded periodically. With regard to Central-
data base of Trusts/Societies, it may be mentioned that it will not be possible to
maintain Central data base. However, Ministry is asking the District Authorities to
maintain district-wise data base in respect of Trusts/Societies to whom work is
allocated.
Vetting Comments
Ministry may mention the action taken on the clarifications received from the
States/UTs. Clarification should be taken from remaining State Govt. of Jharkhand.
Ministry has stated that Distt. Authorities has been asked to maintain district-wise
data base in respect of Trust/Societies to whom works is allocated. Further progress
may be mentioned in the A TN.
Comments of the Ministry
Implementation of the works under the MPLADS is undertaken by the State
Governments/District Authorities, in accordance with MPLADS' guidelines and
the State Government's administrative, financial and technical rules.
State Governments/District Authorities are required and expected to take
appropriate action in case of infringements of rules, guidelines and norms, including
that of release of excess funds to trusts/societies (in such cases, the action taken
would include recoupment of the excess funds with interest and action against the
erring officers).
In cases of infringements of guidelines or rules, including release of excess
funds to trusts/societies, which come to notice from time to time (including through
CAG reports), the Ministry takes-up and follows-up the matter with the State
Government/District Authority concerned and monitors that appropriate action is
taken by the State Government/District Authority. Till the necessary appropriate
action is taken by the State Government/District Authority, the matter is not treated
as settled by the Ministry.
The subject was also taken up in the review of MPLADS with State
Government officers and District Magistrates held on 26.02.2013, wherein it was
inter alia directed as below:—
"Pending CAG audit paras: Attention was specifically drawn to one important
aspects that many of the CAG audit paras enumerate facts that points towards
malafide violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance. It bears emphasis

66
that in such cases the CAG has already seen the record and also given
opportunity to explain before recording such facts. It, therefore, becomes
important to immediately examin such reports for appropriate action, which
could include action in any or all of the following three domains— (a) criminal
culpability, (b) departmental action and (c) civil action for recovery. Delaying
or diluting action in such cases has to be avoided.
The State Governments were requested to expedite (a) necessary action to
get the paras settled as per rules and (b) in case of facts pointing towards
malafide violations of guidelines and financial malfeasance, to take appropriate
action under law and report on action taken in a time-bound manner."
The minutes were sent to all State Governments for necessary action (the
minutes had been approved by Hon'ble Minister for Programme Implementation,
Government of India).
As regards clarifications from Jharkhand, the reply from the State Government
is still awaited. The Government of Jharkhand has again been requested to expedite
its reply. As already stated above, the matter will not be treated as settled till the
necessary appropriate action is taken by the State Government/District Authority.
As regard database of trusts/societies, it may not be feasible for the Ministry to
create and maintain a country-wide database of all eligible trusts/societies. It may
be mentioned that as per para 3.21 of the guidelines of MPLADS, the bonafide and
eligibility of the trusts/societies have to be assessed by the District Authorities.
And the District Authorities are required and expected to maintain a database of all
trusts/societies to whom MPLADS funds have been released.
Sd/-
(S.S Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated  05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I.
Observations/Recommendations
29. The Committee observe that the State level Monitoring Committee headed
by the Chief Secretary/Divisional Commissioner, which is to hold annual meeting
with DAs & MPs to review the progress of implementation of MPLADS, have not
even been constituted in three States/UTs. In other States, the Monitoring Committee
either failed to meet annually or never held any meeting. The Committee express
their serious displeasure on this pathetic state of affairs and recommend that the
Monitoring Committee at the State level under the Chairmanship of the Chief
Secretary/Divisional Commissioner/Additional Chief Secretary be constituted
expeditiously and the meetings of such Committees be convened at least once in a
year with wider participation of MPs to enhance the accountability of the DAs. The

67
Ministry should ask for regular compliance reports in this regard in their biannual
meetings with the State authorities so that corrective measures are taken as and
when required. As assured in evidence, the Committee would like the Ministry to
involve the Minister to write to the Chief Ministers so that the officers responsible
for dereliction of duty could be taken to task.
[Serial No. 29, Para 29 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per para 6.3 (i) of the guidelines, meeting under the Chairmanship of Chief
Secretary/Development Commissioner should be held to review implementation of
the MPLAD Scheme with District Authorities and MPs at least once in a year.
District Authority is required to review and monitor the Progress of the Scheme on
quarterly basis in which MPs are also to be called. However, during the recently
held Biannual Review Meetings on MPLADS, the District Authorities informed
that despite their repeated requests to the MPs to attend such meetings, some of
the MPS are not attending the review meetings nor do they send any reply to the
notice of the meeting. The District Authorities have however been asked to continue
to invite the MPs in the meetings. All the State Governments/UTs administration
have been advised to hold Monitoring Committee Meetings at least once in a year
and furnish the Minutes to the Ministry.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated  05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I.
Observations/Recommendations
30. The Committee are concerned to note that in 18 States/UTs, only 13.69 per
cent of MPLADS funds were sanctioned for areas inhabited by the SC/ST
community against the requirement of 22.5 per cent as per the Guidelines. It shall be
the responsibility of the DAs to enforce the provisions of the Guidelines in this
regard. Although the Guidelines have recently been amplified to give ample flexibility
to the MPs to go beyond the list of shelf of Projects in order to meet the needs of the
SC/ST people, the Ministry have not collated the data on expenditure under the
Scheme for the benefit of the SC/ST people on the plea of inadequate manpower.
The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. They desire that the
Ministry must compile and collate on an annual basis the expenditure under the
MPLADS for SC/ST population, either utilizing the available resources or by
augmenting them, so that any aberrations/slippages on the part of the DAs are
rectified. The Committee specifically desire that in case a constituency does not

68
have ST inhabited area, the 22.5 per cent earmrked funds may be utilized in SC
inhabited areas and vice-versa, in consonance with the provisions contained in the
Guidelines.
[Serial No. 30, Para 30 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The works are recommended by the Hon'ble MPs to the District Authorities.
As per para 2.5 of the Guidelines, the MPs are expected to recommend every year
works costing at least 15% of MPLADS fund for areas inhabited by Scheduled
Caste population and 7.5% for areas inhabited by Scheduled Tribe population.
Provision already exists in the Guidelines that in case, a constituency does not
have ST inhabited area, such fund may be utilized in SC inhabited areas and
vice-versa. It is the responsibility of the District Authority to enforce this provision
of the Guidelines. The Guidelines have recently been amplified to include para 3.27
which provides availability of shelf of  Projects including projects for SC/ST inhabited
areas to MPs. Though the Shelf of Projects is only suggestive, it gives ample
flexibilities to the MP to go beyond the list in order to meet the needs of the people.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated  05 September, 2013]
Comments of the Committee
Please see Para No. 31 of Chapter I.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Observations/Recommendations
5. Diversion of funds meant of MPLAD Scheme to other Schemes of the
Central and State Governments is another area of serious concern. The Committee
find that Rs. 4.67 crores of the MPLAD funds were diverted to other Schemes by 22
DAs of seven States, although the DAs are not authorized to do so. What further
irks the Committee is the fact that the Ministry, instead of taking prompt action
when the irregularities were pointed out by Audit, are yet to write to the State
Governments for taking action against the DAs concerned. Since diversion of
funds meant for MPLAD Scheme to other Schemes is a clear violation of rules
notwithstanding the fact that in some cases diverted funds have been received
back, the Committee exhort the Ministry to impress upon the State Governments
concerned to initiate disciplinary action against the DAs involved in such
irregularities. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry, in consultation and
coordination with the State Governments, should resort to foolproof measures with
a view to ensuring that under no circumstances funds meant for MPLAD Scheme
are diverted, even temporarily, to any other Schemes.
[Serial No.  05, Para 05 of the 55th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(15th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
District Authorities are not authorised to divert funds meant for MPLADS to
any other schemes. Ministry has issued strict instructions to the District Authorities
from time to time to adhere to the provision of the Guidelines. Whenever such
diversion is reported, Ministry directs the States/UTs Government for taking
remedial action including action against the erring officials. This Ministry has sent
letters to all the Nodal States Authorities/UTs Administration to initiate action
against the erring officials for violation of Guidelines.
Vetting Comments
Ministry's reply is silent regarding action taken by the States/UTs Government
against the erring officials.
Comments of the Ministry
Implementation of the works under the MPLADS is undertaken by the
State Governments/District Authorities, in accordance with the State Government's
administrative, financial and technical rules. State Governments/District Authorities
69

70
are required and expected to take appropriate action in case of infringements of
rules, guidelines and norms, including diversion of funds; in case of diversion of
funds, the action would include restoration of funds back to the MPLADS and
action against the erring officers. In cases of infringements of guidelines or rules,
including diversion of funds, which come to notice from time to time (including
through CAG reports), the Ministry takes-up and follows-up the matter with the
State Government/District Authority concerned and monitors that appropriate action
is taken by the State Government/District Authority. Till the necessary appropriate
action is taken by the State Government/District Authority, the matter is not treated
as settled by the Ministry.
Sd/-
(S.S. Badhawan)
Joint Secretary to Government of India.
[Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation Office Memorandum
No. C-16/2011-MPLADS/55th PAC Report dated  05  September, 2013]
N
EW DELHI; PROF. K.V. THOMAS
21st December, 2015 Chairperson,
30 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2015-16) HELD ON 17TH DECEMBER, 2015
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs. on 17th December, 2015 in
Room No. "51", Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. K.V. Thomas — Chairperson
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Nishikant Dubey
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
5. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
6. Dr. P. Venugopal
7. Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
8. Shri Dushyant Singh
9. Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
10. Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
11. Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A.K. Singh — Additional Secretary
2. Shri T. Jayakumar — Director
3. Shri Tirthankar Das — Additional Director
4. Smt. Bharti Tuteja — Deputy Secretary
Representatives from the office of the comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Rakesh Jain — Deputy C&AG (RC)
2. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Director General of Audit (RC)
3. Shri Parag Prakash — Director General of Audit (ADS)
4. Shri Mukesh P. Singh — Director General of Audit (ACE)
5. Shri Manish Kumar — Principal Director of Audit (PAC)
71

72
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for
consideration:
(i) **** **** **** ****
(ii) **** **** **** ****
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations contained in the 55th Report of PAC (15th Lok Sabha) on the
subject "Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS)."
3. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the above
mentioned draft Reports. After discussing the contents of these draft Reports, the
Committee adopted the draft Reports at Sl. No. (i) with some changes/modifications
which are indicated in the enclosed Annexure. The Committee then adopted the
draft Report at Sl. No. (iii) without any changes/modifications. The Committee,
however, decided to postpone the adoption of draft Report at Sl. No. (ii) for the
want of further examination of the subject.
4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalise these Reports in the
light of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of factual
verification by the Audit and present the same to Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.
****Matter does not pertain to this Report.

APPENDIX  II
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
(i) Total number of Observations/Recommendations 33
(ii) Ob servations/Recommendations of the Committee Total : 22
which have been accepted by the Government: Percentage : 66.66%
Para Nos. 1, 2,4, 6-9, 11-13, 17-23, 25,26, 31-32 and 33
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the T otal : 04
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of Percentage : 12.12%
the reply of the Government:
Para Nos. 15, 24, 27 and 28
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : 06
which replies of the Government have not been Percentage : 18.18%
accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Para Nos. 3, 10, 14, 16, 29 and 30
(v) Observations/Recommendations in respect of Total : 01
which the Government have furnished interim Percentage: 3.03%
replies:
Para No. 5
73
GMGIPMRND—4156LS—28.5.2016.

74
PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520 006
(AP).
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842 002. (Bihar).
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P.B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110 001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110 009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110 024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110 001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110 052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110 002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110 002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110 054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110 003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110 006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110 005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P.B. No. 708, New Delhi-110 001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110 059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service, C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110 034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462 003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2671,
Mumbai-400 002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd
Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400 002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605 001.
TAMIL  NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641 012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600 014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (UP).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226 001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.