81

EXTRA AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE BY
ANURAG

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of

the Committee contained in their Forty-fourth Report (16" Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

Herta जपते

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


PAC NO. 2114

EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

EXTRA AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE BY
ANURAG

[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of
the Committee contained in their Forty-fourth Report (167 Lok Sabha)]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE

सत्यमेव जयते

Presented to Lok Sabha on: /{ -08 2 0 ! 7

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: [1-0 8-.201F

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

August, 2017 /Shravana, 1939 (Saka)


CONTENTS

PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC AGCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2017-18) (iti)
INTRODUCTION (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER | Introductory 1
*CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations of the Committee which
have been accepted by the Government
*CHAPTER Hl Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do

not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
the Government

*CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration

CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies

APPENDICES

|. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2017-18) held on 9" August, 2017

I. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public. Accounts
Committee contained in their Ejighty-first Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha)

(ll. Annexures

*Not included in the cyclostyled copy of the Report



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2017-18)

Shri Mallikarjun Kharge - Chairperson
MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Subhash Chandra Baheria
Shri Prem Singh Chandumajra
Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Chandrakant Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab

Smt. Riti Pathak

Shri Neiphiu Rio

10. Shri Abhishek Singh ©

11. Prof. Ram Shanker

42. Dr. Kirit Somaiya

13, Shri Anurag Singh Thakur

14. Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

15. छा. P. Venugopal

RAJYA SABHA

कण कफ कफ YON

oO

16. Shri Naresh Agrawal

17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
19. Vacant”

20. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
21. Shri Ajay Sancheti

22.. Shri Bhupender Yadav

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh " - Additional Secretary
2. Shri T. Jayakumar - Director
3. Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Deepankar Kamble - Committee Officer

* Shri Shantaram Naik ceased to be a member of the committee consequent upon his retirement
from Rajya Sabha on 28 July, 2017. 2


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee (2017-18), having been
authorised by the Committee, do present this Eighty-first Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the
Committee contained in their Forty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)’on “Extra
Avoidable Expenditure by ANURAG" relating to the Ministry of Defence.

2. The Forty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on
287 April, 2016. Replies of the Government to the Observations/Recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 23 March, 2017. The Public Accounts
Committee considered and adopted the Report at their sitting held on 9" August, 2017.
Minutes of the Sitting are given at Appendix-l.

3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.

4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. .

5. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on_ the
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report (Sixteenth Lok.
Sabha) is given at Appendix-il. हि

NEW DELHI; पु ; MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
97 Auqust, 2017 Chairperson

18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee



CHAPTER - 1

REPORT
This Report of the Public Accounts Committee deals with Action Taken by the
Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their
Forty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on “Extra Avoidable Expenditure by’
ANURAG" based on Para 5.1 of the C&AG's Report No, 30 of 2013 relating to the Ministry

of Defence.

2. +The Forty-fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha), which was presented to Lok
Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha = on 2g April, 2016, contained 04
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the
Observations/Recommendations have been received from the DRDO, Ministry of Defence

and these have been categorized as under.

{i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by the Government:

Paragraph Nos. 1,2 and 3

Total: 03
Chapter- II

(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from the Government .

NIL

Total: 00
Chapter- Ill

(iii) | Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:

-NIL-

Total: 00
Chapter- IV -

(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies

Paragraph No. 4

Total: 01
Chapter- ४



न 2

3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the DRDO, Ministry of Defence on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contdined in their Forty-fourth Report
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the
succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the Action Taken by the
Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations which either need reiteration

or merit comments.

| Cost Estimation/Price Negotiation
“(Recommendation Para No. 2)

4. The Committee had noted that M/s ITI Ltd. quoted a price of Rs. 17.50 crore for
upgrading of CHITRA computing facility at ANURAG. Considering the rate as high, the
Tender Purchase Committee negotiated the price for Rs. 16.38 crore, after which DRDO
accorded financial sanction. The Committee found that DRDO in their own admission had
stated that they did not take into account the dollar variation cost while determining the cost
estimation and their estimate was Rs. 15.00 crore without tax and Rs. 16,00 crore was
considered reasonable, To their utter surprise, the Committee found that the Tender
Purchase Committee negotiated for Rs, 16.38 crore although DRDO considered Rs. 16,00
crore to be reasonable. The Ministry, however, had a different view point which highlighted ©
that CHITRA upgradation was estimated independently by ANURAG by taking last purchase
price of major items including three years warranty and operational support. The.Committee
felt that in the absence of competitive price bids, the cost of the upgradation project was not _
reasonably fixed. Moreover, they were of the opinion that the contention of the Ministry did
not conform to modern methods of cost “estimation. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that the Ministry setup an enquiry to go into details of the factors which were
taken into consideration before finalising the cost of upgradation of CHITRA to ascertain the

reasonableness of the cost. Action taken in this regard be intimated to the Committee. °

5. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“An inquiry.has been initiated by Ministry of Defence in the instant case. DRDO has
now adopted policy. of employing Cost Estimation Committee for arriving at
reasonable cost. An officer of ICoAs (Indian Cost Accounts Service) will be a member
of Cost Estimation Comrnittees in all. rnatters requiring concurrence of Defence
Finance”, हि हि है

कि


3
6. The Committee noted that for purchasing hardware and other peripherals for
upgrading ‘the computing facility, the Tender Purchase Committee of the Ministry
settled for Rs. 16.38 crore although the DRDO itself admitted that Rs. 16.00 crore was
reasonable, The Committee find it surprising that the DRDO accorded financial
sanction to spend a higher amount without asking the Tender Purchase Committee to
either re-negotiate or to invite competitive bids. The Ministry had replied that an
inquiry has been initiated by the D (Vigilance), Ministry of Defence. The Committee
desire that the said enquiry be fast tracked and the findings be carefully studied and
implemented across the board to ensure transparency, for saving public money and
also getting the requisite hardware at a reasonable! competitive cost. The Committee
note that in pursuance of their recommendation, the DRDO has since adopted the
policy of employing Cost Estimation Committee for arriving at a reasonable cost in all
matters requiring concurrence of Department of Defence Finance, the Committee
desire that the roles of the Cost Estimation Committee and the Tender Purchase

Committee be clearly defined and timelines prescribed for estimation and approvals.

I. Outsourcing of Project Execution
(Recommendation Para No. 3)

7. The Committee were appalled to note that M/s ITI Ltd. had outsourced the entire job
of upgradation of CHITRA and placed back to back supply orders at a cost of Rs. 14,26
crore on M/s. Real Time Tech Solutions (RTTS), Bengaluru and subsequently to M/s RTTS,
Singapore, although M/s ITI Ltd. had taken the job at a cost of Rs. 16.38 crore. They were,
however, not convinced with the contention of ANURAG that they were not aware of the
sub-contract on M/s RTTS by M/s ITI Ltd. til April, 2011 as the Committee understood that
the representatives of the vendor associates of M/s ITI Ltd. included the members of M/s
RTTS, who must had attended the price negotiation committee meeting in December, 2010.
Meanwhile, the Committee noted that after the award of the turn-key project, M/s ITI Ltd,
sought Customs Duty Exemption Certificate for orders placed on M/s RTTS, Bengaluru,
which was denied by ANURAG, after which M/s ITI Ltd. cancelled their orders on M/s RTTS,
Bengaluru and placed the same on M/s RTTS, Singapore. The Committee felt that at the
time of denial of the Customs Duty Exemption Certificate, ANURAG must have sensed the’
intention of M/s ITI Ltd. to get the work outsourced by an external agency. The Committee
wondered why at that point of time, ANURAG did not cancel the job awarded to M/s ITI Ltd.



4

or did not prevent then from getting it outsourced. The Commitiee felt that the way the
contract was awarded on a single tender basis to M/s ITI Ltd. albeit taking into account the:
trust that they had created out of an earlier job execution (CHITRA) speaks volumes about
the unfounded faith ANURAG or the DRDO officials had on M/s ITI Ltd., due to which
perhaps DRDO/ANURAG failed to check them from getting the job outsourced even though
it had come to their notice accidentally. The very fact that M/s ITI Ltd. did not inform
ANURAG about outsourcing and got it accomplished _at a cost of Rs. 14.26 crore shows that
the DRDO officials must have acted as facilitators for their profit, thereby incurring losses to
the exchequer. The Committee considered this a very serious issue not only because of
| financial loss byt also because of the intentions behind officials who were in charge of
scientific and defence research of the sub-continent. They, therefore, recommended that the
Ministry should debar such companies having doubtful credentials from executing DRDO
projects as execution of the projects by such companies might compromise security of the
country. They also recommended to suitably amend the existing procurement procedure to
insert a clause whereby such outsourcing without the concurrence of the organization which
awards the contract will not be permissible. The Committee were unhappy to note that the |
information sought by them seeking explanation of M/s ITI Ltd. for breach of trust and
outsourcing the job to M/s RTTS was still awaited. The Committee desired an expeditious

action in the matter.
8. ° The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

“On the directive of PAC Sub Committee, ANURAG had sought explanation from
M/s 111, vide letter dated 23" January 2015, for breach of trust & violating tender
stipulation in outsourcing job to M/s RTTS. In response, Mis IT] had submitted, vide
their letter dated 20" February 2015, that they have not violated any terms and
_ conditions of RFP. They have informed that M/s RTTS was selected as per their
procedure in view of limited financial resources and need of specialized software for
HPC cluster. Further, it has also been confirmed by M/s ITI they had included
confidentiality clause in their enquiry and hence not violated confidentiality clause of
tender, M/s 11 have maintained that difference between ANURAG PO on Mis ॥॥|
and M/s 11 PO on RTTS units is around 8.83% of POs on RTTS. They have also
had paid additional amount of Rs. 13 lakh due to revision in service tax which was
not reimbursed by ANURAG as revision became effective after expiry of original
PDC. MoD has initiated an enquiry against M/s ITI, Bangalore in the instant case.
ANURAG had not placed any PO on Mis IT! after 2010. ANURAG has decided to
stop all transactions on-going/scheduled with M/s ITI Limited. DRDO has issued a
standard template for, RFP vide letter no. DMM/
May 2013, wherein under standard terms and. conditions-at Sl. .No. 12 1195 been --
specified that:"Thé séller has no rightsto give, bargain

An

/PP0050912/P-1 (REP) .dated 17. ..

35811 assign or’ sublet.ors..


5

otherwise dispose of Contract or any part thereof, as to give or to let a third party
take benefit or advantage of the Contract or any part thereof without written consent
of Buyer". It may also be noted that instructions issued relating to framing of RFP
specify that Part Il contains Standard Terms & Conditions which have legal
implications. Therefore, neither deviation from the text given in the clause nor
deletion of any of these clauses should be admitted. In case a deviation from these
clauses has to be considered/allowed, approval of DRDO 110 will be required.”
9. The Committee note that in congruence of their recommendation the Ministry
has directed all labs/ Establishments not to enter into any contract issue SO (Supply
Order) with Mis ITl Ltd., Bengaluru. The Committee are of the view that giving a
foreign company a sub contract to upgrade a sensitive system which was connected
to all DRDO Labs was a serious lapse as it gave access to the strategic data to the
outsiders and merely including a confidentiality clause cannot safeguard the security
interests of the country. In the instant case, the ITI Ltd, a Government of India
Undertaking, failed to even inform ‘ANURAG, the sub contracting of the execution of a
defence contract to a foreign company. The Committee are, further, astonished to
note. the callous attitude of ANURAG as it was not even aware of the sub contracting
of execution to the M/s RTTS Ltd. tit! 2011 despite several indications like seeking of
Customs Duty Exemption Certificate by M/s ITI Ltd. and presence of the officials of 7
M/s RTTS Ltd. during meetings etc. The Committee while noting that DRDO has
issued a standard template wherein it has been specified that "The seller has no right
to give, bargain, sell, assign or sublet or otherwise dispose of Contract or any part
thereof, as to give or to let a third party take benefit or advantage of the Contract or
any part thereof without written consent.of Buyer", are of the view that a robust
monitoring mechanism be developed wherein the DRDO/ MoD can monitor the award/

execution of contracts and take legal recourse accordingly.

॥; CONCLUSION
(Recommendation Para No. 4)

10. The Committee are disturbed to note that ANURAG proposed the up-gradation of the
existing system. (CHITRA) on single tender basis through Mis ITI Limited only in order to
have a seamless up-gradation. Although, the Committee are convinced with the rationale for
up-gradation of the CHITRA facility, they do not find any justification behind award of work of
up-gradation- through’ single tender or nomination basis to M/s ITI Ltd. Moreover, during
examination of the. subject, when the Committee enquired whether the Ministry/DRDO had
ever tried to find out if at the tinte of execution of CHITRA, M/s ITI Ltd. had executed through



6

the heip of any third party, neither the Ministry nor the DRDO could give any satisfactory
reply. DRDO in their own admission has submitted that selection of M/s ITI Ltd. was based
on the past record and the general awareness of what it has been doing in the various
systems, The Committee wonder whether work of up-gradation pertaining to scientific
research-can be. awarded on the grounds as claimed by DRDO. The Committee feel that it
appears to be a pre-decided move on the part of DRDO to award it to M/s IT1 Ltd. only which
not only violates the prescribed procurement procedure of the Government of India but also
reflects inaction on the part of the controlling/administrative Ministry in’ monitoring such
sensitive issues. They, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to find out whether such award of |
contract is permissible and if not, to initiate appropriate disciplinary action against the erring °
officials. The Committee fee! that since scientific and defence research involves some
security risks, they desire the Ministry/ORDO to make all out efforts to see that the
specification, design and security of the nation is not put to risk or is not compromised in any
manner while undertaking such turn-key projects. Action taken in this regard may be

intimated to this Committee.

11. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes have stated as under:

An enquiry has been initiated by Ministry of Defence in the instant case as
recommended by the Hon'ble PAC. Further action taken would be submitted to the
Hon'ble PAC. ‘ :

42. The Committee noted that ANURAG awarded the upgradation of the existing
system (CHITRA) on single tender basis to M/s ITI Ltd for ensuring seamless
upgradation. However, Mis ITI Limited sub-contracted the job to M/s RTTS Ltd in view
of its limited financial resources and need of specialized software for HPC cluster
without informing ANURAG, The Committee note that as per Defence Research and
Development Organisation (DRDO) Procurement Procedure 2006, for non-proprietary
items single tender system should be adopted with the approval of Competent
Financial Authority (CFA) only when single response is available inspite of limited .
tendering on more than one occasion. The Committee are of the considered view that
. ANURAG not only violated. the Procurement Procedure of DRDO by not inviting
competitive bids but also awarded the contract to a party which did not have
adequate resources, Further, neither ANURAG nor DRDO. could not satisfactorily

respond to the query regarding involvement. of :a; third-party. during execution. of

छा


7
security of the nation is not put to risk or is not compromised in any manner while

undertaking such turn-key projects .

अखक कं जे मे से #ै के # ik

NEW DELHI, © है MALLIKARJUN KHARGE
9" August, 2017 Chairperson

18 Shravana, 1939 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee


APPENDIX-I!
(Vide Paragraph 5 of Introduction)

ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-FOURTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

(v)

Total number of Observations/Recommendations

Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
which have been accepted by the Government:

Para Nos. 1, 2 and 3
Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government:

-NIL-
Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted. by the Committee and which require
reiteration:

-NiL-

Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which the Government have furnished interim replies:

Para No. 4

04

Total : 03
Percentage
Total: 0
Percentage
Total : 00
Percentage
Total : 04
Percentage

175%

10%

10%

125%