mets ea Fe

SGC DRONES REG PO ESOT, 25.

:5:200:ल्‍४2

¢
F
%
:

63

ADMINISTRATION OF PROSECUTION
AND PENALTIES IN CENTRAL —
EXCISE AND SERVICE TAX

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTY- THIRD REPORT

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


हब की crreremes veer उसपर

PAC NO. 2096

SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)

SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA

ama OF

PROSECUTION AND PENALTIES

IN CENTRAL EXCISE AND
SERVICE TAX

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)

Presented to Lok Sabha on: {43.1 2 2@lé.

Laid in Rajya Sabha on: ..{6-.42.2e!6

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

December, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)



CONTENTS

PAGES
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2016-17)...-- (ii)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-II] OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2016-17)...... (vy
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)....... (vii)
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEEF-IIl OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2015-16)... (x)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS GOMMITTEEF (2014-15}, (xi}
॥४11२०00000110 0 ............ ..- ---.* Gail)

REPORT
PART- |
i Introductory
I Administration of Prosecution and Penatties
PART - Il

Observations/Recommendations

APPENDICES

i Minutes of the 2" Sitting of the Sub-Committee-Ilf of PAC (2015-16) heid
on 28" January, 2016

॥ Minutes of the 7" Sitting of the Sub-Committee-Ill of PAC (2016-17) held
on 14" December, 2016

i Minutes of the 20" sitting of the PAG (2016-17) held on 157 December,
2016

ANNEXURES
| Annexure «|

॥ Annexure - Il

14


Composition of Sub-Committee - ॥॥ (Direct and Indirect Taxes) of the Public

Accounts Commitiee (2016-17)

Convenor”

Alternate Convenor :

Members

छः फ #+ ५०7० ;-+

Shri Nishikant Dubey

Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi
Prof. Richard Hay

Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Rey
Shri Ajay Sancheti

(४2



COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
“ (2015-16)

Prof. K.¥. Thomas - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia
Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shri Nishikant Dubey
Shri Gajanan Kirtikar
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio
Shri Dushyant Singh

ee NA hw ww HD

SEAR

ड़

ath
a
noe

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Dr, Kirit Somaiya

Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
Shri Shivkumar Udasi

Dr. P, Venugopal

कनने.। कन+.. +न+े
ARS

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Naresh Agrawal
17. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
18. Shr Anil Madhav Dave
19. Shri Vijay Goel
20. Shri Bhubancswar Kalita -
21. Shri Shantaram Naik
22. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

"-श प्क्टग्ररणफयणएशक PMR OT RN EE DA IT:

wip



Composition of Sub-Committee — |॥ (Direct and Indirect Taxes} of the Public

Accounts Committee (2015-16)

Convenor हु Shri Nishikant Dubey
Alternate Convenor : Dr. Kirit Somaiya
Members : Shri Sharitaram Naik

Shri Ramesh Pokhriyal “Nishank"
Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy

जाकर पे

ESE NLL

(2



: COMPOSITION OF THE ARE USITION OF THE PUBLEC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
iy (2014-15)
Prof. K.V. Thomas - Chairperson

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri ७.8, Ahluwalia

nO:

Shri Sudip Bandyopadhyay
Shri Ranjit Singh Brahmpura
Shti Nishikant Dubey

Shri Gajanan Kirtikar

Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
Shri Ramesh Pokhtiyal "Nishank"
Shri Neiphiu Rio

lot. Shri Dushyant Singh

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
123, Shri Shiv Kumar Udasi

13, Dr. Kirit Somaiya

14. Shri Anurag Thakur

5% Dr P. Venugopal

oP ND A Rw ०

=

RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Satyavrat Chaturvedi
17. Shri Vijay Goel
18. Dr. Satyanatayan Jatiya
19. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
20. Shri Shantaram Naik
21. Shri Sukhendu Sekhar Roy
22. Shri Ramchandra Prasad Singh

' Bleoted w.c.£ 3 December, 2014 vice Shri Rajiv Pratap Rady wha has boen appointed as Minister w.e.f. 90 November, 2014.
‘Elected w.c.f. 3% Decembsr, 2014 vice Shri Jayant Sinha who has been appointed 55 Minister wef 9° November, 2014.
 Blected w.c.t. 3 Decomber, 2014 vice Dr, M, Thambidutei who has becn chosen as 1100० Deputy Speaker, Lok Sabha and
has since resigned from the membership of the Committee.

(xD |



|
|!
i

Lon SNE I! EOE TOL

SIT EB MORN

INTRODUCTION

i, the Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee, do present this Sixty-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on
“Administration of Prosecution and Penalties in Central Excise and Service Tax”
based on C&AG's Report No. 29 of 2014 relating to Ministry of Finance-Department of
Revenue.

2 The above-mentioned Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
was laid on the Table of the House on 28" November, 2014.

3. The Public Accounts Committee (2014-15) took up the subject for examination
and report and the subject was carried forward for examination by successor Public
Accounts Committee during their term (2015-16) and allocated the subject to Sub-
Committee-H| (Direct and Indirect Taxes) of PAC (2015-18) under the Convenorship of
Shri Nishikant Dubey, MP and Member of PAC which took-up examination of the
aforementined Audit Report, procured written replies and took evidence of the
“representatives of the Ministry of Finance-Department of Revenue and Central Board of
Excise and Customs (CBEC) on the subject at their sitting held on 28" January, 2016
The Sub-Commitiee considered and adopted the draft Report on the subject at their
sitting held on 14 December, 2016 and thereafter, the Public Accounts Commitlee
(2016-17) considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 15 December,
2016. The minutes of the Sittings are anpended to the Report.

4 For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type and form Part- Il of .
the Report.

5. The Committee thank the Sub-Committee for taking oral evidence and obtaining
information on the subject as well as finalizing and placing the draft Report before the
Main Committee.

‘6. The Committee would also like to express their thanks to the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance-Department of Revenue and the Central Board of Excise and
Gustoms {CBEC) for tendering evidence before them and furnishing the requisite
information to the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject.

7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India and the
Committee Secretariat in preparation of the Report.

NEW DELHI; | PROF. K.V. THOMAS

15 December, 2016 पु 5 Chairperson,
24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka} Public Accounts Committee.



PRESALE EE BN NIT RN ELEN LILES ESI ELLE LO SLRS PETE RISD YSN LOLI PNET SO RETR

REPORT
PART -।

|, fntroductory

Central Excise and Service Tax laws provide stiff punishments of imprisonment and
fines for specific violations. Such an imposition is possible only by a Court of Law. These
are independent of the penalties and confiscation that can be imposed by Excise
authorities through departmental adjudication. In Central Excise, prosecution sets in motion
a legal process by which Government seeks ta ensure punishment of companies and
persons concerned with evasion of Central Excise duty. The Prosecution Cell at the
Commissionerate headquarters is responsible for the entire prosecution proceedings as
and when sanctioned by the Commissioner against any Proprietor, Firm, Company or
Individual who are found guilty of an offence punishable with imprisonment in tems of

* Section 9 of the Central Excise Act, 1944. The responsibility of this Celi starts from

arresting a person found guilty, remanding him to judicial custody, to arrange for a speedy
and successful trial before the competent Magisterial Court.

2... Cefttrat Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) set up under the Central Boards of

Revenue Act, 1963 is a part of the Department of Revenue under the Ministry of Finance,
Government of India. Member (Central Excise) and Member (Service Tax} in the 085९
have the overall charge of the prosecution relating to the respective levies. Directorate
Generai of Central Excise intelligence (0558!) is the apex intelligence organisation
functioning under CBEC, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, entrusted with
detection of cases of evasion of duties of Central Excise and Service Tax.

i. Audit Review

3. As prosecution and penalty are important deterrent mechanisms, it was intended to
examine the administration and implementation of prosecution and penalty machinery, by
CBEC and its field formations for combating tax evasion. To achieve this, it was saught by
examining current structures, its utilisation and effectiveness. Audit examined records
related to the period FY 11 to FY 13 in respect of Central Excise and from FY 12 to FY 13
in respect of Service Tax prosecution cases made available by 46 Commissionerates out of
the 104 Commissionerates and the records at the DGCEt zonal units.

4. Section 9 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 defines cammission of the following
offences as punishable:- .

a) contravening any of the provisions of Section 8 or of a rule made under specific
clauses sub-section (2) of Section 37;
7) evading payment of duty under the Act;


6) removing excisable goods or conceming himself with such removal in contravention
to the Act and Rules;

@) acquiring or in any way conceming himself_with transporting, depositing, concealing,
selling, purchasing or otherwise dealing with excisable goods where he knows of
has reason to believe that the goods are liable to confiscation under the Act and
Rules; हर

8) contravening any provision in relation to Cenvat Credit under the Act and Rules;

f) failure to supply information or knowingly supplying false Information; and

) attempting to commit or abetting commission of an offence relating to evasion of
duty or transit of goods or restriction on storage of goods or non-tegistration ofa
unit

5. Section 89 of the Finance Act, 1994 defines the following offences as punishable in
relation to Service Tax

a) knowingly evade payment of service tax

0) availing and utilising Cenvat credit without actual receipt of taxable service or
excisable goods either fully or partially;

०) maintaining false books of accounts, failure to supply any information or supplying
false information, and

d) collecting an amount as service tax but failure to deposit it for a period of more than
six months. |

6. The punishable offences by a company or firm are provided under Section SAA of
the Central Excise Act. This Section provides that:-

1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time
the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly unless he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.

2) Where an offence has been committed by a company and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to
any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed fo
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.

7. . Section 9AA is a deeming provision. If two vital ingredients are satisfied i.e. ‘an
offence’ has been committed and the accused was ‘in charge of the company, then he is है
deemed to be guilty. The proviso to the sub-section (1) enables a person in charge fo prove

. his innocence. Thus, the prosecution need not prove that the contravention was done



ATID a WRB te $i Rt

COMET ARENT RO a ete,

intentionally and deliberately by the accused. !t would be sufficient for the prosecution to
establish that ‘an offence’ has been committed and the accused is the ‘person-in charge’ of
the day-to-day functioning of the company.

8. Offences under Section ५(1)(9) {evading payment-of excise duty} and Section
9(1)(bbbb) {violation of Cenvat Credit Rules} af the Central Excise Act are cognizable and
non-bailable, if the duty exceeds fifly lakh (with effect from 10 May 2013). Other offences
are non-cognizable. Except for the cognizable offence of collecting Service Tax but not
depositing it with Government for more than six months under Section 90(1) of Finance Act,
1894 other offences specified in Section 89 are non-cagnizable.

9. Section 9A(2) of Central Excise Act, 1944 provides the Chief Commissioner of
Central Excise to compound any offence under the Act. An amendment 10 Section 83 of
the Finance Act, 1994 with effect from 8 April 2011 provides for the compounding of
offences relating to Service Tax. ‘Compound’ means to seltle amicably. Compounding is
essentially a compromise between the prosecuting authority and the prosecuted entity. The
prosecuted person/entity agrees to pay the composition amount through this procedure in
lieu of dropping prosecution. Compounding can be either before or after the institution of
prosecution procedures. ff the case is pending, then the Court is informed about the
‘compromise arrived and requested not to proceed with the case.

10. in the following cases, compounding is not permissible: -

a} If a person has been allowed to compound offence ance in respect of offences
under Section 9(1)(a},(b},{bb}, {bbb}, (bbbb) or (c) of Centrat Excise Act, 1944.

b) In case of Excise ‘offences under Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985.

०). If a person was allowed to compound case once in respect of any offence for
goods of value exceeding rupee one crore.

d) If a person was convicted by the Court under Central Excise Act, 1944 on or
after 30 December 2005.

Central Excise (Compounding of Offences} Rules, 2005 and Service Tax (Compounding of
Offences) Rules, 2012 prescribe the respective compounding procedures,

11. Against this backdrop, the PAC (2016-17) selected the subject as reported in
C&AG's Report No. 29 of 2014 for detailed examination and report. Subsequently, the
subject was referred fo the Sub-Committee on Direct and Indirect Taxes ie. Sub-
Conmnittee-lil dealing with subjects on taxation. Subsequently, the Committee obtained
background note and requisite replies and some other clarifications from the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Revenue and Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC). The
Committee tock oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance, Department
of Revenue and Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) on 28.01.2016 and obtained


SPecmanee oh ARENT Ae,

information on the subject. Based on the information gathered, the Committee proceeded
with examination of the relevant issues in detail as outlined in the succeeding paragraphs.

|

SCREEN ORT TEN IOLT:
1
1
1



NI ITSO ELT TLE Moa

Aa

j
|
|
!ः
ते
हि
ह
&

A

Chapter -It

Administration of Prosecution and Penalties

Launching of Prosecution
The main guidetines for launching the prosecution are:-

i)

i)

fil)

Launching of prosecution shall be with the final approval of the Chief
Commissioner.

Prasecution should not be launched in cases of technical nature or difference
in interpretation of law, The monetary jimit for launching prosecution has been’
enhanced fo हैं 25 lakh wef 12 December 1997. In the case of habitual
offenders prosecution should be considered irrespective of the monetary limit.

Prosecution should normally be faunched immediately after adjudication has
been completed. It should not be kept in abeyance on the ground that the
party has gone in appeal/revision.

’ Procedure for Prosecution

Procedure envisaged for prosecution is as follows:-

i)

ii)

iil)

vi)

An investigation report for the prosecution should be carefully prepared and
signed by an Assistant Commissioner, endorsed by the Commissioner and
forwarded to the Chief Commissioner for decision within.one month of the
adjudication. of the case. A criminal complaint in a Court of Law should be
filed onty afier the sanction of the jurisdictional Chief Commissioner has been
obtained.

’ Prosecution, once faunched, should be vigorously followed.

To ensure the deterrent effect of prosecution, department must secure
convictions with utmost speed through regular monitoring of the progress of
the prosecution, |

Ensure avoiding delays in the court proceedings due to non-availability of the
records required for production before the Magistrate.

A Court of Law has the power fo publish name, place of business etc. of a
person convicted under the Act but exercises it sparingly. Department should
make a prayer to the Court to invoke this Section in respect of all persons
convicted under the Act.

A Prosecution. Register may be maintained in the Prosecution Celi of the
Conmissionerate Headquarters,


८. Cases

44. There were 593 prosecution cases pending as on 31 March 2013 in 46 selected
Commissionerates involving a money value of % 2,011.56 crore as shown in the table
below:

Prosecution cases

Year ~ Opening balance Additions et Closing =
‘No. Amount 7 दे Amount No. Amount No. Amount
2000-10 s05| 1799738] 9| 205381| 5| 27,14387| 5091. 1,54,884.12
2010-11] 509 | 154,68412| 47| 16,15480| 7|  279.76| 549 4,69,759.17
खा sao | 160,750.17] 30] 15,2635) 4] 98.12| 584] —_1,84,787.40
2012-43) 584| 164,887.40] 35 | 2154253] 26] 5,273.73| 593 2,01,156.49

45. tt was observed that the pace of the disposal of the prosecution cases was slow in
comparison to the additions during the FY 10 0 FY 13 and a total of 155 cases involving
revenue of & 128.60 crore were pending in Surat | and Ahmedabad | Commisstonerates

alone which constituted 26 per cent and G per cent of the total prosecution cases and

ammount involved in the cases respectively as shown below:
St. | Commissionerate L cases
No. हि No.| Amount
1. | Surat! | 114 9,689.37
2... | Ahmedabad | At 3,170.15
3. | Ludhiana ‘| 35 4,319.91
4. [Ghaziabad 29 10,180.84
5. Indore | 24 11,950.53
6. | Jaipur | 24 8,351.75
7. | Delhit | 211. 9,437.91
8... शपथ ॥! 201... 1,984.16
9... Bhopal है 19 |... 33,व7.03
40. | Chandigarh t 19 9,933.54

Total ' 346) (99,198.19



dj

52:

ER ESR POS BL ST IG EEE OM ee EE TE TT

RASS

re
हि

16. Audit noted that the 1005 pendency was notwithstanding fhe fact thal statistical
delaits of prosecution cases were collected on monthly basis by Board/Directorate of Legal
Affairs from its field formations through monthly technical report (MTR).

17. . The Ministry in their Background Note, furnished to the Commiltee stated that with
respect fo Surat | Commissionerate, it had been reported that once the prosecution was
filed in the court of law, it became sub-judice matter and the same was being monitored
accordingly. However, fhe same could be pursued with the respective Chief Judicial
Magistrate of Court by the jurisdictional AssistanYDeputy Commissioner of Central Excise
& Service Tax and with respect to Ahmedabad | Commissionérate, it had been reported
that the dispasal of the pending prosecution case was at entire discretion of the court.

18. During oral evidence, Member, CBEC reiterated that:

“The cases which are lying in Surat and Ahmedabad are cases where the cases
have already been field in the court of law, So it is not that they are pending for want
of action by the Chief Cammissioner. In most of the cases the pendency is with the
courts. The Audit also recognised the number of cases where they have been
decided by the courts वीक व gap of 26 years. Once it has gone to the court, we are
nat in control of it. Secondly, as regards the revenue, the revenue is taken care of in
the adjudication order. The duty may have been recovered or may not have been
recovered. It is only that we want to prosecute these people. But they are not
necessarily linked with the amount of duty involved in these cases.”

-19. The Ministry further stated that Member (Central Excise) acknowledged that there

were several prosecution cases where there was significant delay. However, once a
prosecution case had been filed in a court of law in respect of any offence, the State had

become a party to the proceedings and only the court had the authority to bring the same to

a close, unlike in a civil suit. Circular of 4" April, 1994 depicts the position in this regard
that only so long as the case has not been filed, the department had the authority to take
decisions concerning proceeding with the same or otherwise. The matter regarding
withdrawal of prosecution cases had on earlier occasion been taken up with the
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice and the advice received was along
the same lines. However, as recently as in 2012, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had held that
when an adjudication falls, criminal proceeding also would nat lie. CBEC was examining
whether to take up the issue once again with the Ministry of Law and Justice, citing this
decision.

20. During oral evidence, the CBEC Chairperson stated as under:

we have revamped all our old circulars and taken note of all the
recommendations which the Audit has given in ifs report and incorporated almost all
the ten recommendations in a comprehensive circular which we issued on the 23
October, 2015. This is a circular which has taken on board every one of the
recommendations and tried fo plug the laopholes which have been pointed out in the


saint i ७ EE A on svi _

functioning of the process of prosecution in the Central Board of Excise and
Customs. You might have noticed in the circular that there are specific
recommendations, be it the need for ensuring the lang pending prosecution cases
which are reviewed periodically. This is para 7 of the circular which specifically deals
with that. The point made regarding delay in submission of investigation repart is
dealt with in and para 6 of the circular specifically imposes timelines. This is
recommendation considering the pendency of prosecution cases during the monthly
meetings. We have incorporated this in para 7 of the circular. This is on the need for
fixing the responsibility of those who are not following the prescribed instructions.
We have fried to fill up this gap in para 13. On the need for having specialised
training programme, we have again tried to adopt this in the circular, The point
which | making is that we have tried to set right the position by a comprehensive
circular which addresses these concerns.” :

21. Further, he stated as ‘under:

:

“For the future, we have tried to address the problem at least by ensuring that there
is one comprehensive circular. All the previous circulars have been superseded and
done away with because multiplicity of circulars is also causing confusion. So, this
is the single most important step which we have taken, thanks fo ihe Audit Report.

“The point which | want to make is that, in cases where we have faunched
prosecution, the matter is entirely thereafter in the hands of the courts. We have
special public proseculors in all these places. The problem thereafter is of the delay
in the entire prosecution process which has been pointed out of cases pending for
several'years. This is a reflection as much on our inability to push the case forward
as if ts on the ability of the courts not fo be in a position to handle such volumes of
prosecution simply because they are overworked. We file these cases in Special
Ecanomic Offences Courts which are designated for this purpose across the country
and it is a problem in the manner in which we have been able to ensure that the
prosecution process comes to a logical conclusion. This. delay results in witnesses
not being there and the persons whom we are proceeding against passing away in
the interregnum because of the sheer delay and if is 8 challenge for us to ensure
that the process of prosecution gets expedited. This is again a broad point which |
am making to explain the long pending prosecution itself.”

22. When enquired about the imptementation of the said Circular in the field formations
and the feasibility of the same, the Chairperson, CBEC, during oral evidence inter-alia
stated that monthly reports were also being incorporated and the detalis were being
submitted online. Further when details were sought about punitive action being taken
against concerned officials and with wham such responsibility lay, the Chairperson, CBEC
inter-alia stated that the responsibility lay with the Chief Commissioner or the Director and
when the Chief Commissioner launches an investigation after sanction and the praseculion
hadn't been done then the Chief Commissioner can take action.

23. During oral evidence, it was enquired upon expediting cases in various courts and
whether it was due to the negligence of some officials and responsibility foxed upon them,
the CBEC Chairperson, deposed as under:



24,

“Yes, may not be in all ihe cases, but definitely this is happening. We instruct our
prosecutor to fill application for expeditious hearing. They are binding on the officers
of the department. They are sent after the approval of the Finance Minister. This
does not create a new law. It asks the officers to follow the procedures. All our
circulars ate binding on the officers. we have tried to address this problem. We have
said that in cases where on identical issues proceedings or a Supreme Court order
or a High court order has been accepied then the Principal Chief Commissioner or
Director Generals should give directions to the concerned Commissionerate fo
request the public prosecutor to file an application for withdrawal.”

Further, supplementing the CBEC Chairperson, Member, CBEC explaining

withdrawal of a case, during oral evidence, deposed as under:

D.

25.

“Sir, there are two situations. One is where the prosecution has been sanctioned but
the complaint has not yet been filed in the court of jaw. The Audit has pointed out
that there are a number of cases where there has been long delay and the cases
have not yet been filed. In case, we want fo review thase cases whether it is a fit
case for prosecution or not and if not then we withdraw those cases. The second
situation is where the prosecution has already been jaunched in the court of law.
There could be a situation where a person has asked for compounding of offences.
He is gone to Chief Commissioner and said that he wants to compound his offence.
That is one situation. Second situation could be that there ts an adjudication order
which is there for him where the higher court of law has dropped the proceedings. If
the adjudication has dropped then there is no question of pursuing the prosecution
because the prosecution need more stringent application of law, There we have to
go to the Minister, the competent authority, with that case and seek withdrawal. Sir,
they are different. In the first situation where the complaint has not been filed there
the calf will be taken by the member concemed of the policy wing to see whether the
complaint need not be filed now. But in the second situation, because it is already
before the court of faw, it is the minister who is the competent authority to decide
whether a particular case needs fo withdrawn or not. Both the situatians we have
covered in para 10. We have also called a report from our field officers. Sir, as far
as the prosecution is concerned, it is alt manual. Only the monthly repart is coming
online from the Commissionerate to the Chief Commissioner's office to the Board
Office. Yes, Sir. It is there. But prosecution decisions are not there. Only High Court
cases and Supreme Court cases are there.”

Prosecution in cases involving meagre revenue

.As per CBEC’s letter dated 26 July 1980, a monetary limit of ¥ 10,000 was

prescribed for launching of prosecution in order to avoid prosecution in minor cases. This
limit was revised fo rupee one lakh vide Circular dated 9 August 1996. Further, with effect
from 4 Apri! 1996, the limit was revised to = 5 lakh. The monetary limit for prosecution is
% 25 lakh with effect from 12 December 1997. However, in the case of habitual! offenders
the above fimit is not applicable. -


ROE २००००: ५

Tren tecnts

रू
1
ul
8
Fs
x
Fa

Piao ED I SOL RI ER Se CMP,

MS ERIE ROENSTIEEN EER SOE

10

26. During oral evidence, the CBEC Chairperson stated as under:

“The Audit has also pointed out about habitual offenders. In this circular, in para 4.2,
we have defined as to who are the habitual offenders. We have addressed the
shortcomings largely for the future. The Audit has specifically pointed out cases
where there has been delay.”

27. During oral evidence, the Member, CBEC stated as under:

“We have done it. We have called for the report fram all the field formations the total
number of cases which are pending for long and the amount involved is less than हें
Five fakh.” .

E. Delay in submission of Investigation report

28. As per para 30) of the Board's Circular dated 9 August 1990, in all cases where the
Commissioner of Central Excise in charge of judicial work was satisfied that prosecution
should be launched, a proposal/investigation report for the purpase of kaunching
prosecution should be forwarded fo the Chief Commissioner for decision within one month
of the adjudication. On examination, it was observed that in 138 prosecution cases in 27
Commissionerates, the forwarding of investigation reports suffered delays ranging from a
month to over 10. years to obtain the mandatory sanction of the Chief Commissioner to
launch prosecution.

29. During examination, the case of M/s. P.K. Profile (P} Ltd. Fatehpur, manufacturers of
goods covered in Chapter 72 of Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 in Lucknow
Commissionerate was highlighted by Audit,. noticing that the SCN involving duty of हैं 1.57
crore was adjudicated on 4 July 2000. However, proposal including Investigation report
was forwarded to Chief Commissioner only on 9 September 2010 Le., after a delay of more
than ten years. . .

30. The Ministry, in their Background Note furnished to the Committee, stated that with
Tespect to-Lucknow Commissionerate for M/s P.K. Profile (P) Ltd. it was reporled that the
case file of M/s P.K. Profile (P} Lid., Fatehpur, was with Central Excise, Allahabad, as
previously Central Excise Division, Raebareli, was under the jurisdiction of Allahabad. After
the change of jurisdiction from Allahabad to Lucknow Commissionerate and after further
processing at their end, the proposal could be received from Lucknow Commissionerate in

September, 2010.

31. During oral evidence, when enquired about whether it was done in the name of
increasing efficiency or to create hurdles, the CBEC Member, during ora! evidence, stated


IES 2

५८2५८,

STEEN

11

as under.
“Sir, | admit it is not a logical answer. It is a very feeble excise. | admit it.”

F, Approval by sanctioning authority

32. As per para 2(i) of Board's Circular dated 9 August 1990, prosecution should be
launched with the final approval of the Chief Commissioner after the case has been
carefully examined by the Commissioner in the light of the guidelines.. The sanction
accorded fo launch a prosecution may appear to be an administrative act. However, as
decided by CEGAT in UO! vs. Greaves’ Lid., without prior approval! of the Chief
Commissioner, prosecution cannot continue and the accused has fo be acquitted. As per
Board's direction, the prosecution should not be delayed or kept in abeyance for
confirmation of demands in appeal. Hence, the decision of non-initiation af prosecution
until the decision on appeal is not in consonance with the Board’s order.

33, The Ministry, in their Background Note, furnished to the Committee, stated that in
vatious cases, it can be seen that the demand as appeared in them may not be sustainable
on merit in view of observations of CESTATs on merits of the case while passing the say
orders in these cases, therefore a decision is taken by the sanctioning authority not to grant
sanction for faunching of prosecution. Granting sanction for faunching of prosecution is a
sensitive matter, where the sanctioning authority has to take decision on merits, on the
basis of facts of individual case and in terms of prosecutian guidelines circulated vide
Circular No. 15/90 dated 09.08.1990. when the sanctioning authority is of the view that the
proceedings are not likely to sustain as the case of department is not likely to sustain and
the same view if affirmed by the Court during appellate proceedings then launching of
prosecution in such type of case would be a futile exercise, causing unnecessary litigation
and inconvenience to the Department as well as assessee.

34. When enquired about the five cases from the selected Commissionerates 1.8. Calicut
- 2, Chennai IV — 1 and Cochin - 2, it was observed that the copies of approval by Chief
Commissioner to initiate prosecution were not available in the relevant files, the Member,
CBEC, during oral evidence, deposed as under:

“Sir, these are the old cases. Sir, | would just like to submit one thing. The very fact
that the sanction for prosecution is there on the file and only on that basis the court
would have taken it on record. tf is quite possible in this situation, in the cases
mentioned here, that the original sanction order has gone in the court file and other
copies are not available with us in the file. But it cannot be a situation where the
court has accepted a prosecution proposaf from the Department without getting the
approval of ihe prosecution sanctioning authority. It does not appear plausible.”


|
:
k
L

AERTS

12

Supplementing fhe above, CBEC Chairperson stated as under:

“Sir, | can assure you that in future we will review each of these cases."

G. —_—Delayin filing complaint

36. As per para 3 (i) of Board’s Circular dated 9 August 1990, a criminal complaint in a
Court of Law should be filed only after the sanction of the Chief Commissioner has been
obtained for prosecution. Further, para No. 2.8 of the Chapter 17 of the Central: Board of
Excise and Customs Manual of Supplementary Instructions, 2005 stipulates that once
prosecution is sanctioned, the complaint should be filed in Court withaut any considerable
delay. The abstract of delays in filing complaint in Court of Law is given below in the table:

EE: No. Delay ; +f of i
cases
1. |More than three 20
years
2. Between one and 47
three years
3. Less than one year |- 108

37. Audit observed that there was a need for introduction of a provision to the effect that
if a case was not filed within a period to be fixed by the department, sanction would be
treated as withdrawn. Such items would also need to be reported in the proposed
Management Information System under.consideration of the Board. Provision may also be
incorporated to the effect that in case the need for filing of complaint was subsequently felt

-necessary, fresh sanction from CBEC should be obtained. The need for such prescription

of timeframe was esséntial also so as (० protect the rights of taxpayers, notwithstanding the
fact that they may be offenders. Hence, a suitable time limit may be specified and
complied with. हु

38. The Ministry, in their Background Note, furnished lo the Committee, submitted that
to gather all the material evidence to establish the mens-rea is a time taking process
requiring collecting records/documents from different sources more so when the case is
registered by the investigating agencies like 05081, While the instructions issued by the
Board are adhered to, itis always been the endeavor of the Depariment lo present the
case effectively, clearly establishing the aspect of mens-rea so that the case is sustained -
from the point of prosecution and the accused is punished.


oe ४०३८-०५

B

H. Review of prosecution cases

39. 85 per para 3 (ii) of Board Circular dated 9 August 1990, prosecution once launched
should be vigorously followed. The Commissioner of Central Excise in-charge of judicial
work should monitor the cases of prosecution at monthly intervals and take corrective
action wherever necessary to ensure that the progress of prosecution is satisfactory.

40. During oral evidence, when asked about the detaits in Para 2.10.1 of the C&AG's
Report where a case of the year 1987 involving an amount of % 51,000, the CBEC Member,
stated as under:

"The case of M/s Caps & Containers has finally been decided after 25 years and
conviction ts there in this case. A fine of %10,000 has been imposed on each of
these accused.” हि

41, When asked about for how many persons the above mentioned was done, the
CBEC Chairperson, during oral evidence inter-alia stated that for five persons it was done.

42, Further, during oral evidence, when enquired upon the periodic review of long
pending cases, the CBEC Chairperson stated as under:

“Sir, we witl issue a circular asking all our officers to review ail the cases where
appeal has been filed and ask them to file application for withdrawal.”

43. 0870 Chairperson, during oral evidence, inter-alia stated that where duty
involvement was & 5 lakhs, a threshold of हैं 10 was prescribed.

44. Further, he stated that:

“Number two, on the larger point of prosecution, prosecution is a deterrent. While |
agree with you that long pending prosecution involve huge amount of expenditure.
But ultimaiely, it has a significant effect on others. It is a deterrent only. Realisation
of duty is done independent. Prosecution is over and above thal.”

45. Supplementing the CBEC Chairperson, the Member, CBEC stated as under:

“We are already on the job of collection of data. We have gat, unfortunately, report
only from seven cases out of 23. Now, we will do it on an urgent basis and see that
these cases are withdrawn." * :



warren HAN ५८

SSA Ecc ५० ६२८: SNE EFT RR OE OR ROTI पद

14

PART Il
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERVATIONS

4. The Committee note that prosecution is the commencement of a criminal

- proceeding, where the Government exhibits before a Court of Law the forma

charges against a person accused of an offense and seeks to impose on such
person a suitable punishment and penalty. Thus, in Central Excise, prosecution
sets in motion a legal process by which Government seeks to ensure punishment
of companies and persons concerned with evasion of Central Excise duty. A
performance audit was conducted to seek an assurance that the systems and
procedures relating to prosecution and penalty were adequate and adhered to by
the Central Board of Excise and Customs. The Committee further note that the
major findings of this performance audit were Eleven cases from 5

Commissionerates involving meagre amount of हैं 1.82 lakh which were under

- prosecution in various Courts for periods exceeding 30 years. Audit could not

identify the pendency period in 43 prosecution cases having a revenue
implication of % 31.50 crore as the Department was not able to provide details of
date of filing of complaint. In 138 prosecution cases in 27 Commissionerates, the
sending of investigation reports suffered delays ranging from a month fo over 10
years to obtain the mandatory sanction of the Chief Commissioner to launch
prosecution. | 61 cases under 12 Cammissionerates and in four cases under
DGCE] Mumbai Audit could not verify whether the investigation reports wore
submitted within the stipulated fime or-not due to non-availability of records in
the concerned files. in 175 cases relating to 37 Commissionerates and DGCEI,
Delhi there was delay of a month to 75 years in filing complaints with the Courts
of Law. Out of 46 selected Commissionerates, 30 Commissionerates reported that
they are not doing any review on pending prosecution cases. Instances of delay
in Court proceeding due lack of proper attention by the Departmental officers
were noticed. In 19 cases where prosecution was Initiated, none of the accused
persons had been informed separately in writing about the offer of compounding.

In 24 Commissionerates no remarks were found in the Director General


LT TART REE

Stes

ELLE ET TENE 217 0220

15

(inspection) reports pertaining to prosecution cases. The Department was not
reviewing the prosecution cases for withdrawal as per Board's Circular dated 4
April 1984. The Committee on their examination of the Report No. 29 of 2044
found serious lacunae in administration of Prosecution and Penalties by the
CBEC, Department of Revenue, Ministry of finance. The Commitiee found that
prosecution cases involving meagre amounts have been pending for years,
delays on part of the Department and non-foliowing of the timelines prescribed in
various circulars issued by the Ministry. The Committee in fhe succeeding

paragraphs have made their observations and recommendations on the subject.

2. The Committee note from the Audit observation that there were 593
prosecution cases pending as on 31 March, 2013 invetving a money value of
2011.56 crore and out of which 155 cases were pending in Surat | and
Ahmedabad | Commissionerates and from the reply of the Ministry that as on 31
March 2018 the total pendency of Central Excise prosecution cases is 1292 and
Service Tax is 34. The Commiftee strongly feef that the lack of adequate
monitoring on the part of the Department has resulted in increasing pendency.
The Committee while noting that pursuant to fhe Audit observations, a
comprehensive circular has been brought out superseding all the circulars
issued earlier are of the view that the Department should ensure that-circular is
implemented in letter and spirit and make all out efforts fo expedite/ withdraw the
prosecution proceedings by evolving a robust in-built monitoring mechanism
whereby review of all pending cases is done periodically to ensure adequacy of
action taken by the officers in disposal of the cases alongwith tracking of the
expenditure details in carrying out these prosecution proceedings. The
Committee are of the view that prosecution registers maintained at various
commissionerates be also checked periodically, the cases pending in the courts
are pursued actively with the Chief Judicial Magistrate for expediting the
hearings, and the cases where on identical allegation a noticee has been
exonerated in the quasi-judicial proceedings are withdrawn. The Committee
further observe that all these measures would eventually help the Ministry in a

beffer administration of the prosecution and penalties.


5
#
g

७७:४४

10४४2५७०५५७०७:१४:०८८६४५६०१०४

कण: ey

16

3. The Committee note from the Audit observation that 11 cases involving an
amount of 21.82 lakh has been pending for more than 30 years and in 43 cascs
pendency periods are not even available. The Committee are shocked to note that
two prosecution cases with petiy amounts of 79000 and 2750 are pending since
1973 and 1978 respectively. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry
that the prosecution in both these cases were launched in the years 1973 and
1978 before the monetary limit of %10000 for launching prosecution was
prescribed, The Committee while noting that 288 pending cases are older than 15
years and involve duty of %5 lakhs or less with an average of 780000/- per case
conveyed their unanimous view during ‘evidence cases involving meagre
amounts pending for decades is more of a harassment of the officials as well as
the defendants. Also, charges of lawyers and TA/ DA claims of the officials often
result in expending more than the amounts involved in the prosecution. The
Committee appreciate that the Ministry has now decided to recommend filing of
application before the court to withdraw from prosecution of the cases where
evasion of Central Excise duty is less than %6 lakh and is pending for more than
45 years and desire thaf the limits prescribed vide this circular be reviewed
periodically to factor in the inflationary trends. The Committee while
acknowledging that the bigger and habitual offenders should not be allowed to
get away feel that the Ministry should now ensure that the cases are disposed off
timely and such huge pendencies do not recur. The Committee also desire that
fast track mechanism for disposal of the pending cases may be evolved

preferably by holding lok adalats.

4. .The Committee further note that in all cases where the Commissioner of
Centrat Excise in charge of judicial work is satisfied that prosecution should be
launched, a proposal/ investigation report for the purpose of launching
prosecution should be forwarded fo the Chief Commissioner for decision within
one month of the adjudication ‘of the case, However, according to Audit, in 138
prosecution cases, the forwarding of investigation reports suffered delays
ranging from a month to iOyears to obtain mandatory sanction of the Chief


17

Commissionér to launch prosécution and in 65 cases there was delay upto 4
years from DGCEI units in forwarding the investigation reports. The Committee
are shocked to note that a Ministry which is levying penalties on other parties on
technical grounds is itseif so casuat in its working and is excusing itself with the
reasoning that the standard of evidence required for prosecution has to be totally
different and requires in-depth study and time consuming deliberation and
therefore are only of administrative nature. Further, the Committee observe that
though the guidelines prescribe that ail the applications for compounding of
offences must be disposed of within 6 months, there were delays upto 25 months
in the disposaj of application of compounding. Again, the Ministry stated that the
guidelines have only been issued for necessary guidance and advice to the field
formations and the said time limit is only advisory in nature. The Committee
strongly deprecate the attitude of the Ministry as the audit has only gono by the
guidelines made by the Ministry itself which have also been reiterated in the
latest circular. The Committee earnestly desire that the Ministry may sensitize its
Officials about the timelines which are to be followed invariably. ह

5. The Committee observe that a criminal complaint in a Court of Law should
be filed only after the sanction of the Chief Commissioner has been obtained for
prosecution and once prosecution is sanctioned, the complaint shouid be filed tn
court without any considerable delay. However, Audit found that there were
detays upto 15 years in filing complaints with the Courts of law. The Committee
nofe from the reply of the Ministry that the delays were procedural lapses and due
to administrative reasons which did not lead to any adverse revenue implications.
The Committee while noting the casual response of the Ministry are of the view
that the Ministry should prescribe timelines for every stage of filing a complaint
with the court and any delays should only be condoned by the highest authority. .

6. The Committee also note that Director General (inspection) and Principal

, Coliector, who would be inspecting the offices of Collectors should specially

check the points contained in the Circular at the time of conducting inspection,



3
५
1
|
}

et

SNR SETTER

ees eter, agence

SUMNE

ee

18

however, in many cases DG (inspection) failed to make any observations
pertaining to tho prosecution cases as specified in the circular, The Gommittec
are of the considered opinion that inspections by higher officers are deterrent
against the complacent behaviour of the officials. The DG should ensure that
reasons for pendoncy and non-compliance of the guidelines of the Ministry are
checked during field inspections and remarks made in writing and timelines be

prescribed for action to be taken in this regard.

7. The Committee note that in 61 cases under 12 Commisssionerates and in
four cases under DGCEI Mumbai, Audit could not verify whether the investigation
reports were submitted within the stipulated time or not due to non- availability of
records. The Commitiee further note that Audit could not identify the pendency
period in 43 prosecution cases as Department was not able (० provide details of

‘date of filing of complaint. The Committee also find that in five cases, the copies

of approval by Chief Commissioner were not available in the relevant records.
The Committeo are shocked to note that the papers might have been misplaced/
lost from fhe records when a clear guideline exists that it shall be the
responsibility of the officer who has been authorized to file complaint, to fake
charge of all documents, statements and other exhibits etc. The Committee direct
that the responsibility for fos! misplaced documents be fixed and appropriate
action taken against the officers found responsible in this regard. The Committee
also desire that all-the all records/fiies be stored in digitized format, henceforth,

so that they are always readily available for verification.

8. The Committee have learnt that 30 out of 46 selected Commissionerates
reported that they are not doing any review on pending prosecution cases, lack of
proper attention by the Departmental officers Icading to delay in Court
proceedings, not informed tho accused separately about the offer of
compounding in 19 cases and have not reviewed prosecution cases for
withdrawal. The Committee, therefore, deprecate the officers of the Ministry for

their lackadaisical approach. The Minisfry has been issuing circulars but its own


|

ANY RPI TIN M8 SOSA KCNA. :५५८:

19

officials are convenientiy ignoring the guidelines and working on their own pace.

“The Committee strongly desire that the officers who are prompt in disposing their

work should be given incentives and those taking unduly Song time should be
warned and penalised without loss of time.

ER RSI

NEW DELH}; PROF. 1९.५. THOMAS
15 December, 2016 Chairperson,
Public Accounts Committee.

24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)


A -- CONFIDENTIAL

MINUTES OF THE - SECOND SITTING OF SUB-COMMITTEE _ Il
(DIRECT/INDIRECT TAXES) OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2015-16)
HELD ON 287 JANUARY, 2016.

The Sub-Comnittee sat on Thursday, the 28" January, 2016 from 1500 hrs to 1600
hrs in Committee Room No. 'E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Dethi.

PRESENT

Shri Nishikant Dubey न Convener
Members
LOK SABHA

2. Dr. Kirit Somaiya
RAJYA SABHA
3. Shri Shantaram Naik

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
4. Shri AK Singh - Additional Secretary

2. Smt. Bharti S.Tufeja - Deputy Secretary

REPRESENTATIVES OF CENTRAL BOARD OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS BOARD OF EXCISE AND CUSTOMS

Ss. Name Designation

No. .

1 Shri Najib Shah - Chairman (0850)

2. Ms Neerja Shah - Member (CX)

3. ShriK.K. Sharma - Member (Service Tax)

4. Shri S.M. Tata -  Cominissioner {ST)

5. Shri Manish Kumar Sinha - Commissioner (Central Excise)
6 Dr. Sanjay Agarwal - - Commissioner (PAC)

REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER ANY ee THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA -

1. Shri Sanjeev Goyal - Principal Director (C-E.)
2. Ms.M. Hemabindu - Principal Director (S.T.}

|


हि a ee वीतीकी कर के करन
(००००-४८: te SSE iy haan फेस---

“2h

2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members and the representatives of the

Centra Board of Excise and Customs to the second sitting of Sub-Committee ill of PAC.
: The Convenor, then, apprised the Members that the meeting was convened to discuss
हि C&AG Report No.29 of 2014 on ‘Administration of Prosecution and Penalties in Central
Excise and Service Tax'. He drew the attention of the witnesses to the confidentiality of the

matter till a report on the same was presented to the House.

ब्ध्य्ध्य्व्प्ट्णः

3. The Convenor and members then raised various queries on the above-mentioned

subject including legal status of the Ciroutar dated 237 October, 2015, requirement of
status of computerisation of records,

SEIS

enforcing penalties on the paras in the same;
rs while initiating prosecution, whether any action was

absence of copies of sanction orde!

taken against officers for delay in sanction, reasons of delay in pending cases, expediting

tong pending cases ४०.

4, The Convenor while stating that more money was spent on tegal fees for fighting

cases in the courts than the amount of some offences, desired that a review of alt cases

where appeal has been filed be done and thase cases involving meagre
or also desired that the

amounts of

money be settled to reduce the burden of the courts. The Conven:

Member, Lega! may be present in the next sitting of the Sub-Committee.

. 5. The Chairman and Member, Excise, Central Board of Excise and Customs replied
to the queries raised by the members on related aspects of the subject. As 5006 queries .
required detailed information and clarifications to be sought from other departments, the

Convenor asked the representatives of 0850 io furnish written replies to the Secretariat -

The Secretary assured to do the same.

6... The Chatrperson thanked the representatives of CBEC for appearing before the
of India for providing

Committee and the representatives ‘of the office of the C&AG
assistance to the Committee in the examination of the subject.

i The witnesses then withdrew.

é A copy of the verbatim proceedings has been kept on record.

4 .
।

| The Committee, then, adjournea. adjourned.



MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE-HI

{DIRECT _AND INDIRECT TAXES) _OF PUBLIC _ACGOUNTS AND _ INDIRECT TAXES) OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON 14" DECEMBER, 2016.

The Sub-Committee sat from 1300 hrs. to 1345 hrs. on 14" December, 2016 in
Room No. 51, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
Shri Nishikant Dubey - Convenor

MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
Shri Shivkumar Udasi
3. Prof. Richard Hay
RAJYA SABHA
4... Shri Ajay Sancheti

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

Smt. Bharti S. Tuteja - Deputy Secretary
2. ShriAK. Yadav - Deputy Secretary
2. At the outset, the Convenor welcomed the Members to the Seventh Sitting of

the Sub-Committee-ill (Direct and Indirect Taxes}. Thereafter, the Sub-Committee took
up the draft Report on “Administration of Prosecution and Penalties in Centrat
Excise and Service Tax” based on C&AG’s Report No. 29 of 2014.

3. The Convenor invited suggestions of the Members on the above mentioned
draft Report. After discussing the contents of the draft Report, the Sub-Committee
adopted the same with minor changes/modifications.

4. The Sub-Committee authorized the Convenor to finalize the Report in the light
of consequential changes arising out of the factual verifications by the Audit and

present the same before the Main Committee for consideration and adoption.

The Sub-Committee then adjourned,



~ abn

MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PLES SESSS SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2016-17) HELD ON $8” DECEMBES 2°. 45° DECEMBER, 2016.

The Committee sat from 1015 hrs. to 1055 hrs. on 45" December, 2016 in

Room No. “51”, Paciament House, New Octhi.

PRESENT
Prof. K. ४. Thomas - Chairperson

MEMBERS

LOK SABHA

Shri Nishikant Dubey

Prof. Richard Hay

Smt, Riti Pathak

Shri Janardan Singh Sigriwal
Shri Abhishek Singh

Dr. Kirit Somaiya

Shri Shivkumar 0. Udasi

en ear en

RAJYA SABHA
9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
40. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita
44. Shri Shantaram Naik
42. Shri Ajay Sancheti

LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT

4. Shri 5.0. Chaudhary _ Joint Secretary
2. Shri Tirthankar Das - Additional Director

Smt, Bharti S. Tufeja - Deputy Secretary -

REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA

4. Shri Rakesh Jain - Deputy CAG (RC/LB)

2, Shri Manoj Sahay . Principal Director of Audit (AB)
3. Shri Mukesh P. Singh - DGACE


2c

2
2. At the outset, the Chairperson, PAC welcomed the Membors to the Sitting of

the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for

consideration: -
() oe nH was one aaa
(iy) हे vee ane sen ane

(ii) Draft Report on ‘Administration of Prosecution and Penalties in Central
Excise and Service Tax' based on C&AG Report No. 29 of 2044.

3. The Chairperson invited suggestions of the Members on the above mentioned
draft Reports. After discussing the draft Reports, the Committee adopted draft Reporis

eee ves

at SI. No. (ii) and (iii) with minor changes/modifications.

+e eh Ae

4. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the adopted Reports in
the light of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of the suggestions
given by the Members and factuat verification by the Audit and present the same to

Partiament.

5. It was further decided that henceforth the Public Accounts Committee will hold

its sitting every Friday in the week.

The Committee then adjourned.


[nr er ne eaten
ae set DM हु े

eo cms ere:

CONFIDENTIAL
MOST IMMEDIATE
BY HAND/BY FAX
F.No.233 /@] /2016-CX-7
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)

|
|

- dated 150 March, 2016 ~

OFFICE MEMORANDUM

Subject:- Examination of the subject “Administration of Prosecution and
Penalties in Central Excise and Service Tax” bascd on C&AG
Report No.29 of 2014 - regarding

Kindly refer to Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch) OM
No.27/16/2015/PAC dated 34 February, 2016 forwarding copy of the minutes
of the Oral. Evidence held on 28% Jarmary, 2016 with PAC. In this regard,

- Ministry vide its O.M, of even No. dated 17 February, 2016 had furnished
comments on the instructions/observations made by the PAC members in the
minutes.

2. Ministry vide ils Circular No.1018/6/2016-CX issued from
F.No.96/54/2014-CX.1 dated 29% February, 2016 (copy enclosed] has issucd
instructions to the ficld formations for withdrawal from prosecution in Central
Excise cases older than 15 years involving duty less than Rs.5 lakhs.

Encl.: as above 7
ae
u आल ५

(Sanjay Agarwal).
Commissioner [PAC]
Fax No. 26161208

-
5, Bharti Tuteja,
Deputy Secretary (PAC},
Lok Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi-110 001

Copy to:- Shri Sanjcev Goyal, Principal Director (Service Tax),
Office of the C&AG of India, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg,
New Delhi - for information please. a



4

CAEL WI Lens

BNE AE BOREAS

PDA EET
SSM MORERSUASEITS BABE

Circular No. 1018/6/2016-CX

9. No. 96/54/2014-CX.1
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue.
Central Board of Excise & Customs

New Delhi, dated the 29" February, 20 16

To,

Principal Chief ‘Commissioncrs/Chief Commissioners of Central Excise (AU),

Principal Chief Cormmissioners/Chiel Commissioners of Central Excise & Service Tax

(Al),

Principal Commissioner of Ceatral Excise, Service Tax (AN),

Web-master, CBEC

Sir/Madam,

Subject: - Withdrawal from prosecution in Central Jéxeise cases older thax

15 years involving duty less (han rupees five Jakhs.- reg.

GAG submitted its report regarding administration of prosecition and penalty in

Central Excise and Service Fax wherein regarding withdrawal of ofd cases of
prosecution, it noted that “though the discretion to allow withdrawal of prosecution
ultimately rests with the Court, it is the department’ s responsibility to ensure periodic

8 stats of long pending cases as to cosure that casi

rought to the notice of the Cowt

monitoring of th es which 10 the

opinion of the department merit withdrawal are being bi



[eee ere, so Sere sea eee

alongwith all supporting facts at the proper time in terms of Sections 257 and 321 of
CxPC 1973.”

2. The issue has been examined. The prescnt limit for arcest and prosccution in
Central Excise cases is Rupces ome crore which was made effective vide Circular No.
1010/17/2015-CX dated 23.10.2015. Barlier, the limit for Jaunching prosecution was
Rs.25 Lakhs, which came into cffect vide letter F.Na. 208/31/97-CX6 dated 04.04.1994,
‘Taking into consideration this increase in the limit for prosecution over 4 period of time,
expenditure involved in continuing with old prosecution and equivalent value of the
present threshold limit of rupees one crore in the past, it was decided (0 coect
jnformation on prosecution pending ia courts for more than fifteen years where the duty
involved is less than rupees five lakhs. On the basis of the reporls received, it was found
that there are 288 cases older than fificen years, involving duty of rupees five lakh or less.
In these 288 cascs, the total amount of duty evasion involved was found to be Rs.2.31
crore, which comes to an average of Rs. 80,000/- per case.
4. Provisions relating to withdrawal. of prosecution are contained in Section 257 and
Section 321 of the CyPC. Farther, in the ease of Sheo Nandan Paswan Ys. State of Bihar
and Others, (1983) 1 SCC 438, 07706 Supreme Court noted, while examining the scope
of Section 321, four grounds for seoking withdcawal Grom prosecution. Out of 2४९ four
grounds, two relevant grounds for Central Lixcise are 88 under:-
0) Incxpediency of the prosecution for reasons of State and Public Policy, and
(li) Adverse effects that the continuance of the prosecution will bring to the public

* interest in the Light of the changed situation.


4.5 Withdrawal of such cases would send a positive message to the manufacturing
sector im which policy of “Make in India” is being actively pursued.

55. After due consideration, it has béen decided with the approval of the competent
authority to reconamend fillmg of application before the flow’ble Court to withdraw from
prosecution of the cases where evasion of Central Excise duty is Jess than Rupees five
Jakhs and prosecution is pending for more than fifteen years. Chief Commissioner shall
give direction to the Contval Excise Officer in the concerned Cornmissionerate to request
the Public Prosecutor to file an application requesting the Couit to allow withdrawal from
prosccution in accordance with law. It may be noted that on filing of such applications, it

is for How ble Courts to finally decide whether or not to pursue the prosecution.

6. Attention is also invited to the circular no. 1010/17/2015-CX datcd 23.10.2015 on
withdrawal from. prosecution where quasi-judicial proceedings on identical facts have

failed. Appropriate action as per this Cireular may be taken where necessary.

7. Application should also be moved for withdrawal from prosecution against the co-

notices in a case, where the prosecution, against the main nolicee is proposed to be

withdrawn, as the grounds for withdrawal of prosecution would apply equalty to the co-
polices. ,

8. On examination of specific cases, if there arc more grounds available for
_-digcontimation of prosccution proceedings, the same may be incorporated in the
application before writing to the Public Prosecutor to file the application. On the other

hand, if there are valid grounds availabic for continuation of the prosecutions


e
é

OPENER

LESION ISI CLLELENY

-, Se _

procecdings, the same should be examined by the Chief Commissioner and where it is

proposed to continue with prosecution, i should be brought to the notice of the Ceatral
Excise wing in the Board with necessary justification.
if any, in the

force from 1* of March, 2016. Difficulty,
ice of the Board. Hindi

9, This shall come into

implementation of the circular should be brought to the not

vession will follow.

(Santosh Kumar Mishra)
Under Secretary to the Goverment of India



RATT

|

Circular No. 1009/16/2015-CX
- बन, No. 96/54/2044-CX.1--
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
Central Board of Excise & Customs
. New Delhi, dated the 23 October, 2015
To
Principal Chief Commissioner! Chief Commissioner of Central Excise (All),
Principal Chief Commissioner! Chief Commissioner of Central Excise ahd Service Tax
(Al), .
Madany Sir, हु -

Sub: Central Excise Guidelines for launching of Prosecution under the Central
Excise Act, 1944 and Finance Act, 1994 regarding Service tax-reg.

tam directed to refer to following circularsfinstructions issued by the Board regarding
guidelines for launching of prosecution under the Central Excise Act, 1944 and the
Finance Act, 1994: है
1, Circular No. 15/90-CX.6 dated 09.08.1990 issued from F. No. 218/7/89-CX.6.
2. Circular No. 30/30/94-CX dated 04.04.1994 issued from F. No. 208/20/93/CX.6.
3. Letter F. No. 208/31/497-CX.6 dated 04.04.1994 regarding enhancement of
monetary limit. हे
4, Circular No. 35/35/94-CX dated 29.04.1994 issued from F. No. 208/22/93-CX.6.
5.. Letter F. No. 203/05/98-CX.6 dated 06.04.1998 regarding making DG, CEL
competent authority to sancfion prosecution in respect of cases investigated by
DGCEI.
6. Letter F. No. 208/05/98-CX.6 dated 20.10.1998.
7. Letter F. No, 208/21/2007-CX.6 dated 15.06.2007,
8. Circular no 140/9/2011-Service Tax daled 12-5-201 4.

2. In supersession of these instructions and circulars, following consolidated guidelines
are hereby issued for launching prosecution under the Centrat Excise Act, 1944 and the
Finance Act, 1994.

3. Person 19018 to be prosecuted

-3.1 Whoever commits any of the offences specified under sub-section (1) of Section 9

of the Central Excise Act, 1944 or sub-section (1) of section 89 of the Finance Act,
1994, can be prosecuted, Section SAA (1). of Central Excise Act, 1944 provides that


23

3 2परदद24000००१:७

LETRA TE OSLO ERT Y BEGIN SCE NI SPI TENOR BITING ESSE SS APPEL SSI i ८२८००

where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every person who,
at the time offence was commitied was in charge of, and was responsible -to, the

company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall

be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable ta be proceeded against and
punished accordingly. Section 9AA (2) of Central Excise Act, 1944 provides that where
an offence under this Act has been committed bya company and it ts proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, of is attributable to any
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secratary or other officer of the company,

such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that °

offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation ta Section 9AA provides that (a) Company means anybody corporate
and includes a firm or olher association of individuals and (b) director in relation to a
finn means a partner of the firm. These provisions under Section SAA of Central Excise
Act, 1944 have been made applicable to Service Tax also vide Section 83 of the
Finance Act, 1994. .

4, Monetary limits: Central Excise and Service Tax

4.1 Monetary Limit: In order fo optimally utifize limited resources of the Department,
prosecution should normally not be launched untess evasion of Contral Excise duty or
Service Tax, or misuse of Cenvat credit in relation to offences specified under sub-
section (1) of Section 9 of the Central Excise Act, 1944 or sub-section (1) of section 89
of the Finance Act, 1994 is equal 10 or more than Rs. One Crore.

42 Habitual evaders: Notwithstanding the above limits, prosecution can be launched
in the case of a company/assessee habitually evading tadduty or misusing Cenvat
Credit facility. A company/assessee would be treated as habitually evading tax/duty or
misusing Cenvat ‘Credit facility, if it has been involved in three or more cases of
confirmed demand {at the first appellate level or above) of Central Excise duty or
Service Tax or misuse of Cenvat credit involving fraud, suppression of facts etc. in past
five years from the date of the decision such that the totat duty or tax evaded or fotal
credit misused is equal to or more than Rs. One Crore, Offence register (335J) may be
used fo monitor and identify assessees who can be considered to be habitually evading
duty. .

4.3 Sanction of prosecution has serious repercussions for the assessee and therefore
along wiih the above monetary limits, the nature of evidence collected during the
investigation should be carefully assessed. The evidences collected should be
adequate to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the person, company or individual
had guilty mind, knowledge of the offence, or had fraudulent intention or in any manner
possessed mens-rea (guilty mind) for committing the offence. हु :



EAA RR ID $7 sO EP TS RII 22221 NR OEE

Fan SPR

5. Authority to sanction prosecution

5.4 The criminal complaint for prosecuting a person should be-filed only after obtaining
the sanction of the Principat Chief/Chief Cammissioner of Central Excise or Service Tax
as the case may be.

5.2 In respect of cases investigated by the Directorate General of Central Excise
Intelligence (OGCEN}, the criminal complaint for prosecuting a person should be filed
onfy after obtaining the sanction of Principal Director Geneéral/ Director General, CEI.
5.3 An arder conveying sanction for prosecution shalt be issued by the sanctioning
authority and forwarded fo the Commissionerate concerned for taking appropriate action
for expeditious filing of the complaint.

6. Procedure for sanction of prosecution

6.1 Prosecution proposal should be forwarded to the Chief Commissioner / Principal
Chief Commissioner or Director General / Principal Director General of DGCEI { in
respect of cases booked by DGCET) after the case has been carefully examined by the ..
Commissioner/Principal Commissioner or Additionat Director General /Principal
Additional Director General of DGCEI who has adjudicated the case. In all cases of
arrest, examination of the case to ascertain fitness for prosecution shalt be necessarily
carried out,

- 6.2 Prosecution should not be launched in cases of technical nature, or where the

additional claim: of duty/taxis based totatly on a difference of opinion
regarding interpretation of law. Before launching any prosecution, it is necessary that
the department should have evidence to prove that the person, cornpany or individual
had guilty knowledge of the offence, or had fraudulent intention to commit the offence,
or in any manner possessed mens rea (guilty mind) which would indicate his guilt. It
follows, therefore, that in the case of public limited companies, prosecutian should not
be launched indiscriminately against all the Directors of the company but it should be
restricted to only against persons who were tn charge of day-to-day operations of the
factory and have taken active part in committing the duty/tax evasion or had connived at
it.

6.3 Prosecution should not be filed merely because a demand has been confirmed in
the adjudication proceedings particularly in cases of technical nature or where
interpretation of law is involved. One of the important considerations for deciding

“whether prosecution should be launched fs the availabilify of adequate evidence. The

standard of proof required in 4 criminal prosecution is higher as the case has to be
established beyond reasonable doubt whereas the adjudication
proceedings are decided on the basis of preponderance of probability. Therefore, even
cases where demand is confirmed in adjudication proceedings, evidence collected
should be weighed so as fo likely meet the test of being beyond reasonable doubt for
recommending prosecution. Decision should be taken on case-to-case basis
considering various factors, such as, nature and gravity of offence, quantum of duty/tax
evaded of Cenvat credit wrongly availed and the nature as well as quality. of evidence
collected. है .



|
fj
f
i
४
i
4
|

8.4 Decision on prosecution should be normally taken immediately on cornpletion of the
adjudication proceedings. However, Hon ble Supreme Court of India in-the case of
Radheshyam Kejriwal [2011(266)ELT 294 (SC)] has interalia, observed the folfowing :-

(i) adjudication proceedings and criminal proceedings can be jaunched
simulianeously; (ii) decision in adjudication proceedings is not necessary before
initiating criminal prosecution; (iii) adjudication proceedings and criminal proceedings
are independent in nature to each other and (iv).the findings against the person facing
prosecution in the adjudication proceedings is not binding on the proceeding for criminal
prosecution. ‘Therefore, prosecution may even be launched before the adjudication of
the case, especially where offence involved is grave, qualitative evidences are available
and itis also apprehended that party may delay completion of adjudication proceedings.

6.5 Principat Commissioner/Commissioner or ADG (Adjudication) acting as adjudicating
authority should indicate at the time of passing the adjudication order itself whether he
considers the case to be fit for prosecution 50 that it can be further processed and sent
to Principal Chief Commissioner! Chief Commissioner or Principat Director Generalf
Director Generat of DGCEI, as the case may be, for sanction of prosecution, Where at
the time of adjudication proceedings no view has bean’ taken on prosecution by the
Adjudicating Authority then the adjudication wing shail re-submit the file within 15 days
from the date of issue of adjudication order to the Adjudicating Authority to take view of
prosecution. Where, prosecution is proposed before the adjudication of the case,
Commissioner/Principal Commissioner or Principat Additional Director
General/Additional Director General, 09081 who supervised the investigation shall
record the reason for the same and forward the proposal to the sanctioning authority.
The adjudicating authority shall also be informed of the decision to forward the praposal
so that there is no need for him ta examine the case at. the time of passing of
adjudication order from the perspective of prosecution. Principal Chief Commissioner/

- Chief Commisstoner or Principal Director General/ Director General of DGCE] may on

his own motion also, taking into consideration the seriousness of an offence, examine
whether the case is fit for sanction of prosecution irrespective of whether the

adjtidicating authority has recommended prosecution.

6.6 In respect of cases investigated by 95081, the adjudicating authority would intimate
the decision taken regarding fitness of the case for prosecution to the Principal
Additional Director General’ Additional Director General of the Zonaf Unit or
Headquarters concerned, where the case was investigated and show cause notice
issued. The officers of unit of Directorate General of Central Excise Intelligence
concerned would prepare an investigation report for the purpose of launching
prosecution, within one month of the date of receipt of the decision of the adjudicating
authority and would-send the same fo the Director General, CEt for taking decision on
sanction of prasecution. The format of investigation report is annexed as Annexure-| to

~ this Circular.



SIGH: ५

02428

eae oe

ETAT LTO HOT

6.7 In respect of cases not investigated by DGCEI, where the Principal
Cormmissioner/Commissioner who has adjudicated the casc is satisfied that prosecution
should be launched, an investigation report for the purpose of launching prosecution
should be carefully prepared within one month of the date of issuance of the
adjudication order . Investigation report should be signed by an Assistant/Deputy
Commissioner, endorsed by the jurisdictionat Principle Commissioner/Commissioner
and sent to the Principat Chieff Chief Commissioner for taking a decision on sanction for
faunching prosecution. The format of investigation report is annexed as Annexure-t to
this circular. A criminal complaint in a court of flaw should be, filed by the jurisdictional
Commissionerate only after the sanction of the Principal Chief / Chief Commissioner or
Principat Director General/Director General of DGCEI has been obtained.

. 6.8 Principal Commissioner/Commissioner of Additional Director General (Adjudication)

shail submit a report by 10” of every month to the Principal Chief /Chief Commissioner
or the Principal Director General’ Director General of CEI, who is the sanctioning
authority for prosecution, conveying whether a view on launching prosecution has been
taken in respect of adjudication orders issued during the preceding month.

6.9 Once the sanction for prasecution has been obtained, criminal complaint in the court
of law should be filed as early as possible by an officer of fhe jurisdictional
Comumissionerate authorized by the Commissioner.

6.10 It has been reported that delays in the Court proceedings are offen due fo non-
availability of the records required to be produced before the Magistrate or due to delay
in drafting of the complaint, listing of the exhibits ९०, I shall be the responsibility of the
officer who has been authorized to file campiaint, to take charge of all documents,
statements and other exhibits that would be required to be produced before a Court.
The list of exhibits etc. should be finalized in consultation with the Public Prosecutor at
the time of drafting of the complaint. No time should be lost in ensuring that all exhibits
are kept in safe custody. Where a complaint has nat been filed éven after a lapse of
three months from the receipt of sanction for prosecution, the reason for delay shall be
brought to the notice of the Principal Chieff Chief Commissioner or the Principal Director
General or Director General of DGCEI by the Principal Commissioner Commissioner in
charge of the Commissionerate responsible for filing of the complaint.

7. Monitoring of Prosecution

7.1 Prasecufion, once faunched, should be vigorously followed. The Principal
Commissioner‘Commissioner of Central Excise/Service Tax should manifor cases of
prosecution at monthly intervals and take the corrective action wherever necessary to
ensure that the progress of prosecution is saiisfactory. In DGCEI, an Additional’ Joint
Director in each zonal unit and DGCE! (Haqrs} shall supervise the prosecution related
work, For keeping a track of prosecution cases, a prosecution register in the’ format
enclased as Annexure-Il to this Circular should be maintained in the Prasecution. Cell of


|
:
H
:
x
Z

222

each Commissionerate. fhe register shall be updated regularly and inspected by the
Principat Commissioner/Cornmissioner at feast once in every quarter of a financial year.

7.2 For keeping a track of prosecution cases, a prosecution register in the format
enclosed as Annexure-!l to this Circular shouki be maintained in the Zonat Unils of

DGCEI and DGCE| (Hars.) pertaining lo cases investigated by them,

8, Appeal against Court order in case of inadequate punishmentiacquittal:

8.1 Principal Commissioner/Commissioner responsible for the conduct of prosecution or
Principal Additional Director General or Additional Director. General of DGCEI (in

" respect of cases booked by 05081), should study the judgement of the Court and,

where it appears that the accused person have been let off with fighler punishment than
what 18 envisaged in the Act or has been acquitted despite the evidence being strong,
appeal should be considered against the order. Sanction for appeal in such cases shall
be accorded by Principal Chieff Chief Commissioner or Principal Director General/

Director Generat of 05658.

9, Publication of names of persons convicted:

9.1 Section 9B of the Central Excise Act, 1944 also rade applicable to Service Tax vide
section 83 of the Finance Act, 1994 grants power to publish name, place of business etc.
of the person convicted under the Act by a Court of Law. The power is being exercised
very sparingly by the Courts. it is directed that in deserving cases, the department
should make a prayer to the Court to invoke this section in respect of al! persons who

are convicted under the Act.

10, Procedure for withdrawal of Prosecution:
10.1 Procedure for withdrawal of sanction-order of prosecution

10.1:1 In cases where prosecution has been sanctioned but complaint has not been
filed and new facts or evidences have come to light necessitating review of the sanction
for prosecution, the Cormmissionerate or the 09581 unit concerned should immediately
bring the same te the notice of the sanctioning authority. After considering the new facts
and evidences, the sanctioning authority namely Principal Chief? Chief Commissioner or
Principat Director General or Director General of DGCEI, if satisfied, may recommend to
the Board (Member of the policy wing concerned) that the sanction for prosecution be

withdrawn.

10.2 Procedure for withdrawal of Complaint already filed for prosecution
10.2.1 In cases where the complaint has already been filed complaint may be withdrawn


as per Circular No, 998/5/2015-CX dated 28.02.2015 which provides that where on
F identical allegation a noticee has been exonerated in the quasi-judicial proceedings and
P such order has attained finality, Principal Chief Commissioner! Chief Commissioner or
the Principal Director General/ Director General of 05051 shall give direction to the
concerned Commissioncrate fo file an application through Public Prosecutor requesting
the Court to allow withdrawal of the Prosecution in accordance with law.

|
14. Transitional Provisions ~

11.1 Al cases where sanction for prosecution is accorded after the issue of this circular
shall be dealt in accordance with the provisions of this circular irrespective of the date of
the offence. Cases where prosecution has been sanctioned but no complaint has been
filed before the magistrate shall also be reviewed by the prosecution sanctioning
- authority in light of the provisions of this circular.

12. Compounding of offences

12.1 Section SA(2} of the Central Excise Act, 1944 also made applicable to Service Tax
vide section 83 of the Finance Act,1994 provides for compounding of offences by the
Principal Chieff Chief Commissioner on payment of compounding amount. Circular no.
54/2005-Cus dt 30-12-2005 and Circular no 862/20/2007-CX-8 dated 27-12-2007 on the
-subject of compounding of offences may be referred in this regard which inter alia
provides that ali persons against whom prosecution is initiated or contemplated should .
be informed in writing, the offer of compounding. -

13. Inspection of prosecution work by the Directorate of Performance
Management: है न

13.1 Director General, Directorate of Performance Management and Chief
Cornmissioners, who are required fo inspect the Commissionerates, should specifically
check whether instruction contained in this Circular are being followed scrupulously and
fo ensure that reasons for pendency and non-compliance of pending prosecution cases
are looked into during field inspections apart from recording of statistical data.

14. The field formations may suitably be informed. Receipt of this Circular may please
be acknowiedged. Hind version wilt follow.

Yours faithfully,

(ROHAN)

Under Secretary to the Govt. of India

i

SRA EATS WASPS RI EGET EES


i
हे
।
H
|
q
i

ore n am

rom srt 18233

eee,

Aanexure-l

F. No. -
INVESTIGATION REPORT FOR THE PURPOSE OF LAUNCHING PROSECUTION
AGAINST
COMMISSIONERATE DIVISION

1. Name & address of the person(s) (including legal person(s):

22 Central Excise/Service Tax Registration No {If any)?

3. Nature of offence including .commadity:
Charges:
Period of offence:
Amount of evasion involved
Particular of persons proposed to be prosecuted :
Name:
Father s Name:
- Age : Sex:
Address:
. Occupation: -
Positian held in the Company/Firm:
. Role played in tha offence :
Materiat evidence available against the accused (please indicate separately
documentary and oral evidence}

Action ordered against the accused in adjudication.
8. Brief nole why prosecution is recommended :
(Deputy/Assistant Commissioner ar Deputy/ Assistant Director, DGCE!)

FOP ao |

Place

Date
9. Ehave carefully examined the Investigation Report and find it in order for filing
criminal complaint under Section 9 and 9AA af the Ceniral Excise Act, 1944.

(Commissioner, CentratExcise_

(Additional Director General, OGCEI------- }

Place

Date

-1. The proposal should be made in the above form in conformity with the guidelines

issued by the Ministry. With regard to column 4 above, ali the charging sections
in the Central Excise Act/Service Tax and other allied Acts should be
mentioned, With regard to column 7, information should be filled separately for
each person sought to be prosecuted.


2. Acopy of the Show Cause Notice as well as the Order of Adjudication (Wherever
adjudication has been issued} should be enctosed with this report.

3. If any appeal has been filed, then this fact should be specifically stated.



_FORMAT OF PROSECUTION REGISTER

1 डा. | Case Name of Registration | Nature of j
{ investigated - detection assessee and | no, | offence |
1 1 address 1 |

i ae ee ~

6

=n er emyntin ras pres MN ANTE GLA ERNE,
| Amount of | bate of sanction of | Date of Date of filing of
taxiduty Baa i .| Acgused-person } prosecutian . | compounding offer : complaint

confi irmed

12 15
hesannmeeyeninaniniren! के “कलाललनपा जलने atime हल मटल०० ००० sreerenngee inane
if Appeal status- date/ | 1 Date of ) Remarks/sign with name and date q
judgemisht ५ { court in which filed | heating | (Officer fiting the Information) {

— _ | 20

ANNEXUREA 9
FORMAT OF PROSECUTION REGISTER TO BE MAINTAINED BY DGCEI

: Date of Recaipt of ४. हर te ot submission of | Date of Receipt of Sanction Sanetion Order
in-O in DGCEt “. Investigation report Order from 03,081 No. & Date
न न irene

H 5

न बिनापितनन restos बन tt बन
| File No. of Narne of Commiss- | Details of Order
i -ionerate © | passed by Court

10

i

Annexure-I